Lecture 14, Jacques the Fatalist, Part 2
In the last lecture, I described the metafictional games that Diderot plays in Jacques the Fatalist.
As the book goes on, this kind of thing would start to get tiresome, and in my opinion,
interest from Shandy, it does get tiresome.
So Diderot introduces longer, more conventionally structured stories.
But even in those, plenty of questions are raised about what stories mean,
and about how well we can know other human beings, or even ourselves.
There are a large number of these embedded narratives in Jacques the Fatalist.
The one I'll concentrate on is the longest and most interesting of them.
And then after that, I'll return to the problem of determinism,
and its implications for self-understanding.
At the very end, I'll say something about Diderot's view of social relationships,
and especially the master-servant relationship.
The first narrative, and by far the longest of these, goes on for close to 50 pages.
It's the story of Madame de la Pomerée, and her revenge on a lover who no longer cares for her.
But it's not presented as a self-contained whole, like a mini novella,
on the contrary, it's narrated by somebody else, the hostess of an inn where they're staying,
who has already shown herself to be a lively, appealing, busy body.
Just to bring out how little we know about Jacques and his master,
listen to how unforthcoming Jacques is when this hostess tries to worm out of him
what he and his master are up to.
The hostess says, are you gentlemen going far?
And Jacques says, we don't know.
And it goes on like this.
Are you gentlemen following someone?
We're not following anyone.
You're traveling or stopping according to business you have on the way.
We don't have any.
Then you're traveling for pleasure, or for our pains.
I hope it's the former.
What you hope isn't worth a lemon rind, it'll be as it's written up above.
In conventional novels, remember, the reader is in on everything.
The characters might have secrets from each other, but usually not from us.
Or if there are some, we get the pleasure of gradually figuring them out.
When we read Jacques the Fatalist, we're on the outside, just as much as the characters are.
And again, in true empiricist style, it's a book about what can you tell by looking at outsides.
And I think Diderot, in fact, is a lot more skeptical than Hume was about what people do allow each other to see.
Hume told us, don't introspect.
He said, the only thing we can know is external objects.
Well, you might imagine that other people would be a little bit close to us, but not at all.
This is what Hume says, I think, very surprisingly, in the treatise of human nature.
Company is naturally rejoicing as presenting the liveliest of all objects,
a rational and thinking being like ourselves,
who communicates to us all the actions of his mind
and makes us privy to his inmost sentiments and affections.
Well, there speaks a gregarious man, somebody for whom social interchange is the most real experience there is.
Diderot enjoyed company, too, but he had a much more ironic view
of the extent to which people ever get to see what Hume called their inmost sentiments and affections.
Now, here's the long story that the hostess tells.
They notice another guest who's at the inn, and because she has gossip about everybody,
she says, I know who he is, he's the marquises-arcy, and there's a quite remarkable story about him.
For years, he was the lover of a haughty, distinguished widow, whose name was Madame de la Pomerée.
But eventually, his ardor cooled, and although he kept visiting her regularly,
she could tell he had changed, and she found it intolerable.
So to extract his real feelings from him, she thought up a trick.
She would claim that she was the one whose passion was dead.
So she tells him she has to make a solemn confession, and this is what she says.
She's referring to herself in the third person.
She says, you are the same as ever, but your friend has changed.
A woman who is accustomed as she is to examine closely what goes on in the most secret recesses of her heart
and to deceive herself in nothing. She cannot hide from herself that love has departed.
But of course, the secret recesses are hiding exactly the opposite of what she's telling him.
She knows his love has departed, but she loves him more passionately probably than ever,
now that he doesn't want her.
The desarcy is completely taken in, and it's hugely relieved by this expression of sincerity.
And so he replies, your frankness and honesty stagger me and ought to make me die of shame.
My friend, your sincerity carries me away. I'd be a monster if it didn't.
And I'm going to admit to you, the story of your heart is word for word the story of my own.
Well, there's the trickiness of sincerity again.
Diderot told us in his paradox on the actor, a good actor can perfectly simulate feelings he doesn't have.
And Madondola Pomeray is such a good actress, she actually simulates lack of feeling when the problem is she's got too much feeling.
So what looks to desarcy, like perfect sincerity, is in fact total hypocrisy.
And of course it works because it's what he wants to hear.
That's the problem with intersubjectivity.
Hume thought people's minds were completely open to each other.
But he wasn't considering what we saw over and over in Rameau's nephew.
Each person is trying to impress or influence the others and at the same time interpreting what you hear to fit your own preconceptions about what you want.
What happens next in this story is an incredibly elaborate plot that Madondola Pomeray cooks up for her revenge.
She finds an extremely beautiful young woman who had been well brought up in the country but came to Paris and became a high priced call girl.
And she makes a deal with this young woman and her mother.
She will pay them a huge sum of money and in return they will act out roles that she's going to script for them.
She sets them up in a quiet household posing as a pair of deeply pious women whose only interest in life is going to church.
And she arranges it so that desarcy sees the young woman and falls head over heels for her.
And of course his desire is spurred by her apparent unattainability.
It's the same stimulus we saw in La Princesse de Cleve.
Madondola Pomeray says to him when he reveals this interest of his, she says,
Don't confuse these women with the others you've known.
You can't tempt them. You can't seduce them. You can't even approach them.
They won't listen and you'll never attain your goal.
In fact, it's exactly the opposite. They are eminently seducible.
And Madondola Pomeray has a hard job making them never slip up in their completely phony roles.
But it works. Months and months go by, desarcy earnestly pursues his virtuous courtship
and finally he gets the young woman to agree to marry him,
which he has to do because she's too virtuous to consider any other kind of relationship.
And now at last Madondola Pomeray springs her trap.
She invites desarcy to come to her house and she says this,
Marquis, learn to know me. You've gained an honest woman whom you weren't able to keep
and that woman is me. She has avenged herself by making you marry someone who is worthy of you.
Leave my house. Go to the Rue Traversière at the Hotel d'Ambour.
There you will learn the filthy trade that your wife and your mother-in-law have been practicing for the past ten years.
Well, the triumph of Madondola Pomeray seems complete, but it's thwarted in the most unexpected way.
Desarcy, after his first horror and outrage, is deeply moved by his new wife's grief and penitence
and he realizes he really does love her after all.
So the revenge depended entirely on his being revolted by what's happened,
but if he and his wife actually love each other, the revenge totally evaporates
and all that elaborate play-acting and hypocrisy was in vain.
Well, there's the story and it's a good one. They even made a movie of it once in France.
But as Diderot presents it, there's layer upon layer of ambiguity
and it all depends on that, on the way he presents it.
If it were a freestanding novella, it would be self-contained, an imitation of an action,
as Aristotle would have said. It has a coherent structure, it has a surprise ending
and that might seem to teach a moral truth, like true love is deeper than appearances
or love is stronger than hate, but embedded in Jacques the fatalist, it comes across very differently.
First of all, it's being told by this hostess and she very clearly identifies with Madondola Pomeray's anger
and she clearly thinks Desarcy got exactly what was coming to him when he was tricked into marrying a whore.
So already, we're having to ask, where is this story coming from?
Instead of just taking it as a self-contained image of life.
In fact, we don't know anything about this hostess, so what is her personal stake in this?
Jacques's master comments at one point, he tells a story much better than you'd think an innkeeper would be able to.
So could she be a well-born lady in disguise? Well, Diderot lets us wonder, but he won't tell us.
And none is the issue of who's listening. The person receiving the story still has to interpret it.
Jacques is shocked that the hostess sighs with Madondola Pomeray.
He regards that scheme of hers as cruel and obsessive and his master makes a very apt retort.
He says, Jacques, you've never been a woman.
Which is a reminder that most women in 18th century literature were, in fact, invented by men,
as is true of Memzal de Lesbinais in D'Alembert's Dream. Diderot wrote it, not her.
At this moment, I think D'Alembert is suggesting there are aspects of experience one can't fully share,
although novelists often pretend you can, because you can't really imagine being someone other than you are.
Especially if you're talking about the experience of the other sex. There's a line in a Steve Martin movie
where he says, I could never be a woman. I would just stay home all day and play with my breasts.
And of course, he's not really imagining being someone else. He'd still be Steve Martin.
Well, as always, Diderot is being very open about what happens when you invent a fiction.
It means what it means to each person. We interpret it from our own subjective viewpoint.
And right here is a point of tension within empiricism that we've already begun to notice.
It was supposed to be all about objectivity. It was supposed to define what we have in common as social beings.
But as soon as you ask questions about meaning, you're right back into subjectivity again,
whether or not empiricism knows how to deal with it.
So what do we learn from the story of Madondola Pomeray? Is the lesson love conquers all?
Not necessarily. I actually don't think that's what Diderot himself believed,
although certainly I'm giving you my own interpretation. This is a very thought-provoking work that invites us to do that.
Here's what I think. If everything we do is playing a role, which is pretty much where Ramo's nephew ended up,
then why isn't falling in love also a role?
We all know you can be conditioned or programmed to fall for a certain kind of person,
but the more interesting question is, is that hollow and insincere?
Well, only if you have a secure concept of sincerity, the kind that Diderot rejects,
that would correspond to some deep core of authenticity. And I've argued all along, he just doesn't believe that.
So I think what we end up is this.
Desarcee Swyfe, the former call girl, was certainly playing a role when she pretended to be pious and virtuous,
and she knew she was doing it. She did it with her eyes open because she was handsomely reimbursed for it.
Desarcee himself, when he fell for her, was like a subject in a behaviorist experiment.
He was the puppet. Madame de la Pomerée was pulling his strings.
But falling in love is falling in love. Once it happens, it's perfectly real.
And as for his new wife, why shouldn't she be happy to escape her degrading life
and unite herself with this kind and good man? So they really do love each other, but that's a role too.
Just because it feels right and it's no longer mean and manipulative, that doesn't mean it's not a role.
So I think Diderot is posing some really fundamental questions with this story, open-ended, something to think about,
not giving us the answers.
And if you would read the story of Madame de la Pomerée sometime in its original context embedded in Jacques the fatalist,
you'll be struck by how much it is a story told by a particular person to a particular audience
and with lots of interruptions and commentaries as it goes along.
In fact, the story I already described about the two pairs of dualists is told by Jacques right in the middle of the Pomerée story
when the hostess is called out of the room for a few minutes to do some kind of business in the inn.
And just to make sure we don't miss the point, she tells the story in elegant literary language,
not unlike the Princess de Cleves, but it keeps getting broken into by the demands of her job.
Here's what happens when she starts to describe the very original conquest of Madame de la Pomerée by Désarcy
way back when they first became lovers.
And she says, the marquee's youth, his good looks, the appearance of the truest of passions,
in a word, everything that delivers us to seduction by men.
Madame, what is it? It's the male. Put it in the green room and hand it out as usual, had its effect,
and Madame de la Pomerée, after demanding the most solemn vows, bestowed happiness on the marquee.
So by letting us hear the everyday language and the question about where to put the male,
Diderot forces us to remember a story is only a story, not reality as memetic theory is to claim,
it's social interaction and here it's going in many different directions at once.
The 20th century Russian theorist Mikhail Bakhtin, in a book called The Dialogic Imagination,
invented a term that literary critics have found very useful.
The term is heteroglossia, which means different, even incompatible languages or discourses,
that people speak in real life with their very different backgrounds and assumptions.
Bakhtin said poetry, certainly including epic poetry, tends to be monoglot.
It imposes a single voice on what it's telling.
But the novel, he said, is inherently heteroglot.
It gives us overlapping layers of language through which people try to express themselves and influence each other.
Some novels do keep that in the background.
Diderot makes sure it's in the foreground.
And we ourselves, when we sit back to enjoy the story of Madame de la Pomerée,
we need to remember we too, in a sense, have been programmed.
We're responding to literary conventions that have been around a long, long time.
We shouldn't pretend it's reality we're seeing.
After giving us the story of Madame de la Pomerée,
the narrator gets ready to finally move on to the story of Jacques Love's,
which he's been postponing for hundreds of pages since the beginning of the book.
And then he interrupts himself, and he turns on the reader directly,
and he utters really a kind of accusation.
He says,
So, reader, always love stories.
One, two, three, four love stories I've already given you.
Three or four more you'll soon hear.
That's a lot of love stories.
All your novels are love stories.
Practically all your poems, elegy, songs, epistles, comedies, tragedies, operas,
they're all love stories.
You've been nourished on love stories ever since you first existed,
and you never get tired of them.
Really, it's amazing.
Since you first existed because you were playing the role of reader.
At this point you start wondering,
is there any such thing as real life?
Like Boswell, we want our lives to follow patterns,
and we're going to ask our authors to keep giving us those patterns.
But to talk like this is emphasizing, of course, our subjective take on life.
What if we go back to the objective side of empiricism,
and take another look at the theory of determinism?
Well, what makes Madame de la Pomerée especially interesting
is her trying to control her story rather than just submit to it.
She tries to be the playwright.
She scripts a story with human actors playing the role she gives them.
What she's really doing is trying to be destiny.
She knows the people involved.
She knows how to manipulate them.
She has the power to do it.
She can control cause and effect.
Desire C does exactly what she set him up to do.
The two women whom she treats throughout with absolute contempt as mere tools
have no choice but to do it.
But when he and his wife fall really in love,
the whole meaning of what she did is negated.
She didn't have the power after all.
So, let's reframe those issues from the philosophical point of view.
Diderot was a philosoph as the problem of determinism.
That actual word wasn't even invented until a bit later in the 1790s.
What Diderot is using is the older term fatalism,
which does tend to imply purposiveness or meaningfulness
in the actions that human beings play out.
And that's certainly what Jacques means when he talks about the great scroll up above.
So, let's step back and try to distinguish determinism from fatalism.
Since even to use the metaphor up above implies meaning,
it has a vestige of religious significance in it.
Here, where we live, is down.
The real story is up.
As in Christian providentialism, everything happens according to God's plan.
But also ancient astrology, there may not be a plan,
but at least the confusion of our own lives is controlled by eternal cosmic forces.
Jacques's fatalism, as I mentioned, is a soldier's view.
He got it originally from his captain.
Every bullet has its billet, they used to say, in English.
So, I can stop worrying.
I can move freely around the battlefield
because nothing I do will alter the outcome.
But Diderot was trying to formulate with something else.
A determinism that only asserts everything that happens had antecedent causes.
It tells us nothing at all about value or meaning or purpose or plot.
But Diderot also knows the human mind can hardly bear to accept that.
We want meaning so badly, we'll go to great lengths to find it.
I can give you a good example.
I was in a science museum not long ago,
and I got fascinated by actually a very old-fashioned exhibit.
It illustrated probability.
It was a box with evenly spaced pegs in it.
And when you pulled a lever, a whole bunch of ping-pong balls fell in through a hole in the top,
and they bounced and skittered down among the pegs perfectly at random.
But when it was done, they formed a complete bell curve.
Greatest number in the middle, fewest at the ends, neat curve in between.
And of course, here's the point.
It's so hard not to imagine there's a reason for the curve
that the ping-pong balls wanted to end up like that.
And it's even harder to accept that one time out of a thousand,
they'll all be on one side and not on the other.
The mind wants patterns.
It will find them if it possibly can.
And as I understand it, modern probability theory is simply descriptive.
It says if we drop enough ping-pong balls, they'll form a bell curve.
They just do.
And any y explanation would be a covert metaphysics.
It would be a philosophy of meaning sticking its nose in where it doesn't belong.
And by the way, since Dieterra was so interested in evolution,
that was always the problem with evolution, too.
What Darwin contributed a whole century later was the mechanism, natural selection,
that explained how true randomness could result in complex and efficient organisms.
And that's why Darwin was so hated by so many people.
But human stories, as opposed to clattering ping-pong balls,
or even evolutionary theory, cannot manage without some vestige of meaningfulness.
Jacques has his answer in the great scroll, though he has no idea who wrote it or why.
At one point, he's told his master's story about how a kind man saved him after a battle
from a war injury by taking him into his cottage and getting him cured.
And then he paid the guy back by sleeping with his wife.
And the master says, I'm pondering one thing.
Is it that your benefactor was cuckolded because it was written up above?
Or was that written up above because you were going to cuckold your benefactor?
Well, as far as Jacques is concerned, there's no point in making the distinction.
So he says, both of them were written side by side.
Everything was written at the same time.
It's a great scroll that unrolls little by little.
Well, that part's true enough as Diderot himself is unrolling the scroll.
And this is one of the ways that Jacques the fatalist, as I've already hinted,
anticipates 20th century modernism.
For people who can no longer believe in any source of ultimate meaning in the universe,
works of art can still create form and meaning out of the incomprehensibility of experience.
And Diderot understood very well that even if you try to substitute impersonal determinism
from the great scroll of fatalism, it's just not possible for humans to believe
that we're helpless puppets.
In fact, the reformist program, the Enlightenment, would have had no point if that was true.
So what Diderot ended up realizing was he was torn between two poles,
and he could not give up either.
Determinism was the conclusion to which thought comes.
Free will is the experience that our feeling keeps asserting.
In any way, a theory of true randomness, such as Darwin would establish,
is less threatening to freedom than a fatalistic belief in a great scroll up above
where everything is already scripted.
And the very first words of Jacques the fatalist aren't fatalistic at all.
The first words are, how did they meet?
By chance, like everyone else.
And if that's so, maybe a rigid determinism isn't the right term either.
Maybe what Diderot would be most attracted to is modern chaos theory,
according to which it's not possible to predict the outcome of all those interacting causes.
Well, taken as a whole, Jacques the fatalist is extraordinarily full of unpredictability,
and spontaneity, and chance.
Like that moment when Jacques, absolutely in the spur of the moment,
locked the Ruffians in the room and took their clothes.
And finally, before we leave Diderot, it's important not to get too stuck
with the paradox either of subjectivity or of storytelling.
He was very much a man of enlightenment, remember one of its most visible leaders.
And since his novel emphasizes the interaction of people in society,
it's not surprising it carries a powerful social message.
The full title is, Jacques the fatalist and his master,
who as I said, isn't even given a name.
For that matter, Jacques isn't given a last name,
and apparently Jacques was the standard generic name for a man's servant at that time.
The reason this book was published only in that carefully limited edition
for a few privileged princes was its genuinely subversive implications.
The master-servant relationship is what especially interests Diderot.
And he makes clear that Jacques has had a whole series of masters.
There's nothing special about this one.
It's not so much a relationship, you know, as a sort of commercial contract between the two.
And what emerges as the book wanders along is that it's a symbiotic connection.
Each one needs the other.
It's why they always make up after their quarrels.
They are operating within.
They have to accept the rules of society that define a master and a servant.
Now theories that focus on an inner core of self, which of course Diderot rejects,
see each individual as free standing in his or her unique authenticity.
We'll see Rousseau presenting exactly that in the Confessions.
He was literally a man-servant in his early life.
Empiricism sees people as defined by this complex web of relationships,
every one of which involves comparison with other people and very often a power relationship too of some kind.
And back in Locke's essay concerning human understanding,
there's a striking passage which is powerful in its comprehensiveness.
He says,
After one of their quarrels, Jacques spells out for his master what the fundamental master-servant relation is.
He says,
And then I know you can't get along without me.
I will abuse this advantage whenever the occasion presents itself.
And the master protests,
But Jacques, we've never contracted anything like that.
And Jacques replies,
Contracted or not,
that's how it's been done for all time,
is still done today and will go on being done so long as the world exists.
So each one in his way exercises power over the other.
The master is nominally the boss,
but since it's Jacques who has practical skills,
he needs Jacques more than Jacques needs him.
And this allows Jacques to conclude,
rather tauntingly,
it was determined that you would have the title and I would have the thing itself.
In its more optimistic forms,
in Hume for instance,
empiricism imagined a society built on healthy interaction among free individuals.
And Hume in fact thought very little about class stratification,
servants and masters and questions like that.
Diderot's sharper social vision,
as we've already seen it in Ramo's nephew,
reveals a society of parasites,
con men,
manipulators of every kind.
And everyone is playing by implicit rules
that seem designed to maximize selfishness.
So Jacques sounds a lot like Ramo the nephew,
and he goes on to say,
everyone has his dog.
The government minister is the king's dog.
The chief clerk is the minister's dog.
The wife is the husband's dog,
or the husband is the wife's dog.
What happens, Alexander Pope
wrote a clever couplet on this very theme,
which he had inscribed on the collar of a little dog
that he gave to his friend the Prince of Wales.
So you would have to imagine some very highly placed gentleman at court
noticing the collar and bending down to see what it says,
and this is what they would read,
I am his highness's dog at cue.
Pray tell me, sir, whose dog are you?
So here's where our study of enlightenment attitudes has brought us.
A yearning to believe in an authentic self,
but also a strong suspicion,
perhaps even a conviction,
that the only self we have is socially constructed.
Moreover, a yearning to believe
that competition in society produces the good of all,
but also a suspicion
that what it really produces is parasitism and mutual exploitation.
To see how these conflicting insights
might be, if not reconciled,
at least pushed forward to a completely new place.
We'll turn in the next lecture
to the greatest original genius of the Enlightenment,
Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
Rousseau, as I say, had been a servant in early life.
Moreover, he had ample experience of role-playing.
He was very given to it, in fact.
We'll see some fascinating examples of it in his autobiography,
The Confessions.
He fell in love easily and a lot,
and he understood just as Diderot did
that we tend to fall in love in predictable ways.
And, in fact, Rousseau and Diderot were best friends
and close collaborators for some years at the very time
that Rousseau was turning himself into a philosoph.
But what he developed was an altogether new
and amazingly original way of explaining how,
in spite of all this,
in spite of acknowledging that most of what we do
is socially programmed,
it could still be possible to believe
in an inner core of authenticity,
a true self that we can and should be faithful to.
Like the moi character in Ramos's nephew,
Diderot acknowledged the human yearning
for a coherent and authentic self,
but the skeptical side of his mind constantly told him
that was only a self-flattering illusion.
Rousseau, with an originality that is really extraordinary,
redrew the map in an entirely new way.
And that's what we'll go on to see in the next lecture.
Thank you.
