Lecture 15, Rousseau, Inequality and Social Contract
Up until now, we've been following out the logic of empiricism, which was tremendously
empowering for the Enlightenment, as an engine of progress, focusing on external objects and
on the ways they might be changed for the better.
But as we've seen, there was also a dark side to the picture, as in the folly and cruelty
described in Candide, or the cynical self-promotion in Ramos' nephew.
And empiricism seems to leave each one of us trapped in our own private subjectivity,
which makes the longing for an authentic inner core more painful than ever, even while they're
telling us we don't have an inner core.
And this is where Jean-Jacques Rousseau comes in.
His answer to this dilemma is a simple one.
What if we really do have an authentic self, but one that's been covered over and distorted
by a lifetime of social conditioning?
What if the entire human race took a wrong turn and betrayed its authentic nature as the
price of creating civilization?
As we'll see in his autobiography, The Confessions, Rousseau knew all about life as role-playing,
internalizing other people's values.
He experienced it very painfully in himself.
But unlike the other philosophes, he was determined to get behind the way things are, to try to
understand how they got that way.
Rousseau began as their ally.
For years, he was close to Diderot.
He contributed a lot of articles, mostly on music, to the Encyclopedia.
But as his own thinking matured, he broke away and became a kind of renegade from the
Enlightenment.
In this lecture, I'll address the seminal work in which he advanced his ideas.
It's called A Discourse on the Origin and Foundations of Inequality Among Men.
It's also known as the Second Discourse.
Every time I read it, I'm knocked out all over again by its force and clarity, the way
it is still fresh, full of living ideas.
Jean Storobansky, the greatest of all Rousseau scholars, speaks of the immense echo of these
words in time and space.
And it's nothing less than a reimagining of the foundations of the self by rethinking
the whole question of the self in society.
It's full of paradoxes.
Rousseau knows it is.
The answer isn't to try to reconcile them, let alone argue them away.
What they really are is antinomies, perceptions that are felt to be contradictory, but are
also felt to be both true.
This work is known as the Second Discourse because it followed by a few years, a prize-winning
essay, it too was entered for a prize competition, that had made Rousseau famous.
The competition asked competitors to decide whether the progress of the arts and sciences
in modern times has been good or bad for society as a whole.
And the correct answer, of course, was yes, that was the Enlightenment program.
But Rousseau answered no.
He attacked the idea of progress at its very root.
He argued that even if, which he agreed, civilization brings much that is good, it also brings with
it much that's fundamentally destructive.
And so his analysis has been called the Auto Critique of the Enlightenment.
It's an attack from inside, which raised a whole set of questions that are still very
much with us today.
Classical writers often invoke the myth of a primitive golden age, but for them it was
a purely imaginary ideal, a utopia like El Dorado and Candide.
Rousseau takes seriously the possibility that primitive humans might have been free or relatively
free of selfishness and injustice.
And he asks, in this Discourse on Inequality, what happened so it ended?
What he's doing is inventing an anthropology, as in fact the great 20th century anthropologist
Claude Lévi-Strauss has said of Rousseau.
In a way, he's not actually talking about primitive men at all because he recognizes,
really just as a modern anthropologist would, that even the most isolated tribal societies
are really already civilized.
They obey the same kinds of rules we ourselves do.
But Rousseau is talking about as humans as they might have been before they got socialized
in the first place, which really means before they became fully human.
So these prehumans that he's thinking about are what we would today call hominids.
Another point that's important to stress, people often misunderstand him on this.
It's true that he talks as if he's tracing a historical development from those hominids
all the way down to complex civilizations.
But he doesn't want his argument to stand or fall, and he says this clearly on whether
some particular sequence of development really actually happened.
And his key idea is contained in this sentence in his preface.
It is no light undertaking to untangle what is original and what is artificial in the
present nature of man.
And to understand, well, a state that no longer exists, which may never have existed, which
probably never will exist, but which we need to have just notions of all the same in order
to judge our present state properly.
What Rousseau is doing is deliberately bypassing history, because the normal assumption of
Enlightenment thinkers was, human institutions have developed over time.
So to understand them, we should trace their development.
And Rousseau's insight is, if you do that, you always end up justifying things as they
are.
You'll make some improvements, you'll fine tune the way things work, but you won't
ever change things fundamentally.
And what he's doing by inventing this, as he admits, hypothetical original state of
mankind, he's inventing what today would be called a thought experiment.
He's asking, what if we try to imagine our earliest ancestors before they entered into
the social relationships that we take for granted?
By asking the question this way, he's in a position to offer a really subversive challenge,
which modern theories of law are still wrestling with.
What if law itself is a tool of oppressive power rather than its opposite?
What if inequality is a fundamental fact of civilized life?
In explaining what went wrong, he's really inventing a secularized version of the Christian
story of the fall.
But instead of Adam and Eve disobeying the divine command, it's primitive humans inventing
civilization with all its real benefits and then finding out too late they've paid a terrible
price.
But once again, it's not the usual primitivist fantasy of savages living in an El Dorado
of perfect happiness.
Kind of thing 18th century travelers claim to have seen in the South Pacific, blissful
people doing nothing all day but eating breadfruit and making love and surfing.
What Rousseau calls natural man was really an animal, brutish, amoral, subhuman by our
standards.
He never denied for a moment that civilization has given us a lot.
He just claims the price we pay for it is crippling.
So now you can see where this is taking us with regard to the self.
Rousseau's fundamental claim is that our true self is a solitary, pre-social one.
So instead of man being the social and political animal, as has always been assumed, it's the
invention of society that perverted us from our true nature.
But he also holds out the possibility that all is not lost.
Maybe we still do have that true natural self somewhere deep down if we can only learn to
get back in touch with it.
So now let's follow him in the steps of this argument.
Rousseau proposes that nearly everything we think of as human is not in fact essential
to our nature.
The only fundamental principles, according to him, are self-love and compassion, the
word he uses in French is PTA, but the English word pity is too narrow.
Both of these need further explanation.
You remember, pride was the fundamental sin in religious teaching, and the Enlightenment
philosophes therefore work to rehabilitate pride, and in fact decriminalize pride.
They redefined it as the healthy self-image we need to live a good life.
What Rousseau did was to break pride down into two different aspects.
One of them he called, just as those old moralists did, amour propre, or self-love, and he was
highly critical of it, and the way he defined it was, one self-image seen through the eyes
of others, whom we're always trying to impress or fool.
The other aspect he called amour de soie, love of self.
And by that he meant the simple instinct of self-preservation and respect for one's personal
integrity.
To see what he was doing, we might retrace some of the steps we've been over in the course
so far.
Pascal would say, amour propre is just plain wicked, it's evidence of our sinfulness.
Hobbes and La Rochevacau would say amour propre is selfish, sure enough, but it's fundamental
to human beings, it's what motivates every single thing we do.
To that matter it's what motivates Pascal when he preaches against it.
Hume would say, amour propre has gotten a bad name, in fact it's perfectly compatible
with sociability because we like ourselves best when we're sharing the good qualities
of other people.
Now Rousseau is saying something genuinely new, he agrees with the old negative view
of amour propre, but he denies that it's the whole story.
Rousseau's story is, our ancestors sided out with healthy amour desois and it's when
they began interacting in society that they succumbed to selfish, destructive amour propre.
And the way he describes primitive humans is that they were what we would now call hunter
gatherers, they wander freely through the forest, he says male and female were equal
because there was no occasion for a hierarchy of one sex over the other.
If a male encountered a female they might mate, but relatively casually and they would
soon separate.
This may not seem plausible biologically given what we know today about primate groups, but
you can see what Rousseau's trying to get at.
He saw love, just as the old 17th century moralists did, as hopelessly compromised by
rivalry with others and a desire to dominate or be dominated.
And in the confessions we'll see how he understood it to have played out much like that in his
own life.
So what he's trying to imagine in the so-called natural state is sexual attraction that could
be just that.
No flirtation, no courtship, no possessiveness, no jealousy, no heartbreak.
It would be a simple instinct like sneezing and presumably natural women would say afterwards
who was that natural man.
Well needless to say the arrival of babies would complicate the picture and Rousseau
doesn't deny the family was a logical development, and not only that, he doesn't deny the family
brought much that was valuable.
He says conjugal love and parental love are the sweetest feelings known to mankind.
But what follows?
Not just the rivalry and emotional control that are inevitable even in the happiest families,
beyond that rivalry and competition in the larger group.
And here's a wonderful passage from that discourse that captures the full power of
Rousseau's paradoxical vision.
Listen to the way it starts with tender nostalgia for those early days and then unexpectedly
gives way to something much darker.
People grew accustomed to gathering in front of their huts or around a big tree.
Singing and dancing, true offspring of love and leisure became the amusement or rather
occupation of the idle gatherings of men and women.
Each one began to look at the others and want to be looked at himself and public esteem
took on value.
The one who sang or danced the best, the most handsome, the strongest, the most skillful
or the most eloquent, became the most esteemed.
And this was the first step toward inequality and toward vice at the same time.
When these initial preferences were born on the one hand, vanity and contempt.
On the other hand, shame and envy.
And the fermentation caused by this new leaven eventually produced compounds fatal to happiness
and innocence.
So there it is in a nutshell.
The very things that seem sweetest and most harmless are bad just because they're good.
Put people in groups and they're going to start showing off and competing.
And then if they're the successful ones they'll feel the bad kind of amour propré, pride
in their superiority or if they're the unlucky ones they'll feel shame and resentment.
We're not talking about Hobbes here with his war of all against all, we're talking about
dancing under the Greenwood tree.
These are aspects of what's best in culture.
What about the other stuff?
Rousseau in fact had a lot of respect for Hobbes.
His objection wasn't that Hobbes was too cynical about human behavior which most people were
saying.
His objection was Hobbes was really describing modern humans pretty accurately when he thought
he was describing the state of nature.
But as Rousseau tells it, it really was a fall.
We can never go back.
Once we've tasted the fruits of civilization, nothing could make us start wandering through
the forest scavenging for acorns again.
He was never that kind of primitivist.
He's trying to explain where we came from, not turn back the clock.
And the truly crucial change, he says, and this is the center of his response to the
competition question, came when human beings invented agriculture and metallurgy.
They then required division of labor, whereas in the old hunter-gatherer days everybody
could do the same things for themselves.
And then inevitably they generated bureaucratic systems to organize people's work on a large
scale.
Modern anthropology is strikingly close to Rousseau here.
It confirms the labor needed to produce wheat or rice is far more arduous and time consuming
and requires far more organization than anything the early tribal bands experienced.
And here's what Rousseau has to say on this.
From the moment that one man needed the help of another, and it appeared that it would
be useful for one man to have enough provisions for two, equality disappeared, property was
introduced, labor became necessary, and the vast forests changed to smiling fields which
had to be watered with the sweat of men, and in which slavery and poverty were soon seen
to germinate and grow along with the crops.
Through a landscape painter those fields might look smiling and picturesque, but the labor
to clear them and raise the crops is a massive undertaking.
And in many places, for example during the 18th century and the sugar plantations of
the Caribbean, it was such cruelly hard work that nobody would do it unless slaves were
imported and forced to get the work done.
So this is Rousseau's answer to the competition question, where did inequality come from?
It's not the result of this or that defective political system, which might just be reformed.
It's built into the very nature of society.
As soon as humans needed each other in that way to do what they couldn't do by themselves,
all the rest was bound to follow, exactly in the way that rivalry and shame were bound
to follow the gathering of families and villages.
And that's not all.
Rousseau's main interest here isn't political.
It's trying to understand what we lost within ourselves when we sold out our natural freedom
for the temptations of civilization.
And his conclusion is we've condemned ourselves to a life of continuous inauthenticity.
Instead of simply being ourselves, we look at others and measure ourselves in the mirror
of their reaction to us.
And in a memorable phrase, he says, to be and to appear became two different things.
And in French, it's a kind of a rhyme, être et par être, to be and to appear.
They sound alike their opposites.
The 17th century moralists said we need to see ourselves as others see us as the only
hope of getting around our self-love.
The empiricists said something like that too, because we should be relating to others, not
looking within.
Rousseau says that's the problem, not the answer.
We have to stop seeing ourselves as others see us.
Some years later, he wrote a treatise on education called Amile, which has had an enormous influence
on theories of education ever since.
It's all about trying to let a child grow up according to his or her natural bent instead
of programming them to fit a socially approved model.
And in Amile, Rousseau says, with his usual penetrating clarity, as soon as one sees through
the eyes of others, one must will by their wills.
You always say we want, and you always do what the others want.
What Rousseau is creating here is something that became so influential, we can hardly
recognize now how original it was.
Humans in Hume, different though they were, saw history as reflecting the constants in
human nature.
So did Gibbon.
Rousseau sees human nature itself as having been modified by history.
When he thinks his way back to natural man, in that thought experiment in the discourse
on inequality, what he arrives at is not reason, because natural man was pre-rational, and it's
not society, because creating society was the fall.
So the main features of the Enlightenment idea of humanity are pushed aside.
What we end up with is an unconflicted state of being, at home in oneself and one's world.
Not haunted by the past, not worried about the future, not preoccupied by what other
people think.
So now spontaneity becomes the chief virtue.
Eternity is an end in itself, whereas Pascal and Bunyan and La Rochefoucault would have
said it's a big mistake to be authentic to our true self, and Hume and the other empiricists
would have said you don't have one to be true to.
Rousseau thus provides a powerful theoretical justification for what Hume was saying as an
assertion, and Boswell experiencing intuitively that feeling, not reason, not moral duty,
has to be the basis of living, and although in a way that was the standard Enlightenment
line, what he's adding to it is something altogether new, because he's saying most of
our feelings are not spontaneous at all, they're socially conditioned and inauthentic.
And whatever you think of his myth of primitive existence, the critique of social life as we
know it, which it leads to, is very powerful.
At the end of the discourse, he contrasts the life of a Caribbean islander with the
life of a successful politician in Europe, and he tries to imagine what could possibly
persuade the islander to change places with the European, and he says, it would be necessary
for the words power and reputation to have some meaning for his mind, and for him to
grasp there's a class of men who think the gaze of the rest of the world counts for something.
The savage lives within himself, the sociable man is always outside himself, and knows only
how to live in the opinion of others.
Oh, it reached the heart of his message.
He's undoubtedly mistaken about the people he's calling savages, they have their own
versions of power and prestige, but the idea behind this proved to be immensely attractive,
that it should be possible to live within himself on Louis Mem, whereas the admired
person in modern Europe lives outside himself, or to Louis.
And so the big break with empiricism comes right here, for empiricism living outside
yourself was not only unavoidable, it was good for you.
So what does Rousseau want us to do?
Certainly not start walking on all fours as Voltaire sarcastically claimed he did, not
even throw away our furniture and clothes and books and try to live like a primitive
islander.
What he wants is to find an inner source of self that will minimize as far as possible
the internalized expectations of other people.
As far as we can, he encourages us to live within ourselves, not outside ourselves.
And in the confessions, in his final book The Reveries, which we'll turn to in the next
three lectures, he'll explain how he tried to achieve this in his own life.
But what about the social and political implications of inequality, which on Rousseau's account
came into existence all the way back when humans formed the very first societies.
However much we may try to find an inner personal harmony, the outside world is always there,
and inside our heads because it shaped us to be what we are.
So here we need to look briefly at the social contract, which is Rousseau's great work
of political theory.
In this work, he applies his ideas to the problems of real societies and the real world
of today.
Social contract was published in 1762, and it was a long time before many people took
it seriously, but after the French Revolution in 1789, it was hailed as a prophetic work,
and Rousseau's remains were ceremonially reburied in the Pantheon in Paris.
Its famous opening sentence is amazing in its condensed power, man is born free and everywhere
he is in chains.
It sounds like a trumpet call for revolution, and that's certainly how they read it in 1789.
But if you pay attention to the first paragraph as a whole, it goes in a very different direction.
Man is born free and everywhere he is in chains.
Each one believes he is the master of the others, and yet he is a greater slave than
they.
How did this change come about?
I do not know.
What could render it legitimate?
I believe I can answer that question.
The chains will always be with us.
There's no turning back.
We can't be pre-rational savages again, the only ones who are truly free.
What we can try to do is legitimize the chains, and that means conceive of a political system
that could embody our own authentic commitment instead of binding us to an authority imposed
from outside.
Previous theorists who talked about the social contract thought of it as a historical event.
People once got together and agreed on some rules for mutual benefit.
Rousseau's innovation breakthrough, I would say, was to see the social contract as not
connected with history, but as an ongoing fact in the present moment.
The implicit understanding without which no system of society can be legitimate.
And as his opening paragraph says, even the person in power is really a slave, he's enslaved
to the system of authority that keeps him in power.
It needs constant effort on his part if he's not to lose his mastery, just as Hobbes described
it.
So that the reason oppression is bad, isn't God told us not to do it, otherwise we would,
or still less some abstract moral philosophical idea tells us not to.
It's bad because it ruins everybody.
Even the tyrant, in order to keep power, has to constantly do what he doesn't want.
Now, up until this time, some degree of oppression and inequality was always taken as inevitable.
Remember that implicit contract between master and servant and Jacques the fatalist.
It threw so more than anyone who made the rejection of inequality, not just the adjustment
of it to ameliorate it, central to modern and political social thought.
Here's the crux of his argument, and it's the point where it parts company with the
standard enlightenment line.
The enlightenment line was, modern man is individual, there's no going back to the
old medieval society of subordination.
So the social contract as Locke, for example, describes it as like a commercial agreement
between independent individuals who commit themselves to certain specific obligations.
And this leads to Thomas Jefferson's view that the best government is the one that
governs least.
But Rousseau felt that that way of thinking doesn't begin to address Hobbes' insights,
and he was a lot more impressed with Hobbes than Locke, that what's always at stake is
power, and power is always going to be abused.
So what Rousseau tries to imagine is a collectivity, a community, that could somehow embody the
shared wishes of all the separate individuals.
So the social contract would be this ongoing shared understanding, not some historical
event in the past, and he calls this the volonté général, the general will, and he explicitly
contrasts it to the kind of political system we ourselves live under today, in which the
votes of the majority elect a group of representatives, and then they in turn debate and negotiate
to pass some laws which the minority may not like one little bit, or even the majority
that elected them because they might be responding to behind-the-scenes influences that have nothing
to do with the desires of the majority.
Either way, we're talking about politics as the art of compromise, and in Rousseau's opinion
that's not good enough.
In order not to feel alienated from the government, he wants to feel that he personally shares
in its decisions.
In fact, he wants to feel united with a single whole, which he calls le moi comme un, the
common me.
Not surprisingly, Rousseau has no use at all for representative government, such as we
have.
He thinks the only valid social contract would be reflected in the shared choices made by
all the citizens of a small city-state, such as existed in ancient Greece, and he thought
had survived to some extent in a few modern places, like the independent city of Geneva
in which he grew up.
What he's talking about is this.
The system won't be truly legitimate unless there's a shared emotional commitment, not
a legal contract, where you protect your own interests and probably try to get the better
of everyone else.
Rousseau cares so much about this principle, it leads him to make some pretty disturbing
statements, and most notoriously, he makes this one.
In order that the social pact shall not be an empty formula, it tacitly includes this
commitment, which alone he give force to the others.
Whoever refuses to obey the general will shall be compelled to do so by the whole body, and
this means nothing else than that he shall be forced to be free.
Rousseau is never afraid to confront head on the difficulty in his theories, and with
the hindsight of two centuries later experienced, one could certainly see the seeds of modern
totalitarianism in that pithy statement, the paradoxical expression forced to be free
certainly sounds like something out of Orwell's Animal Farm, but against that kind of objection
Rousseau could have made two replies.
One, he's talking about a small city state, anyone's perfectly free to leave if they
don't want to be there, he certainly couldn't have envisioned the modern police state, nobody
at that time could, but more important than that is the other reply we could imagine him
making.
After a memory started out saying we can't throw off our chains, the best we can do is
find a way to legitimate them, and he sees his version of the social contract as the
only escape from the total selfishness of modern individualism.
If we can't commit ourselves to full acceptance of the will of the whole, even if it chooses
something we personally might not, as if it were a common me, then we're stuck with competition
among separate individuals, each working mainly for personal advantage.
And later on in the course we'll look at enlightenment figures like Benjamin Franklin
and Adam Smith, who truly believe that's the way it ought to be.
Rousseau speaks for the side of modern experience that has profound doubts about individualism,
and yearns for a way of belonging to a larger whole.
Hume and the philosophic extolled the virtues of sociability, Rousseau's view was closer
to Hobbes or Pascal, we may remember Pascal said each me is the enemy of all the others
and would like to be their tyrant.
Rousseau is addressing the fundamental problem of power, given that power is always going
to be exercised in society, he wants each person to share in it not just submit to it.
So here's where we end up in Rousseau's social and political theory, a very hard headed analysis
of human nature to try to establish what's fundamental as opposed to what's socially
conditioned, and also an unflinching recognition that social conditioning is very, very hard
to undo.
One aspect of this thought is a brand new kind of attention to personal development over
time, as individuals respond to very particular social influences, and following that insight
Rousseau in my opinion, literally invented modern autobiography, and that's where we'll
go with him in the next lecture.
