Lecture 18, Rousseau, Reveries of the Solitary Walker
In the last lecture, I described Rousseau's realization that his career as a famous writer
even though incredibly successful, represented a wrong turning in his life.
It lured him into the game of self-promoting role-playing, even though he might have seemed
to be the opposite since his theory was all about authenticity instead of playing roles.
He once said, in a Paris salon you had to check your real opinions at the door along
with your overcoat.
But he himself always proudly asserted his own personal philosophy, and yet that was
exactly what was wrong as he came to see.
His pride as a thinker was amour-propre, it was self-presentation pretending to be selflessness.
At one point he even ostentatiously gave away his watch to show he wouldn't need to
be telling time anymore, but that's the point he did it ostentatiously.
It was a theatrical gesture.
In the lecture on Rousseau's nephew, I quoted from Diderot's Paradox on the Actor, which
argues that an actor is most convincing if completely artificial, if he keeps his own
feelings out of it so as to simulate more perfectly feelings he doesn't have.
Not surprisingly, Rousseau thought differently.
He too wrote about acting in a short work that reflects his break with the philisoph,
who had been his friends and guides.
When he first lived in Paris, Diderot was his best friend, and in many ways, Rousseau
absorbed an intellectual style from Diderot.
Now, it happened when the volume of the encyclopedia came along that needed an article on Geneva.
Dallembert, the co-editor, wrote the piece himself, and he wanted to stress the increasing
liberalization of that formerly rigid Calvinist theocracy.
Now, Dallembert was friendly with Voltaire, who had settled on an estate just outside
of Geneva.
He wanted to be well away from Paris in case of trouble with the censorship there.
Because Voltaire was a playwright and loved the theater, he was agitating to get the authorities
in Geneva to allow a theater there for the first time.
It was forbidden by the puritanical Calvinists.
So to please Voltaire, Dallembert threw in a plug for a theater in Geneva, not in some
newspaper article, but right in the middle of his article in the encyclopedia.
And so was Furious.
He was in the habit of putting under his name on the title page of his books, Citizen of
Geneva, though it wasn't strictly correct because when he converted from Protestantism
to Catholicism, he lost his citizenship.
And although Rousseau had been successful in Paris in the theater himself, he regarded
theater as a symptom of cultural decadence.
It was all right for Paris, but not Geneva, which was supposedly closer to the simpler
values of the ancient city-states.
So in 1758, Rousseau published a letter to Monsieur Dallembert on the theater.
And in this work, Rousseau not only denounced the plan to start a theater in Geneva, but
delivered a withering critique of the art of acting itself.
You may remember Diderot giving analogies for his paradox in a work that wasn't published
at the time Rousseau wrote this letter, but I'm sure they often talked about it between
themselves.
Diderot said, an actor is like an unbelieving priest preaching the passion of Christ or like
a prostitute who feels nothing but swoons in your arms.
Now from Rousseau's point of view, the example of the prostitute is not just an analogy.
This is what Rousseau says.
What is the talent of the actor, the art of counterfeiting himself, of putting on another
character than his own, appearing different than he is, of being passionate in cold blood,
of saying something other than what he thinks as naturally as if he really thought it, and
at last forgetting his own place by the end of taking someone else's.
What's the profession of the actor?
It's a trade by which he performs for money, submits himself to the affronts that others
buy the right to give him, and publicly puts his person on sale.
Boswell thought of the actress he called Louisa as little better than a prostitute, Rousseau
goes further, every actor, male or female, is selling fake emotions for money.
Now right at the time he published this piece, he was hard at work on the social contract
and his other masterpieces, but he was also coming to see more clearly that even if his
books were telling the truth, he himself was living a lie.
He had sold out on the Saint-Timon de l'Existance, the feeling of immediacy and wholeness that
he had back at Les Charmettes twenty years before, he had become his role, the counterculture
philosopher or guru, it was time to stop.
Something else happened in the early 1760s to accelerate this change, due to the official
outrage against his writings, both for political and religious reasons, he became the target
of active surveillance.
There was nothing unusual, Voltaire experienced it for years and he liked it, it proved how
important he was.
It's scared, Rousseau, he always had a tendency toward paranoia and now the paranoia expanded
dramatically, especially after an order for his arrest was fired in France and he had
to leave at a moment's notice and flee to Switzerland.
He now began to suspect his own friends, and especially Diderot, of masterminding a plot
against him.
Admittedly, it was perfectly true that his friends thought he was unworldly and not very
good at taking care of his own best interests, and they did impertinently make various arrangements
behind his back, but also other things happened that upset him greatly, and especially this,
Voltaire, who disliked Rousseau, revealed publicly that years before, Rousseau had placed all
five of his children as soon as they were born in a foundling home, and they could never
be traced again.
This greatly, of course, grieved Thérèse, their mother, but she didn't go along with
it.
Well, once it became public, Rousseau tried feebly to argue that this kind of abandonment
was normal practice for unmarried men in his circle, in fact he didn't marry Thérèse
until the very end of his life, but still it looked very bad, coming from the great theorist
of bringing up children.
So he was under attack in various ways, but he went much further, and he started imagining
a massive plot was being organized all over Europe, supposedly to neutralize and silence
him.
Unquestionably, this was a fantasy, it was a projection of his own insecurity and generalized
feelings of guilt.
But it had the effect of liberating him from the pressures of social expectations, and
in fact he didn't behave at all like a crazy person.
By deciding to tune other people out, he felt free to create his own life as it suited
him best.
He did keep numerous friendships, including several with highly placed aristocrats, but
he firmly refused any sort of patronage, which had been usual for writers at that time.
He wanted to be as independent as possible.
If somebody sent him some bottles of wine as a gift, he would send them back.
He never made much money, although his writing sold so well, in those days an author sold
the original manuscript to a publisher, and the publisher made all the profit after that.
So he decided to choose a trade that would be almost like the artisan labor of his childhood
in Geneva, since he was an accomplished musician, and since there was a steady demand for hand
copied music manuscripts, he became a copyist.
Other people thought this was weird, that he would let himself be paid by the page for
essentially mindless labor at something a photocopy machine would do today, but he knew
why it was right for him, and he explained it this way in a work where he refers to
himself in the third person.
It's through laziness and aversion to dependency and poverty that Jean-Jacques copies music.
He does his task when and how he likes.
He doesn't have to account to anyone for his day, his time, his work, or his leisure.
He has no need to arrange anything, plan anything, or worry about anything.
He doesn't have to expend his mind.
He is himself and lives for himself all day, every day.
In other words, Rousseau is doing his best to achieve the lifestyle that was closest
to natural man, no more work than was necessary to avoid poverty, and done only when he himself
felt like it.
Wasivite, idleness, becomes a positive ideal, not something to be avoided.
It's living in the moment with no need to plan and worry about the future, and above
all, being himself, rather than a person controlled by the expectations of others.
So that's why he says he is himself and lives for himself all day, every day.
After fleeing France in 1762, Rousseau lived for a time in Switzerland, got expelled from
there by a cabal of ministers against him, spent a year in England, which he hated and
while he was there he had a bitter quarrel with Hume, whom he suspected wrongly of scheming
against him.
Then he went back to France, and now the authorities left him alone, as long as he would stay out
of public view and not publish anything anymore, and that suited him fine.
The last two years of his life, he began to write a series of essays, which were unfinished
at his death in 1778, and were later published under the title, Reveries of the Solitary
Walker, Referee du Plumineux Solitaire.
This uncompleted final work represents a new move toward the integrated self that makes
a virtue out of social alienation, and also very interestingly it rejects the narrative
mode of self-understanding that was so effective and original in the Confessions.
The reveries begin very somberly, me voici donc seul sur la terre, so here I am alone
on the earth.
Solitude, which had been the source of spiritual insight in the religious tradition, was anathema
to the gregarious enlightenment.
Diderot wounded Rousseau deeply with a deliberate jibe in one of his plays about the wickedness
of a man who lives alone.
Rousseau believed Diderot was talking about him, and he was right.
It was essential for Rousseau to believe that his retreat was positive, and that it was
other people, nearly all other people, who were doing the rejecting.
So in this opening gambit of the reveries, he continues,
The most sociable and loving of humans has been outlawed by unanimous accord, but myself
detached from them and from everything.
What am I myself?
He concludes that without intending to, they've liberated him to find himself.
When men reduced me to living alone, I found that in confining me, to make me miserable,
they had done more for my happiness than I could have done myself.
Rousseau had always liked to wander in the fields and woods.
He was a great walker, in fact.
He now took up in earnest the study of botany.
On his walks, he would collect specimens of flowers and leaves, which he carefully mounted
in beautiful bound volumes that are preserved to this day.
They're like books written by nature herself with real leaves and flowers instead of words.
The reason he chose botany was it allowed him to appreciate the richness of nature with
no personal advantage in view.
He didn't aspire to be a scientist.
He wasn't theorizing about the nature of life the way Diderot did.
He was simply mastering a body of knowledge for its own sake, and he could do it as the
spirit moved him.
No obligation to be an expert or even remember everything he learned.
And he contrasts this explicitly with the kind of difficult, abstract thinking that he used
to do in his days as a philosoph.
I have sometimes thought quite profoundly, but rarely with pleasure and almost always
against my own inclination and as if by force.
Reverie relaxes and amuses me.
Reflection fatigues me and makes me unhappy.
Thinking always was, for me, a painful and charmless occupation.
The musician Bobby McFerrin has a song with a memorable refrain, No Discipline Seems Pleasant
at the Time, But Painful.
That's what Rousseau is saying.
He prefers reverie, by which he means a kind of free associating daydream that allows the
mind to wander without coercion of any kind.
And again, that's what natural man's mental life would have been like.
Not strenuous attempts to explain systems of government or the meaning of beauty.
But the book called the reveries, of course, isn't a reverie itself.
It's a series of written meditations on the ideas that reverie might suggest.
And one of Rousseau's discoveries is memory isn't as reliable as he thought it was when
he wrote the Confessions.
What he decides now is, in the Confessions, he was narrating what seemed emotionally true
to him at the time of writing.
He couldn't literally reproduce what had happened decades before.
So he says, I wrote my Confessions from memory, and memory often failed, may or supplied incomplete
recollections.
I filled up the gaps with details that I imagined to supplement them.
I like to expand on the happy times of my life, and sometimes I embellish them with ornaments
my tender regrets supplied.
Well, as we've seen in his account of happiness at Les Charmettes, that's exactly how his
nostalgic imagination revised the often lonely and unhappy experiences at that time.
The Confessions were written to clear Rousseau's good name with the general public.
The reveries, which he intended never to publish, were written to focus his reflections on the
meaning of his own experience.
So now he wasn't trying to narrate the past with all the lapses of memory that compromise
any effort to be accurate in an autobiography.
Now he's trying to reanimate the past, to make it live again in his imagination.
So he says, in trying to recall so many sweet reveries, instead of describing them, I fell
back into them.
It's accurate to say that in statements like this, Rousseau is paving the way for the line
of thought that would lead to Marcel Proust's great novel about the past, which was originally
translated in English with a title from one of Shakespeare's sonnets, Remembrance of
Things Past.
But Proust's original title suggests a more profound engagement with the past.
It's à la recherche du temps perdu, in search of lost time.
And now Rousseau is able to commit himself fully to his ideal of idleness, as he explains
in the fifth walk of the book, there are ten walks in all.
For an all too brief period, six weeks in 1765, Panterrez lived on a little island called
the Ile de Saint-Pierre, St. Peter's Island, in a small lake near Neuchâtel.
If you ever look on a map, Rousseau calls the lake the Lac de Bienne, but on a modern
map it'll have its German name, the Beelers-A. It wasn't total isolation.
There was a farm on the island, there was a manager who oversaw the work, but it felt
like an enchanted refuge from the hostile world outside.
And as Rousseau remembered it, now he's writing 15 years later in the reveries, there again
he could recover that condition of happiness he experienced at Les Charmettes.
And it's in this passage he invokes that Italian phrase that quoted in the last lecture,
dolce farniente, sweet doing nothing.
So he says, what was this happiness, and in what was its enjoyment?
I would challenge the men of this century to guess from the description of the life
I led there, precious farniente was the first in chief pleasure that I wished to savor
in all its sweetness, and everything I did while I lived there was no more than the delicious
occupation of a man who has devoted himself to idleness.
As a perfect representation of this happy idleness, or idle happiness, Rousseau describes
how he would row out to the middle of the lake, lie down in his back in the boat, and
gaze up into the sky while the wind and waves gently move the boat about.
Or at other times he would go down to the lake shore, and let the sound of the waves
lull him into daydream, and here again he uses all the resources of poetic prose to
conjure up what it felt like.
The noise of the waves and the agitation of the water caught hold of my senses, and vanished
all other agitation from my soul, plunging me into a delicious reverie, in which night
often surprised me unawares.
The ebb and flow of the water, its continuous but varying noise, ceasely struck my eyes
and ears, and taking place of the inner movements that reverie had quieted in me.
They suffice to make me feel my existence with pleasure without any effort to think.
The empiricist self was a receptor, constantly acquiring and sorting sense impressions which
the mind would then compare and analyze.
Rousseau here is simply a living being, letting himself go, no more mind-body problem, allowing
what he sees and hears to hypnotize him into a feeling of oneness with nature.
And the central role played by nature deserves to be emphasized.
If the self is going to be separated from society and needs something else to bond
with, Rousseau no longer believed in the personal God of his earlier training, but he shared
in the deism or natural religion that turned nature itself into a value-filled God term.
In passages like the one I just read, Rousseau is developing the attitude toward nature that
would soon flower in romanticism.
Beyond that, create the tradition that leads to Thoreau at Walden Pond.
Rousseau says in the reveries, I am what nature meant me to be.
For him, nature is not the blind evolutionary force of hum and diderot.
It's a loving mother.
It has intentions for him.
Its intentions are good.
People forget nowadays, at one time, say in the Middle Ages, the word nature meant everything
that exists in the universe, including cities, because it's natural for human beings to
make cities, just like it's natural for bees to make beehives.
Thanks to romanticism, nature came to mean the world of mountains and lakes apart from
human beings, and as conferring spiritual value, if we can immerse ourselves in it.
When Wordsworth wrote around 1800, nature never did betray the heart that loved her.
Wordsworth also wrote, one impulse from a vernal wood may tell you more of man, of moral
evil and of good, than all the sages can.
Rousseau, more than any other individual, created and popularized this attitude, because
he didn't just say, as other deists would, that the structure and regularity of the universe
proves that some great clockmaker once constructed it, Rousseau makes the much larger claim that
natural man was at home in the world in a way that civilization has betrayed.
And for him, nature becomes the mother.
They could take place of the human mother he never had, or indeed of Madame de Veyron,
who eventually let him down.
Nature becomes a refuge from the competition and selfishness of human life, and a guide
to the healthy idleness that Dolce Farniente teaches us to live.
Even when he moved back to Paris in the 1770s, Rousseau still took long walks, almost every
day, in the countryside, which at that time was still just outside the city, as he collected
his plants, or copied music to make a few francs.
He seems to have been genuinely happy.
As I said earlier, his paranoid fantasy of persecution, far from ruining his life, set
him free to be himself.
There's a passage in the Confessions, low-key, but quite touching, where he describes how
he and Thérèse would pass the time on an ordinary day in Paris.
The windowsill served us as a table, we were breathing fresh air, we could see the neighborhood
and the passengers by, and even though we were on the fourth floor, we could enter into
the street life even as we ate.
Who could describe or feel the charm of those meals, composed entirely of a quarter loaf
of bread, some cherries, a bit of cheese, and a half bottle of wine that was shared
between us, friendship, trust, intimacy, sweetness of soul, but delicious seasonings you contribute.
For what Rousseau longed for, most of all, was a release from self-hood altogether, something
even more disengaged than that dozing reverie by the lapping waters of the lake.
Once in his life, he actually did experience this, as he tells us in a remarkable anecdote
in the reveries.
He was walking in a narrow street in Paris, when a rich man's carriage came hurtling
along accompanied by a huge, great dean.
Rousseau wasn't able to dodge in time the dog bowled him over, and he fell hard on the
cobblestone street.
At an earlier time in his life, he would probably have seen the incident in political terms.
Rich men could run over pedestrians with impunity because the law always looked the other way,
but this time he felt he had discovered something entirely different.
The blow gave him a concussion, and he never forgot the feelings he had when he regained
consciousness.
Night was starting to fall.
I perceived the skies and stars and green leaves.
This first sensation was a delicious moment.
I was conscious of myself only through this.
I was being born into life in that instant, and it seemed to me I filled up all the objects
I perceived with my frail existence.
Entirely absorbed in the present moment, I remembered nothing.
I had no distinct notion of my individuality, not the slightest idea of what had just happened
to me.
I didn't know who I was or where I was.
I felt no pain or fear or uneasiness.
I watched my blood flow just as I would have watched a brook without imagining that this
blood belonged in any way to me.
I felt through my whole being a ravishing calm, and every time I remember it, I can find nothing
comparable in all the activity of familiar pleasures.
If we think back to the standard empiricist model of the self, this remarkable experience
contradicts it in every way.
The empiricist self was always aware of the difference between sense impressions from
outside and the interpreting mind within.
Rousseau has no sense of any distinction between himself and the surrounding world.
He says he feels as if his own frail existence fills up everything around him.
The empiricist self was keenly aware of its own individuality.
Rousseau is no longer aware of himself as an individual.
The empiricist self was defined by memory.
Insofar as it couldn't remember its own past, it would cease to be itself, Rousseau has
no memory at all of who he is, and yet somehow he's more fully in self at this moment than
any other.
So what has happened to him in this accident, at least as he in self interprets it, is a
moment of release from separate individuality.
That individuality of which he was normally so proud, which he wrote the Confessions to
explain and defend, it was like a mystical experience with a specifically religious element
removed, and what it really is, in his own terms, is the reemergence of natural man from
deep within.
In the end, all of these forms, rejection of society and fame, the sentiment de l'existence,
the wasivité of happy idleness, the dolce farinente, and it's literally out of the
body experience after the accident with the dog.
In all of these, Rousseau is staking out a position in open opposition to the program
of the Enlightenment, because that was all about purposeful activity and social interaction,
whether in research programs aimed at collective progress or convivial entertainment, like
Diderot enjoying witty repartee at a café or a salon, or Hume playing backgammon with
his friends.
So there's the final stage of Rousseau's remarkable career as a thinker.
In the first, he drew on his own experiences, and much powerfully focused reading, to develop
major theories of politics and society that are still influential today.
In the second stage, he decided that the quest for fame had been a bad mistake, an expression
of Amour Prophre, rather than his authentic self, and he wrote the Confessions and some
other works, too, to explain his own life.
Now in the third stage, he seeks to lead a natural life, as far as possible within himself
instead of outside himself, to use his own terms.
So now as we prepare to leave Rousseau, I'll try to summarize his achievement, though I
also need to acknowledge that not everyone was equally impressed.
There were many very intelligent people for whom Rousseau's whole approach seemed misleading
or wrong.
Well, his achievement was to find new ways of talking about the interior self and its
conflicts, ways that were very different from the doctrinal religious explanation that was
taught to him as a boy in Geneva, but we do need to remember it was a religious training
that did acknowledge the fundamental significance of conflicts in a way that empiricism refused
to do.
Now, in postulating a natural self that's been covered over or deformed by the social
eye itself, Rousseau is laying the foundation for an idea of personality as the basis of
a person's identity, deeper than all the roles they play.
And he presents a picture of civilization, not as the natural goal of human development
as it was for the Enlightenment, but as a deeply flawed attempt to repair the damage
that was caused when the state of nature was left behind.
Rousseau's way of thinking, even more than his arguments, has worked its way into the
very fabric of our self-understanding.
When we talk about the divided self or an identity crisis, those are concepts that grow
directly from Rousseau's ideas.
When we talk about alienation and inauthenticity, we're building on his thought.
Another major line of influence is the new way Rousseau got people to think about childhood.
By his powerful presentation in Emile of how one might try to bring up a child, according
to his or her natural bent, shielding the child from premature socialization.
And by his account of his own childhood, he's showing how formative experiences shaped the
person he became.
Modern America has been called the Therapeutic Society, and insofar as we're preoccupied
with self-realization and healing of psychic wounds.
We're very much in the tradition of Rousseau.
Remember years ago, hearing a story about a New Yorker, it took a job at a university
in California in the 1960s.
Nighty arrived, he went out to dinner, and when he came back his apartment had been burglarized
and the stereo was gone.
When the policeman came, he was very courteous and said, you must be feeling terribly violated
by what's happened in New York.
I said, I don't feel violated, I just want my stereo back.
And the cop said, no, you're blocking on your feelings.
Well, the policeman was trained to speak with the voice of Rousseau.
You could say the New Yorker was answering with the voice of Voltaire.
And if the reveries give us a moving and seductive vision of wholeness and peace, I shouldn't
forget the price Rousseau himself paid for that, as the flip side of his trenchant critique
of civilization is an essentially negative dropout philosophy.
While Voltaire was brilliantly exposing the cruelties of the Seven Years War, you could
read Rousseau's account of that period in the Confessions and barely guess that a war
was happening at all.
And toward the end of the reveries, he repeats an appotent sentence, his essential critique
of life and society.
So long as they can sometimes have their own will, or rather be able to dominate the will
of others, they force themselves all their lives to do what they dislike.
They omit no servility for the sake of being able to command.
It's a magnificent formulation, but in response to it, Rousseau's solution is a negative one.
He says, I have never believed that man's freedom consists in doing what he wants, but
rather in never doing what he doesn't want.
It's a modern poem by Philip Larkin.
He complains to people, tell him, you've always done what you want.
You always get your own way.
And Larkin makes the bitter reply, what they mean is, I've never done what I don't.
And the title of that poem of Larkin is, The Life with a Hole in It.
And with that parting thought, it's time to return to the other main focus of this course,
the activist, optimistic, other directed side of the Enlightenment.
