Lecture 20 Franklin and Adam Smith
As we move deeper into Franklin's autobiography, we're naturally tempted to try to find the
private self as opposed to the public self.
While that's a distinction that's become a modern cliché, most people today try to
preserve a barrier between their professional work life and what they call their personal
life.
I don't believe that distinction would have made much sense to Franklin.
He does his best to make the private and the public synonymous.
And unlike with so, whatever does happen when Franklin's out of the public eye is relatively
marginal to his sense of who he is.
If to recall an analogy I suggested in an earlier lecture, the Rousseau self is like
an artichoke with a prickly outside and a sweet heart.
And if the Hume or Diderot self is an onion, just layer upon layer, you peel it away until
there's nothing left.
Maybe Franklin is neither one.
I like to think of him as the potato, a thin, tough skin to protect the inside, but a single
uniform substance all the way down.
And very helpful in nourishing it is, too.
However, if the usual modern assumption is that there has to be psychological intention
and complexity behind the mask, what can we deduce about what Franklin doesn't tell us?
Let's think about relationships, which for Rousseau were at the absolute center of psychological
experience.
Rousseau was a loner, he had a few very intense relationships.
Franklin was a team player.
He was happiest as a member of a club or group that would permit a kind of controlled intimacy,
but also a certain privacy for each individual.
He had a great many of these sociable friendships, and there's no doubt he was truly gifted at
it.
A friend of his in London wrote, just in a letter to someone else, I never saw a man
who was in every respect so perfectly agreeable to me.
Some are amiable in one view, some in another, he in all.
Franklin had lots of friends of both sexes.
With women, he enjoyed playfully flirting, but as far as we know, he wasn't prone to
passionate attachments.
So again, an area of life that's central to understanding Rousseau is more or less compartmentalized
with Franklin.
His account of his marriage in the autobiography is quite telling in this regard.
When he went to England for a while as a very young man to try his fortune there, he jilted
a Philadelphia girl named Deborah Reed.
Later on, when he came back to Philadelphia, he had a chance to make amends, but there's
nothing sentimental about the way he describes it.
He'd been courting another young woman that he was attracted to, but he demanded that
she bring a dowry of a hundred pounds, which would help to pay off his debts as a beginning
printer.
At that point, her family backed off.
Well, here's Franklin's comment on his situation at the time.
I soon found that the business of being a printer was generally thought a poor one,
so I was not to expect money with a wife, unless with such a one as I should not otherwise
think agreeable.
In the meantime, that hard-to-be-governed passion of youth had hurried me frequently into intrigues
with low women that fell in my way, which were attended with some expense and great inconvenience
besides the continual risk to my health by a distemper, which of all things I dreaded
though by good luck I escaped it.
Well, at this point in his life, the young Franklin sounds a lot like the young Boswell,
but with the great difference, Boswell could never get control of his appetites.
They did indeed damage his health.
Franklin's solution was to repair the breach with Deborah Reed, who by now was a poor marriage
risk.
Through no fault of her own, she had gotten married, but to a ne'er-do-well husband who
disappeared, and although he was presumed dead, no one was quite sure.
Well, here's how Franklin finishes his story.
I pitied poor Miss Reed's unfortunate situation, who was generally dejected, seldom cheerful,
and avoided company.
I considered my giddiness an inconstancy when in London, as in a great degree, the cause
of her unhappiness.
We ventured over these difficulties, and I took her to wife September 1st, 1730.
He was 24 at the time.
None of the inconveniences happened that we'd apprehended.
She proved a good and faithful helpmate, assisted me much by attending the shop.
We throved together, and have ever mutually endeavored to make each other happy.
Thus, I corrected that great erotum, as well as I could.
Most of all, then, Franklin provided himself with a valuable partner, who could share an
economic discipline, as well as companionship.
And it appears that they were affectionate, but never passionate.
They lived apart for long periods of time, including the many years Franklin spent in
London and Paris.
The real point of the story, as he tells it, is that he was able to correct an erotum.
For Rousseau, past Miss Reed's, like the stolen ribbon, are permanent wounds that could never
heal.
For Franklin, their mistakes, erota, it's always possible to rub them out and start
over.
He also got to score a kind of triumph, a payback for an earlier humiliation, when
he first arrived in Philadelphia as a teenager.
He was exhausted and bedraggled from a long boat journey.
He was a very far from prepossessing figure.
And writing 40 years later, he relishes the contrast between his condition then and his
later success.
I was in my working dress, my best clothes, being to come round by sea.
I was dirty from my journey.
My pockets were stuffed with shirts and stockings.
I knew no soul nor where to look for lodging.
I was fatigued with traveling, rowing, and want of rest.
I walked up the street, gazing about, till near the market house, I met a boy with bread.
I bade him give me three penny worth of any sort.
He accordingly gave me three great, puffy rolls.
I was surprised at the quantity, but took it, having no room in my pockets, walked off
with a roll under each arm and eating the other.
Thus I went up Market Street as far as Fourth Street, passing by the door of Mr. Reed, my
future wife's father, when she, standing at the door, saw me, and thought I made, as I
certainly did, a most awkward, ridiculous appearance.
Well, Deborah Reed may not have been impressed back then by the bedraggled youth with the
socks in his pockets and the puffy rolls under his arms, but seven years later she was very
glad indeed to accept him in marriage.
This little story can serve as a model for everything in Franklin's life.
Every setback is transformed into success, and each relationship, including marriage,
is to some extent a judicious policy decision.
When Franklin does get let down by a dishonest or two-faced friend, he doesn't complain about
the treachery of human nature, he just chalks it up to experience and gets on with his life.
And of course, acting magnanimous can be a big plus.
When Franklin's printer brother eventually fell on hard times and had to come and beg
him for financial assistance, he gave it cheerfully, as another Bostonian, John F. Kennedy, is to
say, don't get mad, get even.
Well, if it turned out leaving Boston for Philadelphia was the ideal liftoff for Franklin's career.
This was not the spiritual city on a hill that Boston still smugly claimed to be.
It was a trading center, it was deliberately tolerant in the Quaker tradition of anyone
who could make himself useful.
The empiricist ideal was all about building a stable character, the thing Boswell could
never manage to do, and the mechanism for doing that was a kind of behaviorist reinforcement.
As Hume said in the treatise, habit is all important.
You can condition yourself to act in certain ways.
In effect, you organize yourself to become a certain character, and you imprint it through
habit until it becomes, in a telling phrase we still use, second nature.
For Rousseau, there's only one nature, the one that got distorted when civilization was
invented.
Franklin figured this out very early, and when he returned to Philadelphia, this scene of
creating a new life, he was still only 19 when he came back from England, he drew up what
he called a plan of conduct.
He noticed that he'd begun to strike people as assertive, he seemed like an opinionated
free thinker which made them uneasy.
Also, he kitted around a lot, he made puns, same sort of thing Boswell used to do.
Franklin noticed people were thinking of him as shallow and frivolous.
Still worse, he was given to outbursts of anger, and he noticed people didn't care for those
one little bit.
So he set out systematically to delete these tendencies and acquire the correct habits,
whereas the Rousseau kind of theory would say the seething anger is still inside, it's
just being repressed.
This was a project for Franklin very much in the empiricist mode.
It was a behaviorist experiment with himself as the subject.
So think some more about the contrast with Rousseau.
Rousseau wanted to recover his true self by getting rid of the habits and behaviors that
social life created, Franklin wanted to acquire them.
So what he did was this, Franklin drew up a list of 13 virtues, stressing behaviors
like frugality and industry.
He decided he would concentrate on one virtue per week, and to help him do this he prepared
a grid on which he could check off each day, or rather if the day was unblemished and had
no marks on it, he knew he was making progress, but if he had to mark down what he called
spots, then there was more work to do.
By 13 virtues, same reason as 13 episodes in a sitcom, you get through four complete cycles
in one calendar year.
Some of the virtues are kind of bland and not very challenging.
Number one is temperance, which is defined as eat not to dullness, drink not to elevation.
Of course, that would have been a challenge for James Boswell.
Franklin was a man who could control his appetites.
Boswell would have had more trouble with number 12, chastity, which reads, rarely use venery,
it's an old word coming from the goddess Venus, rarely use venery, but for health or
offspring, never to dullness, weakness, or the injury of your own or another's peace
or reputation.
Here's Franklin at 19, committing himself to a life program that perfectly embodies the
empiricist view of the self, and the basic idea, remember, is to treat the self as an
other, not an inner depth of private subjectivity, but an outwardly oriented collection of traits
and behaviors that can be effectively modified.
And the process is based on method and order, which is entirely in keeping with both of
Franklin's main interests, experimental science and rational capitalist planning.
So he didn't just resolve to improve his life, Boswell was forever resolving and failing,
Franklin worked out a logical sequence.
The grid makes it almost like a board game, he got the idea of inscribing the grid on
a piece of ivory so he could wipe it clear after every 13 week cycle, the errata were
literally being erased.
And the whole thing was intended to shape a stable, reliable character, so he's creating
right from the beginning the image of Ben Franklin, and you see there's nothing dishonest
about it.
If your character is something you can alter by artificial means, then why shouldn't you
create the best character you can?
The bottom line to use an appropriately financial metaphor was Franklin was making himself into
the person who could realize his own potential to the fullest extent.
Modern readers often look a scant at his emphasis on frugality and industriousness, but they
were essential to what he wanted most.
If he had financial security and if he had self-discipline, then he'd be ready for any
challenge whatever, whether it was discovering knowledge about electricity or helping to
write the Constitution of the United States.
Those are characteristic enlightenment values.
Here are two more ways that Franklin's project reflects the ideals of the enlightenment.
One is, it regards active doing is good and idleness is bad, yet again the very opposite
of Rousseau's anti-enlightenment position.
Franklin defines his virtue number six, industry, like this.
Lose no time, be always employed in something useful, cut off all unnecessary actions.
And the most fundamental enlightenment assumption of all is this, that we are predisposed to
do good.
It was Cotton Mathers essay to do good that appealed to Franklin, not Mathers puritanism.
In fact, Franklin's autobiography is like a drastically secularized version of the Puritan
tradition of self-examination, with all the Puritan guilt taken out.
Just to give you a taste of the kind of thing he would have heard in church in Boston when
he was a boy, here's a typical statement by a gifted preacher named Thomas Shepherd from
a couple of generations earlier.
Shepherd was the first chaplain of Harvard College, he was a kindly effective pastor,
he was much loved by his parishioners.
All the same, this is how Shepherd talked about human nature.
Every natural man and woman is born full of all sin, Romans 129, as full as a toad is
of poison, as full as ever his skin can hold.
Mind, will, eyes, mouth, every limb of his body, every piece of his soul is full of sin.
Their hearts are bundles of sin.
Well, that was the old religious meaning of natural man, being whose nature is catastrophically
perverted by original sin.
Franklin is a man of the Enlightenment.
His nature is the nature of hum and the deists.
It's a force we should cooperate with, not repress.
Follows also that moral behavior isn't based on obedience to divine commands, but on simple
common sense.
Franklin was once going to write a book that would be called The Art of Virtue, and he says
he was going to show that vicious actions are not hurtful because they're forbidden,
but forbidden because they're hurtful.
It is therefore in everyone's interest to be virtuous.
So honesty is indeed the best policy.
The reason to get a virtuous character is there'll be a big payoff if we do.
One further point before we leave these 13 virtues.
The idea is to shape a well-rounded character, but not to aim at some kind of impossible
perfection.
For Franklin, human behavior has to be the art of the possible, just like politics does.
In the autobiography, he tells an entertaining story to illustrate this point.
He knew a man who bought an ax, and he wanted it to be completely shiny, so he brought it
back to the blacksmith to have it re-ground.
The smith said, sure, okay, as long as you turn the grinding wheel.
So they worked and worked and worked, and it still didn't look right.
And the smith said, turn on, we'll get it by and by, as yet his only speckled.
And the customer said, yes, but I think I like a speckled ax best.
Well, that's Franklin's position on human behavior.
We always will have some faults.
It's normal.
But it doesn't mean we're a toad full of poison.
It just means nobody's perfect.
Human failings are occasions for humorous tolerance.
There's that modern sense of humor of Franklin's, not satirical outrage like Voltaire, certainly
not religious mobilization like the old Puritans.
In another anecdote, Franklin describes a successful negotiation with an Indian tribe.
Pennsylvania was famous for being more generous to the Indians than most colonists.
But the representatives from Philadelphia were careful to insist no rum be consumed until
after they'd finished talking.
So once the treaty was signed, the Indians had a colossal blowout of a party.
And the next day, they sent their spokesman to apologize.
And the spokesman said, the great spirit who made all things made everything for some use.
And whatever use anything be designed for, that use it should always be put to.
Now, when he made rum, he said, let this be for Indians to get drunk with.
So to conclude, if Franklin has an inner life, no doubt he does, he's not sharing it
with us.
Or, and this is the more important point, I don't think he's worrying about it himself.
He wants his public image to be as near as he can get it to the whole truth.
When he was a young printer, just starting out, he made sure that people would see him
trundling his own print, his own paper through the streets to the shop in a wheelbarrow.
He also made sure nobody ever saw him taking time out to go fishing.
This wasn't dishonest, it was a genuine act, that is, he was making sure the truth about
himself, because he really was incredibly disciplined and hard working, he made sure
that's what people saw.
Of course he was promoting an image, but he's working very hard to make his self correspond
to the image.
Well, I think it's fair to say, Franklin is analytical, but he's not theoretical.
He's a thorough going pragmatist in psychology as in politics.
For someone of very similar values to Franklin who did theorize, want to turn to the Scottish
writer Adam Smith.
Smith was a close friend of Hume, he was a professor at the University of Glasgow, and
he published two great works.
One was called The Theory of Moral Sentiments in 1759, the year of Khandid.
The other was called The Wealth of Nations, 1776, a date we all know.
They were actually part of a single conceptual project.
He was developing a theoretical basis for the social implications of modern individualism.
He wanted to show the competitive free individuals really participate in a great system that
works to everyone's benefit.
It was a theory of social interaction really combining two disciplines that didn't have
names yet.
One would be social psychology as opposed to the introspective kind Rousseau was developing
at just the same time.
The other, of course, is economics, studying how millions of individual choices actually
add up to generalizable laws of the market.
Now, a fundamental to Smith's argument is the concept of sympathy.
It's implicit in the title of his big book, The Theory of Moral Sentiments.
We have moral sentiments or feelings, and they're just as instinctive and genuine as
our other feelings.
So the very first words of that book are, how selfish so ever man may be supposed, there
are evidently some principles in his nature which interest him and the fortune of others
and render their happiness necessary to him.
At the same time, this remains the empiricist self.
Each of us is totally separate.
Even if we do sympathize with other people, we do it by extrapolating what our feelings
would be if we were in their position.
So it's not, I feel your pain, it's I hypothesize your pain by imagining what my pain would
be like.
And this leads us to a remarkable paradox.
The only way to understand our own selves, as we said before, would be to think of the
self as an other.
And Smith is explicit about this.
He says the best way to understand our own behavior is to imagine an impartial judge
outside our self and see ourselves the way that person would.
And so here's how he puts it.
I divide myself, as it were, into two persons, and I, the examiner and judge, represent a
different character from that other I, the person whose conduct is examined into and
judged of.
So extraordinary detachment and self-control, that procedure seems to call for, and in fact
it's like a description of Benjamin Franklin's way of conducting his life.
Rousseau celebrated the spontaneous feelings of childhood.
Rousseau saw children as more natural than adults because they haven't yet been deformed
by too much socialization.
Adam Smith says, families are much too indulgent to children's whims and tantrums when the
kids get to school, then they have to learn how to fit in.
And that's Smith's essential point.
The reason children learn self-control is not because adults coerce them into it.
It's because they find out other people won't like you.
They won't cooperate with you unless you become the kind of person they like.
And of course, that's exactly what Franklin did with his 13 virtues.
So I'm arguing that that way of thinking treats the problem of the self as essentially
irrelevant just the way Hume did.
We only exist socially.
We know who we are by seeing how others see us.
For Rousseau, that's the root of what's wrong.
For Smith and Franklin, it's why life works as well as it does.
Of course, all of this can look like a pretty flimsy foundation for ethical behavior, this
hypothetical way of imagining yourself in someone else's shoes and treating them kindly
because that gets you the best payoff.
But it's easy to see why so many people at the time were attracted to this kind of thinking.
The old moral code was in retreat.
That said, you should do good even if you don't want to because God tells you to.
And I should repeat what I said before.
Cultural change is not monolithic.
There were plenty of people who still thought the old answers were the right ones.
Samuel Johnson, an exact contemporary of these people, was a very conservative religious
person.
He had nothing but contempt for this new ethics of sympathy.
Friend of Johnson said some friend of theirs was going to grieve because he hoped to get
a big inheritance and didn't get it.
Johnson said, he'll suffer as much as your horse did when your cow had a miscarriage.
So from Johnson's point of view, this new philosophy of moral feeling was really just
a cover for selfishness.
I remarked at the outset, we remember Adam Smith today mainly as the writer of the wealth
of nations.
Well, it's not hard to see the affinity of a psychological theory with his economic
theory because it holds that if each individual strives to maximize his or her personal advantage,
the result will be the good of the whole.
Confusingly, by the way, in the 18th century, this was called liberalism, but of course it
corresponds to what in modern America is called conservatism.
Smith also argued strongly for the division of labor and what would soon become the modern
factory system.
In a famous example, he pointed out, if a single workman made pins, which apparently
required 20 separate operations, he could only make a few dozen a day.
But if you divide the operations among 20 different workers and each one does just one
little task, they could turn out thousands of pins a day.
Well, we all know the downside of that, the fatigue and boredom of the worker who does
nothing but put the left tail light on over and over again.
But Smith should not be blamed for what came later.
He has a very real point, and it was an admirably progressive point.
It was at the old hierarchical society that had just a tiny number of rich, noble people
on top and a huge number of virtual serfs down below.
That was a recipe for economic stagnation and widespread poverty.
And indeed, in the 18th century, over most of Europe, subsistence was so marginal a single
bad harvest could trigger a catastrophic famine.
What Smith saw in emerging capitalism was two very new things.
One, as his example of the pin factory suggests, was a huge increase in productivity due to
the division of labor.
And what that ought to mean would be more wealth for everyone, that's what Smith expected.
And also this, Smith was envisioning the freedom of each person, which we so much take for
granted today, to sell his or her labor wherever they like, to see free from the old repressive
guilds and monopolies, and free from the apprentice system in which Rousseau and Franklin
both suffered.
Smith rightly regarded that as a kind of slavery.
For Rousseau, the division of labor, as he says in the Inequality Discourse, was the
beginning of the fall.
Smith writes practically a hymn to the way even a single wool coat embodies the labor
of scores or even hundreds of people during specialized jobs.
And he takes it for granted that nonstop repetitive labor is a good thing.
Well, remember the virtuousness that was attached to work in that Protestant ethic that Max
Weber described.
It's a rather chilling passage in The Wealth of Nations where Smith says, the division
of labor is good not just because it's more productive, but also he says it discourages
sauntering.
That's the word that used to mean loitering or dawdling at work.
He says, the habit of sauntering in an indolent, careless application is naturally acquired
by every workman as obliged to change his tools every half hour and apply his hand in
different ways.
It renders him almost always slothful and lazy and incapable of any vigorous application
even on the most pressing occasions.
Well, the road that leads to the modern efficiency expert is plainly visible there and laziness,
which for Rousseau was the goal of existence because of this gusting vice.
As time went by and Smith's theory became a cornerstone of the modern economy, Rousseau's
critique of the tyranny of labor began to look better and better.
Just to quote the poet Philip Larkin again, he says, why should the toad work squat on
my life?
But Smith, like Franklin, sees work as a positive good.
In the new discipline of economics offered what was then a brand new concept, the economy
as a way of conceptualizing and trying to control the big collective forces that shape
our lives.
This would be at a very different level from personal psychology, even if each individual
is psychologically motivated in making their economic choices.
Maybe this gets to the heart of modern uneasiness about the self.
Any unified field theory of human life is long gone, the way once the four humors and
the four elements added up to a single explanatory model.
Now we have competing disciplines that speak very different languages, there's psychoanalysis
but then there's experimental psychology and there's anthropology and sociology and political
science and economics and all the rest.
Well in the texts we've been considering in this course we can see the fundamental issues
of modern experience being born.
All along I've been stressing the implicit opposition between the pragmatic empiricist
model which culminates in Franklin and Smith and the Rousseau one.
I could put it still more clearly, it seems to me our culture talks the Rousseau line
and it lives the Franklin life.
When we talk about getting in touch with our true self or being what we were meant to be
or healing the inner child, then we're talking like Rousseau.
When we commit ourselves to a career, when we strive to be cooperative members of a group
and apply rational analysis to shared goals, well then we're doing what Franklin and Smith
wanted us to do.
Rousseau thought that shame was a particularly destructive emotion because it's the internalized
expectations of other people.
If we're worried about what others are going to think, then we're not living authentically,
we're betraying our own true nature.
And remember just to invoke once more that story of the stolen ribbon, Rousseau says
the reason he accused the innocent servant Marion was he couldn't bear the shame with
all those eyes staring at him of admitting he stole the ribbon.
It's been said that shame is closely connected with nakedness, it's not wanting to be seen.
So Rousseau's imagining the hostility of all these staring people if he confesses the truth
and he just can't face it.
That's what Adam Smith recommends.
We should be detached from ourselves, we should try to imagine what a judgemental spectator
would think if they could see our moral nakedness.
So the goal is be the kind of person they would approve of if they could see us.
Rousseau suffering from a lifetime of guilt for that crime against Marion and many other
experiences of that sort, Rousseau developed his theory about prehistory.
A hypothetical pre-civilized stage where people wouldn't need each other, they could live
as solitary individuals, social expectations would never arise.
But Adam Smith could well retort since this ideal natural state is by definition, Rousseau
admits it incompatible with life as we know it, surely we do better to work with our socialized
expectations instead of postulating some ideal inner self that's separate from them or opposite
to them.
Rousseau's view is that once something wrong has been done in your life it's a permanent
source of guilt and so for him the important thing is to confess one's guilt, hence the
title of his autobiography.
Franklin's view is if something wrong has been done it's a mistake in erotim.
Recognize it, find some way to make up for it.
Calling it an erotim might sound simplistic but it's the logical outcome of this other
directed empiricist theory of the self.
Well with Smith and Franklin we now leave the self-confident enlightenment behind.
In the four lectures still to come we'll spend time with two great writers who question
the Enlightenment's assumptions at a very deep level and pose the kinds of questions
that are still disturbing to us to this day.
In Blake we'll see a profound rethinking of the Enlightenment's critique of imagination.
But first in La Clôte we'll look at an unforgettable troubling novel that follows out the logic
of a secular universe in which each person tries to create a self but in which cooperation
and sympathy may not be in the least the guiding principles of human life.
