In this lecture and the next, we'll be looking at Le Liaison d'Angereuse by Chauderlot de
Laclo. This is a great novel that pushes the ambiguities of role-playing just
about as far as they can go with extremely disturbing results. This
novel has become fairly well known in recent years thanks largely to a couple
of modern movie versions that I'll say something about in the next lecture. The
plot is relatively simple. An unprincipled rake named Valmont decides to
seduce a virtuous young married woman who is known as the Président Tourvel. The
name is kind of confusing. Her absentee husband, he's never there, is a judge
known as a Président. He presides over a court. So in the French style she's
referred to by the feminine version of his title, she's La Président. And in
fact it's interesting that just as in the Princess de Cleve a hundred years
before, this is a character whose first name we never learn. The book is an
epistolary novel. It's composed of letters which is supposedly written by the
various characters, mainly letters between Valmont and his former lover
with whom he still corresponds, whose name is the Marquis de Mertoy, a person
even more cynical and amoral than he is. As I mentioned in a previous lecture, this
epistolary form had a very big fad during the 18th century and it was because
it gave the illusion of real-time immediacy and of course the kind of
voyeurism of peeking into other people's secret lives. La Princess de
Cleve had an omniscient narrator, a cool, remote voice, always lucid, never
misleading us. Epistolary novels can't do that. The characters are doing their own
talking or writing, but previous novels of this kind were very careful, all the
same, to give their readers a secure moral standpoint. There was a hugely
popular English novel about 30 years earlier by Samuel Richardson called
Clarissa and in that novel a saint-like teenage girl is seduced and destroyed by
a wicked rake. So in fact it's the model for Tuerville and Valmont in La Clos
novel, but in Clarissa there's no one like the diabolically clever Marquis de
Mertoy and there are many footnotes which Richardson kept increasing in later
editions to warn us whenever the villain loveless might start to look too good so
that the author is constantly telling us where to stand. Moreover, although Clarissa
certainly is at some level attracted to this rake loveless, it's only through
trickery that he ever gets her into his power and even then she goes on
virtuously resisting him until finally in desperation he drugs her unconscious
and rapes her. So she's never desperately in love, she never chooses him and to
this day I think the English tradition doesn't like to think you could fall
head over heels for Mr. Wrong. In the French tradition, as we've seen before,
passion can be a truly life-threatening illness and the character Tuerville
absolutely does fall head over heels for the vicious rake Valmont. There was
another immensely successful epistolary novel and I need to mention that briefly
because it's by Rousseau, Jolie or the new Elouise, a high-minded presentation of
totally admirable people and what they learn is to overcome their passion and
become just good friends. There are no villains at all of any kind in Jolie. Now
we happen to know that La Clôte was a great admirer of Rousseau and I'll come
back to that in the next lecture but as we'll see it's far from clear in
reading his novel how that should make sense. In Les liaises en dangereuse, the
dilemmas of moral choice are deeply confusing and the very possibility of
knowing the truth at all seems less and less likely. Even if the characters
were willing to say what they really mean and feel and that I suppose would be
the 18th century definition of sincerity, even then how sure could we be that
their self-knowledge is reliable, that they're not lying to themselves. Even more
strangely within the world of this novel the only apparent choices seem to be two
very traditional models of behavior that go way back to the court culture of the
time of Louis XIV fully a century before the liaises en dangereuse was
published late in the 18th century 1782. One model is the religious one of
Pascal and I believe of Madame de la Fayette. That's the model that the
virtuous Tourvel does her best to live by and it's based of course on the
deliberate repression of passion. The other model is the libertine ethic of
that 17th century court now I suppose of the upper class generally in 18th
century Paris and it's committed to self-gratification and to the closed
circuit values of mondanité, worldliness. What's going on here if those two models
started to lose their authority a hundred years before why should the liaises
en dangereuse be such a throwback? Well my answer is this but I have to stress
I'm only guessing. La Claude never comes forward to tell us his views but my
answer would be he sees very clearly empiricism isn't working. Its psychology
is just not adequate to explain human treachery and self-deception so whatever
their limitations were those older models make better sense than the
cheerful worldview of Locke and Hume and Franklin and Smith. But La Claude is not
some kind of reactionary he's not saying let's go back to the good old days. On
the contrary his novel shows how very far those older models are from working
either and that leaves his characters trying to get control of their lives
with no roadmap available at all and under conditions of intense pressure and
threat. Because unlike Rousseau's novel this one does have villains and unlike
Richardson's novel it gives us no moral standpoint from which to condemn them or
even be sure we understand them. Now for a novelist who's clearly interested in
ambiguity as La Claude is there are further advantages to the epistolary
mode. Here's one since letters are static documents even if they were real
they would still be problematic because they're no longer in their proper place
in the flow of lived experience. There's always a time lag between writing and
sending a letter and the other person reading it it's like radio signals from
the moon. And here's another thing language as we've already remarked in
talking about empiricism is inherently ambiguous because it's always a second
order representation of the thing it describes so that exactly the same words
in fact could mean completely different things depending on the intentions and
understanding of the person using them. And as a brilliant example of this in
the Liaison d'Angereuse when Valmont is beginning to lay siege to Tour Valle who
is still resisting him honorably and he's trying to convince her that for the
first time in his whole life now he's truly and deeply in love. He sends her a
letter that begins like this. I have passed a stormy night during which I
never closed my eyes at times agitated by a devouring passion at times utterly
depleted in every faculty of my being. I come now madam to seek from you the
peace that I need but cannot yet hope to enjoy. Indeed the situation in which I am
writing makes me understand more than ever the irresistible power of love. Well
that sounds noble enough doesn't it and it extorts a reply from Tour Valle who
is trying to resolve not to write to this guy again. But because Valmont includes
it in a letter he's writing to his ally Marquis de Mertoy because he gives her a
full explanation of the circumstances we realize that the whole letter which is
like a page or a page and a half long is a diabolical double entendre. Every
sentence in it has a double meaning. What Valmont tells Mertoy but poor Tour Valle
the ultimate recipient of the letter has no way of guessing is that the desk on
which he's writing it is the naked back of a prostitute friend of his who is
choking with laughter as he does it and when he says he's had a sleepless night
sometimes passionate sometimes exhausted he's talking about his night with the
prostitute and when he uses the word love we realize for him it's only sex and
this letter goes on for a whole page playing this cynical game. He says I
foresee already I won't be able to finish this letter without being forced to
interrupt it. I must leave you for a while to relieve an excitement that is
growing every moment and becoming too strong for me. So this is a sadistic game
founded on anticipating Port Tour Valle's utter misunderstanding when she
gets the letter and it should make us wonder how sure we could ever be that
any letter can be read correctly. In this case it's a private joke between Valmont
Routoy. He sends it to her so she can have a good laugh then she'll forward it
to Tour Valle but this particular time then we've been taken backstage behind
the curtain to understand what's going on nearly all the time we have no way of
getting there in this novel. Now novels that want to be realistic usually try to
do that by attempting to seem transparent as if it's just a window you're
looking through. You forget it's words on the page. It's the illusion of real life.
We already saw how Diderot's meta-fiction tries to counteract that by
constantly interrupting and introducing short circuits in the narration but
even Diderot has to admit once a story gets rolling with its own momentum like
the one about Madame de la Pomerée you can't help getting into it. In contrast
with that, Lélie Sondangerous is unyieldingly textual. It pretends that
its letters are real although actually there's a little preface warning it
might be just a novel and it does give us this voyeuristic interest of opening
other people's mail but there's also the frustration which the characters
certainly feel themselves of trying to peer behind the words what's really
being said here to see the other side of the cards and a French critic has put
it very well there isn't any other side of the cards. Well having acknowledged
the deliberate ambiguities and puzzles in the way this novel is set up what can
we say about how the characters understand themselves? Boswell liked to
see himself as Captain Mack Heath from the beggars opera. Belmont likes to see
himself as I suppose the stage manager of a theater of a comedy or farce getting
other people to play ridiculous roles to amuse him. He tells various stories
throughout the book of how he set people up to do that. The plot of the novel is
going to get a lot more tragic but it's never clear whether La Closet is
actually a tragedy and that's an important question we'll come back to in
the next lecture. Now if Torvelle the victim tries to live in the moral
universe of Pascal, Belmont lives in a Hobbesian world of continuous power
struggle and sex is his theater of action. In this context it's fascinating to
think about La Closet's actual profession. He wasn't a professional writer
this novel is the only thing of consequence he ever wrote. He spent his
life as a military engineer. He oversaw the construction of huge defensive
fortifications of a kind that sprang up all over Europe in the 17th and 18th
century. Way back in the 17th century Louis the 14th had a famous chief
engineer named Vauban who perfected the art of elaborately geometrical
fortifications. The idea was sort of like the Magino line in the 20th century
it would make France impregnable to assault and they looked like modern
fractals all these proliferating angles that would allow all sorts of
crossfire while the defenders would remain invisible inside and recent
critics have generalized this model symbolically to think about La Closet's
novel and I think it makes sense to do that. The main impulse of 18th century
thought was toward feeling or sympathy. L'Église Saint-Ange-de-Rose represents
a return to the 17th century idea that the self is a fortress surrounded by
defensive ramparts and Mère-Toy and Vellement are working tirelessly to
make their psychic fortification as impregnable as possible but Vauban the
military theorist also stressed no fortress is invulnerable if enough time
and pressure are applied and his solution was don't be passive protect
yourself by acting aggressively but unpredictably to keep the opponent off
balance as we say in football the best defense is a good offense. There was a
time when La Closet had to while away an entire year on a boring little island
off the west coast of France preparing defenses there for a British attack
which never came and it was when he was on that island during that year that he
wrote L'Église Saint-Ange-de-Rose and you could say that just as the nobility
in Louis XIV's time displaced their competitiveness from the battlefield of
the bedroom La Closet displaces it still further to imaginary letters about
imaginary seductions. There's a minor character in this novel called Cécile.
She's a naive girl fresh from convent school. The nuns of course tried to
teach her to be a good girl but she's dying to fall in love now that she's
reached Paris and she quickly does with a nice young man named Don Cénie who is
her music tutor. Now it happens that her mother has already set her up to be
engaged to be married to some man she's never even met and the plot twist is this
fiance of hers had once been the lover of the marquise de Mertoy and then had
left her had spurned her. Well in Mertoy's code that was an unpardonable
injury. He exerted the power she was made to be the weak one. So Mertoy tries to
talk Valmont into seducing this girl Cécile just for a bit of revenge. Now
this is what's interesting Cécile is extremely attractive and obviously more
than susceptible but Valmont refuses to do it. What would be the point? It's easy.
He needs a conquest. It should be a challenge to his strategic powers.
That's why he goes after the cold pious Tourville because a seduction is only
gratifying if it's like an Everest expedition. Lots of planning and oxygen
tanks and Sherpa guides and the one relationship that matters in this novel
is this strange increasingly antagonistic one between Valmont and Mertoy and it
has a special point of interest in the gender difference. They're both committed
to this ethic of seduction as power. We happen to know that La Clos was very
interested in the social situation of women. That's a theme I'll come back to
in the next lecture. Now Mertoy occupies a very interesting position from a
feminist point of view. She states clearly herself. It's the age-old double
standard because the libertine code required a male to make his conquest
known. They would be valueless if they weren't. People need to fear him as a
brilliant seducer who somehow always gets away with it. But Mertoy being a
woman is blocked from that kind of success. Any conquests of hers have to
be secret. She has to pretend to be totally virtuous. If even one of her
affairs were ever known she would lose the respectability which the hypocrisy
of society imposed on women. And Mertoy puts it wonderfully well. She says for
you men a defeat is nothing more than one success the fewer. In this very
unequal arrangement we're lucky if we don't lose. You're unlucky if you don't
win. Well in effect her only public is Valmont. Somebody who can acknowledge her
brilliance as she keeps forcing him to do. And certainly smart as Valmont is,
Mertoy is much smarter. But as an example of the double entendre letter what we
discover most of all in this engrossing novel is how hard it is to figure out how
to interpret people and make ethical judgments. Let me give you a tiny example.
On three separate occasions quite offhand Mertoy drops hints in her
letters to Valmont that she thinks little Cecile is very attractive indeed and
maybe she will initiate her sexually herself. Now what are we supposed to
learn from this? You see another kind of novelist would give us some clues and
this one won't. You might say these lesbian hints indicate her openness to
instinct or maybe desire to transgress taboos at premonition of the Marquis
de Sade, the guy who gave sadism a bad name. Or if traditional morality is
relevant we're seeing her perversity and moral corruption. But quite possibly she
doesn't give a damn about little Cecile. She's saying this to just taunt an
unsettled Valmont when he reads it. Well we expect an author to tell us what to
think but I suppose LaClois suggesting why should novels allow us to
understand imaginary people better than we can ever understand real ones. Well
one thing we do know. Valmont has been getting along with a standard issue
libertine philosophy the same one that was around in the time of LaRouche
Foucault a hundred years before and it serves him just fine until events get
too complicated and at that point he'll be way out of his depth. Mertoy is
very different. She writes a very long letter right at the midpoint of this
novel about her early life and she tells how even really as a girl she
developed a personal philosophy that was very original but also scary and it's
absolute indifference to other human beings. What she says is most women are
driven merely by feeling. They want sexual pleasure but they think it would be
wrong unless they're in love so they convince themselves they're desperately
in love with some particular man but really she says it's love itself that
they're after. In her case she says from her earliest days she had an intense
desire to know. Her pursuit of pleasure has been rational. If other people are
like subjects in a behaviorist experiment Mertoy is the experimenter and
the greatest of her achievements is this job of self-creation that she's
performed on herself. She says it very clearly indeed. As for me what do I have
in common with these unthinking women? When have you ever seen me break the
rules I prescribe to myself or betray my principles? I call them my principles
deliberately. They're the fruit of my deep reflection. I created them and I may
say I am my own piece of work. Je suis mon ouvrage. Well you see how close that is
to the ideal of Enlightenment empiricism. Shape a consistent, rationally chosen
character seeing yourself from the outside except the philosoph expected it
to turn out like genial Hume, Le Bon Davide or kind avuncular Ben Franklin.
In Mertoy we've got an amoral monster who uses other people with absolutes in
thisism and discards them whenever she feels like it. She fits the Enlightenment
pattern in another way too. She says she developed early in life an actor's skill
at perfectly controlling her voice and facial expressions so that her true
feelings could never be guessed. But she says whereas actors do it on stage to
get applause from an audience she likes to do it in private to advance her own
pleasure. And it turns out that pleasure is her goal. She says this in another
letter. She's taunting Valmont by describing the tethered gratification
he'll get if Tour Valle ever does finally go to bed with him. And she says
don't hope for the least pleasure. Can there be any with prudes? I mean the ones
who are prudish in good faith. They keep their reserve even in the midst of
pleasure and offer you only half gratification. That total abandonment
of oneself. That delirium of voluptuousness in which pleasure is purified by
its own excess. These benefits of love are unknown to them. Well there's that old
contrast we've kept seeing between pleasure and happiness. It was in La
Planceste de Clavre we saw it in Rousseau. For Mertoy it becomes a kind of
absolute and she chooses pleasure not happiness. She pursues pleasure so
intensely that it banishes everything else. It becomes an end in itself. It
gives a brief sensation of what she calls total abandonment of oneself. But
only brief. The entire experience is controlled by reason. Behind this
intensity of appetite Mertoy remains as cold as ice. And even if she does
experience temporary abandonment of self it remains utterly self-ish. There is no
giving at all to the other person. So the abandonment is like jumping all by
yourself out of an airplane and savoring the free fall before you pop the
parachute. In modern terms Mertoy's philosophy could be said to be a bid for
existential authenticity. She really sees herself clearly as the only person who
escapes social mediation of her desires and actions. She makes her own rules. She
won't play by anyone else's. But the cost is very great. She does it by being at
war with the entire human race which includes Valmog. Throughout the book he
keeps trying to persuade her to sleep with him again because that would prove
he still got some power over her. And just as constantly she keeps refusing
which proves she's the one with the power. Remember that Diderot was a little
bit uneasy about the implications of role-playing. Well with Mertoy we have
Diderot's paradox of the actor carried to the extreme role-playing that's
utterly cynical and calculated and self-serving. And whereas Diderot used
the concept of the aesthetic in Rameau's nephew to separate vicious roles on
stage from moral standards in real life, Lélie Zondangerous constantly blurs
any distinction between life and art. This extraordinary novel is like a house
of mirrors where you can no longer tell what's real and what's the reflection of
a reflection. One point Mertoy coolly tells Valmog how she decided to give one
last night of pleasure to an admirer she was totally bored with and was
actually about to get rid of. So just to amuse herself she thought she'd let him
have one night of apparent bliss when she's really just stringing him along.
And she says she's particularly proud of the repertoire of roles that she acted
out even while the poor sap thought she was really giving herself to him. I don't
believe I've ever taken such pains to please or been so satisfied with myself.
After supper by turns childish and rational playful and emotional times
even a libertine, I amused myself by imagining him a sultan in the midst of
his harem while I was the various favorites in succession. In fact his
repeated attentions were received each time by a new mistress though always the
same woman. As it happens the fantasy of being a sultan in a harem choosing
imperiously from a selection of beautiful women was very common in the 18th
century. Boswell often indulged in it to his amazement he happened to find out
so did Samuel Johnson. But here it's the woman who's controlling the fantasy. She's
playing the man like a fish on a hook. She'll toss him overboard when she's
through with him. So Mertoye supposes she's proved her own total mastery of
the situation but Vellmont has an interesting comeback and his reply to
her letter he says well he admits he's irritated to learn that some inferior
guy was granted favors that he didn't get but then he adds as for you don't
you feel humiliated you give yourself the trouble of deceiving him and he's
happier than you you think he's in your chains but it's really you who are in
his he sleeps tranquilly while you watch over his pleasure what could a slave do
more than that. Well Mertoye claims to hide her real self while she's acting out
these harem girls. Vellmont retorts if her lover can't tell a difference then
it works for him so what she's actually done is enslave herself to her slave a
very disturbing insight and it'll come back at a much more profound level to
haunt Vellmont himself in his relationship with Tourville as we'll see
in the next lecture. Well as I say there's absolutely no way we could ever
know the truth in this novel because there's no helpful narrator to give us
the truth and remember also we can't ever be confident that any of these
characters certainly not Mertoye really mean what they say we can't
necessarily take anything at face value she could have made up the whole thing
about the harem fantasy just a torment Vellmont. Well as I've described it up
till now the story is putting pressure on the empiricist idea of role playing as
socially advantageous and what it does in effect is combine the 17th century view
of human beings as self-centered rivals with the 18th century view of humans as
role players and the mixture is highly explosive but Tourville Vellmont's victim
has a totally different perspective to all of this and it's because of what
happens to her this is one of the world's great novels. Tourville resists
Vellmont as long as she possibly can but what she doesn't realize is she has
passionate emotions that have never yet been awakened she's married to a man she
has no particular feeling for one of those arranged marriages much like the
princess to Cleve and her husband who whereas the princess lived with her
husband and honored his goodness of heart Tourville never sees her husband
she hardly knows him Vellmont sees this as his tactical chance and he's
perfectly right what he doesn't understand is this if and when Tourville
does really fall in love it's going to be total it's going to be like a leap of
faith right off the deep end in fact a true passion and when we think about it
Vellmont and Mertoy are selfishly calculating they're not passionate in
the least and what happens in this novel is exceptionally painful for Tourville
because she really does believe her religious faith unlike Cecile the dopey
convent girl Mertoy contemptuously says Cecile is just a machine for pleasure
anyone can push her buttons as we say today what Tourville does knowingly with
her eyes open she says she's doing it is transfer to Vellmont the total
commitment she previously felt for God he becomes everything to her she's
prepared to throw away her whole life for him so when he does turn out to be
false she's left with an abyss the absolute ruin of everything she ever
stood for now that is a total commitment it may be unwise it is not wise but it's
a commitment and a commitment is what Valmont and Tourville I'm sorry Valmont
Mertoy will never be able to make there's a brilliant aphorism by Nietzsche
in his book beyond good and evil he says Christianity gave eras poison to
drink he didn't die of it but degenerated into a vice well a major effort of
18th century thought was to decriminalize passion to find a way to make
desire positive instead of power hungry and selfish what if passion is flawed
at its heart what if it's turned on by violating taboos and what if authenticity
of feeling which Tourville does truly express what if that turns out to be
appallingly destructive it's another classic theme that's still much debated
in modern theories of ethics should we be just my actions or by our motives well
we'd like a nice clear answer but it doesn't look like we'll ever get one
and here to La Clôte invents a brilliantly ambiguous episode to make us
think about it Valmont notices that Tourville has been sending one of her
servants to spy on him when he takes walks in the country probably thinks he's
meeting up with some girlfriend so he stages a little scene for the spy to
witness a poor family is about to be evicted for debt and he gives them a
lot of money of course Tourville is greatly impressed when she hears about
it but what's more interesting is Valmont's account of his own feelings he
writes to Tourville I'm sorry writes to Mertoy a young peasant ran to me and said
let us fall at the knees of this image of God I'll admit my weakness my eyes got
wet with tears and I felt an involuntary but delicious emotion within I'm
inclined to think there's really pleasure in doing good and people we call
virtuous have less merit than we're told they do this is calling the bluff of a
major premise of 18th century ethics sentiment was supposed to be an
immediate instinctual response but the empiricists thought that each of us is
concerned with our own individual self so they also said we do good deeds to
feel good about ourselves modern scholars have invented the name ethical
hedonism for this defensive moral behavior Valmont admits he's experienced
his own surprise genuine emotions that have produced tears they're real enough
tears if this were a standard sentimental novel of the 18th century and there were
scores of them he would now have a moral conversion and renounce his wicked
ways in Lelya Zondanger is no such thing the feelings are real but they're a
behavioristic response to a predictably sentimental scene he despises the poor
family just as much as he ever did he was only using them and he knows that in
order to deceive to reveal so the emotions he felt were perfectly sincere
perfectly genuine but no guide at all to morality or anything we could call his
true self so it would seem that real feelings can be just as artificial as
fake ones which leads us still further into the moral and psychological
labyrinth that we'll explore in the next lecture
you
