Lecture 23, Blake, Songs of Innocence and of Experience
Up until now in this course, we've been working within the assumptions of the Enlightenment,
whether it was the optimism of the philosoph who rejected introspection in favor of social
adjustment or the critique from within of Rousseau.
Then in Les Lézondins Girous, we encountered a darker, much more disquietting version of
Rousseau's critique.
And now in the final two lectures, we'll look ahead to the movement that developed
toward the end of the 18th century known as Romanticism.
Romanticism took many very different forms.
We would need a whole course of its own to explore them.
For our purposes, we'll end with a single figure of amazing genius, William Blake, who
was born in 1757 and is very much a man of the 18th century.
I do need to emphasize that like Rousseau, Blake was atypical and he knew it.
Cume and Diderot and Franklin wanted to fit in and they did fit in.
Blake like Rousseau could never fit in and he was driven to understand why.
Either way he was like Rousseau, he never went to school a single day in his life.
He read books with a passion, aggressively filled the margins with queries and objections,
but he had no experience at all of pleasing teachers and taking exams, something that
Diderot and Voltaire certainly did.
As a boy, Blake was apprenticed to an engraver because he showed artistic talent that happened
so as Rousseau.
Blake went on to become a skilled craftsman and all the rest of his life, he made his
living, though he was always extremely poor, by engraving illustrations for other people's
books.
But meanwhile, he developed a totally unique art of his own.
It was a method of engraving his own poems together with pictures and printing them in
little books, which he and his wife would hand color with watercolors.
These pictures aren't illustrations, they're parallel modes of understanding.
The pictures are iconic, they're two-dimensional, highly symbolic, whereas most artists of the
time specialized in very realistic landscapes and portraits.
And often Blake's pictures seem strangely out of sync with the words, which then forces
us to think harder about what we're being given.
And if you possibly can, you should try to get hold of a facsimile edition of Blake,
there's some quite inexpensive ones, that reproduces his work in this original format.
And in the bibliography for the course, I've also mentioned a website where you can see
excellent color reproductions of all of his work.
Now Blake's hope in producing his poems in this way was to bypass the publishing industry
so that he could reach buyers more directly.
But in fact, the poems seemed so eccentric and Blake himself was so obscure that they
were virtually unknown in his own time.
And it's a sad irony that in later days they became priceless collector's items.
A few years ago at Sotheby's, one of Blake's shorter works sold for $2.5 million.
He couldn't have got, you know, $5 for it, but more as a collector's item than as the
work of living thought that he intended it to be.
And I'm afraid at the same auction the dress Marilyn Monroe was wearing when she sang
Happy Birthday, Mr. President, sold for $1.5 million so you can see the relative value
of collector's items.
Well, throughout this course I've been tying my lectures closely to texts because I do
firmly believe how something is said determines what it means.
Well with Blake that's particularly true.
He put it once that he wanted his symbolic art to rouse the faculties to act.
In this lecture I'll begin with a short poem of his, Mock on, Mock on, Voltaire Rousseau.
And I'll discuss that one in detail because it directly addresses the central assumptions
of the Enlightenment.
After that we'll look at several poems from the collection he entitled Songs of Innocence
and of Experience.
And then in the final lecture of the course we'll turn to the conceptual argument, very
directly critiquing the Enlightenment.
And Blake advanced in a work that he called The Marriage of Heaven and Hell.
So let's jump right in with a poem of three stanzas, twelve lines in all, has no title
because he never engraved it and presented it to any kind of public.
He wrote it in pencil in a notebook so likewise it has no picture to go with it.
And this is the poem, Mock on, Mock on, Voltaire Rousseau.
Mock on, Mock on, it is all in vain.
You throw the sand against the wind and the wind blows it back again.
And every sand becomes a gem reflected in the beam's divine.
Blown back they blind the mocking eye, but still in Israel's paths they shine.
The atoms of Democritus and Newton's Particles of Light are sands upon the Red Sea shore
where Israel's tents do shine so bright.
Like everything of Blake's, this remarkable poem condenses an astonishing amount of meaning
into a few words.
So I'd like to go back through it one stanza at a time.
Mock on, Mock on, Voltaire Rousseau.
Mock on, Mock on, it is all in vain.
You throw the sand against the wind and the wind blows it back again.
Rousseau and Voltaire thought of themselves as opposites.
In many ways they were.
They were certainly antagonists.
But from Blake's point of view, they are two sides of the same coin.
And that coin is deism, the religion of nature.
What they share is the belief that nature can be an adequate source of meaning.
Now in Blake's view, the Enlightenment was absolutely right to stir things up,
to criticize the repressive dogmas of organized religion.
To that extent, it was profoundly liberating.
And we'll encounter him saying that in many ways.
But Blake also thought it did this clean up job so vigorously,
it threw out the meaning with the bathwater.
What he has in mind in this poem is the hollowness at the heart of empiricism
when it comes to satisfy the human yearning for meaning in life.
Now Blake himself was brought up in a very unconventional version of Protestant faith.
As we'll see when we look at the marriage of heaven and hell in the next lecture,
any orthodox denomination would have thought of him as a dangerous enemy.
But he thought of himself as a Christian.
He believed the fundamental insights of religion were still true
if you could translate them out of theological dogma
and recover the questioning openness they originally had.
He also believed that a Hindu or a Buddhist would have equally valid insights
in their own symbolic system.
Now in this poem, Machan Machan,
he's suggesting that although Enlightenment thinkers like Voltaire and Rousseau
believe that they've retained all that really matters in religion
with their deistic religion and nature,
what they're really doing, Blake says, is mocking the spiritual quest
that religion was originally intended to inspire.
So the agitation promoted by the Enlightenment,
he says, is like stirring up the sand of the desert
but looking into the wind and having it blow back in your face.
That's why he goes on,
so every sand becomes a gem reflected in the beam's divine.
Blown back, they blind the mocking eye,
but still in Israel's paths they shine.
In themselves, grains of sand are just tiny identical particles.
They're hard and sharp.
They'd sting your eyes if you let the wind blow them back at you.
But if you let the light shine through them,
then they can gleam like jewels,
which they virtually are, those little quartz crystals.
And if you see them like that, literally see them in that light,
then sunlight becomes the beam's divine
that guided the Israelites in their flight from Egyptian bondage
through the sands of the Sinai desert to reach the promised land.
So now having given those grains of sand spiritual meaning,
seeing the desert not as a place of hopeless barrenness
but a way station on the pilgrimage of life,
very much like Pilgrim's Progress, a book that Blake admired.
Now he comes back to those mocking phyllis-suff
with his final stanza.
The atoms of Democritus and Newton's particles of light
are sands upon the Red Sea shore
where Israel's tents do shine so bright.
The ancient philosopher Democritus hypothesized
that everything we perceive in the world,
all the color and smell and the rest of our sensory experience,
all of it is somehow less real
than invisible, tiny, identical particles which he called atoms.
And this early theory of atomism was nothing like modern physics
which tells us atoms are astonishing force fields
and impossible to pin down.
This older atomism, as Blake understood it, was terribly reductive.
It reduced all the richness of experience
to tiny particles nobody had ever seen
and all just jumbled together like marbles in a bag.
Indeed, Isaac Newton was best known to non-specialists
in the 18th century and he was a great sort of culture hero.
Not for his theory of gravitation,
he needed advanced math for that.
But another book that he wrote called Optics
which conjectured that light hits our retinas
in a stream of tiny particles.
Newton called them corpuscles.
So the flood of solar energy
that makes life itself possible
is redefined as a stream of infinitesimal data bits
and of course that perfectly fits the theory of empiricism.
What Blake is saying is we can't live in a universe
that's been drained of all spiritual meaning.
So instead of these tiny particles of Newton,
Blake gives us the life-giving son of divine energy
which is lighting up the chosen people in their great exodus,
that great symbolic story of escape from captivity.
So you can see in this incredibly meaning-packed poem,
Blake is rejecting some central assumptions
that characterize the Enlightenment.
He dismisses deism as no religion at all,
just a lukewarm effort to have good feelings about nature.
Something Hume, of course,
in his dialogues on natural religion would also agree with.
And Blake goes further to suggest
that Enlightenment thought reduces nature
to barren meaningless atoms.
Moreover, whereas the empiricists demoted imagination,
they thought it was mere fantasizing.
They aimed for expository clarity.
Blake is returning to a symbolic mode
that asks questions instead of giving answers
that rouses the faculties to act.
But as I say, he's not just dismissing the Enlightenment.
It was perfectly right to stir up the sand
to attack complacent defenders of the status quo.
Moreover, Blake never denied that Rousseau or Newton
had great mental powers.
In fact, he saw them as mighty geniuses
who had been trapped and shackled by their own assumptions.
He did a remarkable painting that shows
a youthful, naked, very athletic-looking man
seated in a rather constricted posture
leaning over to draw geometrical shapes
on the ground with a pair of compasses.
And the surprising title of the painting is Isaac Newton.
The idea is Newton has allowed his own muscular genius
to be bound down.
And by giving himself to abstract mathematics,
reducing everything to the terms of empiricist science,
Newton has left the world of air and sunlight behind.
So in Blake's picture, we realize
Newton is at the very bottom of the sea.
He seated on a rock, crusted all over with polyps and anemones
and a kind of drowning life and death.
As for Rousseau, he certainly rejected
the god of patriarchy that was taught to him
in Geneva and his Calvinist youth.
But as Blake says in another work of his,
Rousseau remained a worshiper of the goddess nature.
And of course, that's the same thing
I was saying in an earlier lecture,
when I called nature Rousseau's god term.
Rousseau thought we could escape psychic dividedness
by surrendering to nature and returning
to the wholeness of natural man.
Blake just does not believe that's possible.
His own account of this self will be uncompromisingly
dynamic, as we'll see later in this lecture
and then in the final one.
Blake also delivered, in one of his later works,
a devastating critique of Rousseau's confessions, which
suggests the moral limitations of this worship of nature.
And he pairs Rousseau again in this work,
as in the Macan poem with his great rival Voltaire.
Voltaire, Rousseau, you cannot escape my charge
that you are Pharisees and hypocrites,
for you are constantly talking of the virtues of the human heart
and particularly your own, so that you may accuse others,
and especially the religious.
Rousseau thought men good by nature.
He found them evil and found no friend.
Friendship cannot exist without forgiveness of sins
continually.
The book written by Rousseau called his confessions
is an apology and cloak for his sin, not a confession.
It's an extraordinarily acute critique.
Rousseau asserts an inner goodness
that society has perverted, but is still
accessible deep within.
And yet, as Blake says, Rousseau falls out
with everyone who matters in his life,
even the most significant people,
such as Diderot and Madame de Varon.
And Blake's right, the confessions is an apology.
It's showing why Rousseau mustn't be blamed for acting
like he did.
Even his guilt over that stolen ribbon
is exonerated by explaining socially induced shame
paralyzed his natural goodness.
So this is why Blake wants to recover
a living principle of the spirit, a power the phyllis of dismissed
with their worldly mockery.
He needs to force greater than the self
to save us from ourselves.
Even while, as we'll see, he utterly
rejects any kind of God who is a judgmental patriarch on high.
And I should make it absolutely clear,
I'm not preaching Blake's philosophy.
I'm just trying to describe it accurately,
as I would with Puscall or Rousseau.
To grasp what this new idea of the divine implies,
we should turn to one of Blake's earliest works,
The Songs of Innocence, which he published in 1789.
He actually seems to have intended these poems
to be read aloud to small children who could gaze at the pictures
while the parent or the nurse was reading.
And what the Songs of Innocence convey
is something that modern child psychology tells us
is absolutely essential to give the child a feeling of security,
belonging, being loved in a universe that cares
about each one of us.
That's not to say that cruelty and suffering
don't appear in the Songs of Innocence.
As Blake well knew, a small child probably
feels injustice more keenly than most adults.
One of the most powerful of the Songs of Innocence
is a poem called The Chimney Sweeper.
And it's an implicit indictment of a society
that conscripted very small children
to crawl up filthy chimneys to clean out the soot.
They usually died early of skin cancer.
There was a campaign in parliament
to put an end to this, and the landlord lobby
prevented it for the next 100 years.
And what Blake especially highlights in that poem
is the kids were made to accept their lot
by telling them they're doing their duty in order
to deserve God's love.
Well, that would be religion as a weapon of social control.
Blake hated that just as much as the Enlightenment
Philassof did.
But elsewhere in the Innocence poems,
images of Jesus appear, not the angry father God far away,
the one that Bunyan and Pascal feared and propitiated,
but the divine spirit in its most human form.
One of the Songs is an extremely simple poem called
The Lamb, which divides into two symmetrical parts,
a question and an answer.
The question is, little lamb, who made thee?
And the answer comes without hesitation,
little lamb, I'll tell thee.
He is called by thy name, for he calls himself a lamb.
He is meek and he is mild.
He became a little child, like a nursery rhyme,
a very comforting one, inspiring the child
to identify with Jesus, the lamb of God, the good shepherd.
Many of the Innocence poems, for example,
a tiny one called Infant Joy, have hardly any text at all,
but stunning symbolic pictures.
In that poem, a flower like a gorgeous red flame
opens up to reveal a mother and child inside it
with an angel standing before them.
It's the traditional image of Jesus and his mother.
And very interestingly, the flower turns out
to be a botanically accurate anemone,
which Blake knew was traditionally associated
with the goddess Venus.
And what he's implying, no doubt for the adult reader
who might figure this out and perhaps then try
to talk about it with the child,
what he's implying is that the pagan goddess of sexuality
and the virgin mother of Jesus should be seen
as two symbolic versions of the same thing.
In Blake's view, of course I'm drawing on his other works here,
Christianity shouldn't be about denying the flesh.
It should celebrate the fertility that generates flowers
and children and all the rest.
And indeed, the pictures in the Songs of Innocence
are filled with vines and vegetation
that twine through the text.
So you've got a feeling of irresistible energy
like that great line of Dylan Thomas,
the force that through the green fuse drives the flower.
Although Blake insists
on a spiritual dimension to experience,
and although he regards empiricist science
as hopelessly reductive,
he's like the Enlightenment thinkers
in believing in the value of this world,
not waiting to escape to an otherworldly heaven after death,
the heaven provided over by a patriarch.
Blake calls him in one of his satirical poems,
Old and Noba Daddy Alost,
Nobody's Daddy Up in the Sky.
And by the way, Blake not only intended
a multimedia effect with these combined words and images,
he also thought of them as genuinely songs.
We know that he sang them himself,
though alas, nobody reported what kind of tunes he used.
By the way, I can recommend a powerful modern setting
of the songs by Greg Brown,
I've put that in the bibliography.
So ideally it would be three media
with a very comprehensive effect,
the left brain text, the right brain pictures and music.
In 1794, five years after engraving the Songs of Innocence,
Blake produced a whole new set
that he placed in a kind of dialogue with it.
And this set is called Songs of Experience.
From then on, he would bind the two sets
in a single book, Songs of Innocence and of Experience,
though interestingly, he would also sell
a copy of Songs of Innocence by itself.
Adult experience has to confront
a great deal of disillusioning knowledge
that childhood innocence hasn't got yet.
But the point seems to be that experience
mustn't cancel out innocence, mustn't become cynical.
On the contrary, the spiritual openness of innocence
is something Blake wants to never lose.
In the time we have left in this lecture,
I'll address three of the Songs of Experience.
I'll start with a very short, rather disturbing one,
called The Claude and The Pebble.
It presents a view of love relationships
that has a lot in common with Lélie et Sainte-Donce-sur-Rus.
Here's the entire poem in 12 lines.
"'Love seeketh not itself to please,
"'nor for itself hath any care,
"'but for another gives its ease,
"'and builds a heaven in hell's despair.'
"'So sang a little Claude of clay,
"'trodden with the cattle's feet,
"'but a pebble of the brook
"'werebled out these meter's meat.
"'Love seeketh only self to please,
"'to bind another to its delight,
"'joys and another's loss of ease,
"'and builds a hell in heaven's despite.'
In a way, it seems like a perfect match,
the masochistic, soft Claude,
that only wants to be trampled on
for whom love is total giving,
and the sadistic, hard pebble for whom love is power.
But of course, a sadomasochistic relationship
isn't a very healthy one.
It's like the joke where the masochist says,
beat me, and the sadist says, no.
But it makes you think, doesn't it,
of Tourvel and Valmont?
The whole story of Lélie Zondange-Rus
is like a novelized expansion of this little poem,
and it captures a dilemma in the experience of love
that we know tormented Blake all his life.
Can love be truly mutual,
or is it always a power trip?
But there's a further surprise.
When you look at the picture for this poem,
it's just something altogether different.
There's no sign of the Claude or the pebble.
What we see is some peaceful cattle and sheep
drinking from a stream,
along with a duck and a frog jumping,
and the idea seems to be the Claude and the pebble
are both being trampled,
and the world is going its way up above,
completely indifferent to this obsessive little psychodrama
down under the water.
And I would add a further comment on this poem.
It's all too easy to think of these two speakers
as if they were characters in a novel,
the Tourvel type and the Valmont type.
But the very fact that Blake presents them
as these strange symbolic objects,
a Claude and a pebble, makes us think twice.
My belief is this, that he imagines them as two forces
that exist in each one of us all the time.
There's the part that wants to give itself
wholeheartedly in love, which is admirable,
but can turn into a kind of masochistic self-abasement.
And then there's the part that exerts energy and strength,
and that would be good if it didn't turn easily
into control and domination.
So this is Blake's way of imagining psychology,
not the intricate biographical history of Rousseau's confessions,
and certainly not the social interchange
of Hume and Diderot and Franklin,
but a continual dynamic of inner forces
that are always, forever altering and recombining.
And in the extremely elaborate personal myth
that Blake developed later on,
he's attempting to present this vision
in all of its complexity.
And in the final lecture of this course
on the Marriage of Heaven and Hell,
we'll get a glimpse at least of where he's trying to go.
In Blake's notebook, there are two very short,
unpublished lyrics on different pages
that seem to address this question.
One of them is very positive, and it goes like this.
What does it men and women do require?
The lineaments of gratified desire.
What does it women do it men require?
The lineaments of gratified desire.
And a wonderful formulation.
You thought some kind of opposition
was coming, Venus instead of Mars.
And his point is it should be mutual.
Each one should want the gratification of the other.
But on another page,
there's a much more disillusioned version of the same theme.
In a wife, I would desire,
what in horrors is always found?
The lineaments of gratified desire.
Blake packs a lot of thought into those three lines.
Marriage should be a source of mutual fulfillment,
but by implication, husbands and wives
often find out otherwise.
But you can count on horrors to show gratified desire,
not because it is gratified, because they're paid to show it.
It's the experience of Boswell's London Journal,
condensed into this tiny poem.
Now let's turn to the best known of all of Blake's poems.
I can't read it through in full,
but many people already know it.
The Tiger, with its hypnotic and cantatory rhythms.
It begins, tiger, tiger, burning bright
in the forests of the night.
What immortal hand or eye
could frame thy fearful symmetry?
The poem is clearly a companion to the lamb
in the Songs of Innocence, it even says so at one point.
The poem describes a god who labors like a muscular blacksmith
to create the tiger, hammering red-hot metal on an anvil,
twisting its sinews, joining the link chain of its backbone.
And every reader feels and feels rightly
it expresses a kind of awe or dread at this powerful creator.
The last line of the poem changes one word
from the first stanza,
could frame thy fearful symmetry,
becomes dare frame thy fearful symmetry.
But there are also some discordant hints in the poem,
which most readers probably don't notice,
because Blake's very unexplicit about them.
And here's the first of these odd notes.
The second stanza of the poem reads,
in what distant deeps or skies
burnt the fire of thine eyes,
on what wings dare he aspire?
What the hand dare seize the fire?
Given some familiarity with the rest of Blake's work,
I think there's no doubt as to his illusions here.
The wings are those of the rebel angel Satan,
as Milton describes him at length in Paradise Lost,
which Blake regarded as one of the greatest poems ever written,
but also as imprisoned within a repressive Calvinist theology
that accepted the doctrine of punishment for original sin.
In Milton's poem, Satan picks himself up
off the burning lake in hell,
where he's been hurled after the failure
of his rebellion against God.
And with huge bat wings, he flies through empty chaos,
to make his way to the newly created earth
and tempt Adam and he eaves to their destruction.
The second allusion in that passage I just read
is to a pagan myth,
which ever since ancient times
was seen to be strangely similar
to the Judeo-Christian story of the fall.
Zeus was afraid the human race
would get too strong and smart
and might try to overthrow him.
So he ordered the gods never to give the secret of fire
to the human race,
which symbolically would be the beginning of civilization.
But one god Prometheus disobeyed and gave us the gift of fire.
So after that, he was chained to a rock
on the high Caucasus Mountains
and every day an eagle sent by Zeus
comes and tears at his liver.
But since he's immortal, he never dies.
He just goes on enduring this endless punishment.
Now these are both stories of rebellion
against a tyrant god.
Blake thought of them as two versions of the same myth
or rather similar perversions of the same truth.
Blake absolutely refused to believe
the world was created by an omnipotent god
who immediately issued prohibitions
of this one fruit thou shalt not eat
and was prepared to torment anyone who disobeyed.
So right from the start, his poem, The Tiger,
is about awe and dread at divine power,
but also planting a seed of questioning about it.
And now for the next to last stands the poem
before the first one is repeated.
When the stars threw down their spears
and watered heaven with their tears,
did he smile his work to see?
Did he who made the lamb make thee?
As we know from other passages in Blake's works,
he's definitely recalling here the war in heaven.
As Milton describes it, the defeated angels wept
with grief and shame and they threw down
their weapons in despair.
And the answer to the question, did he smile?
Has to be yes.
In Paradise Lost, god laughs sarcastically
at the humiliation of his enemies.
So now we get Blake's challenging question.
Did he who made the lamb make thee?
And the orthodox answer is yes, of course.
God made everything in the whole universe,
gentle lambs, man-eating tigers alike.
But Blake is planting questions
of a very unorthodox kind.
Maybe we shouldn't worship an all-powerful god
who made everything and then chose to punish what he made,
first the rebel angels, then the newly created human beings.
Or to put it in modern terms, but these are very much,
I think what Blake has in mind,
maybe the whole idea of a punitive god
is a projection of our own guilt and insecurity.
That's exactly what Percy Shelley would suggest,
a romantic poet a generation later,
in a poem he called Prometheus Unbound.
Prometheus doesn't have to stay up there on that cliff.
It's our own self-condemnation that put him there.
He's free to get down as soon as we realize that.
Now if you get a chance to look at the picture
that goes with the tiger,
of course, most people have encountered the poem
in modern anthologies.
They never see the picture as Blake intended.
It's a big surprise.
It isn't an image of awesome power.
It's a smiling pussycat.
There's nothing fearsome about it at all.
He did various different hand-colored versions of that image,
but none of them suggest holy dread.
So this poem is intended to unsettle us
and make us do our own thinking.
By the way, it has exactly the same number of lines
as the poem called The Lamb.
Whereas the lamb is leisurely and full of repetitions,
the tiger feels huge and intense.
The lamb was about a religious belief system
that made you secure in childlike innocence,
not childish, but childlike.
The tiger is all about questioning.
Where beliefs come from?
Why human beings have created them the way they do.
The lamb asks the question, who made thee?
And it answers, I'll tell thee.
The tiger is nothing but questions.
If you run your eye down the right-hand margin,
there's something like 13 question marks
in a poem of 24 lines.
The beginning of this course,
I said that during the Enlightenment, philosophy
abandoned its traditional role as the quest for wisdom,
transformed itself into narrow epistemology,
how we get knowledge into our heads and use it.
Blake, like other romantic writers,
is doing the same thing philosophers
such as Kant and Hegel in Germany were doing in his time,
bringing back the ultimate questions
and reviving ways of thinking that the Enlightenment
had dismissed as superstitious and obsolete.
APPLAUSE
