Lecture 24, Blake, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell
Blake's utterly unique work, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, is an appropriate finale
for this course. It embodies a searching critique of Enlightenment ideas, and yet it
builds on them. The Marriage of Heaven and Hell is a totally off-the-wall challenge to
normal reader expectations. It's a medley of incongruous forms, poetry, proverbs, allusions
to contemporary people, parodies of other writers, satiric narratives. It starts out
as if it's about religion, but you soon see it's about politics too, and psychology, and
the whole way we understand ourselves in the world. In a single lecture, I can't take up
everything in this densely packed work. I'm going to concentrate on certain parts that
directly address the themes of this course, together with some illuminating parallels
from other works by Blake. And at the end, I'll talk about a poem from the Songs of
Experience called London that condenses everything into one short masterpiece. The title page of
The Marriage of Heaven and Hell shows at the top pairs of lovers strolling or sitting under
some leafless trees in a very calm and colorless scene, but underneath them fierce flames are pouring
upward in another sky. And at the bottom, two soaring figures are kissing in a kind of twisted
embrace full of athletic energy. The conventional idea, of course, was heaven is up above and the
torments of hell fire down below. Blake's idea is we need to rethink the entire symbolism that
heaven and hell have represented. Maybe the flames down below aren't all bad after all.
So this is how Blake puts it, as soon as we got a little way into his text.
Without contraries is no progression. Attraction and repulsion, reason and energy, love and hate
are necessary to human existence. From these contraries spring what the religious call good
and evil. Good is the passive that obeys reason. Evil is the active springing from energy. Good
is heaven. Evil is hell. Blake is phrasing this in religious terms, but the opposition he's
talking about goes far beyond that. Practically every philosophy before the romantic period
was hierarchical. Certain values were on top, others below, generally reason on top, passions
below. And even when a writer like Hume said reason is and ought to be the slave of the passions,
what he meant was natural instincts, not violent passions like love and hate. Now Blake is not
trying to merely invert the hierarchy, putting passion on top and reason below. He's calling for
a dynamic union of these oppositions that we all experience in our lives. A marriage is a union
of two very different people. There will always be some tension in it, like that pair of figures at
the bottom of the title page, but according to Blake that's as it should be. And the great
insight of the romantic thinkers in general was that human nature is dynamic. So instead of trying
to suppress parts of ourselves as traditional psychology and ethics taught, or trying to escape
from our conflicts as Rousseau wanted to do with his reveries in the bosom of nature, we should
acknowledge our conflicts and try to make them productive. In addition, Blake was a political
radical. And writing in 1790, as he was in this work, there's a very immediate context.
Conservative critics of the French Revolution of 1789, such as Edmund Burke, invoked the symbolism
of the fall from the Bible to associate the revolutionaries with the sin of pride, the
satanic rebellion. So Blake is very deliberately rehabilitating the satanic. What he certainly
doesn't mean is that cruelty is good, far from it. What he means is energy and conflict are
fundamental to human existence. Whereas he believes official religion and political thought
defined energy and conflict as wicked, and that was in order to make people passive and subservient.
So Blake says, those who restrain desire do so because theirs is weak enough to be restrained.
And the restrainer, or reason, usurps its place and governs the unwilling.
That makes me think of James Boswell, afraid of his own desires, struggling to deny them.
But in Blake's term, unwilling when he does that, his deepest self is in pain. You may remember
Boswell, when he was trying to understand this in himself, wrote, I act passively.
And that's exactly what Blake is saying. Blake continues, desire being restrained by degrees
becomes passive till it is only the shadow of desire. Likewise, Blake rejects the dualism of
flesh and spirit, but also rejects its empiricist revision as the dualism of body and mind. And
he's especially indignant that religion teaches, as he puts it, the God will torment man in eternity
for following his energies. And in opposition to that, Blake asserts, energy is the only life and
is from the body. And reason is the bound or outward circumference of energy. So this way,
reason is the shaping form that keeps energy from being chaotic and diffuse, just as in Blake's art,
a bounding outline would control the shape of the energy within. But it's the energy that's crucial,
and Blake adds the concise comment, energy is eternal delight.
Empiricism was all about the pursuit of knowledge. And with that motto, sapere, ode, dare to know,
the Philasus challenge, the traditional story of the fall, the story in which Adam and Eve
disobeyed the original command, ate the forbidden fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil. Well, Blake completely agrees with the Enlightenment in rejecting that. But he does
not agree that knowledge should be reduced to epistemology, those bits of sense data we collect
and recombine. He wrote a work very early called, There is no natural religion, in which he explicitly
condemns Enlightenment assumptions about knowledge. Man's perceptions, Blake says,
are not bounded by organs of perception. Hepacy is more than sense, though ever so acute, can
discover. If it were not for the poetic or prophetic character, the philosophical and experimental
would soon be at the ratio of all things and stand still, unable to do other than repeat the same
dull round over again. This is Blake's view of empiricism. It ties itself down to a world where
nothing is real except sense data. And this becomes a closed circuit going round and round the same
dull round over and over like the orbits of the planets in the Newtonian universe.
But although Blake rejects the epistemological definition of knowledge, he does agree with
the Philisoph that knowledge is a positive good. Like them, he rejects the story of the fall,
which ends with an angel with a flaming sword posted at the entrance to the Garden of Eden
to make sure the human race never gets in again. And here's what Blake says in The Marriage of
Heaven and Hell. The cherub with his flaming sword is hereby commanded to leave his guard at the
tree of life. And when he does, the whole creation will be consumed and appear infinite and holy,
whereas it now appears finite and corrupt. This will come to pass by an improvement of sensual
enjoyment. Theology taught the world will be burned up in a last judgment at the very end of time
that will bring the end of the universe as we know it and will then condemn the torment in hell
those sinners who are denied salvation. Blake holds the true last judgment is an interior breakthrough
that perceives the whole universe as already spiritually transformed. In another work he said,
whenever any individual rejects error and embraces truth, a last judgment passes upon that individual.
And in The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, the passage about the angel with the flaming sword
concludes like this. If the doors of perception were cleansed, everything would appear to man
as it is infinite. For man has closed himself up till he sees all things through narrow chinks of
his cavern. Blake is recalling Plato's myth of the cave in which the whole human race is like
prisoners chained in a cave unable to do more than guess at the true reality outside which
throws flickering shadows on the cave walls. And in a number of places in his works, Blake
likens the empiricist self to those prisoners chained down in the cave of the skull trying to
make sense of the flickering images projected on our retinas from outside. And what we need to
understand Blake is saying is that the true spiritual world isn't somewhere else as Plato and
Christianity both taught. It's right here. If only we can cleanse the doors of perception and see
it truly. Jim Morrison was a reader of Blake. That's why he called his band the doors. So why
shouldn't we reject the body as religions seem to teach? Because the body is in fact our source of
energy and understanding. But neither should we merely gratify it the way Mertuy does so
destructively in Lilius Andangeruz. Blake says what we need is an improvement of sensual enjoyment.
It will no longer imply an all or nothing opposition between body and mind or body and soul,
but instead a dynamic interaction, a marriage of reason and energy, a marriage of heaven and hell.
So just to summarize where we stand with respect to the themes of this course,
Blake's position is incredibly far from Benjamin Franklin and Adam Smith,
but it's also very far from Pascal and Bunyan because Blake denies that our souls are separate
from our physical selves and that they need to escape to some distant heaven. Moreover,
he also denies that what's trapping us here in this veil of tears is our sinful desires,
which need to be ruthlessly repressed. You don't get Pascal and Bunyan calling for an
improvement of sensual enjoyment. To put it another way, Blake does agree with the older
religious thinkers that human psychology is deeply conflicted, full of self condemnation and
self repression. But unlike them, he encourages us to get beyond restrictive moral categories of
good and evil. He has a lot in common with Nietzsche a couple of generations later who wrote
Beyond Good and Evil. When Blake calls for a marriage of heaven and hell, the idea is not
that we should start acting like demons. It's that positive energy shouldn't be labeled demonic,
and negative passivity shouldn't be labeled good. At the very end of the work, he describes Jesus
as a man of energy and passion, and he actually claims that in one way or another he broke all
of the Ten Commandments. So Blake's Jesus is very much a living human being, not a temporary
embodiment from outside of our world. We should notice also how Blake inverts enlightenment
materialism, such as we saw in Dallinbert's Dream. Blake says,
Man has no body distinct from his soul. For that called body is a portion of soul discerned by the
five senses. Dieterl's collaborator Ulbach, who is a resolute materialist, said the soul is nothing
more or less than the body in one of its functions. The British philosophy journal Mind used to
print on its title page this dry comment, Mind is classified by the United States Post Office as
second-class matter. Well, Blake turns that upside down. For him, there's no mind-body problem,
because the only reality we know is in our imaginations, but that's part of our bodily
life, not its opposite. So for Blake, body is an expression of mind, not the other way around.
And this actually, to some extent, he's following a philosopher named Bishop Barclay,
who stressed the isolation of the empiricist self and used that as an argument for the existence
of God, the one principle that can connect us with the outside world. But Barclay was a very
atypical empiricist, and we haven't had space in this course to introduce him. Another way of
thinking about these issues is this. Blake wants us to recover the openness and freshness of childhood
before the cynicism of experience crippled our ability to really perceive. As he once said,
we should see through the eye and not with it. In his notebook, there are some verses called
Auguries of Innocence, which make this point with memorable clarity.
To see a world in a grain of sand and a heaven in a wild flower,
hold infinity in the palm of your hand and eternity in an hour.
For empiricist science, infinity is just empty space going on forever, as Pascal said,
and eternity is just the clock ticking on and on, tick, tick, tick forever. For Blake,
infinity is the fullness of reality that we're immersed in right here and now.
We can see a world in a grain of sand, not the atomistic particles of Macron, Voltaire, Rousseau.
As for eternity, it's the fullness of time in which every single lived moment participates. Blake
says in The Marriage of Heaven and Help, eternity is in love with the productions of time.
And I've often thought that the breakthrough Blake is calling for, that individualized last
judgment when we free ourselves from error. It's very much like the satori that followers of
Zen Buddhism aspire to. If you achieve that breakthrough, you don't leave this world behind.
On the contrary, you see it more fully and deeply. You feel more completely at one with it.
As part of his campaign to inspire a new understanding of spirit, freeing it from dogmatic
repression, Blake gives a concise critique of Milton's Epic of the Fall of Man, Paradise Lost,
which he regarded as a truly great poem, but shackled, as I said in the last lecture,
by its repressive theology. Blake's critique is much more than literary criticism. It's about
how beliefs get distorted and are then preached by a culture's official spokesman. So he says
in The Marriage of Heaven and Help, in Milton, the father is destiny, the son, a ratio of the five
senses, and the Holy Ghost, vacuum. Blake did not believe in the Trinity, God in three persons.
That was the concept he thought was literally unbelievable. And he thinks what theology has done
is split up the idea of the divine into separate compartments. So in Paradise Lost, and I think
this is true of the poem, God the Father is much like Calvin's God, remote, cold, punitive, judgmental,
nothing like a loving father, like the one of the Hebrew Bible, who deserves to be loved in return,
as in the Songs of Innocence. As for the son, who according to Blake, should be the divine
principal at its most real and most human little lamb who made thee, in Paradise Lost, the son
becomes a common denominator of the empiricist world into which he temporarily enters, a ratio of
the five senses is how Blake puts it, a temporary incarnation, not an always living principle
of vitality. And as for the Holy Ghost, as the very name might suggest, so shadowy and hard to
understand, it might as well be non-existent, a vacuum, Blake says. So here, just as in Machon,
there's a radical rethinking of traditional symbolism. And Blake goes on to say, the reason
Milton wrote in fatters, when he wrote of angels and God, and at liberty of devils in hell, is
because he was a true poet and of the devil's party without knowing it. People often misunderstand
that statement because they don't know the context in the revaluing of good and evil that the whole
of the marriage of heaven and hell is about. Blake's point is not that Milton was really vicious
and diabolical. Not at all. It's that Milton in his own life was a rebel against tyranny
in the Puritan Revolution. Milton was a close advisor of Oliver Cromwell. He defended the
execution of King Charles I, which was regarded as blasphemous at the time. He was very lucky not
to get a death sentence when the Puritans were thrown out and King Charles II returned to the
throne. So what Milton never realized, according to Blake, is that in Paradise Lost, he is showing
us a tyrannical God, even though Milton believes we ought to adore him. And so Milton cannot help
making Satan's rebellion against that God seem heroic, even though his own theology tells him
that's wrong. Poetry is an argument, it's imaginative insight. Milton has plenty of that,
so his poem says more than he means it to say. And since Blake agrees with the way the Enlightenment
criticized institutional religion against Milton's kind of theology, what Blake gives us in the
Marriage of Heaven and Hell is really a kind of enlightenment anthropology of religion. He says
that in the earliest days, poets imagined rivers and mountains filled with spiritual energy. They
gave them names accordingly. But later on, what happened was this. A system was formed which some
took advantage of and enslaved the vulgar, that is the common people, by attempting to realize or
abstract the mental deities from their objects. Thus began priesthood, choosing forms of worship
from poetic tales. Thus men forgot that all deities reside in the human breast.
As an anthropology that could have been written by Voltaire or Hume, but whereas the Enlightenment
wanted to debunk both kinds of gods, the animistic deities of rivers and mountains,
as well as the holy trinity of Christian theology, Blake wants to return to an idea of the divine
that resides in living beings. And so he says, men forgot all deities reside in the human breast.
Blake's goal is not to preach some new religion of his own. In fact, there's some satire in the
marriage of heaven and hell on Immanuel Swedenborg, an 18th century mystic who did found a church of
his own. Blake's goal, as always, is to rouse the faculties to act, to goad us, and to thinking for
ourselves. One of the most interesting ways he does this is in what he calls the proverbs of hell,
which are etched by a mighty devil on a flat rock. Actually, that's a playful illusion to
Blake himself, seeing the reflection of his own face in the copper plate that he's etching with
acid in his engraver's technique. While ordinary proverbs are trite, they're meant to be truisms.
They recycle conventional wisdom. A stitch in time saves nine, out of sight, out of mind. Blake's
proverbs are unforgettably thought-provoking aphorisms. They're challengingly open, where the maxims of
La Roche-Foucault were closed. I'll select just a few of them and make some comments,
though by their very nature they can't be exhausted by any commentary. Each person
should ponder them for him or herself. Right at the very beginning we read,
drive your cart and your plow over the bones of the dead. Conservatism was all about obeying the
wishes of the past. Edmund Burke wrote eloquently about how the present generation should be aware
of altering what took so long to perfect. Blake is saying the past is dead. It's the living. You
have to make their world for themselves. And if the bones of the dead have any value,
it's not to be fetishized in some kind of ancestor worship, but to be nourishment for new
crops will be planted after plowing over them. Here's the next proverb. The road of excess
leads to the palace of wisdom. Ever since ancient times, moderation was taught as the supreme ideal.
The oracle at Delphi had a double motto, know thyself, really meaning know your place in society,
and nothing too much. Blake is saying you can't be wise until you've tested the limits.
Wisdom doesn't come from passive subservience and neither does self-knowledge. Some of the
proverbs have an overtly political theme like this one. Prisons are built with stones of law,
brothels with bricks of religion. That particular proverb is so richly suggested before I comment
on it, I'd like to turn to the Song of Experience, I said we'd take up. It's the poem called London,
and it epitomizes Blake's vision of society and the self, because he sees them as two versions
of the same thing, society as the outward projection of the conflicts of the self.
Blake was very much a city person. He lived outside of London for only one period in his life
when a would-be patron got him to move to the countryside. He was miserably unhappy there.
And whereas some of the Romantic poets like Wordsworth and Blake's time
got disillusioned with politics and recommended dropping out of the social and political world,
much as Rousseau had done, Blake was a committed radical. He makes philosophy like Voltaire look
like privileged country gentlemen, as indeed Voltaire was. Now the telling couplet inaugurates
of innocence, that poem I quoted that begins by seeing infinity in a grain of sand, and a couplet
is, the prince's robes and beggar's rags are toadstools on the miser's bags. Adam Smith remember
thought the growth of wealth would raise the standard of living for everyone. Blake is using
the older moralistic term miser for somebody who accumulates wealth, and he's saying that both
extremes in society, the expensive robes of the prince and the rags of the street person, both of
them, are fun, gloidal growths that are nourished by a society that's measuring itself by the wealth
it creates. So the prince's robes and beggar's rags are toadstools on the miser's bags. Well,
this brings us to the poem London, 16 lines long, short enough to read all the way through.
I wander through each chartered street near where the chartered Thames does flow,
and mark in every face I meet marks of weakness, marks of woe. In every cry of every man,
in every infant's cry of fear, in every voice, in every band that met curse, the mind forged
manacles I hear. How the chimney sweepers cry, every blackening church appalls, and the hapless
soldier's sigh runs in blood down palace walls. But most, through midnight streets I hear,
how the youthful harlot's curse blasts the newborn infant's tear, and blights with plagues
the marriage curse. To me, this poem is Blake's masterpiece. As an urban worker, he was fully
aware of the anonymity and lack of freedom in the modern world of work. But as a political
radical, he believed it was due mainly to the way society was structured for the benefit of the
privileged. Start with those charters, the chartered streets, the chartered Thames. In the 1790s,
when he wrote this, in the aftermath of the French Revolution, there was a big conservative
crackdown in England for fear the revolution might spread. One of Blake's friends was the
agitator Tom Payne, who had been a spokesman for the American Revolution. Payne argued the charters
that supposedly guaranteed the freedom of Englishmen, the various legal documents all the way back to
Magna Carta, drawn up over centuries specifying what their rights were. These charters were really
ways of circumscribing and limiting rights. Whatever wasn't officially granted could be treated as
forbidden. Every block in London could be located on a map of real estate rights. The river Thames
flowed between artificial walls, as if it too was tied down and subjected. So that's why Blake
writes, I wander through each chartered street near where the chartered Thames does flow. And what he
sees is the harried, deadened faces of modern urban workers. He says, marks of weakness,
marks of woe. It's like the line from Dante's Inferno that T.S. Eliot put into the wasteland,
watching the commuters streaming over London Bridge. I had not thought death had undone so many.
But this is only the start of Blake's great poem. What he hears in the cries of infants,
in the foul language of people in the street, is what he calls in an unforgettable phrase,
the mind forged manacles. The South African martyr Stephen Biko once said, the strongest
weapon in the hand of the oppressor is the mind of the oppressed. That's exactly what Blake is saying.
People keep obediently in their place, just like those poor little chimney sweeps in the Song of
Innocence poem, because they've internalized their submission. They're wearing manacles inside their
minds. And Blake's charge is this is no accident. The official power structure likes it that way.
So the Church of England, which should be in the moral forefront leading the fight against child
labor, was indeed telling those miserable chimney sweeps to patiently do their duty, slavery though
it certainly was, and early death though it led to. And that's why Blake says, how the chimney
sweepers cry, every blackening church appalls. The soot on the London churches is a visible sign
of their moral failure. In the same way, young soldiers who are dying all over the globe in
battles to extend the British Empire, they're carrying out the policy of the government because
they've been taught to feel patriotic when they do it. It's the mind forged manacles again.
And if we can only see with our eyes what these deaths mean, then Blake says the hapless soldier
sigh runs in blood down palace walls. The poem ends with the most bitter example of all, the
prostitute whose curse he says blights with plagues the marriage hearse. An astonishing upsetting
word choice, not the carriage bringing the happy couple to the church, but the vehicle of death
they're really riding in. And it's because the prostitute has given venereal disease to the husband
and he'll pass it on to his wife and she'll transmit it to her unborn baby. We remember Boswell
was uneasy about his addiction to prostitutes, but he could never get any perspective on it.
Blake's message is this, prostitutes are not just bad girls who've made a mistake, that prostitution
was a semi-official safety valve to keep loveless, passionless marriages intact. It was supposedly
illegal, but it was very openly condoned. So now for the proverb of hell that I postponed in order
to talk about this poem London, prisons are built with stones of law, brothels with bricks of religion.
It's a startling idea that religion could be responsible for the existence of brothels,
but in Blake's view that's what repression and denial lead to. One of the songs of experience is
called The Garden of Love. It describes a chapel with thou shalt not, writ over the door, and the
poem ends, priests in black gowns were walking their rounds and binding with briars my joys and
desires. For Blake desire is a positive good, but a culture that represses desire forces it to detour
into unwholesome forms, including this subculture of prostitution. His choice of words in that
proverb is interesting too. Prisons are built with stones of law. Stones are dense, strong,
natural objects. Every society needs law in some form, though it might abuse its power and use
prisons for repression, not justice. Bricks are entirely man-made, clay and straw packed into molds.
The bricks of religion are very different from the stones of law. A picture for this poem, London,
by the way, is unlike most of the others, not a symbolic image, but a naturalistic representation
of the kind Blake almost never did. A boy in wintertime leading a crippled old man past doors
that are shut against him, and another boy trying to warm his cold hands at a fire in the street.
So what do we have in these works of Blake? An extraordinary union of opposites.
There's a trenchant critique of the way society works. Every bit is searching as anything the
Enlightenment produced, but at the same time a vision of spiritual renewal, a quality of innocence
that potentially survives in us all. On the one hand, the self is heavily conditioned by social
forces, the mind-forged manacles. On the other hand, each individual can achieve spiritual breakthrough
and recreate the meaning of his or her life, seeing the grains of sand not as barren matter,
but the scene of a pilgrimage to something better. So Blake's crucial insight is conflicts are built
into our psychological nature. When we project those conflicts outward, we produce a repressive
social and political order, and then repressive religious and philosophical explanations are
invented to support it. Of course, his message is extreme and outrageous. He knew that, but the calm
expository prose of the Enlightenment was not for him. His poem, London, is a protest ballad.
Well, the final line of the Proverbs of Hell reads, enough or too much. And an earlier Proverb said,
you never know what's enough unless you know what's more than enough. And that goes for this course too.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series. Our courses are now available
to order online. Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer service representatives
at 1-800-TEACH-12. That's 1-800-832-2412. Thank you very much.
