So the key ends up being, how do we stop negative feedback cycles everywhere? And how do we start
propagating virtuous cycles? So we want to be able to pull the body levers, the environment levers,
the relationship levers, the psyche levers simultaneously.
Charge up your axons, ready your receptors, and shift your lobes into upper beta phase.
You are listening to Smart Drug Smarts, the podcast dedicated to helping you optimize your
brain with the latest breakthroughs in neuroscience, neurotropics, and psychopharmacology.
Hello, and welcome to Smart Drug Smarts. My name is Jesse Lawler. I'm your host,
and this is the 169th episode of this podcast dedicated to the ongoing betterment of your brain
by any and all means at your disposal. This week, we're going to be getting a little bit into
futurism, philosophy, complexity science, and the evolution of the medical industry,
what things might be looking like in 5, 15, 20 years, what things should be looking like,
the intersection of big data and personalized medicine, and last but not least, what all this
means for your brain. We're going to be talking with the founder of a group called the Neurohacker
Collective, Daniel Schmacktenberger in the main interview, getting pretty geeky, but also covering
some really, really interesting topics. It's one of those big picture conversations that points out
both the horrible ways in which society seems to be running itself off of a cliff, and also the
awesome opportunities that we have to radically improve things. I had a great time with this
conversation, really appreciated Daniel's ability to kind of shine a light on both the
opportunities and the pitfalls that we've got in front of us. So a good interview coming up in
somewhat of a longer episode this time. If you're exhausted by the end of the interview and just
need to get some sleep, hang around until the end of the episode, I'm going to tell you what sleeping
position actually proves to be best for your brain. Believe it or not, the position that you
sleep in, as well as just about everything else about sleep, can make a quantitative difference
in your brain health. This is true at least if you are a rat, but probably true for people as well.
That'll be in the ruthless listener retention gimmick. But as usual, let's kick things off
first with This Week in Neuroscience.
Smart Drug Smarts This Week in Neuroscience
So it's always nice to see a Smart Drug Smarts alumnus in the news, and I wanted to get this
one in there. This is not actually a This Week in Neuroscience, but a late last year in Neuroscience.
But the lead author of this paper that was recently published in the journal with a cool name, Brain
Stimulation, was none other than Dr. Martin Monti of UCLA, who he spoke with on a twofer
episode where we interviewed both him and Dr. Kathleen Bell about traumatic brain injury.
This was probably 10, 15 episodes ago at this point. But right around that same time, Dr. Monti
was also helping a 25-year-old man who was in a coma recover and break out of that coma through a
never-before-used technique called low-intensity focused ultrasound pulsation, which in layman's
terms jumped started his brain out of the coma using sonic stimulation to excite neurons in
the brain's thalamus. Prior to last year, the closest thing that neurologists had been able
to accomplish to this was using DBS, Deep Brain Stimulation, which is a surgical procedure which
is invasive. But what Monti and his group did was a purely non-invasive technique using a device
about the size of a coffee cup saucer, which created a small sphere of acoustical energy that
could be aimed at different regions of the brain to excite the brain tissue there. In this case,
they targeted the thalamus, which is a region in which the performance is typically vastly diminished
in patients suffering from coma. The changes in the patient, according to Monti, were remarkable.
Prior to the procedure, the man showed only minimal signs of being conscious and understanding
speech. He could perform small, limited movements, but by three days after the procedure, he'd regained
full consciousness and full language comprehension. He could reliably respond to doctors by nodding,
yes, shaking his head, no, and he even made a fist bump gesture to say goodbye to one of
his doctors who left the room. According to Dr. Monti, the researchers expected a positive
result with this technique, but he cautioned that the procedure requires further study on
additional patients before this could become a standard of care. It's possible, he said,
that we were just very lucky and happened to have stimulated the patient just as he was
spontaneously recovering. The device used emits only a small amount of energy and it worked just
by turning it on in 30 second blocks 10 times over a 10 minute period. So 30 seconds on, 30
seconds off for 10 minutes, that was enough to stimulate the thalamus. According to Monti,
if things work out, this could eventually be built into a portable device such as a helmet
that could be used to wake up coma patients or other people in vegetative states.
Smart drug smarts. The podcast So Smart, we have smart in our title twice.
Picked up a couple of five star reviews on iTunes this week, although I'm only going to give you
one of them now because I've got a couple other things I want to go over. Nick in the house 96
from the USA says, the science behind these podcasts is incredibly accurate. I wish I would
have known about these podcasts in my chemical engineering undergrad courses, probably the
most educational podcast I've ever listened to. I also heard from a listener who can do something
called mirror writing, which is the type of ambidexterity where somebody can write with both
hands simultaneously with their right hand and their left hand doing exact mirror images of one
another. So me, for example, I would be able to write my name perfectly forward with my right hand
and simultaneously be writing a backward version of it with my left hand. She says that she's been
able to do this her entire life. In fact, when she was in high school, she would take notes
backward with her left hand just because she was able to and presumably to weird out her friends.
She does, however, have a hard time writing forward with her left hand. And anyway, she said
there's very little information available about this on the internet and she wanted to know how
common this isn't if maybe some other listeners were able to do this or at least knew something
about it. I said that sounded cool enough to mention on the next episode. So if there are any
other mirror writers in the audience, definitely drop me an email. I will get you guys connected.
Finally, I also heard from a couple of people over the course of this week about last week's episode
when there was a little bit of a sideways jab from the guest Dr. Gary Wank about running and how
runners are oftentimes physically injured as a result of their running. Some people got probably
justifiably huffy about this, that normally it's bad running form and more frequently bad
running shoes that lead to runner's injuries. And a couple of people mentioned by name the book
by Christopher McDougal from a couple of years ago, Born to Run, which is a good book. I'll vouch
for that very, very entertaining read. And among other things, he comes down really hard on Nike
as fomenting a style of running with landing on your heels that is not good for human feet.
But anyway, this is not a cross training or a shoe comparison podcast. So I won't go too deeply
into that, but did want to let the popular discontent be heard, not scare anybody away from
running. If you might have been thinking of doing some running and last week's podcast talked you
out of it, you might want to think about that one more time. While you're out there exerting energy
on your run making use of your mitochondria, I would be remiss if I did not mention mitogen by
axon labs, six ingredients there, including adebonone, solbutiamine, biopqq and more,
a synergistic blend to load up your mitochondria with precursors and proliferate the number of
mitochondria that you've got. Very handy for everything from running to thinking and anything
in between. You can find mitogen and its sister stack nexus, which is a cognitive stack, both of
those over at axonlabs.io on the web or if you're at the Smart Drug Smarts homepage, we got a shop
link in our header. Axon Labs runs 24 seven, 365 days a year. And every now and then little
special things go on worth knowing about time boxed deals and such. The best way to find out
about those, of course, is to follow what's going on on Smart Drug Smarts various social media channels
or our newsletter at the Brain Breakfast, where we often give first whiff when we've got something
new going on. You can sign up for that over at smartdrugsmarts.com slash newsletter. That's
just about all. So let's jump ahead now to the main interview. Smart Drug Smarts. So I'm about
to be speaking with Daniel Schmockdenberger. He is the founder of something called the Neurohacker
Collective, the creators of a new tropic supplement that hit the market last year called
Qualia. If you're a new tropics fan, you've probably seen Qualia ads on some websites,
but Qualia is just the most visible tip of a fairly large iceberg that they've got going on
over at the Neurohacker Collective, an iceberg which I'm about to ruin the iceberg metaphor,
but is slowly surfacing and revealing more and more of itself to the world. Daniel Schmockdenberger
and his team have very, very large scale plans for upregulating human cognition, the human condition
in general. I think he would probably not blush to say that he is on a mission to save the world,
change the world, certainly. And he believes that we've reached a point in science where
reductionism in deconstructing things has probably reached about the end of its usefulness in most
cases and we're using a big data whole systems approach is probably the best way forward in a
lot of major endeavors like medicine. So what this is going to be is a bit of a hodgepodge
conversation around future of medicine, system science, new tropic stack design,
how society should be thinking about IP law, and on and on there's one technical term which gets
dropped here which is a shit ton of data which I think has never been used on this show before,
but it's a keeper. Lots and lots of talk about big data and a fun little fact about
Neurohacker's product, qualia. If that word qualia sounds familiar, it's an old one. It is
actually the plural form of quali which is defined as a property such as whiteness which can be
considered independently of the thing having the property. So you could talk about the quali softness
of a blanket, but leave out the blanket. Thought that was a pretty cool name. Now the man that
came up with that name, Daniel Schmockdenberger. One of the key distinctions between complicated
systems and complex systems is self-organization. And when you have a self-organizing system,
when you look at a cell, it was not designed exogenously like a computer chip was. So they
had fundamentally different processes of coming about. So complex systems are the result of
self-interacting dynamics and evolutionary processes. So you have self-interacting dynamics
and the things that are effective end up getting selected for and then you keep having these
increased effectiveness selection dynamics. And one of the interesting things about self-organizing
systems is the way they have non-arbitrary boundaries, the relationship of the cell
to the world around it, the plant, the animal, whatever it is to the rest of the world around
it has a non-arbitrary boundary where you have the agency of that system being able to move
within the environment, externalize entropy outside of the system and have sensory input
of some kind, information processing and actuator output. Complicated systems are totally
different at all of those processes. The advent of what we call modern science with Galileo
Descartes, really codified with Newton and going beyond, started working with small variable systems
where you had an angle and how much gunpowder and that was really all that was needed. And in
those small variable systems, classical mechanics and specifically reductionism, taking a very
complex idea like how do we win a war, finding a couple key variables, bringing it all down to
those key variables, was super useful, right? It was so useful. We didn't need dowsing rods
anymore. We didn't need guesses. In fact, it was so much more effective than all those systems that
it became the dominant system for knowing how to do things. And we started being able to get into
systems that had more variables than just a couple. But then as you start to encounter the
natural world, the biological world, and you start to deal with complex systems where you have
not just a slightly larger number of, but still distinct variables, but you have nearly
indefinite number of variables. You have bottom up and top down effects. They're all radically
interacting where they co-evolved in such a way that the variables it studied in isolation actually
do different things than they do in synergy and combinatorics of that context. So context ends
up defining the thing very profoundly, then just looking at a small number of variables and then
putting it back together and not realizing that those variables actually do different things in
isolation than they did together. And they do different things with synergies of them than
they did separately. It doesn't end up being adequate. Our systems of medicine have done really
good where the cause of illness or small number of variable causes like acute illness. The issue
comes from a bullet wound or a car accident or something where you can trace the causation to
something fairly acute. Then we're pretty good at being able to reverse that and that's where
Western medicine is really proliferated. But if you have cancer or autoimmune disease or neurodegenerative
disease or any kind of complex chronic scenarios that are multifactorial, there might be some
elements of toxicity involved, some elements of pathogenicity, some elements of deficiency,
some genetics, some psychoneuroimmunology, like lots of things with delayed causation over time
and then causal cascades where many different elements are interacting. We aren't able to trace
the etiology of them. We're also looking for it to be the same etiology that MS is one thing,
that anxiety is one thing and it's not. It is a set of similar-ish symptoms that can have not
only many different causes but different sets of those causes in different people in different
contexts. We need fundamentally different epistemology, different processes of knowing
and studying to do a good job with those kinds of things. A lot of people are going to be nodding
and following along, agreeing with that in principle, but also saying yes, but everything
that we hear from neuroscience is that the brain is still this really complicated, partially
unknown frontier. And if there's maybe one area of science where we don't know enough of the
fine minute specifics yet to be able to move away from reductionism, the brain might be it.
Would you disagree with that statement? Would you think that we're near some sort of swing
point or tipping point? What's your general thoughts there?
I would say we need to frame up the topic differently. In reductionism, our goal is to
take a complex system and break it down into subsystems that are simpler and break those down
into subsystems and that's the direction of specialization. We take health and we look at
neurology and gastroenterology and oncology and rheumatology. We break the body into these kinds
of anatomical tract systems. Try to understand those. One of the problems ends up being here
that you can have gut issues that a gastroenterologist should be looking at that are affecting
brain issues via gut, brain access dynamics via microbiome, the enteric nervous system,
like so many different dynamics. And so the cross system effects, it's actually a reason that
there's an assumption that whole systems effects are harder and further away epistemologically from
here than reductionist answers. And I'm actually saying that reductionist answers are infinitely
far away because they can never solve these things. Ultimately, we'll always be reductionist and that
we will always be looking at a subset of everything that is involved. We're never going to know that
every variable that's involved, we have perfect confidence margins on. So we're reducing the
whole to some subset, but the key is that we seek to have that be not only a growing subset, but
that we understand the interconnectedness more. Obviously, we've been in Western apathic medicine
and science in general, trying to understand more and more variables, understanding all the
complex interactions between them and how they self organize complex, not complicated interactions
applying a different kind of thinking to how it emerged that way is where we have a lot of room
for growth right now. And that's the whole systems biology movement. So we move from these anatomical
tracks to these similarly causal worlds of looking at the body, genomics, microbiomics, transcriptomics,
conectomics, the whole world of things like this that are involved at a level of self organization.
We're very far away from understanding the human connectome or the human genome adequately,
even though we've sequenced the genome combinatorics on those genes and then gene expression and then
recursion at the level of what's happening in the blood to changing gene expression is something
that we're quite far from. Owning a book versus being an expert in that book and what the author
actually meant in all the various interpretations are two very different things. Very different
things, but the movement to start trying to take what seemed like very different areas of study
and understand how this one system involved to have all of these parts interacting is,
I would say, one of the frontiers of the biological sciences right now.
Your organization, as the great name, you got Neurohacker.com, but it is named the Neurohacker
Collective. Why did you choose the Neuro? Why draw that particular circle of emphasis for yourself?
So Neurohacker Collective was born out of a think tank that was working on complex system
problem solving for all of the major complex systems at a civilization level. So we're working
on future economics where the incentive of all agents is aligned with the well-being of other
agents in the common. We're working on governance, so better systems of decision making, and we're
working on infrastructure to have closed loop infrastructure where there's no waste or need
for ongoing unsustainable materials acquisition, etc. And we're working on how do we make sure
that we have models that are really adequate for where humanity's going. And once it was time to
start building some of these, we've done work in a number of the areas, the reason why we decided
to invest a lot in the psychoneurospace early, and we're still working on all of those spaces
interconnectedly, but why the psychoneurospace so important is a couple reasons. One is all the
problems that we see in the world that we would want to change, whether we're talking about overfishing
of the oceans or biodiversity loss or war or crazy fundamentalism or crime or anything,
all these problems are being caused by human activity. And human activity is being predisposed
by lots of things, economics are predisposing it, but physiology is part of what's predisposing it.
Everyone knows that when their hormones are really out of place, the neurotransmitters are
out of place, that not only do they feel shittier, but they're likely to act differently and different
in potentially less good ways. Well, that ends up going all the way to the level of
psychopathy, empathy is mediated over certain neural networks, and it can be up or down
regulated complex problem solving is mediated over certain neural networks and can be more or less
capable. So the hardware that human consciousness and decision making runs on is a big deal.
And so not only are all the problems predisposed by human action, but all the solutions
are going to have to come through human action. And so how do we elevate the collective intelligence
and the collective experience and positive predisposition of humanity is a bandwidth limiting
factor for all critical things. And so working at this level of helping to upregulate human
experience and human capability ends up being a very highly leveraged thing to do for everything
else. Because then as you take people who want to do positive things and empower them at a
hardware level, more positive things get to happen in a distributed, decentralized way.
The other reason why we want to work on is because it's very complex. And the more complex it is,
the degree to which you succeed there means that those same tools can be repurposed to other things.
What is a specific problem that you would like to solve that you're working to solve now?
We are working on psycho neurotopics. And what we can share publicly is things where we're kind
of able to offer direct to people enhancement technologies, medical technologies obviously
have to go through a whole legal process for what it means to clear those medical technologies,
but we're working on the research of it deeply. And so when we're talking about psycho neuro,
we're talking about neurodegenerative things and kind of psychiatric things where you have to deal
with not only the brain and the nervous system, which is more complex in terms of orders of magnitude
of total interactions happening than any other body system, but you also have to do the whole
rest of the body system in which it's embedded. And you have to deal with the interface with the
psyche, radically harder kind of science because science doesn't deal with psyches well, doesn't
deal with subjective stuff. So it will only deal with the objective correlates of the subjective
stuff because that's what science evolved to do. And so having to deal with subject object interface,
plus the complexity of the objective, we started there because it was an area both where you can
alleviate the most suffering, enhance human capability the most. And if you can do well there,
you can do well with things that are relatively easy like cancer and autoimmune disease and other
aspects of human optimization. But so let's take in a single example, let's take anxiety,
but I could have just as easily said Alzheimer's or MS or sleep disorders or anything, right?
Sure. Let's say we're going to take anxiety, which is obviously pretty ubiquitous right now and
growingly ubiquitous. Then we say, well, how do we fix anxiety? Well, psychiatric cancer has been
given benzodiazepine. This obviously doesn't address underlying cause at all. But in the
process of not addressing underlying cause and just saying there's something wrong with their
GABA circuitry, let's make a much, much, much stronger GABA receptor agonist. Exogenously,
you exogenously externally override an endogenous system that you just deemed broken without
understanding what was wrong with it. And then in the process of doing that, create more dependence
on that exogenous thing. And then you fix the level of one in chain chemical, like what's
happening at a GABA receptor independent of the complexity of things it's normally interacting
with, which ends up meaning you throw off a bunch of ratios, you throw off a bunch of causal chains,
and so you get side effects. So those kinds of single molecule interventions not only don't deal
with cause, so the underlying pathogenesis can get worse, but they end up leading to oftentimes
increased dependence and side effects. So obviously an adequate approach to anxiety has to
understand cause and understand all the possibilities of cause and understand them
uniquely in each person and then have treatments that are customized to all the different things
that can go on. And for example, it would look like how much of a particular person's anxiety
is psychogenic in origin and how much is physiogenic might be a first question.
Psychogenic meaning the origin is primarily physical. Psychogenic mean the origin is primarily
psychological. If an axe murderer is chasing you, you should be anxious. Right. And if an axe murderer
chased you and you got acute PTSD from that that's continuing to loop, that's very different than
and so now you've got anxiety afterwards from that kind of acute PTSD, that's very
different than if you start having anxiety after head trauma, where you actually damage
some neural networks, or if you've always had anxiety that's maybe related to genetic predispositions
for methylation disorders, or if you got your anxiety primarily after getting a parasite,
which caused a gut brain access disorder, so your GABA production in your gut is lower,
or et cetera, et cetera. So we find that there are thousands of physiologic contributing factors
to what we call anxiety and potentially thousands of different kinds of psychogenic factors. And
there's different kinds of psychotherapeutic process and different kinds of medical process
and health process that are more effective for different sub elements. So then you have to say,
well, can we map the entire space of things that correlate with anxiety that could be causal?
And then can we figure out how to do differential diagnosis across all of them to see exactly
which things are going on for this person, which weighted subset of which elements. And then can
we map our treatments to the specific pathways, not to the in symptomology. So then which
combinations of treatments and which order of operations can all be prioritized and personalized
factoring everything that is known. Which sounds like you've got to be drinking data from some
large, large streams in order to try to have a reasonable guess based on all those different
types of data inputs that you'd want. Well, so you're looking at, say there was head trauma
involved, you've got to have some kinds of appropriate brain scans. Is it QEG? Is it
spec scan? Is it et cetera? How do you get that? Or you might simply look at behavioral scans,
cognitive psycho effective scans that we've have found over enough time correlate well
to a specific kind of trauma to the degree that it's genetic and predisposition. We've got to
be looking at whole genome sequencing and maybe at the level of gene expression, transcriptomics
or proteomics or to the degree that we're looking at mold toxicity that causes excitotoxicity and
the nervous system and anxiety. We have to be looking at the kind of clinical chemistry that
gives us toxicity and pathology, right? That's a lot of data. And right now it's hard to even get it.
We don't have high enough sensitivity and specificity on everything and it's stupidly
expensive and then you can't get it often enough to see what's working. So that's a diagnosis
issue. We have to get better and better diagnostic systems. So this is something that we're very
focused on both what's happening at the cutting edge of all different kinds of diagnostics that
we can synthesize. How can we help diagnostics get better towards adequate? And then once we have
this shit ton of data, the interpretation layer is how do we actually interpret all that data
where you aren't just looking at each biometric in relationship to a reference range, but you're
looking at each biometric in relationship to all the other biometrics and psychometrics to see
intercausal effects. That's ultimately a kind of AI processing a shit ton of diagnostic data,
psychometric and physiogenic data that then leads to a process where we have to have synthesized
all of the treatments that have been vetted as having some efficacy and then relating those down
to the pathways over which they have efficacy and then being able to customize. That though is
a decent baseline description of the future of complex medicine, personalized medicine.
What's that going to look like? Are those data sets going to be publicly available to some extent
or are these going to be developed almost like by rival hospitals or rival medical groups selling
access to their own particular live data sets? This is asking you to speculate obviously nobody's
got the magic wand here. Let me go a little bit higher for a minute because the question you asked
spoke to it. Medicine within capitalism is broken inexorably and unavoidably because
the theory of markets should not apply to something where people don't actually have a viable choice.
For-profit prisons are a problem, right? One should not have a profit incentive that is against
the liberty of the populace. For-profit military industrial complex is a problem.
Let me question that for a second though. It seems like if you actually completely flipped
the model, for example, paid a doctor for every month that you were perfectly healthy and you had
no complaints. If the incentives were different, it seems like maybe the system while not being
perfect could still be radically better than what it is now and still be a capitalist system.
So this is the key thing. That is a foundationally different system. It is actually paying for health
rather than paying for sickness services, right? That's true. So when you really start to get into
what it would take to do that, there's a lot of problems, right? Because you get, well,
individual responsibility of the people being problematic you get. To have an adequate system,
I won't say what it takes to actually structure it right now because we'll have to dive down
some deep economics rabbit holes, but we should do that sometime if you want. You do have to make
sure that you don't have anywhere within the research or science or medical or regulation
process an incentive for anything less than robust health and illness prevention.
And that's even things like right now, the IP is such that I've got to put in a shit ton of
money up front in drug development, never make that money back. I've got to be able to patent
my stuff so that I can charge a really high price as opposed to market competition on it,
which means I can only pursue patentable things. So plans are out. Diet exercise right there,
out of getting that level of research funding. And I've got to do single molecules going through
a clinical trial, but the clinical trial shows can never do personalized medicine, right? Because
I have some effect over a bell curve, but some people are on the back of the bell curve,
somewhere on the front of the bell curve. I'm simply looking at does this one molecule intervening
in one part of a very complex dynamic cause something other than placebo and of course
then all kinds of problems associated. So everything down to the level of IP law change
to where the incentives are perfectly aligned with collective well-being.
There's probably several revolutions. I was going to say a revolution,
but there's probably multiple revolutions necessary for that.
Yes. So you think about it, our underlying IP law is broken, right? We can patent single molecules
that are synthetic, not complexes of molecules that are varying for individual people in a way
that a clinical trial could never do because we're doing n equals one optimization, not molecules
that came from natural sources, right? So the IP structure is broken. The clinical trial epistemology
itself is inadequate for personalized medicine. The incentive systems where you're maximizing
the lifetime revenue of a customer and a customer happens to be a patient, which means start them
on meds younger and have more cross cell upsell, which is the side effects to other meds. All
that's broken, but also the underlying epistemology of system reductionism is broken. So medicine has
gotten as far as it has, and it is now more of a problem to chronic health. It's still great for
acute health than it is a asset. And to transcend it, the revolutions are new science, new understanding
of what IP means, new regulation, new economics, all those things have to change.
That's a really interesting point that you just made. And I guess I kind of want to go
back and underscore it that for acute health, medicine is still very useful and is probably
still arguably making significant progress year after year, decade after decade. But for ongoing
health, day to day, how you feel, what your non-emergency medical care is like is either
flatlined or possibly getting worse. I wonder when that shift took place, what year, what decade
it would have been, because you could almost kind of feel that the average health of a random 35-year-old
in middle America is probably worse now than it was 20 years ago. Well, we see declining sperm
rates at the industrialized world that are related to xenoastrogens in the plastics, pesticides that
are endocrine disruptors, et cetera, et cetera. We see that the average mother in the United States
has hundreds of petrochemical traces in her breast milk, which means what's happening at the neurotoxic
and carcinogenic level of infants. So let's go to a level even higher than everything we talked
about so far. What are the tier one causes of illness? Tier one, meaning the initial deviation
from homeostasis, because we can define health from a cybernetic perspective, a complex regulatory
system perspective. We can define health as the total resilience and homeostatic capacity,
this regulatory system across all of its regulatory axes. We didn't say the homeostasis,
we said the homeostatic capacity, how much deviation from homeostasis in terms of impulse can come,
that it can actually process and stay within healthy ranges.
So to put that in layman's terms, if you think of your body as a bunch of springs, if I move the
ball at the center of the springs away from the center, how quickly and easily does it shake
itself back into a center position? Yeah, most of the time when we do labs, we're looking at,
is someone's glucose in range? Is it too high or too low? We're looking at homeostasis, we're not
doing a stress test where we give someone then a lot of sugar or a little sugar and we're testing
then how well does it stay in range in proximity to stresses, right? So the actual homeostatic
capacity that determines the resilience of the system is one of the major things we need to
pay a lot more attention to. So then we can say that's health, aging is the decreased resilience
of the system. You can be totally healthy and aged, but smaller deviations from homeostasis
can take you out of health, like falling and breaking hip or whatever, right? You don't have
current pathology, but you have less resilience to pathological inputs. So we're defining disease
and aging fundamentally differently. Disease is some deviation from homeostasis input that
exceeded the homeostatic capacity of the system that led to altered functioning, pathophysiology.
Right. So the tier one deviation, sometimes we'll say, okay, this autoimmune disease is preceded by
increased inflammatory markers. So inflammation caused it. Well, no, inflammation was part of
a causal cascade. Inflammation is a signaling molecule that responds to some tissue being
irritated by something, right? So there's something higher in the causal chain. The initial deviation
from homeostasis will always be the way that the organism interfaces with its environment
over the overarching behavior of the organism. So either the organism takes in too much of
something it shouldn't from the environment. Toxins, pathogens, or things that are good,
but in excess amounts, sugar, calories, et cetera, it doesn't take in enough of something from the
environment that it needs to deficiency. Its fundamental code is not optimized genetics,
microbiomics, right? Epigenetics that are passed down or the overarching behavior of the system
is off stress, psycho neuro immunological stress, right? The way the psyche affects it or not
exercising lifestyle posture, those kinds of things. So you can always trace back the hormones
that are off or the inflammation markers that are off or the whatever to some of those tier one
causes. Now, let's look at toxicity for a minute. We live in houses where we spend 90% of our time
indoors and the paint has so many VOCs, volatile organic compounds, and the flooring does and the
carpet does and then all of those volatile organic compounds are either carcinogens or neurotoxin
or endocrine disruptors or something like that. We are outside and the smog from the cars has
mercury in it, has zinc and nitric oxide in it, has the food that we're eating is grown in soil
that is both microbiome depleted and trace mineral depleted. The way that we have affected our
environment, we have made an environment that we are not genetically adapted to. And one of the
interesting things about humans is we get to evolve one generation to the next profoundly
on the same genome because we are genome evolved to do mimetic evolution, quick processing
neuroplastic evolution without having to choose genome. And that leads to tools where we change
our environment faster than we can adapt to it. So when you look at the tier one issues in health,
it's not just an issue of like, we're less healthy because medicine was bad before medicine,
we have built a world that is not healthy for people. And so can you have optimized healthy
people in a biosphere that is environmentally toxic on so many metrics, topsoil deficient,
et cetera. So ultimately, when we talk about the future of medicine, one of the big things has to
be the future of how we do infrastructure and recreating a built world that is optimizing
for the quality of life of the beings in that world. Very much agree. What's your real world
best guess as how probably two steps forward, one step back at some points, technology will still
be progressing and public health will be moving forward. In terms of the things that fairly
easy to predict within current systems, technologically advancing, I'll say diagnostics
are going to get a lot better. And so whole genome sequencing is going to get cheap enough that it
replaces just partial genome SNP analysis. And so that'll become ubiquitous, we'll have whole
genomes on everybody or the availability to have that metabolomics is going to get good and
inexpensive and the interpretations on metabolomics, as well as some aspects of transcriptomics,
proteomics. So we start understanding the expression layer. Well, those are all going to
become good, as well as microbiomics. Some of those omics, let's actually stop and sort of give
people the bullet point quick definitions of those like proteomics is the folding of proteins.
What is metabolomics? So we're actually looking at the metabolic byproducts of different types
of cells, what we can understand about what's happening with the cells based on those metabolic
byproducts. So we can understand different dysfunctions of cell types and different functions
of cell types based on the metabolites and the total amount and relative ratio and proportions
of different metabolites. One of the cool things about metabolomics is you can assess a lot. You
can infer things about toxicity because toxins change cell processes and predictable ways pathogens
change cell process deficiency does inflammation does oxidative stress does so you can infer a lot
of those things from the metabolites. And instead of where most of our blood chemistry right now
requires taking blood and then spinning it a particular way putting particular reagents in
so you have to run a lot of vials of blood if you want to get good insights. The metabolomics
is very likely to be accessible in the not too distant future via mass spec technology,
which means things like home urine units where you start getting a lot of data every morning.
I think home medical assessment, you can see the XPRIZE working on trichorders gene radar
from nano biosam gives the ability to do PCR level diagnostics with a drop of blood. Wow.
Across a lot of things. I think laser interferometry where just a laser beam goes through your skin
into your blood and then the scattering pattern that comes back gives insights about what's in the
blood and I think there's a very good chance that will get a lot better. So the ability to start
getting a tremendous amount of data very frequently and then being able to do big data processing
across people but even big data on the same person because you can get so much data so
frequently you know whenever an illness comes you do retrospectives on and see what were the
first deviations that you could see that's going to be one of the major things that happens that's
game changing. Say you've got like an autoimmune antibody emerging or inflammatory markers or
immune differentiation problems but you find that before that happened you had a tiny little
change in the ratio of endogenous opioids. You'd look at those together but then you start understanding
oh do opioids play a top-down relationship in immune modulation and then you get to start
seeing this tiny little opioid change way pre-symptomology and being able to help it then
and then you don't develop autoimmune disease. That as one example of many different kinds of
pathogenesis that we'll start to gain insights into and some that people in integrative medicine
already have insights into but it's hard to scale it because you know if you're going to see a really
good integrative physician and they're working across a lot of things they're looking at vector
borne illnesses and mold stuff and toxicity stuff and microbiome stuff you're spending a lot of money
and there's a lot of like concierge care or it's not that good yet and so now imagine it getting
way better than concierge care is because you get so much more data and so much interpretation
understanding but then scalable for everybody. To a large extent personalized medicine is really
treating us each as special little snowflakes but then holding that up against this idea that we
have like 90% of our genes are the same as a stock of corn and how do we reconcile those two ideas?
Complexity theory, chaos, which is the tiniest changes in the initial conditions of a complex
system lead to huge and unpredictable changes later down the chain and in results so we can be
almost the same but those tiny changes end up making fundamental ontologic differences.
So what's so beautiful about this from a philosophic point of view is we can get that we are
almost the same as everyone else and almost the same as all the other animals so we get
to recognize this profound interconnectedness that leads to empathy and a sense of interinvestedness
while holding the absolute uniqueness of every single thing which leads to everything being
irreplaceably precious and that combination is both true. We're fundamentally interconnected
mostly the same expressions of the same underlying stuff and utterly irreplaceable.
It's an interesting dichotomy and the fact that both are two sides of the same coin is pretty
fascinating. That specific concept regarding dichotomy is one of the key things that we actually
have to get better at in medicine which is is health based on bottom-up effects where understanding
the genome is enough for everything or there are a lot of top-down effects where you have to
understand the neuroendocrine system and the connectome. Both there's bottom-up effects
and top-down effects that lead to very complex feedback patterns. Is psychology affecting our
bodies? Yes, are our bodies affecting our psyche? Yes, leading to feedback patterns that can
bish a cycle or virtuous cycle. There's a lot of what seem like competing truths that are actually
not competing. They're complementary parts of more complex systems that we have to understand
better. That's an interesting question. Given that we'll probably find not necessarily just
treating people that have conditions that they like better but also looking at ways of optimizing
things, people that are looking for performance enhancements, there could be either psychological
or chemical physiological sort of more process-oriented approaches. If we've got various
handles on approaching a change, how do we decide which handle to work from?
Fantastic question. When we talk about the future of medicine we usually think about
going from illness to baseline. Optimization is evolving the baseline. We have thought about
optimization in the past in a zero-sum way, which means the total capacity of the system is fairly
fixed. If you evolve one thing, it's usually at the cost of something else. You can take
steroids and get buff, but you're going to die faster. You can take Adderall and enhance your
focus, but it's going to be at the cost of empathy or irritability or something else.
Those enhancements are not that interesting. Those were the easy, the early, complicated,
not complex approaches where we tried to lift one variable rather than lift the resilience and
information processing capacity of the whole system. That's the key thing when we start understanding
complex systems is, can you increase the net resilience of the entire system where you are
increasing the empathy and the focus at the same time? Where you're increasing the muscle density
and longevity at the same time? The answer is yes. It's a fundamentally different optimization
approach. Then medicine, which is preventing illness and reversing illness to baseline,
enhancing baseline, which is a biologic transhumanism, if you want to think about it,
how we evolve ourselves and develop ourselves to further capacities. Those actually become
gradients of the same system. Then the question, where do you do psychological stuff and where do
you do physiologic stuff is actually the same as where do you do, within physiology, bottom-up
stuff at the level of cell energy versus top-down stuff at the level of conectomics and brain
patterns. The answer is all of them. You end up getting positive feedback loops across all of
them. You make a healthier brain at a neurohormonal neurotransmitter level. It predisposes more
positive emotions, perspectives, et cetera. You do work at a meaning-making cognitive behavioral
therapy. Everybody's experienced where you're feeling physiologically because you sprained
your ankle so you can't work out or because you are hungover or you're sick or whatever,
which then, because you're feeling not positive physiologically, becomes a state. There's an
emotional effect of that. Then you start to perceive your life through that state. It's
like shit-colored glasses. Then as you're perceiving life through that state, you start to have more
negative thoughts, which lead to more negative emotions, which then have an actual stress
effect on the body, leading to worse physiology. You get vicious cycle. That could start on the
body side or on the emotion side. Either side is enough to be able to start a propagating process.
You can also propagate up where someone starts exercising, leading to better ways of thinking,
leading to making new decisions about how one is going to think and feel, et cetera.
The key ends up being, how do we stop negative feedback cycles everywhere? How do we start
virtuous cycles, propagating virtuous cycles? We want to be able to pull the body levers,
the environment levers, the relationship levers, the psyche levers simultaneously.
Now, which ones are going to provide the most lift for an individual is going to be different
for different cases, which is where you need to do personalized assessment. We call it diagnosis
if it's illness, but we would call it assessment if it's optimization. We're doing assessment on
someone's physiometrics and psychometrics. We see that there are particular biologic processes
that are significantly off that we can actually intervene in and lift those. Lifting the things
where there's most issue is going to lift the whole system the most. This starts to get into
how do we do advanced human development. It's a combination of everything and the things that are
going to be the most leveraged for that person based on assessment. This not only leads to the
future of medicine and the future of biohacking and neurohacking and the future of psychotherapy
and even what you could call spirituality or personal development, but even the future of
education. How do you optimize the learning and evolution of a particular child or a particular
person in a way that is both unique to their path and optimized for what they can uptake?
It's interesting because it almost seems like this is a threat to the way that
technical professional specialization works in our modern world because it's moving to such a
multi-disciplinary approach to almost everything. I mean, I could see if I'm an orthopedic surgeon,
well, all of a sudden I'm going to have psychologists having advice on what I do. It's like,
well, wait a minute, this is my turf. It seems like to apply some of these ideas would mean
massive second and third order changes was sort of the way that society operates.
Yes. Most specialists will be replaced by robots of all kinds. So Da Vinci is a better surgeon than
handheld surgeons and it's going to keep getting better. Doesn't shake, has more precision, has
optics that can go into a much deeper level of microscopic data than human eyes can.
So whether it's being operated by humans still or operated by algorithms, individual specialty
things that are highly specialized are going to be automated because one of the things that humans
do well is understanding generality and then being able to build tools to do it better than us.
The hammer bangs better than our fist. In addition to fully specialize things being automated,
which leaves humans to more understanding how the parts interact and the generalities,
to the degree that it's a specialized task but that still is quite complex and humans are going
to be involved in it, they will be interfacing with other humans and other disciplines and with
AI systems that are interfacing with the data from those other systems. So this is not what we
call AI in terms of the strong AI. It's a conscious machine, but what we call symbiotic
intelligence where the intelligence of the humans and the intelligence of the computing
processing power together provide the augmented capability because as long as we're saying my
turf and we are not wanting to understand other things that are actually causal, then we're
failing. Right. And so the key is causal closure. How do we understand everything that is causally
affecting what we're working on and then how do we understand everything that is causally affected
by what we're working on so we are not missing causation in the process or then causing externalized
harm somewhere else. Smart drug smarts. So thank you so very much to Daniel Schmacktenburger for
taking the time for that conversation. Really interesting. Daniel is one of the few guests
we've had on this show who does not have either an MD or a PhD following his name. Obviously,
a very, very smart educated guy and not without credentials, obviously something more of an
entrepreneur than an academic. But what are those guys who after talking with him, I just can't imagine
him doing his laundry or flossing or doing any of these kind of like low level human activities
that inevitably everybody does from time to time just seems to really be walking the walk as far
as big picture thinking and taking it upon himself to be atlas and push the species forward.
I have a lot of respect for that and really look forward to seeing what Neurohacker Collective
is doing next. They are over at Neurohacker.com. We've also got a link over there on the webpage
for this episode at smartdrugsmarts.com slash 169 and should you want to try out Qualia,
Daniel and the Neurohacker Collective folks have given us the discount code SDS short for
Smart Drug Smarts, which will get you some savings off the Qualia Neutropic, which has a
jaw dropping 42 different ingredients. But again, you can see what that's all about at
smartdrugsmarts.com slash 169. But now giving your brain a little rest, let's talk about the
proper way to sleep in the Ruthless Listener Retention gimmick. Smart Drug Smarts, Ruthless
Listener Retention gimmick. So proper sleep hygiene is becoming somewhat of a cottage industry
these days. There are no lack of studies looking at how to get a proper night's sleep or a proper
daytime sleep if you're talking about naps. But most of the time we're talking about light
exposure and electromagnetic shielding and making sure that the room is absolutely silent,
things like that. One thing that there's not a lot of buzz about is the actual position a person
sleeps in. Sometimes you hear this with regards to snoring and sleep apnea, things like that.
But apparently sleep position can make somewhat of a direct difference in your brain health as well.
You've probably heard of amyloid beta plaques. These are some of the nasty bad guys that are
partially responsible for Alzheimer's disease. They go evil hand in evil hand with neurofibrillary
tangles. But at night time during sleep, along with other things going on within the brain,
natural processes are working to clear the brain of any amyloid beta plaques that might have built
up during the day. This is something that's easier done during sleep than during wake because
during sleep in any period of restfulness, the brain's interstitial space volume actually expands
a little bit, meaning that the glimphatic pathways, which are basically the exit route for these plaques,
they widen so a little one-lane highway can become more like a three-lane highway ushering
these bad molecules out. Researchers used fluorescence microscopy and radioactive tracers
to look at the brains of rodents who slept in various positions, supine, prone, and lateral,
lateral being the side sleeping position, which is preferred by many rodents and many humans as well.
And it turned out that for widening glimphatic pathways and helping the amyloid betas move out
of the brain, the side sleeping position was the unquestioned winner, which is kind of nice because
sleep experts also recommend side sleeping for better posture and less back pain. So what to do
if side sleeping is not necessarily your thing? Some people prefer sleeping on their back or even
sleeping on their stomach. I admit that I really like sleeping on my back during naps, but if getting
in the habit of side sleeping is difficult, researchers recommend putting a pillow behind
you or in front of you to keep you from rolling onto your front to your back. This also works
with a compliant bed partner. And over the long run, this is one of these small little lifestyle
changes that can make you a little less likely to wind up with Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, or several
other neurological conditions that stem partially from too much sludge building up in the brain.
Just say no to drah, scratch that. Say yes to the Smart Drug Smarts podcast! Join our mailing
list at www.smartdrugsmarts.com. Okay, so that's it for episode number 169. Thank you for hanging
around until the very end of the episode. If you're curious about the links to anything that we
discussed here, all of that will be online at smartdrugsmarts.com.169. If you missed last week's
episode, I spoke with Dr. Gary Wink about his upcoming book, The Brain, What Everyone Needs
to Know, and also the interesting hints that marijuana in small amounts might be handy in
fighting off brain inflammation as a person ages. Next week we're going to be going into the animal
kingdom talking about animal brains venturing a bit off the human track. So I will accept whatever
level of hate mail people want to send me about not talking about something that's directly
applicable to those of you who are listening who happen to be humans. But most of us like animals,
most of us are interested in brains, and of course it's very interesting to hear both about the
contrast and the comparisons between human brains and animal brains, what makes us alike, what makes
us different. So a special animal lovers episode in number 170 coming next week, and probably between
now and then if it hasn't hit already, a little overdose edition is slipping in there, something
between our regularly scheduled weekly episodes. So I will be back at you sooner than usual,
different time, but same podcast, and with that highly nutritious, easily digestible, and always
unflagging commitment to helping you fine tune the performance of your own brain. Have a great week
and stay smart. You've been listening to the Smart Drug Smarts podcast. Visit us online at
www.smartdrugsmarts.com and subscribe to our mailing list to keep your neurons buzzing with
the latest in brain optimization. Smart Drug Smarts should be listened to for entertainment
purposes only, although some guests on the show are medical doctors most or not, and the host is
just some random guy. Nothing you hear on this podcast or read at smartdrugsmarts.com should
be considered medical advice. Consult your doctor and use some damn common sense before doing anything
you think might have a lasting impact on your brain.
