You live in the past, it's weird I know.
I said those words over ten years ago now.
Just look at what has happened to me.
I said it because any information that you perceive has to travel some distance and time
to get to your senses and then it has to be processed by the brain electrochemically.
And therefore there is simply no way that you can be living in the instantaneous present.
In the decades since I said that, there has now been a growing body of evidence that enlarges
this gulf between perception and reality.
Modern neuroscience suggests that not only do you not live in the present, you don't
even live in reality.
This is one of those episodes, isn't it?
Yeah, prepare to feel weird about stuff.
Now entering the facility.
First of all, let's disabuse ourselves of the notion that you actually perceive the
world as it really is.
Three examples.
The first one, take your finger and touch the tip of your nose.
You feel as though these are simultaneous actions, right?
Of course they are, but of course they can't be.
We know that it actually takes more time for electrochemical signals to travel this distance
than it does to travel this distance.
What is going on?
Your brain is actually buffering reality.
Or take this example, where you know two squares are a different color, and then with a little
texture and lighting difference, you know that they are the same color.
Last example, you blink every few seconds, every waking moment.
As this happens, you are functionally blind, your eyes are closed, and yet you never see
all of these interruptions in your vision.
What is going on there?
Your brain is literally filling in the gaps of your life with information it's expecting
from the environment.
All of these examples are hints that perception and reality are not the same thing.
And in the last 20 years or so, modern neuroscience has taken all of those hints and turned them
into theory.
You were born with an evolved sense that the world is exactly as you see, smell, taste,
touch, and hear it.
Ancient Greek philosopher and horsey ride-enjoyer Aristotle was the first to describe this intuition
as naive, or direct, realism.
In other words, you, without any real reason, assume that your experience of the world is
direct, from reality to the brain.
But many smart people, like philosopher and soul patch advocate Rene Descartes, have argued
the opposite, that since our senses can be shown to so easily fail us, something like
indirect realism is more likely.
An outside world or reality in this view does exist, but what we actually experience is
our sense data, which the brain frames, fabricates, and flourishes.
This basic scientific view of perception hasn't changed all that much since Descartes, but
now modern neuroscience has come and pushed everything one step further.
According to a new theory, gaining a lot of ground in the field, heralded as a unifying
theory of cognition.
Not only do you not perceive the world as it is, you don't even perceive your senses
as they are.
Instead, your entire mental experience is completely fabricated by the brain, and the
outside world only calibrates this illusion.
Does this mean humans are nothing more than brains and bats?
Well, I mean, I...
Existence is weird.
Yeah, sure is, Arya.
Sure is.
It kind of makes you want to stop and think for 60 to 90 seconds about something else.
Gamers, I'm a award-winning science educator and totally not a deep fake, Kyle Hill.
If you know me, then you know that I'm extremely worried about the state of our information
ecosystem, the infocalypse, the dead internet, AI that gives me way too many fingers.
It seems impossible today to get to ground truth on the internet.
That's why I'm excited to show you today's sponsor, Ground News.
Ground News is an app and website created by a former NASA employee to empower you to
think critically about what you're reading so that you can escape the constructive reality
of your media landscape.
It's a truth curation service that gathers news articles from around the world in one
place so that you can compare coverage from different perspectives, each with tags showing
you political bias, reliability, and ownership, so that you can start to see the shape of
your echo chamber or not.
Let me show you how it works.
Take a look at this story about a report from the World Economic Forum that names AI-powered
misinformation as the world's biggest immediate threat.
On Ground News, I can see this story has been covered by more than 100 sources, and with
an almost even split of coverage from the left and right.
If I scroll down, I get all of the articles on this topic, and I can compare headlines
to see how different outlets frame the same story.
I can even read the original report and check the quality of its source.
And if you're looking to immerse yourself in someone else's media reality, which can
be useful, check out their blind spot feed, which highlights stories that are disproportionately
covered only by one side of the political spectrum.
Go to the link in the description or to this URL to get 40% off Ground News's Vantage
Plan, which will allow you to use all of its features.
Look, we only have, like, what, three more weeks until the entire internet is overridden
with bots and a corpse of its former self, my meant shell?
I think you personally should check out Ground News and their admirable search for ground
truth.
That's Ground News.
Get real before the bots, which they've probably already done.
It's definitely too late.
No!
If the naive view of human perception is bottom-up from senses to brain, then a growing consensus
in neuroscience is that what your brain is actually doing is top-down.
The brain is not a passive interpreter of your senses, rather it is actively constructing
the world you experience with models and predictions of what it's going to experience
from your senses next.
I will say that again.
You do not actively perceive the world outside of your skull.
Neither do you perceive the senses that your eyes, nose, hands, skin, everything else is
giving to you.
Rather, you are experiencing your brain's best guess of what's going on outside of
your head and your senses are calibrating that.
This means, in a very real way, as some neuroscientists have put it, that your whole conscious life
is really just a controlled hallucination.
It's not as crazy as it sounds if you think about it.
There's no fundamental reason why what you perceive in your head has to be an exact copy
of the outside world.
As long as whatever your brain is doing is keeping you alive and is helping you pass
along your genes, evolution doesn't care.
And under the pressures of natural selection, efficiency wins out.
Like the principle of least action in physics, predictive processing is propped up by the
so-called free energy principle spearheaded by British neuroscientist Carl Friston in 2006.
It holds that it would take an impossible amount of brain power, literally oxygen and
glucose, to use every single stimulus the world hits you with and actively construct
reality from scratch at every moment.
It's been estimated that the world bombards you with tens or even hundreds of millions
of bits per second of information.
Instead, according to the free energy principle and predictive processing, the brain has built
an internal model of the world over evolutionary time and uses that to survive, only updating
it when something outside of it doesn't fit.
The model is therefore successful in so far that it can use thermodynamic free energy,
glucose and oxygen, to minimize informational free energy, surprise and uncertainty whenever
it appears.
I know that's all a lot of jargon, so here's another example.
Have you ever seen something that wasn't actually there, or something that ended up
being something else?
Maybe you've been fooled by this classic pillows under the bedsheet gag.
Until you lift the sheet, until your brain's model encounters surprise or uncertainty and
takes action to gain information to update the model.
For all intents and purposes, there is a person under the sheet.
That's what you perceive.
You may even talk to the pile of pillows before figuring it out.
Your model of the world therefore only changes when your sensory input, what you see in this
case, doesn't match your brain's prediction of what you will see.
In examples like this, I think that you can feel that this is the way your brain really
works.
But Cal, I hear you saying, why do you need to tell me any of this?
Why must you shake the foundations of my very world?
Well first of all, fun voice, no notes.
Second of all, I'm telling you this new theory, not because it is interesting, but it is,
but because it is so powerful.
Some neuroscientists even said it could be as important to brain science as evolution
is to biology.
Is evolution really that important?
Yes, evolution is important, Arya.
Whatever you mean, is it Facebook or something?
Do your research.
In a school.
To really hit home the fact that your reality, as you understand it, is kind of a lie, you
should know what this new model is actually saying.
Again, we are born with this innate, naive sense that we perceive the world from bottom
up, from senses to processing to experience.
But this model has a very hard time explaining many scientific phenomena.
Predictive processing, on the other hand, is again, top down.
Our experience of the world is actually our brain's best model of the world, made with
predictions about what we will sense next.
The outside world only enters this process in the form of prediction errors, which are
used to just update the model.
So your whole mental life begins in your brain, and not in the outside world.
And again, this model is only interesting because it gives neuroscientists a framework
that appears incredibly powerful, able to account for many phenomena across many different
systems, especially perception.
Is it predictive processing theory also helping generated AI get better?
It does, Aria, indicating that we're onto something, and that we're speeding along
the apocalypse.
Predictive processing may in fact become the unifying theory of the brain, as evolution
is to biology.
And evolutionarily, it does make sense that it is more efficient to simply update evolved
internal models of the world than it is to take every sound, photon, chemical into careful
consideration when trying to find food, find a mate, or simply move your body.
Even hunger, thirst, stress, love could all be your brain's way of explaining or minimizing
the prediction error of internal signals like body temperature, heart rate, and blood pressure.
After going over everything, it may seem like a simple idea, but keep in mind that all
I'm giving you today is an overview and a challenge to learn more if you want to.
The model in practice is very hot right now in the field and much more complicated.
Thankfully, that's where it's pulling its explanatory weight.
So if predictive processing is true, if reality is an illusion, as I say, what do I really
mean?
Well, I mean that you need to come to terms with the fact that everything you are, everything
that you feel, is up here.
You are just a few kilograms of monkey junk inside of a completely silent pitch black
skull.
Everything else, pain, sound, love, planning, schmoozing with that guy at that party that
you never actually wanted to talk to.
All of that is in here, it doesn't exist out there.
Color isn't real, atoms don't have color, it's all an illusion.
An illusion that has evolved to help us navigate the world as social animals, not to find
objective ground truth.
Predictive processing still has a lot of validation to go through, it's relatively new, but it
has power and it's apparent ability to explain many things that happen up here.
Giving you an existential crisis, well, that's just a bonus.
Thank you so much to the very nerdy staff here at the facility for the direct and substantial
support and the creation of this year's video.
If you want to join us inside of these hallowed walls, sciency though they may be.
If you want to drape on a silky white lab coat, private discord, videos early, private
live streams each and every month, that's patreon.com slash Kyle Hill to join the facility
today.
If you support us just enough, you get your name on Aria here in every single video.
Look, there's so many of you.
How could I possibly pass all the time?
So you might have an intuition here that if you don't perceive reality and you don't
even perceive your senses in the way that you think that you do, the degrees of freedom
for having something like free will, they rapidly evaporate, right?
So if you don't have the freedom to move even your prediction errors about the world,
if you don't have the freedom to change your mental model of the world until you get prediction
errors from the environment, the option for choosing what you see and what you do and
what you choose and what you intend and what you feel, those choices don't seem to actually
appear anywhere in the long causal chain of your life.
But you not having free will or perceiving reality, we don't have to get into that right
now.
Next time.
