Hi. Welcome. In this course, we're going to talk diversity and innovation, how individuals
and collectives, as teams, can tap into all the different ways that we try to find novel
solutions to problems. Really, just in order to make the world a much better place. Now,
perhaps the best way for me to begin this class is with an example. In March of 2011,
the Air Force Research Lab announced a competition. Now, this competition was to come up with
a solution for stopping vehicles that were speeding towards restricted areas. Now, currently
they had those sort of awful tire shredders, those teeth that pop up and destroy tires.
And in this competition, the Air Force wanted to come up with really just a better solution
to this problem. Now, the winner was going to get $25,000. Now, anybody in the world
can contribute. Anybody could try and throw out some better idea. And in just two months,
1,071 people did. Now, the competition produced a lot of really great ideas, including one
from a Peruvian mechanical engineer named Dante Barbas. Dante's idea was really novel. He
proposed this small remote-controlled toy tank that could get up to 125 miles an hour
in just three seconds. Now, this tank would position itself under the car, and then it
would set off this giant airbag and would cause the vehicle to come to just a sliding
halt. Now, Dante is 66 years old. He's retired, but currently his mind isn't. He's thinking
up a lot of really cool stuff. And his solution is cheap. It's doable. Well, it's just a
brilliant idea. I brought it up because it has two features that are going to be central
to this course. The first is his idea travels, not just on the ground at 125 miles an hour,
but to other contexts. Once we have this idea of this little tank that goes 125 miles an
hour, we can stop almost any moving object, not just a car. In fact, you might even be
able to stop your three-year-old that gets loose at the ball. Second, this idea, this
tank with the airbag and the remote control combines a whole bunch of simple parts. This
is going to be a theme that we focus on throughout the course. Now, to give you an idea of the
power of recombinations, I want to give you a pop quiz. So, this is a sort of quiz you
see in an IQ test. It's a fill in the number problem. So, we've got the numbers 1, 4, 9,
blank 25. So, what number is missing? That's right. You've got it at 16. And the reason
this is 16 is we've just got squares, right? One squared, two squared, three squared, four
squared and so on. Here's another problem. One, two, three, blank eight. Now, this one's
a little bit harder. How do we solve this? Well, the answer to this one is five. And
how do we get five? Well, let's just subtract. Eight minus five is three. Three minus two
is one, right? And so, that one's also really not too hard to solve, okay? Here's a harder
one. One, two, six, blank 1806. Now, you can hit the pause button if you want and try and
think through this because it's really sort of a bit of a doozy. One of my friends, I'm
seeing this problem, says that this is easy. These are the years that the Chicago Cubs won
the pennant. Let me give a better hint. Better hint is this. This is also the answer to what
is called the ultimate question of life, the universe and everything according to the science
fiction writer Douglas Adams. That's right. The answer to this question is 42. Why is
it 42? How did we get that? Well, let's think of the first question, which is really easy.
How did we get that? By squaring. Let's think of the second one, which was also pretty easy.
That was just subtracting. Well, here's how we solve this third one. It's really sort
of fun. What's two minus one? Well, that's just one, but it's also one squared. What's
six minus two? Well, that's four, but we can write four is two squared. Now, what's 42
minus six? Well, that's 36, but we can write that as six squared. And what's 1806 minus
42? Well, that's 1764. Well, that's 42 squared. So, squaring is easy. Subtracting is easy.
But to square and subtract, well, then we get something sublime. Now, this idea that combinations
of things can be more amazing than the things themselves holds for neurons, holds for Legos,
and it's even going to hold for people. Now, teams of people can accomplish things that
no individual could do. And that's one of the things we're going to focus on in this course.
And we're going to see evidence of it everywhere. Let's just start right at the top. Teams of
people put men on the moon. No one person could have done that, right? Not only was
the set of problems required for space flight and lunar landings too large for any one person
to solve them all, it's also the case that many of these problems required teams of people
to crack them. Now, that's also true of the problems involved in creating the atomic bomb
at Los Alamos, cracking the enigma code at Bletchley Park, or developing the technology
required for telecommunications at Bell Laboratories. All these problems required teams of people.
Now, as the problems that we face become harder and our challenges become more complex, we're
going to see that the value of diversity in teamwork becomes even greater. Now, we can
see evidence of this in science. The first 15 Nobel Prizes in physics went to a total
of 19 people. The next eight went to eight people, and these included famous scientists
like Max Planck, Bohr, and Einstein. What about the last 15 Nobel Prizes? Well, they've
been allocated among 42 people. Now, this is a remarkable number given the fact that
at most three people can win. More to my point, in almost every recent prize, several people
felt left out. So, they could have won it as well. So, instead of 42, perhaps 82, even
202 people should have won the Nobel Prize. So, if we look across science generally, what
do we see? We'll pick up almost any journal. What you're going to see is the number of
authors per paper has steadily increased over the past 30 years. More is better. And
more is better, not just because the task of writing a paper suddenly got bigger so
that more heads are needed. More is better because we figured out that diverse teams
are more productive. In fact, Brian Housien Ben-Jones of Northwestern University looked
at every paper published in the natural sciences over a decade. Then they calculated they're
probably putting a home run in academia. What's a home run? A home run is a paper that gets
over 100 citations. That means 100 people said, your paper is so interesting, I want
to tell other people about it. Coauthored papers are four times as likely to be home
runs. They also looked at the social sciences. Well, guess what? Also four times as likely.
What's going on here? Do we lack great thinkers? No. It's that teams are better at solving
scientific problems. So, that's the sort of question that really interests me. So, my
research and my teaching focuses on individual and collective performance. How do we solve
problems? How do we make new products? How do we come up with good policies? So, I'm
interested in what enables an individual to make a meaningful contribution to the world
and what makes a team effective. How does a team and a society become more innovative
and more robust? Recently, I became interested in how new technology allows us to tap into
that diversity, to use the ideas of large numbers of people to solve problems. These
are sometimes called smart mobs or wise crowds, and I'm interested in how those work. We'll
talk about some of that. Now, in my thinking about these topics and reading the work of
other scholars, I keep coming upon the importance of diversity, how both at an individual level
and as collectives, teams, groups, whole societies, we benefit from different ways of thinking.
I've also noticed that at the same time when other people talk about diversity, that this
subject gets politicized. Well, this political politicization and the contrast with what
I and others have found showing the benefits of diversity in sort of the scientific realm
is really my motivation for this course, to think about how diversity contributes to
performance. How do we learn to leverage it? How do we move this topic out of the political
realm and think of diversity like scientists so we can better solve problems, better meet
our challenges? So, along the way, we're going to touch on a lot of really cool stuff, predict
fiction, problem solving, innovation, economic growth, robustness, adaptation, even group
think. We're going to discuss ketchup, card games, the Mars orbiter, and even school buses
full of golf balls. Now, to do this, we're going to learn a bunch of new terminology,
things like perspectives, heuristics, local optima, and even an idea called the adjacent
possible. I think we're going to have a lot of fun along the way. So, let's get it started.
Opening lecture four broad goals. First, I want to convince you of the importance of
diversity. I just want to make the case. Second, I want to describe the types of diversity
that I'm going to cover in this course. Third, I want to give you some understanding of when
and why we see diversity and when we don't. So, I'm going to call these the causes of
diversity. And then, most of all, last, I just want to share my intellectual passion
on this topic. I want to get you as interested in the subject of diversity as I am. So, I've
mentioned some examples of the power diversity in the sciences, but there's similar trends
in business. In business, we see that more and more work is group based. And more and
more workplaces are moving away from individual offices to shared offices and bullpens, these
sort of open floor plans. So, if you look at something like the Alcoa building in Pittsburgh,
you'll see there's central escalators, and you'll see no one really has an office. There's
cubicles everywhere. Mayor Bloomberg in New York has done the same thing. He's wiped
out offices and built just a big corral of cubicles. Now, you can see these benefits
of diversity that you have people interacting at larger scales, even larger than companies.
The economist Ed Glazer of Harvard in his wonderful book, The Triumph of the City, provides
a detailed account of how city workers, by being in contact with more diverse sets of
ideas, are just more productive. How much more productive? Well, Jeff West, one of my
colleagues at the Santa Fe Institute, has shown that worker productivity increases as
city sizes get larger. So, what you see is that bigger cities, people are just smarter.
Now, it's not just size, though. It really is diverse connections, diverse interactions.
So Michael Macy, Nathan Eagle, and Rob Claxton were able to take phone data from England
and reconstruct social networks. And what they found is fascinating. They found that the
diversity of calls correlates really strongly with economic development at the city level.
Now, what's surprising is the number of calls didn't matter. So Stoke-on-Trent, which is
a struggling area, had a higher than average call volume, but very low call diversity.
People were just calling the same people back and forth. But Stratford on Avon, which is
very well off, just made an average number of calls, but people tended to call diverse
people. So it's not the size that really matters here. What it is is the diverse interactions
among people, so they can share ideas. Now, the fact that technology is bringing us all
closer together means that we've now got the potential to tap in to greater diversity.
We can interact with people on projects from all over the world at the same time, and people
from different disciplines even, in ways that would have just been impossible a few decades
ago. And when we tap into that diversity, we can do better. But why? That's the puzzle.
What's diversity doing? Through what mechanisms does it operate? These are good questions
and they're questions that we're going to take up in this course. So to get us started,
I want to talk about innovation and problem solving. How does diversity help us with those
tasks? Why are diverse teams better? Well, to get at those questions, I've got to be
clear. What do I mean by diversity? Now, when most people talk about diversity, they mean
differences in how we look, where we came from, race, gender, ethnicity, and so on.
Here, I mean something very different. I mean cognitive diversity, differences in how we
think. When I talk about cognitive diversity in this course, I'm going to mean things
like perspectives, how we encode problems. And I mean heuristics, the tools and tricks
we use to solve those problems. I'm going to mean things like diverse categorizations,
the different ways we have of parsing the world into piles of similar things. So for
example, I might sort my music into decades, like the 70s, the 80s, and so on. Someone
else might say, no, there's rock, jazz, hip hop, and so on. So we make different boxes
that we use to make sense of the world. I'm also going to mean different models, different
ways of thinking about causal relationships between those categories. So I may say, well,
any album from the 1980s is, man, not going to be so great, but music from the 70s, that's
fantastic. So these perspectives we have, these heuristics, these categories, these
models, and not our identity differences. It's these tools that are going to make diverse
groups, teams, and cities more productive and more innovative. Now, this shouldn't be
surprising. We don't solve problems with our identities. We solve them by thinking. But
wait a minute, wait a minute, hold on. Don't our identities influence how we think? Of
course they do, right? That's why identity diversity is going to be lurking in the background
throughout this course. Identity diversity is going to be an important driver for cognitive
diversity. But so too will training, experiences, interest. They're all going to contribute to
how you and I see the world differently, how we think about specific problems differently.
And it's those differences that we're going to focus on in this course. Let's see why
they matter. So someone's got a problem. They're thinking about how do I encode it? How do
we represent it? Later in this course, I'm going to formally define these as perspectives.
I'm going to show that if people have different perspectives and they represent the world differently,
this is going to be useful for solving problems. So the logic here should be clear. Diverse
perspectives imply more possible solutions. And as far as solutions go, the more the merrier.
Well, that is if we have a way to evaluate them. So that caveat aside, we're basically
going to find that diverse teams are more innovative. But innovativeness is just one
feature of diverse groups. Diversity also makes systems more robust, more able to respond
to challenges and to trauma. For example, let's see how diverse perspectives, this idea of
people representing the world different ways, can increase robustness. Let's think of two
perspectives on the books that you might have in your house. So one might be based on color.
So my copy of the book Oliver Twist is light green. Representing the books by color organizes
all the books in someone's head. Now another perspective would be to represent the books
by author and title. So you can say there's Oliver Twist, which is classified as Charles
Dickens colon Oliver Twist. Now both of these perspectives organize the books and each has
an advantage over the other. So what suppose I'm the person who organizes them by author
and title, and I can't find our copy of Oliver Twist. Now my wife organizes these books by
color. So she says to me, Hey, it's light green. And that enables me to look on the bookshelves
and find the book right away. Suppose another scenario that where we're a party and someone
mentions a horse that just had to be put to rest. And my wife says, Oh, there's a beautiful
poem about that. And it's called Names of Horses. And it's in a thick gold book. So
she says to me, Hey, Scott, who wrote that thick gold book that has the poem about putting
horses to rest? And I say, Oh, that's Donald Hall, because I remember books by their author.
So between us are two perspectives and able to locate the books because she knows the
color. And remember who wrote them because I know the author. And by doing so, we can
respond to a diverse set of challenges. So these are just some examples. In this course,
we're going to see myriad ways formally in which cognitive diversity operates to see
how and why diversity contributes to collective performance.
These cognitive differences are going to produce collective benefits through specific mechanisms,
such as making mistakes less correlated. And as we just saw by giving us more solutions
to possibly consider when we're trying to solve a problem. Now, these mechanisms don't
involve any magic. They all rely on simple logic and that logic we're going to focus
on in the course. So when people talk about the benefits of diversity, they often mistakenly
believe there has to be some sort of synergy. Now, synergies exist. What do I mean by synergy?
Synergies means that where you add things together and get something amazing as a result.
So sodium is poisonous. Chlorine is poisonous. But when you combine them in the right proportions,
we get table salt, which is a good thing. So that's a positive synergy. And sometimes
with diverse groups of people, we get those synergies. But for diversity beneficial, we're
going to see that we actually don't need synergies. In fact, we're going to see the
benefits to diversity are almost always inescapable. And by that, I mean that most of the time
diverse will be better than homogeneous without those synergies. But not any diversity, right?
Not any combinations. If we let a six-year-old loosen the kitchen with a bunch of diverse
ingredients, you might get Kellogg's Fruit Loops with Mandarin oranges and chocolate
milk. It's not going to be very good. Trust me. The same thing can happen in diverse teams.
We need to add the right types of diversity in the right amounts to get good outcomes.
Now before we go any further, let me give a brief outline for the course, where we're
headed over these next 24 sessions. In the next lecture, I'm going to talk about why
diversity has become such a hot topic, how demographics have increased, how we've got
more connectedness in the world, and how the complexity of the challenges that we face
have all brought diversity to the fore. Then what we're going to do is we're going to jump
right into this question of how diversity produces value. We're going to start about
with prediction. How is it that when we're making forecasts of sort of what's around
and then in the curve, that diversity is so beneficial? I'm going to derive something
I call the diversity prediction theorem. And what that's going to tell us is why collective
diversity matters just as much as individual ability when we've got a group of people making
predictions. I'm then going to show you how we should wait diverse predictions, how you
should place more significance to our accurate predictors, and also to more diverse predictors.
And we're going to spend some time learning how to predict, which will be fun. So I'm
going to cover a variety of methods, including something called linear decomposition, reasoning
by analogy, and something known as Fermi's method. It's going to help you make better
predictions both individually and as part of a group. Because after you learn these
methods, you're going to become more diverse in how you think. And so for the same reasons
that groups benefit from greater diversity, so will you personally. If you have more perspectives
to bring out a problem, then you're going to see more solutions just like a group does.
So if you think different, that's going to be a good thing. So after we've done prediction,
we're going to talk about problem solving. And here I'm going to go into some detail
on the role that diverse perspectives and heuristics play in solving problems and how
they recombine to produce innovative new solutions to problems and even produce economic growth.
Now when we talk about economic growth, we're going to see the central role played by recombination.
We'll see how ideas and technologies combine to form new and better ideas and technologies.
Now the central result of this section is going to be something I call the diversity
Trump's ability result. And that states that under certain conditions, groups of diverse
problem solvers will outperform groups of the very best problem solvers. Now that result
is going to give us some reason to pause and for two reasons. First, if diversity Trump's
ability for groups, then how we form groups, who we hire, who we bring in to help us solve
problems, should be done with diversity in mind. And that's correct. But yet many of
us don't realize that when we hire, we think in terms of ability. We think more ability
is always better. Now it is all else equal, but more diversity is also better. So when
you're forming a group, you want both ability and diversity. And ideally, you'd have as
much of both of them as you possibly can. Now second, second reason to pause about this.
If diversity matters so much, does it even make sense to talk about ability? Well, that's
a good question. So we need to distinguish between someone's ability in isolation, how
well you do working on a problem on your own, versus your contribution to a group.
And these might differ. So how well you do individually might differ from how much you
contribute to others. Moreover, how much someone contributes to a group depends on who's in
the group. So if the group contains a whole bunch of people who have the same cognitive
tools that I have, then I probably don't add very much. But if I bring a whole bunch of
different tools to the table, then I may make enormous contributions to the group. And people
may think, wow, Scott's really smart. Well, in fact, I'm no smarter in the second case
than I was in the first when the group contained people who were just like me. But in the second
case, I'm different. And by being different, I can make a more substantial contribution.
To talk about prediction and problem solving, then we're going to turn to a more broad question,
which is robustness. How does a system maintain functionality to external shocks and internal
dynamics? So think about robustness. I'm going to distinguish between variation, which are
differences within a type, and diversity, which are differences across types. So within
the set of birds we call cardinals, there's a lot of variation. Some are redder, some are
bigger, some are slightly smaller beaks, some are bigger beaks. So I look at the birds in
my backyard, I see a lot of variation within the cardinals. I also see diversity. By diversity,
I mean different species of birds. So in addition to cardinals, there's gold finches, rose-breasted
grossbeaks, and the fun-loving, die-bombing chickadees, right, that come swooping into
my feeder. So this variation and diversity are going to differ in how they promote systemic
robustness. What variation does is it enables each type to adapt to changing circumstances.
So variation prevents individual parts from failing. Diversity enables the entire system
to respond, as different parts or different types have the capacity to respond to distinct
trauma, to different situations. So when you invest in a diverse stock portfolio, you're
taking advantage of the fact that some stocks perform well when the economy is hungling
along and other stocks will hold value when the economy stumbles. It's that diversity
of types of stocks that helps provide you with some stability financially. At least
I hope it does. I want to be clear here that I'm not saying diversity guarantees robustness,
only that the appropriate kinds of diversity can enhance robustness. So learning what types
of diversity to encourage or introduce into a system will require data, information, knowledge,
and even wisdom of how that system operates. In those insights, those are going to take
time. Now, part of me fears that I'm being too optimistic in this opening lecture. Humans
seem bent on adding more and more new ideas, instruments and products, which result in
ever more system level complexity. And when you get this complexity, there's an increased
likelihood of large catastrophic events. So we may then, we might encounter what my friend
in the chaos theorist Jim Crutchfield calls hidden fragility. We build up these systems
that then become fragile. Now, painful consequences ensue when that fragility comes out of its
cave. All the more reason to understand how to promote robustness through diversity.
So after we've studied robustness, I want to cast a wider lens. And I want to look at
a general model that in broad strokes explains why diversity's benefits often appear inescapable.
Before earlier I said diversity's almost always producing benefits. Why? Well, why does it?
Why does it improve prediction, problem solving, and robustness? I'm going to present a general
result that has really just a single assumption in it called diminishing returns to type that
shows the benefits of diversity. So diminishing returns to type means that if I look at the
vibe any one type of thing, that it sort of falls off as I get more of it. Well, if that
assumption holds, diverse collections are going to do better. Now, diminishing returns
to type is a widespread phenomenon. Whether you look at ecosystems and what they call
frequency dependent fitness or firms and what they call diminishing returns to scale,
one finds that at some point, having more of the same gives you diminished productivity.
And given that diminishing returns implies a benefit to diversity, we shouldn't be at
all surprised that productivity correlates with diversity. In fact, I would go so far
as to say that when we don't see diversity producing benefits, so if we see diverse groups,
firms, ecosystems not producing benefits, and sometimes this happens with diverse groups
of people, well, then we should go looking for a cause, because that should be surprising
to us. Now, that cause is all too often going to stem from an inability to communicate or
a lack of trust. No one can consider, much less implement an idea they don't hear. Ideas
go on her because we don't listen, because we don't understand, because they're never
uttered in the first place, because we don't feel safe sharing in a diverse group. So I'm
going to conclude the course by talking about some of the consequences of a lack of diversity
when we don't get those diverse ideas in. And we're going to talk about things like
collapse and failure. And I'll outline some of the social processes that produce the
conformity, but sometimes called group think, that causes groups and sometimes entire communities
to make poor decisions. So that conformity can be prevented, we can stop it, but we've
got to heed the lessons from this course. And one of those first lessons is going to
be to recognize the value of diversity. And if we see the value, then we can construct
methods to maintain it. So that's the outline of the course, the topics. We're going to
talk about some big ideas now that we've in and out of these lectures. So I want to focus
on these big ideas. What's idea one? Idea one is this, efficiency, innovation, robustness,
they all require diversity. Not something we might have, it's required in each one of
those cases. If we want a productive, interesting, sustainable world, we need to understand the
role that diversity plays, we need to maintain the right levels and types of diversity. Far
too often we think only in terms of talent. Talent matters, but collective performance
depends on combining and growing diverse talent. Idea two, diversity as it relates to people
often gets framed in identity terms. And then, as much of politics involves dividing
up resources, people mistakenly believe they have to sacrifice something for the sake
of diversity. But more often that's not true. In fact, most often the opposite holds. We're
not talking about splitting a pie. We're not talking about who gets what share. We're talking
about how do we make a bigger and better pie. How we, not you and me, how we collectively
tap into our diverse talents to better see what's coming, find more innovative solutions,
and respond better to challenges. Idea three, these lessons about diversity apply to you
as an individual as well. You're interesting, multifaceted people. As Emerson famously said,
a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds. You wouldn't be watching this
course if you lived the life of foolish consistency. You possess diverse skills and interests.
How do you tap into your own diversity? How diverse should you be? Hope at the end of
this course, you'll see how to be more productive, more innovative, and even more robust. Idea
four, we need to do the math. In this course, I'm going to rely on some formal mathematical
models. Not too complicated, but there's going to be some math. Here's why. Without the math,
we're stuck in a world of opposite proverbs. Two heads are better than one. Too many cooks
spoil the broth. Or hot teas. He who hesitates is lost. A stick in time saves nine. How do
we exudicate between these competing metaphors? We need formal models. Models help us to understand
the conditions necessary for two heads to be better than one. And also when those conditions
don't hold, so that we can boot some of those cooks out of the kitchen. So if we want to
move past metaphor and get somewhere closer to scientific understanding, we need some
models. We need some mathematics. But don't worry. It's not going to be very difficult.
Diversity. It's the last idea. Makes life interesting. So let's step away for a moment
from the pragmatic criteria like efficiency, accuracy, and robustness and that sort of
stuff. Diversity merits attention because without it, life would be dull. Diversity is
why London or New York is more exciting than an empty parking lot. It's why the earth is
more interesting than the moon. It's why the Amazon rainforest is more interesting than
a field of soybeans and an opera is more interesting than a ballad. It's why after engaging this
course, you'll be more interesting than you were before you took it. What we're going
to learn in this course, though, is that interesting depends more than just on lots of diversity.
It's not just a matter of counting up the number of types and saying more is better.
Interestingness requires the proper connections and interactions between those diverse parts.
In the natural world, evolution has had a long time to subject variation in types to
selective pressure in order to create the functioning assemblages that we call ecosystems. In human
systems, that assemblage problem, the creation of effective teams, groups, organizations,
societies, that requires work and requires the work of intelligent, diverse thinkers.
And that's what we want to become. So let's get started. Thank you.
