Hi, welcome back. In this lecture, I'm going to discuss the growing interest in the topic
of diversity. And what I'm going to do is highlight two independent trends that have
individually led to increased interest in diversity and combined have just had an enormous
effect. So the first trend relates to demographics. American society is becoming more diverse.
A majority of the children born in the United States are now non-white, and that's a huge
shift from where we were 50 years ago. Now, relatedly, technology has reduced distance,
so we're also more connected. Our private and work lives intersect with a much more diverse
set of people than they did in the past. Now, the second trend has nothing to do with demographics.
It concerns the changing nature of work, specifically the increased difficulty and complexity of
the challenges that we face in our work life. This trend has produced a new reliance on teams,
on group problem solving, and even on changes in the architecture of buildings. So some
of the things we want to talk about. Now, in this lecture, I'm going to focus on these
two trends, the increased awareness of and interactions between identity diverse groups,
and the necessity of leveraging cognitive diversity to meet the challenges that we face
each day. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to discuss each of these trends independently,
and I'm going to contemplate the mash-up of the two. Now, wait a minute, doesn't this
case seem too simple? So we're now more diverse, and then we face really hard problems, and
so we need diverse teams, and great, so the problem's solved. But not quite, if only we're
that simple, because there's a catch here. We're increasing in demographic diversity,
things like race, culture, etc. The challenges and opportunities before us require cognitive
diversity, differences in how we think. So there's a disconnect, but it's only a partial
disconnect, because often identity diversity and cognitive diversity are going to be correlated.
So therefore, the identity diversity of our work teams is actually going to imply some
degree of cognitive diversity, which is going to make the teams better at what they do.
But on the other hand, identity diversity can also produce conflict, mistrust, and miscommunication,
and all of those things can harm performance. Now, before we can discuss these two trends
and how they interweave, what I need to do is understand the trends themselves. Now,
if you're viewing this course, you probably don't need any convincing, really, that diversity
is relevant. But even so, a little bit of data will help back up your thinking, and it
won't hurt. So here's the evidence. Google has this site called Culture Nomics, where
what you can do is trace the frequency of words in a large selection of books and periodicals.
Here's the graph for the word diversity. It's interesting to look at. What you notice
is that nobody used the word diversity very much at all up through the 1950s. It was very
infrequently used. But then, since 1980, up to 2000, it's just taken off. So you've seen
a huge jump in the word diversity, and now diversity is really everywhere. So it's safe
to say, yes, the diversity is on the rise. Now, here's another fact. Corporations spend
billions, not millions, billions of dollars each year on diversity training and education.
Almost every employee in every firm goes to some sort of diversity training session at
some point during their employment, and oftentimes at least once a year. Here's another fact.
Go to almost any web page for a university, college, daycare center, nonprofit organization,
and you'll notice that they sing the praises of their diverse employees, faculty, students,
whatever. So no matter where you look and how you look at it, diversity seems to be everywhere.
Why? That's the point of this lecture, to understand why all this increased interest
in diversity. So again, I'm going to describe these two trends. One is related to identity
diversity, and the other is related to cognitive diversity and why we need it to solve problems.
Now, in the first lecture in this course, I described identity diversity as differences
in race, gender, cultural ethnic background, physical capabilities, and so on. Differences
in who we are. Now, there are two broad reasons why identity diversity increasingly shows
up on our radar. Demographics and connectedness. So let me first talk about demographics. Let
me start with the United States. From 1900 to 1940, approximately 90 percent of the population
in the United States was identified as white. Almost all of the remainder of the population
identified as black or African American. In 1970, the white proportion of the population
still exceeded 80 percent, and the population classified as of Hispanic origin was less
than 5 percent. Now, today, things are very different. By 2010, the percentage of non-Hispanic
white was less than two-thirds of the population. So that's less than 66 percent. People of
quote-unquote color comprised more than a third. Now, according to many estimates by
2050, whites will no longer even be a majority of the population. So huge, huge change in
demographics. Now, similar trends exist in Europe. The immigrants are moving in in search
of better jobs and lives for their families. Now, it's true that in most countries, the
percentages are smaller than in the United States, but on net, most countries in Europe
are becoming more diverse. Now, what I haven't mentioned so far is gender diversity. Obviously,
the percentage of men and women hasn't changed, but 100 years ago, most women's work was in
the home. That's no longer the case. Women now participate in nearly every sector of
public and private life, in nearly equal numbers as men. In fact, in American colleges and
universities, women now outnumber men. This inclusion in the workforce extends beyond
racing gender as well to other categories, such as physical challenges. So people once
considered incapable of holding meaningful jobs now participate in meaningful and useful
ways in the workforce in record numbers. These are all just great things. Now, finally,
people are starting to accept diversity of other forms, religious beliefs, sexual orientation,
which is allowing people in many cases to be open about their behaviors, their opinions,
their beliefs about areas in which they used to be closed up. And so this results in much
greater expression of diversity. So the diversity that we express and we feel is much more than
it was in the past. So in some, the workplace now better reflects society, and a society
that it reflects is more diverse, more accepting and more open. Now, at the same time, we've
got this massive increase in diversity, we're more connected. So advances in information
technology and transportation reduce time and distance. Firms and markets are global.
So for example, in the 1820s, a farmer in the produce market would only be competing
with local farmers. They wouldn't care what's happening in Italy. But now with modern transportation,
it happens. Farmers around the world are competing with one another. Goods that can be shipped
as they had say anywhere overnight compete with one another in the marketplace on a day-to-day
basis. Now, if you add to this the fact that on average, goods weigh less. So information
goods like movies and songs literally have no weight at all and can ship at the speed
of light. Then you get just a much greater diversity of products and much more diversity
of competitors. So it's just a much more connected world. Now, how large is this effect
then? Well, there's lots of ways to measure this, but here's one. From 1970 to 2000, this
is the time period we saw that huge upswing in the use of the word diversity, the ratio
of exports to world GDP rose from under 30%, 28% to over 40%. So this means a huge part
of the world economy is now trade, which means more competition, more diversity. Now, as
Thomas Friedman's book title suggests, the world is flat. We now can connect with anyone
anywhere, anytime. And here's the point, that person with whom we connect is probably going
to be different from us. That's why there's been so much emphasis on diversity, training
and education and business. There's just more interactions with diverse people.
So that's the demographic side. Now, here's the other trend, and this relates to cognitive
diversity. Differences in how people think about problems, the diverse perspectives and
tools that we bring to bear when we're stuck in some situation, we're trying to solve a
problem. That's the stuff we're focusing on in this course. Now, at the end of this lecture,
I'll talk about a little bit in the next lecture, I'll focus on it more, and I'll try and link
up identity and cognitive diversity. But first, what I want to do is I want to clarify why
cognitive diversity has become such a hot topic, why it's so important. And what's going
to follow later with a bulk of this course is going to be unpacking the various types
of cognitive diversity that exist and showing why they're so important, both to you as an
individual and to the teams, groups, organizations, communities to which you belong. In fact,
even to the entire society, the well functioning of our entire society depends on diverse people
getting along, working together, meeting challenges. So what I'm going to do in this lecture,
I'm going to explain why cognitive diversity has become such a big deal. This relates to
the changing nature of work. That's the main reason. Specifically, how increasingly work
involves less repetitive physical tasks and more thinking.
I'm going to start, though, in a somewhat different place. I'm going to argue that a different form
of diversity used to be a big deal, and that different form was specialization. Fifty years
ago, we thought of diversity in the workplace as specialization. In fact, if you plot one of
those same culture nomics graph for specialization, let's see what you get. This is interesting.
Remember before we had the graph of diversity that was increasing? Now, we can look at the
spread of the word specialization. What we see in the 1920s is a big upswing, as more
and more people start talking about specialization. But then it flattens out from 1960 to 1990,
and then it falls off in the last 10 years. What we see is this increase and then a decrease
in the use of the word specialization. The logic of specialization has two parts. The
first part comes from the study of learning by doing. People get better if they specialize.
You get better faster. Now, the second benefit of specialization is going to come from trade.
Let me show you an example. Let's suppose that you want a company that makes homemade organic
tomato sauce. So, what you do is you cook the sauce in a giant kettle. This can hold,
let's say, 500 cases of the sauce. The cooking is against strength. You can make as much sauce
as you need. What you need to do is you need to hire people to do canning and packing. So,
you've got two workers. We're identifying them here. Here's worker one. Here's worker
two. Now, let's suppose that a worker who only cans can do 200 cases a day, and a worker
who only packs can pack 200 cases a day. So, if you hire two people to can and pack, you
can get 200 cases done each day, right? One packs 200, one cans 200, one packs 200. But
now let's add learning to our model. So, what if someone spends a whole year at a single
task that she's going to become 10% faster? And if you spend, that means half a year on
a task, you become 5% faster. So, what I want you to do is I want to use that example to
show you why specialization works. So, it's first to assume the workers don't specialize.
So, both of them can can and they can pack. So, at the beginning of each year, each is
going to spend half the day canning and half the day packing. So, how much are they going
to get done? They're going to do 100 cases a day. Now, at the end of the first year,
they've been working for half a year at canning and packing. So, they're going to be able to
do 105. So, the first one can do 105 canning and can do 105 packing. The second can do 105
canning and 105 packing. And so, what we get total are 210 cases canned and 210 cases packed.
So, that's a 5% improvement. That's great. But now let's suppose that each one specializes.
So, one worker, this worker, only cans and the other worker only packs. Well, if you
only can or only pack, you're going to get 10% better at your task. So, instead of getting
210, we're going to get 220. So, output is improved by 10%. That's even better. So, the
logic here should be pretty straightforward. If we learn by doing, then we can specialize.
We learn faster and we're more productive. Here's an extreme example to drive home this
point of specialization. So, if you've got 10 people and you're about to leave on a trip
to visit 10 countries over the space of a month. So, you're going to go to Europe, you're
going to visit 10 countries. Sounds great. So, none of these 10 people speaks any of
the languages of those countries. So, let's first suppose these people don't specialize.
So, each learns a very little bit of 10 languages. In fact, three days worth, because they've
got a month. So, trust me on this, three days of Swedish doesn't help very much. But if
they specialize, each could spend an entire month on a single language. And they'd actually,
you know, pick up a little bit of the vernacular. So, the group is going to be much more effective
at communicating if each one is specialized. So, specialization work. Now, that said, specialization
isn't all wine and roses, right? Because in some cases, specialization can prove dehumanizing
to laborers. So, it's one thing to specialize in the cello, right? To be Yo-Yo Ma to spend
your life playing the cello, or to specialize in neurosurgery, because those tasks are going
to stimulate you. You're going to enlarge you. But it's another thing to specialize in some
repetitive tasks, like riveting or canning or packing or sweeping floors. So, you may
get better repetitive tasks, but they may get boring. But remember, specialization isn't
the full story of the early version of why diversity is important. If all I knew how
to do is make shoes, my feet are going to look great, but I'm going to starve. And from
what I'm told, shoe leather doesn't taste very good. Now, for this reason, specialization's
partner has always been trade, because the idea has been you specialize in the new trade.
So, if individuals, regions, or countries specialize in some particular good or product
or service, they can trade those for other things that they need. In this way, each
country can focus on the things that they're really good at and trade for the things that
they need. Now, economists refer to this as comparative advantage. And the theory of
comparative advantage is really rather subtle, because it turns out that relative abilities
are what matters. Not absolute abilities, but relative abilities. And this insight, which
is formalized as a theory of comparative advantage, is really in my opinion, in the opinion of
many. It's one of the coolest ideas in all of economics. So, let me explain how it works.
What we've got is two countries. One of them we're going to call Costa Rica, and one is
the United States. What we're going to assume here is that the United States is a much more
advanced country. And so, it's better at producing particular things. So, it might trade for
something like furniture in a country like Costa Rica that's maybe not as good at making
things like clock radios. So, what's going to matter here is not the absolute abilities
of these two countries, but their relative abilities at making these two products, furniture
and clock radios. So, let me do an example. Let's suppose that a worker in Costa Rica can
make five chairs a month, or can make one clock radio. And let's suppose that a worker
in the United States can make ten chairs a month, or ten clock radios. So, what this
means is the workers in the United States are equally good at chairs and clock radios.
The workers in Costa Rica are relatively better at chairs. Let's also suppose, again, just
for this example, that within each country, the demand for clock radios and chairs is
equal. So, we want the same number of chairs and clock radios produced. This is sort of
a standard analysis you'd use in an economics class, in a case where there's no trade. So,
Costa Rica needs to make an equal number of clock radios and chairs. And so, what they're
going to do is they're going to spend ten months making clock radios. And that's going
to produce a total of ten clock radios. And then they're going to spend two months making
chairs. Now, remember, they can make five chairs in a month. So, that's going to be
ten chairs. Now, in the United States, workers can make ten clock radios a month, or ten
chairs a month. Since they want equal numbers, they'll spend six months at each. And that
means sixty chairs and sixty clock radios. So, that's sixty each. So, if we look at
that, Costa Rica is making ten of each. United States is making sixty of each. So, if we
think of our world economy, this is a no-trade world economy, what we're going to get is
we get seventy chairs and seventy clock radios. So, that's great. It's totally great. But
now let's suppose that we can trade. So, now we want to reanalyze this. And now we're going
to assume that workers in Costa Rica are only going to make chairs. Why are they only going
to make chairs? Because they're relatively better at making chairs. So, if they only
make chairs, they can make sixty chairs in a year. Because they can make five chairs
in a month. And they're going to make no clock radios. Now, the workers in the United States
can make clock radios in chairs as well. And they're equally good at them. But they need
to make more clock radios to satisfy the demand in Costa Rica. And they've got to make sixty
more clock radios than they make chairs. So, what they'll do is they'll work nine months
making clock radios and six months making chairs. So, that means ninety clock radios
and thirty chairs. And if we look at our world economy now, we get a total of ninety clock
radios and ninety chairs. So, this is great because in the past we had seventy chairs
and seventy clock radios. Now we have ninety chairs and ninety clock radios. This all came
for free. This is an increase of nearly thirty percent. And so, what we see here is the contribution
of specialization. By the workers in Costa Rica specializing on the thing they're good
at making chairs and the workers in the United States specializing on the thing that they're
relatively good at making clock radios, we get an increase of thirty percent that comes
from this specialization or diversity. So, what we have is this notion of these sort
of key insights, these benefits from specialization. First, if we specialize, we get better faster.
Second, if we specialize, we can do the thing we're best at and we can reap the sort of
enormous benefits that we see through trade. Now these insights provide the traditional
foundation for why diversity produces value. Now I say traditional because the world has
changed. Think back to those curves I showed. Specialization's ideas peaked, you know,
in the 1960's. Well, the same is true for comparative advantage. Let's look at the picture
for that. If you look at comparative advantage, remember the world has much more trade now.
We see that this has increased all the way through the 1980's and then it's fallen off.
It's not that the idea's fallen out of favor, it's just that comparative advantage is no
longer the important thing that it once was. So what we've got is we've got the diversity
line continuing to slope up. The specialization curve and the comparative advantage curve
have both peaked. So to understand what's going on, we need to understand a little bit
more about the changing nature of work. That's going to help us understand why comparative
advantage is sloped down, specialization is sloped down, but diversity is sloped up.
So let's talk about it. Let's talk about the changing nature of work. Over the past
hundred years, work has become different. It's now less physical and it's more cognitive.
So where have those manufacturing workers gone? They've moved into other jobs. Some
provide services like physical therapy, house painting, things like that. But most think,
literally, that's what they do for work. They think. Here's a good way to categorize work.
People can make stuff, they can service or they can think. Economists call the first
two the manufacturing and the service sectors. The third sector is still sort of searching
for a name and has several of them. Richard Florida, an economist, calls these workers
the creative class. Robert Reich, another economist, calls them cognitive workers.
Florida's done a lot of work thinking about this creative class and he estimates now that
nearly a third of the workforce, the same size that used to be in the manufacturing
sector, now belongs to this creative class. And it's the creative class that we're going
to be talking about in this course, people who think for work. Incidentally, this creative
class not only is it a third of workers, they earn 50% of all wages. In contrast, the manufacturing
sector, which is, you know, most 20% of the workforce earns less than 20% of the wages.
And services like physical therapy, house cleaning, they make even less. So the people
who think not only the large segment of the population, they also make an even larger
segment of total income. So to understand this trend, why this trend, right, manufacturing,
the rise of the creative class correlates with an increase in cognitive diversity, takes
three steps. So let's walk through those. Here's step one. Creative people, what do
they do? They solve, they design, and they predict. Second, the problems that creative
people confront are challenging. I mean, do more on this in a minute, but just for a moment,
you want to think of them, these are tough problems. Third, step three, many of these
problems outstrip the capabilities of any one person. So that means that creative people
have to form groups. And when they form groups, they form groups of people who are cognitively
diverse, because it doesn't do you any good to bring in people who are just the same as
you. If group members weren't different from you, if they didn't think differently, they
wouldn't help you. You wouldn't need more than one person in the group. So here's the
idea. Two heads are only going to be better than one if the two heads differ. So we need
this cognitive diversity when the problems become hard. Or to put it another way, we
don't need cognitive diversity when problems are easy. We just solve them. It's when the
problem becomes difficult that we turn to groups, teams, or in some cases, crowds. But
what do I mean by hard? Well, that gets fun to think about. So in this course, I'm going
to talk about several different meanings of hard. And I'm going to mean two really distinct
things. One will be difficult. The other will be complex. Let's talk about these. So the
term difficult, what does it mean? It refers to high dimensional problems, lots of variables,
and lots of interactions between the various choices and variables we have to make. So
think about designing an airplane or a car. That's difficult. So it's rewiring an old
house, right? There's all sorts of choices you make, and they interact with one another.
Now difficult problems aren't new. We've always faced difficult problems. But the number
of difficult problems is on the rise. And the reason why is that, well, we've solved
the easy ones, right? We've solved most of the really easy problems, and so we're left
with the more difficult ones. Take any academic discipline, whether it's statistics, economics,
math, chemistry. In each case, the low apples, so to speak, have already been picked. And
what we've got left are the hard ones. So the other reason why the problems are getting
harder is that new technologies allow us to see the world at finer levels of granularity.
So it just exposes more dimension. We didn't used to know about genes at all. We couldn't
sequence them. So we were insulated from a whole host of difficult problems related to
genetics. Now that we can sequence these genes at relatively low cost, and we can even engineer
things like genetically altered plants and animals. What we do is we open up a huge number
of problems, and guess what? Those problems are difficult. Now these problems that were
once unassailable are now a big part of our economy. Things like creating molecules to
cure diseases, designing microprocessors, writing virtual reality software. These comprise an
increasing share of our economy in an ever-growing chunk of the creative class' work time. These
are problems that didn't even exist because of the fact that our granularity was much
coarser. We just now see the world to a finer lens, opening up a range of really different
and interesting and challenging problems. Here's just one example. Neuroscience wasn't
really a field 100 years ago, because we had just very few ways of looking inside the brain,
and brain surgery was rare, if not really just impossible, right? But now literally
hundreds of thousands of people work in neuroscience. These jobs exist because we now have the ability
to look inside the brain and see the parts. And that's totally cool. And there's a lot
of work to do to figure out how the brain works. And you know what? It's difficult. So neuroscience
opens up a whole range of difficult problems we have to solve. And another thing is our
difficult problems have become even more difficult. So remember Ben Jones, we talked
about before from Northwestern University? He's examined rates of innovation, looking
at patent data. And here's what he found. The age at first patent is increasing. So people
are older when they write their first patent. What does that mean? It means that it's harder
to come up with a new idea. The problems are harder. Second, specialization in patents
is increasing. In other words, people are developing deeper and less broad skill sets.
And then third, because the problems are harder, people are deeper, teamwork is increasing.
So the number of people per patent has increased. And then finally, and here's the most important
part, the extent of the increase in teamwork is larger in these more technical domains.
So it's larger in pharmaceuticals than it is in say amusements and furniture. So what
we're seeing is deep people who are diverse working together to solve hard problems. So
my point should be pretty clear by now. We've got a lot of difficult problems out there.
And we use diverse teams to solve them. But diversity, but difficulty isn't the only thing
that has led to an increase in interest in diversity. The second reason is rising complexity.
Now a system is said to be complex if it's somewhere between ordered and completely random.
So complex systems are alive. They churn. They're sort of difficult to design, explain,
engineer, predict. They're things like ecosystems, economies, political systems. Now the types
of systems that produce complexity consist of a few common attributes. They have diverse
parts that are interconnected, that are interdependent in their actions, and that adapt to one another.
Now many of the big challenges we face, whether it's constructing robust financial systems,
reducing poverty, improving education, managing the climate, improving transportation, these
can all be thought of as complex. They churn. They're almost alive, and they never go away.
So each day you've got to get up and confront the problem anew. Every day there's traffic.
Every day there's a global financial system. Now that's not true of difficult problems,
hard as they may be. Once you get a difficult problem, once you've solved it, you're done.
You can move on to something else. It's like doing a math problem. Once you've solved
one integral, you're done. You can move on to something new. So once you've invented
the transistor, put it away, move on, go to the semiconductor. But if you run an airline,
if you run a bank, an internet company, every time one of your competitors changes in action,
anytime they introduce a new product or announce a new advertising campaign, your problem changes.
And so what you need is you need smart, diverse people to address it. Now businesses have
always had to adapt. But thanks to information, communication, technology, the rate at which
they have to adapt has changed, and it's changed dramatically. Companies used to wait, what,
90 days to see what products were selling in markets. Now they know instantaneously,
because they get cash register data immediately in their computers at corporate headquarters.
So in these complex, constantly changing environments, diversity becomes crucial in ways that we're
going to see in this course. Now how diversity works, though, is fundamentally different
from how it did in the past. Think back about what I said about specialization and how it
produced benefits. Well, we could think maybe aren't cognitive workers just specialists
too. So some people specialize in design, some specialize in writing computer code, some
in reading and writing data, right? Can I just apply the same mathematical arguments
that I did for specialization with the canner and the packer? No, no, look, there's an
essential difference. In the past, what we were doing, and this is basically something
called scientific management techniques, you broke a problem into parts, and then people
specialized in those parts. One person can, one person packed. So those people who work
together an engine, one would weld the engine block, they have little or no interaction
at all with the people who are putting together the headlights for a car. So specialization
means isolation in the traditional model. So yes, people had diverse skills, but those
diverse skills weren't interacting directly. They were separated by space, and they were
separated by time. And you can think of that metaphorically on an assembly line, one person
works, they pass it to someone else, they pass it to someone else. So you're disconnecting
the specialization. Modern specialization, what we're going to call cognitive specialization,
relies on direct interaction. So on difficult and complex tasks, we tend to work together,
we tend to be in the room together. So sometimes we pass emails back and forth, but there's
a lot of what some people call bricolage. So we work together, what happens is we confront
cognitive diversity, and we confront that cognitive diversity head on, apart from the
pun, but it's apt. Let me try to tie this all up with a pretty bow. There's two fundamental
trends that have made diversity a really hot topic. First, within many countries, especially
the United States, populations have become more diverse and more inclusive and open.
Concurrently, connections across countries have strengthened, trade has increased, owing
to modern technology, and so it's a smaller world. So we're interacting with more diverse
people. Second, as the economy, both the United States and globally has transitioned from
requiring a whole bunch of physical tasks to more of a cognitive economy, it requires
people to work together in teams and to work in diverse teams. So organizations are relying
on teams because of the difficulty and complexity of the tasks that they face. So you've got
diverse people working on hard problems. So diversity then becomes doubly relevant. So
on the one hand, we've got a lot more of it, and on the other hand, we need a lot more
of it. So this seems all neat and simple, right? But it isn't, because as I mentioned
at the beginning, the diversity we have is based on identity. The diversity we need is
cognitive. So how do these align? Well, that's an interesting thing to think about, and that's
where we want to go next. All right. Thank you.
