Hi, welcome back. We're at the halfway point in this course and we've just finished discussing
how diversity can sometimes trump ability and we work through the logic of how that
can occur. And I want to just step back for a moment and I want you to think back to the
first few lectures in the course. Because in those lectures I talked about the rise
of diversity and I described two trends, an increase in the diversity of people with whom
we interact and an increase in the amount of team and group based work. And it's the
mashup of those two trends that means we now have more teams and we now have more diverse
teams. And so we need to know something about how diverse teams work. Now I also describe
a change in how people think about diversity. I described how in my experiences, in meeting
with students, workers, managers, executives, government leaders, it suggested that many
people had experienced sort of bottom line or pragmatic benefits of diversity, so called
diversity bonus. And that this was moving us beyond the logic of fairness, equality and
just enlarging the pool. So I described how individuals use this exact same term, this
idea of some diversity bonus and they've begun the hard work of thinking about how do you
restructure interactions in order to better leverage diversity. Remember those were steps
four and steps five in the diversity journey. Now that's how we got started, but we didn't
have any tools to figure out really what to do, how to proceed. But in the intervening
lectures we've built up some frameworks. So first we talked about prediction and our
prediction benefits from diverse predictive models. Remember we had the diversity prediction
theorem, we saw how collective accuracy depends in equal measure on individual accuracy and
on collective diversity. And as I just mentioned, we've been studying problem solving and innovation
and there we saw that diversity may be even more important than ability, provided of course
that we have a hard problem, smart problem solvers, a diverse pool from which we choose
and a group that's neither too big or too small. So in this lecture what I want to do
is I want to dig more deeply about these theoretical results about the value of diversity, particularly
in problem solving. So I'm going to sort of unpack that diversity term stability theorem
in terms of why it matters. So I'm going to get really practical and I'm going to think
about what our results mean for real groups with real people. And what we're going to
see is that our new ways of thinking are going to help us build better teams, make better
hires. And they're even going to change how we think about questions like who should we
hire, who should we admit to college, like why did one student get in and not another.
So I want to start with just a fun little model and this is actually one of my favorites.
It's a model of hole digging. I'm using hole digging here as a place holder for work done
by an individual in a production economy. So this could be physical labor. So literally
things like hole digging, wood shopping, manufacturing work or farm labor. Now recall from the second
lecture that most employment used to be of this sort. Number 1900, manufacturing agricultural
workers comprised nearly two thirds of the American workforce. And even in the 40s and
50s they were still about 40% of the workforce. Now before I get to the model of quick caveat,
these jobs working in a plant, farming, laying roads or tracks somewhere, these are hard work
and they require great intelligence. And people who spend their lives building cars or houses
or working on a farm, they bring perspectives and heuristics to their work and they get
better at what they do. Remember how we talked about learning by doing through specialization.
However, and here's the key assumption, for the purposes of making a point about the move
away from production to problem solving, I'm going to assume that most of the work and
most of the value of that work results from getting stuff done as an individual and not
as being part of a team solving problems. So let's suppose that I run a company and we're
going to call it Scott's Shovel Services. We do fence posts, we do flagpoles, we do trees
and shrubbery. Now I live in the Midwest, so whole digging is seasonal. Can't really
dig in the winter because the ground is frozen. So each summer what I need to do is I need
to hire some shovelers. So what I do is I take out some ads in college newspapers and
I get a lot of applicants because I pay well. And these applicants send things like resumes,
transcripts, etc. But I don't really care much about that. I don't care what grade somebody
got in calculus. I care about whether they can dig holes, how big they can dig them and
how fast they can dig them. That's the relevant skill, that's what ability is. So to keep
this model as stark as possible, let's suppose that I'm going to just charge $20 per hole
to my customers and then I pay my workers $10 per hole. So it's a 50-50 split, so it's
a piece of work. So in that way over the course of the summer I make $10 for every hole that's
dug and so do my workers. So what's my interest here? So let's assume I'm a profit maximizing
business owner. I want to maximize the total number of holes that my workers are going
to dig. Because if I have a dozen employees, what's my total profit? What's just 12 times
the sum of the number of holes that they dig? I want to make this very formal to prove a
point. So we can let H1 denote the number of holes dug by worker number 1, H2, the number
dug by worker 2, and so on. So what's my profit? My profit is just 10 times H1 plus H2 plus
H3 and so on plus H11. So what I get is basically I want to hire these 12 people who produce
the most holes, who dig the most holes, because I'm going to make the most money. So to be
very specific here, if I want the most productive firm, if I want to make the most money, then
I should take all of my applicants and I should find the ones that are best at digging holes.
So what I could do is I could have each of them dig holes for an hour and then what I
could do is I could estimate pretty darn accurately who was best at digging holes and I could
hire the best. So in this environment, if I run a hole digging firm, I should hire based
on talent and not based on diversity. I don't care about perspectives, heuristics or mental
models, we're digging holes. I shouldn't care about identity, ethnicity or anything else
and I shouldn't discriminate, but what I'm going to do is I'm just going to choose the
best people and all I care about is how many holes someone can dig. Now if I were to discriminate
based on identity, say I'm not going to hire women or members of some ethnic minority,
well I'd be doing two things wrong. I'd be violating a pretty widely health belief that
I shouldn't discriminate and I'd also be violating the law. In addition, I'd also be missing
out on a huge part of the talent pool, the whole bigger pool logic. Because even though
men are bigger on average, there's no guarantee that among my best applicants that the men
are going to be best. It's entirely possible that within my group there's several women
who might be better at digging holes. So talent at digging holes, because like all sorts of
talent, doesn't know gender, doesn't know race. So whether I use moral, legal or efficiency
grounds, I have no reason to discriminate. So by basic logic though, right, I have no
incentive here to discriminate against people, but I also have no incentive to seek out diversity
for the sake of synergies for some sort of diversity bonus because none exist. So I should
be thinking entirely in terms of talent and not in terms of diversity or diversity bonus.
So let's reflect on that observation for a minute. There's no bonus at all. Now you
could say, well maybe there's a small bonus. Somebody might figure out a better way to
hold the shovel, something like that, but that's not likely. So there's no need for
this sort of what I call level four thinking or level five thinking. I don't need to think
about restructuring. So this model of output is the sum of individuals' inputs, the digging
holes, leaves out a lot of detail, but it's not that much different from what we teach
in introductory economics classes. In those classes what we teach is that output depends
on labor and on capital. So for example, the common way to write down the output for a
firm or even for an entire economy relies on something that's called the Cobb-Douglas
production function. So here's what it looks like. It might say that output is the square
root of the amount of labor times the square root of the amount of physical capital. So
by capital we mean things like tools, machines, factories, and so on. Well what's labor? Well
in the simplest version, labor is just what we covered in our whole digging model, except
what I called H, the number of holes dug, would equal a person's ability, possibly times
the number of hours that they worked, something like that. So in this Cobb-Douglas model,
your talent, what I was captured by the number of holes dug, is the variables that matters,
and so what firms do is hire the most able workers to get the most output, and then society
gets the most output. It all makes perfect sense, so it's all a nice, neat, clean model.
But now what I want to do is I want to contrast hole digging with gene splicing. So first,
what is gene splicing? So I'll be honest, when I first heard of it, I assumed that they
had some sort of laser, and they had a laser knife, and they cut genes, they spliced them.
It sounded incredibly cool, seemed like fun. But then I dug a little deeper, and it turns
out I was wrong. Here's how gene splicing actually works. So think of a long strand of DNA. It's
a string of nucleotides, that's the end DNA. And these DNA are cut, but not using a laser
knife, they're cut using something called restriction enzymes. What are these? Well these
enzymes, there's thousands of them, they come in and they can identify a particular sequence
of these nucleotides. And when they encounter it, what the enzyme does is grabs the sequence.
If I got this little snippet of DNA, it grabs it and runs off with it. It's almost like
it lobes with a little piece of DNA. And it leaves the rest of the DNA completely unchanged.
Now this process creates two opportunities, if you're interested in sort of making improvements
in the genetic code. First opportunity is this. You can add on, because the DNA now has this
little dangling strand from where the enzyme was taken, the nucleotide was taken away.
So you can repair the DNA, and while you're adding it, while you're at that, you can add
something else onto it. So there might exist a strand of DNA for this area of skin right
above my upper lip, and there's a restricted enzyme that can identify that. Well I could
come in, snip it, add a new piece, and maybe give myself a little beauty mark right here.
That'd be nice, it'd look like Cindy Crawford. Okay, second opportunity. You can take from
the DNA. Because our DNA sets in motion processes that help us maintain robust health and other
things. So part of one segment of our DNA might help produce insulin. And so what we
can do is we can take a restricted enzyme, we can go in, split it, grab the valuable
insulin producing part, and then we can grow insulin in bacteria in the lab. So we can
actually take that DNA and use it to save lives, use it to produce insulin. Now prior
to using gene splicing, how did we get insulin? Well we harvested it from cadavers. Yes, from
dead people. Now mostly not from people though, from pigs and cows. Now you might be thinking,
wait a minute, isn't it risky taking bacteria grown from pigs and cows and putting it in
humans? It is, a lot of people thought so, and that's why we now use gene splicing. Okay,
so now let's suppose the economy shifted, and I'm closing down after 30 productive years
my shoveling firm, and I'm going to move into the burgeoning field of biomedical engineering,
which gene splicing is just one of the many techniques that my firm is going to use. Now
after surveying a set of medical challenges and needs, my firms decided, you know what
we're going to do? We're going to genetically engineer knuckles. So now my firm is going
to employ 12 people before, in fact for fun I might even call these knuckle heads, and
I've got to think about who do I hire? So I've got the same problem, I've got to hire
some people, but now I want to think, who should these knuckle heads be? So let's suppose
I post an advertisement in the college papers again, and I get a couple hundred applicants.
Now some of these might have PhDs in mechanical engineering, some might have PhDs in biology,
some in medical imaging, some in orthopedic engineering, some in tissue engineering and
so on. How do I write them? Well I can use the same logic I used in my whole digging
firm. I can think about what is the ability of each person, and I should hire the highest
ability people. So how would I do it? Well I can say, what is ability? How about this?
Quality is years in school plus quality of training, maybe plus number of academic publications
they've written, plus strength of letters of recommendation, plus grade point average,
stuff like that, and I might have some really good way to even measure these things objectively.
Well then what I can do is I can compute scores for each of my 200 applicants. So that seems
totally great. Now alternatively, I could follow the lead of some companies and have
the applicants take a common test, remember like how many golf balls go on a bus, and
then I could hire the people who scored highest. This seems like I'm almost doing the same
thing as having them dig holes for an hour and see who could dig the most. So either
way, once I have this ranking, what I can do is I can choose the best 12, the best and
the brightest. So it could be the 12 that have the highest ability score when I had
that sort of decomposition into attributes, or it could be the 12 that scored highest on
the test, but I'm taking the 12 that have the most ability, just like I did when we
dug holes. But in this case, when I've moved from the shoveling firm to the gene splicing
firm, this may not be a good plan. In fact, it could be a lousy plan. Think about why.
Well look, it could be that 10 of the 10, 12 best applicants is rated by score or by,
you know, on the test, they might work in imaging. Now I need someone to do imaging,
but I don't need 10 people to do imaging. And if I hire the 12 best individuals and
I get 10 images, look, my firm isn't going to work. I can't grow knuckles with just images.
If I want to grow these knuckles, I need people with diverse skills. So hiring the best is
sort of mindless. What I have to do instead is seek out diversity, seek out diverse skills.
So I do far better by sitting down and thinking, what talents do I need? What skills do I need?
And then making sure that I had coverage over the relevant skills. So in this alternative
approach, what would I do? Well, I might do the following. I might create some classifications,
biomegist, tissue engineer, mechanical engineer, bio instruments, and even something called
biomechatronics. What is that? Well, that's a field that combines electronics, machines,
and biology, along with robotics and neuroscience to make things like mechanical fish and, well,
knuckles. Now within each of these fields, I might then decide how many people do I need. And
then with each one, I could quote unquote hire the best and the brightest. Now we might say,
well, this seems better, right? And is this optimal? Well, again, probably not. And for the same
reason. Here's why. It could very well be that the two best tissue engineers lack diversity. They
could have gone to the same undergraduate school, the same graduate school, the postdocs in the
same lab, learned the same things from the same people. So I'd be far better off if I think of
my tissue engineers in terms of their skills, their toolboxes, their perspectives, and their
heuristics, just like in our model. So what I should do is I should look in detail at what
projects they've completed, what research they've done, and what they're likely to bring. So again,
instead of thinking of each person as having an ability level, like someone's low ability,
someone's high ability, I want to think of people as vectors of skills, of heuristics,
perspectives, knowledge, experience, that sort of stuff, and seek out diversity. I've also made a
second mistake with this approach. And I'm going to call this the silo error. So they created
categories and then chose people within those categories. So I've constructed silos based on
disciplinary training. Now it could well be there's someone out there who doesn't fit within those
silos. It could be there's someone that started out doing tissue engineering, but then got interested
in imaging. Now this person might not rank highly when considered as a pure tissue engineer, or as a
pure imagist, because they can do both. But this person might have the ability to stand between
those silos and hold them together. And if she can, she might make just a huge value to my firm.
And so she might be the first person I want to hire. So the lesson here should be really clear.
What I have to do is evaluate these applicants, right? In fullness, think of the full person,
and then try to choose a good collection, a good cohort, a good team. So let's suppose now I've hired
them. So I've got my team of diverse knuckleheads, and I've got a lot of interesting people with
different tools. It's most likely going to be the case that then I see this diversity bonus,
the one that I didn't see from my hold digging firm, because what's going to happen? I'm going to see
one person get stuck on a problem, and then another person is going to help her out. Then I might also
decide, wow, I should restructure my team based on which combinations of talents and individuals
produce the most synergy. And I might want to rethink my organizational structure based on
what's working. Well, that's level five thinking. That's restructuring. Okay, take a deep breath
for a second and connect some dots. I'm going to go back to the hold digging, and I'm going to go back
to the diversity Trump's ability theorem. Hold digging, is it a hard problem? No, hold digging
is low-dimensional. If it's not difficult, we don't need diversity. We don't need perspectives
and heuristics. We just have somebody solve it, or in this case, dig it, and dig it over and over
and over. What about building a knuckle? Does it work there? Does this, there's a diversity
Trump's ability theorem there, uphold there? Well, to build a knuckle, we need knowledge of genes,
restricted enzymes, tissues, imaging biomechanics, right? The various functions of a knuckle and
how to reproduce them can be seen through a whole bunch of different lenses. And before we call
these things perspectives, right? Related, there's many techniques, what we call heuristics, for
building the knuckle parts. And these parts all interact, producing a rugged landscape. So yes,
this is a hard problem. What about the other conditions? Is everybody I'm trying to hire
smart relative to the problem? Well, here's where I've got to be intelligent. I've got to call my
applicant pool down to people who have relevant skills. And then I can ask, am I choosing from
a diverse pool? And the answer again is yes, in this example I am. And is my group of moderate
size again yes? So therefore, I want a diverse group. And the theory that we talked about in
the previous lecture explains why. It explains why diversity is going to trump ability. It also
helps us to explain why we don't need diverse hole diggers. And if we step back even further,
the theory explains why this trend toward new thinking about the value of diversity is occurring,
because the economy is moving from hole digging problems to biomechanical engineering problems.
So we're moving from domains where there was no diversity bonus to domains where there's a huge
diversity bonus. Hence, this massive interest increase in the interest in the topic of diversity.
I want to be really careful here though, not to mislead in any way. Because in no way was the
economy just holding any 1900, nor is it all biomechanical engineering now. Reality lies in
between. I want to share a story with you. I was once giving a presentation on leveraging diversity
to a very prestigious law firm. Now, after I described the hole digging model, a senior partner
raised his hand and said, and I'm paraphrasing here, he says, hey, that settles it. What we do here is
we dig holes. And given that we dig holes, we don't need to worry about diversity that much. We
should hire on talent just like we've always done. And we're going to hire the best people,
they're going to do the best work, and we're going to serve our clients best.
Now, sort of shocks and background is way helpful here. If you look at these high powered firms,
such as the one I was visiting, they're pretty hierarchical. There's senior partners who sit at
the top, followed by partners. And these all have a say in the running of the firm. And then at the
bottom, there are associates. And these associates work long hours. I mean, really long hours.
There's something called the Avery Index. And they issued a report on the number of hours worked by
associates at 161 law firms, served by the American lawyer, which is a magazine, not a person.
Now, the fewest number of hours worked, the fewest was 49 per week for 50 weeks. Most were in their
60s. 60, 60 hours per week. Now, keep in mind, suppose you sleep eight hours a night and take
two hours per day to do things like shower, eat, get dressed, get to and from work. That's going
to leave 98 hours in a week. Now, if you squeeze it into five days, there's 70 hours. There's 70
hours left over. And people are working 60. And actually, if you think of those 70 hours, it means
you can't work at firms like Wachtel, Lipton, Rosen and Katz, because associates there worked
71 hours a week. 71. Ooh, I didn't want to think about it, right? Anyway, so according to the
senior partner, there's all these associates, and they're working somewhere between 50 and 71 hours
a week, and they're digging holes. So even though they've got law degrees from Chicago, Duke, Michigan,
Harvard, Yale, Stanford, they're digging holes. Partners said, look, we hire talented people,
stick them in their office, and they bill out 2,500 hours a year. At this point, there was some
tension in the room, because there's a lot of junior associates sitting there. And they've got
kind of confused looks on their faces, because I've been brought in to sort of make this case for
diversity, and they're feeling a little bit worried. So on the one hand, they feel pretty good,
because the senior partner just said, look, we just hired the most talented people. So
they're probably feeling like this is a sign that they're pretty special. But they're confused,
and here's why they're confused, because their work experience didn't seem like whole digging.
They felt like they were solving problems. They learned a lot when they went to these great schools.
So at this point, a junior associate raises her hand, very confident, and she says, look,
I agree. It's true that I spend most of my day digging holes. But it's also true that I spend
somewhere between a half an hour and an hour a day where I get stuck. I hit a rock. And then I have
to go talk with other talented and diverse associates, as well as talented and diverse
senior partners, and get feedback and advice, because I am stuck on a local optimum, and I
can't get off, and I need someone else who's got a different perspective or different heuristics
to help me out. Not only that, she said, it's those few hours when I get stuck, when I'm actually
producing most of my value add for the firm. So think about this. What the associate is describing
is something that's called a 90-10 rule. 90% of the job takes 10% of the time as one version of it,
but the version that's relevant here goes like this. 90% of your value is produced by 10% of your
action. So what this young lawyer was saying is when she's given a task, big chunks of it may be
routine. Not hot routine for you and me, because we didn't go to law school, but routine for a law
school grad. And then there's 10% that require innovative, careful thinking that are hard problems.
Well, what have the models and logic we've covered in this class told us? They say,
when the problem gets hard, that's when you benefit from diverse thinkers. And that's exactly what
this associate was saying. She's saying, when things get hard, we go diverse. So yes, we're
digging holes most of the time, but the value add comes from diversity. So what does our thinking say?
Our thinking suggests that when you think about who to hire, you should think about the tools they
have. Go back to that diversity of Trump's ability result. You want people to have germane tools.
You don't want a skateboarder if you're running a nuclear reactor. But you have to be careful,
right? When you think about what those tools are, but you want germane tools.
You also want to think about what's the ratio of hold digging to collective problem solving.
So the more hold digging to do, the more you want people who are capable at completing individual
tasks. So the more you should care about stuff like grade point average, test scores, past individual
performance, because these reflect individual ability, and they've got reasonably high correlation.
Now on the other hand, suppose your job requires lots of group problem solving,
you want diverse thinkers. Well, how do you test for this? One thing you can do is ask those
open-ended questions and see how someone answers, right? That's why consulting companies ask those
Fermi questions. How many lifesavers are written in the U.S. at this moment by left-handed people?
They do this to see how people think, and they're looking for interesting, diverse thinkers.
Now you ask these questions again, not to see if someone knows the right answers.
But you kind of want to see, do they understand Fermi's method? Do they know that heuristic?
Do they know reasoning by analogy? Do they know linear decomposition? Do they have some tools?
And you also want to see what categories people use, because if an applicant uses different
categories in other people, you might think, hey, maybe I should hire this person. They're a
novel thinker. Now from our technical jobs, you might give the person a problem and literally
look at how she solves it. And if she solves it using a different method than other people,
then you might think, wow, we should include her in the mix because she's bringing a diverse set of tools.
Now we can apply this same logic to something that sometimes gets contentious,
college admissions. And unfortunately, it's the case, it's been my experience,
that too often people rely on sort of the whole digging ability logic. And this results in
frustration. And it also results in missed opportunity. Let me explain them. So on the
frustration front, I don't know how many times I've heard someone say, you know, my son had a 3.8
grade point average and, you know, a certain score on this LSAT or GRE or whatever, and didn't get
accepted. But Cheryl's daughter had a 3.5 and only a 41 on her LSAT. And she got into law school.
My son was better. He had higher grades and a higher LSAT score. It's unfair.
Well, let's think for a second. There's an inference that her son is better.
And that's implying that somehow they can be ranked. And that these two numbers,
grade point average and LSAT score, are all that matters. Now in the next lecture,
we're going to talk about something called the latter's model. And that's going to help explain
this a little bit further. But for the moment, what I want you to do is think about, do you really
think these are the only two relevant dimensions for a lawyer? Grade point average and LSAT score?
To assume that would be to diminish the applicants. These are incredibly talented people. Law school
applicants have a variety of interests, experience, passions, perspectives, heuristics, models, goals,
aspirations. When they're admitting people to graduate school or law school, admissions
directors look at all those things. And they recognize that grade point average can't capture
all those dimensions. So someone can earn really high grades, but not learn many tools. In fact,
high grade point averages often correlate with fewer tools because they correlate with easier
classes. College provides an opportunity to learn new tools, new ways to represent problems,
new perspectives, new ways to solve them, heuristics, and new ways to construct categories,
new interpretations. If you're hiring a lawyer, if you're admitting someone to law school,
you're looking for someone who's supposed to be wise. But what is wisdom? Well, psychologists
have study wisdom, and they characterize wisdom as having several characteristics. One is taking
in multiple perspectives, flexible applications of rules, recognitions of the limits of knowledge.
These sorts of attributes aren't captured by GPA, but they are likely found in someone who has
diverse experiences and learned lots of different tools, who sort of taken the world at its face
value and taken it in widely. So grades then don't capture wisdom. And a focus on grades,
which many students have, can often lead to a less meaningful college experience,
as well as less post-college success. Now, for over two decades, I've served on
graduate admissions committees at some of the top universities in the world. And in some years,
we've had several applicants with perfect GPAs, perfect, 4.0s, and admitted none of them, zero,
none. Why? Well, it's not because we don't want smart people, no. The reason you haven't admitted
them is for the reasons I just mentioned. Those students took easy classes. They didn't get the
right tools. They're not going to make it in graduate school. So, for example, in economics
or political science, we might find someone who took almost no statistics, which is necessary,
very little math, no analytic reasoning. So even though they had perfect grades,
they didn't spend any time learning the tools that are going to be necessary for them to survive in
grad school. So for that reason, most colleges and universities, when they're admitting for
graduate school or even undergraduate admissions, compute grade point averages in relevant classes.
So it could be the case in relevant classes, the quote-unquote son who was unfairly denied
may have only had a 3.4, while the daughter who was given preferential treatment may have had a 3.8.
So in fact, it wasn't unfair. It was the right decision. Let me turn now to the lost opportunity.
Again, if you focus on grades, you're going to take classes that you're going to do well in.
You're not going to push yourself in interesting new areas. So if you're focusing on these grades,
if you're worried about getting a high grade, you're probably not going to learn as much.
So who does do best in grad school and really in life? It's students have a purpose, a goal,
a mission, who then choose courses so they can accumulate tools, knowledge, and experiences
that best help them achieve those goals. And hey, look, we're all students. Every day we get up,
we think it better what we do or we don't. Here's a picture of Ben Franklin's daily plan.
He begins it with a question, what good shall I do today? And he ends it by asking,
what good have I done today? These are good questions to ask. Now our ability to do good
depends, among other things, on constantly learning new skills. Building our sets of experiences
becoming wise. And as we've seen, wisdom depends in no small part on diversity. Thank you.
