Hi. Welcome back. In the previous two lectures, we've talked about how to think about ability
and diversity in the context of our toolbox model. In this lecture, we're going to discuss
how tools and ideas combine to create even more ideas. So we're going to see the awesome
power of recombination. We're going to see how 1 plus 1 really can equal 3, at least
theoretically. On a more practical level, we'll see how a great deal of innovation and growth
stems from taking existing things, ideas, technologies, and tools, and then recombining
them. Because through recombination, what we can do is we can make something new out
of old parts. And if somebody does come up with something that's entirely new, like the
laser, the telegraph, or superconducting materials, we can combine that new thing with
all the existing stuff we have to create even more new things. Now recombinations need not
be high-tech. So the pretzel M&M, which I'm going to talk about in more detail in a second,
is a recombination. It combines pretzels with M&Ms. The Who's album, Tommy, combines rock
and roll with the format of an opera. And one of my personal favorites, the poached egg
toaster, combines the toaster with an egg poacher. That's not all. It also has a timer,
so the eggs and the toast are at the exact same time. So in this case, 1 plus 1 isn't
just 3, it's also a really good breakfast. So I'm going to be focusing on the role of
recombination in creative systems, where what's happening is people are trying to develop
new products, new policies, and new ideas. Now keep in mind that recombination also occurs
in evolutionary systems. So sexual reproduction combines attributes of one parent with the
attributes of other parents. So my colleague, John Holland, who studies evolutionary and
creative systems, refers to these good attributes as building blocks. And he argues quite persuasively
that what evolution does is combine building blocks to create better and better offspring.
I'm going to start really simply. I'm going to use some really simple mathematics so we can all
follow the central logic for how ideas combine. Now this mathematics is sometimes called combinatorics,
and we've already done a little bit of this when we counted the number of possible toolboxes
that people can have. Now the mathematics of combinatorics, a recombination,
relies on three different formula. Now we all know the first. It's just multiplication.
It's A times B. So suppose I have A shirts and B pairs of pants. How many outfits can I make?
Well, it's simple. It's just A times B. So if I have 10 pairs of pants and 15 shirts,
I can make 150 outfits. That's great. Now you might be saying, Scott, maybe all those pants and
shirts don't go together. Well, that's a good point. I'll come back to it later. But keep in
mind I'm a professor, so I can wear some pretty funky clothing if I want to. Now note also that
if I buy two new pairs of pants, I'm not just getting two pairs of pants, but I'm getting
30 new outfits, because I can wear each pair of pants with my 15 shirts. Now the second formula
is called N choose K. It tells us how many ways to pick K items from a set of N. Now we've already
performed this calculation in an earlier lecture, right? We talked about the number of tools someone
can have. But we're going to do it again so I make sure that we've got it and understand it,
because it's really important. Now instead of toolboxes here, let's think of something,
let's say pizzas. Suppose I'm trying to decide what items to put on a pizza. So making a pizza at
home. In my fridge, there's 12 possible toppings. There's three kinds of meat, you know, pepperoni,
some sausage, some ham. Maybe I've got nine types of vegetables in the fridge. And I want to figure
out how many different types of pizzas can I make. So let's suppose I want my pizza to have exactly
three toppings. So if I want to think how many pizzas can I make if I've got 12 items in the
fridge. And I'm going to choose exactly three. Well, that's really just a combinatoric question.
How many combinations of three can I choose from 12? And this is what mathematicians call
12 choose 3. And they write it just like this. So to figure this out, it's fairly straightforward.
All we do is say, well, how many things could we choose first? Well, there's 12 things that I could
choose first. There's 12 items. How many items could I choose second? Well, there's 11. And how
many items could I choose third? Well, there's 10 left. I've chosen those first two. So again,
you might think there's 12 times 11 times 10. But remember, this overstates the number because if
I choose pepperoni, and then black olives, and then onion, that's the same thing as choosing
black olives, then onion, then pepperoni, or onion, pepperoni, and then black olives.
So to come for all these different combinations, the same item's been in different orders,
I've got to divide through the number of possible orders. Well, if I've got three different items,
there's three things I could pick first, two things I could pick second, and one thing I could
pick third. So what I get is 12 times 11 times 10 divided by 3 times 2 times 1. So this gives me
the total number of ways that I can pick things. And this is going to end up being 220. So there's
220 possible pizzas. That's great. That's more than seven months worth of pizzas. Fantastic.
Okay, now I'm going to turn to our third formula. Now for our third formula,
I want to figure out the total number of pizzas I could create if I don't restrict myself to three
items. So to make that calculation, I want to think of each item as being either on the pizza
or off the pizza. So here's how I'm going to do it. So I've got 12 slots. Let's just draw 12 slots
here. Here's six, and then here's six more. This is a lot of stuff that can go on the pizza.
Now for each one of these slots, it can either be on or it can be off. So I'll put a one here
if it's going to be on the pizza. So this could be black olives right here. And this might be
pepperoni. So maybe put a one. I'm going to put black olives and a zero. I'm not going to put
pepperoni. Well, for each of these 12 things, I can go through and put ones and zeros. And now I
can ask, how many different possibilities are there? Well, let's just look at the first two,
black olives and pepperoni. I've got two switches, and I've got two possibilities for each switch.
So that's basically two times two or four. Now if I had three switches, that would be two times two
times two or eight. Now if I have 12 switches, I've got two times two times two times two. So what?
12 times. How big is that? Well, that's 4096. That's a lot of pizza. That's 11 years of pizza.
In fact, that's enough pizza to get you through undergraduate, graduate school, and even get a
PhD. Okay, let's suppose, though, that now I develop the love of anchovies. So that's a 13th
ingredient. I'm not just getting one new type of pizza because I can combine those anchovies
with all 4096 eggs currently have. So that gives me another 4096 types of pizzas. Another 11 years.
So that's totally cool. Now let's see how I can apply these formula more generally today
of recombination and coming up with new ideas. If I'm combining two piles, so I've got one pile here
and another pile here, the number of combinations is just the product of the number in each pile.
So that's going to apply to things like picking shirts or pants, or maybe picking the color
and design of your refrigerator. You want stainless black or white, or do you want side-by-side
French store, or maybe freezer on the top or freezer on the bottom. Now if we're picking from
a fixed set, like the number of ways to pick seven tools, or the number of ways to pick
three mix-ins at the ice cream store, then we use that N choose K formula. We saw that that
number grows pretty fast. And then finally, if we're looking at all possible combinations,
then we get two raised to the power of the number of attributes. And this can be a huge number.
And you'll notice that if you start trying to build a car online, if you're buying a car and
you have all these little check boxes, you quickly realize you're in that sort of space.
Do you want heated seats? Yes or no? Do you want fog lamps? Yes or no? Do you want leather? Yes or
no? Do you want floor mats? Yes or no? Right? It's totally fun. And there's lots and lots of cars.
So there's literally hundreds of thousands of different cars you could get by choosing different
boxes. So here's the key insight that we can draw from these three formula. The number of combinations
grows as we have more and more parts. We want to spin that very simple insight into a more
general understanding, really a theory that provides the foundation for a lot of economic growth
and innovation. So first, notice the really great thing about ideas is that they can be used by
anyone. Economists like to call these non-rival. What that means is that multiple people can use
them at the same time. So while a parent might say to a child to give another child a chance to play
on the teeter-totter, I'm never going to say to my son Cooper, Cooper, you've been using subtraction
long enough. Time to give your brother a chance to use it, right? Because both Cooper and Ori can
use subtraction at the same time. So when someone developed the rules of algebra, they're free for
everyone to use and everyone to use it simultaneously. Oh, I'm sorry. Did you want to use the quadratic
formula? Oh, I'm done with it here. Feel free to use it, right? That's silly. All right. So here's the
big point of lecture. Think of ideas like LEGO blocks. As we develop more ideas, we've got more
LEGOs to recombine to create new and exciting products, ideas and policies, and we can make
more cool stuff. So as John Maurice Clarke once said, knowledge is the only instrument of production
that is not subject to diminishing returns. Or to put it more colloquially, once we have one idea,
then we have, well, more ideas, right? So consider the laser. When the laser was developed,
no one was thinking, wow, we've got a laser. Now we can have handheld laser pointers and laser
printers. In fact, the lasers proved to have an almost unbelievable number of uses, eye surgery,
teeth whitening, and even reading the great chorus's DVDs, right? Economic growth, you know,
our continued progress rests to a substantial extent on this recombination. So Joel Moore-Cure,
who's a famous economic historian, argues, and does so quite convincingly, that we can explain
the great increases in economic growth as occurring because we could recombine these non-rival ideas.
So in Moore-Cure's account, we can only reap what he calls the gifts of Athena once we had the ability
to write them down and share them. So before we had written technical communication, how were skills
passed on? Well, they were passed on from artisan to artisan through apprenticeships. Once we had
books and technical writing, growth became more widespread. Growth exploded because we could share
ideas. Now this idea that economic growth and innovation stem from recombination receives a
much more technical treatment in an article by Martin Weitzman called, with all things,
recombinant growth. Now like a lot of modern economics, this paper is going to involve a lot
of notation in mathematics. And if you just pick it up, if you're a non-specialist, it might seem
impenetrable. But the core idea in the paper is not impenetrable. It's actually fairly simple.
It goes as follows. People develop ideas, then those ideas get recombined to create new ideas,
and that's what drives growth. So let me push this idea of recombination. And I want to offer up
five observations that are going to be relevant to understanding of how ideas get recombined
and drive growth. And these are going to enable us to see when and how recombinations occur and
don't occur in practice. Here's the first one. There can be too much of a good thing. What do I
mean? Well, Weitzman's model, when you walk through the math, demonstrates an overabundance of
possibility due to recombination. Think of the formula that I just wrote. Think of the number
of pizzas, 4,000 different pizzas. There's just too many ideas to pursue. So two to the nth power
gets large really, really fast. Indulge me for just a second. So when I was a young graduate
student, I went to a summer school on complexity theory at the Santa Fe Institute. And now I'm
actually an external faculty member at the Santa Fe Institute. It's just a great place to hang out.
Now one of the motivations for this school was to bring together students from diverse disciplines
and to teach them these new tools from complex systems. And the idea was that they would then
share these tools with others in their disciplines and sort of raise our understanding of the world.
So viewed through the lens of what we're doing now, one goal of the Santa Fe Institute summer
school was to encourage recombinations, to advance science by mashing together ideas. And it worked
and has continued to work. The Santa Fe Institute just has remarkable influence despite a very small
core faculty. Here's what I'm telling you. One of my fellow students named Patrick Andrews,
he worked on computational models of recognition and just a really bright, interesting guy.
And later Patrick invented some software that performed shape recognition, something called
scene reader, the name of the product. I mentioned Patrick not because he and I walked to the bottom
of the Grand Canyon and back in a day. We did and it was great. Or because we met a guy in Santa Fe
with a three-legged dog who could sniff out neutrinos. Both of those are true. The reason I'm
bringing him up is he has this unusual hobby. For a number of years now he's written a blog called
Invention of the Day. So on this blog he just tosses out inventions, usually more than one a day.
These inventions are often recombinations. So they involve things like suitcases that follow you
around, toothbrushes that record so your dentist can know if you're brushing, right? So he's taking
a toothbrush plus a recorder. So this is a totally great site and of course Patty gives
these ideas away for free. His hope is people will take them, use them, maybe even recombine them
and make a fortune. So Patrick just by himself is living proof that there's a ton of ideas out there
and we can get a lot of these ideas through recombination. Well here's what Weitzman says
about his own model. The paper's main theme is that the ultimate limits to growth lie not so
much in our ability to generate new ideas because you're getting so many from recombination as in
our ability to process an abundance of potentially new ideas into usable form. So what he's saying is
the number of combinations whether we're taking one from pile A and one from pile B such as when
we're choosing a cake and a frosting or whether we're choosing a set of options such as deciding
what features to include on a handheld device. We have an abundance of options. The challenge
there for is not to generate ideas. Patrick Andrews has more than one a day, right, but to pick
from among them. Hey, observation two, not all combinations work. Okay, so I've been assuming
that any two combinations work but that's certainly not always true. So many times there isn't as much
of a abundance as maybe I let on because a lot of these ideas really that people might think of don't
make any sense. In fact, the Nobel Prize for an Economics, George Akerlof, made this point. He once
offered up the following example, chicken ice cream. He did this in the context of saying maybe
Whiteman's model doesn't work. Now you might think, okay, that is not going to happen. We're not going
to have chicken ice cream. It's not economically viable. But let's not rush to conclusions here.
Chicken ice cream may be a low point on the ice cream landscape far below chocolate chips. It may
not be a very good idea. But it does open up the possibility of other types of meat ice cream,
including bacon ice cream. And as many of you may know, bacon ice cream, like bacon-favored
chocolate, has become quite popular at trendy ice cream shops. I confess, I actually like it.
It's pretty good, really. I mean, it is. And especially if you get that way or not,
bacon blue cheese ice cream is very good. So chicken ice cream may be ridiculous.
An idea might, you know, not work, but things that opens up this idea of meat ice cream,
which leads to bacon ice cream, which is a winner, and to bacon chocolate, which is another winner.
Hey, I mean, bacon anything is probably a winner. But isn't Akarov still right?
Isn't chicken ice cream a stupid idea? No, in fact, as his fellow Nobel Prize winner Gary
Becker wrote, digustibus non-s disputandum. Tastes are not disputable. So last month,
I went to the grocers, looked in the freezer, and there it was. Chicken ice cream. Not kidding.
It's for dogs. And by all accounts, the dogs love it, but it exists.
Anyways, chicken and bacon ice cream notwithstanding. They're ideas that don't combine.
We don't have laser-guided toothbrushes, at least not yet.
All right, observation three. There's so many combinations that not all the useful ones get
tried. So another reason we may not get the sort of amazing prosperity and growth that we would
expect is that we may be blind to specific ideas. We may see only a few narrow opportunities.
So in my video series for the great courses called Understanding Complexity,
I talked at length about how evolution sometimes has an advantage over creative human systems,
and that evolution sort of tries everything. But people often get stuck in cognitive ruts,
and we don't see all the possibilities. So let me go back to the pretzel
lemonand that I opened this lecture with and explain how that works. So let me first state
that these things are awesome. Okay, pretzels have been around for more than a thousand years,
and their long history, you know, they've been found a place in beer halls, and even within the
Catholic Church, which promoted them as acceptable food during Lent hundreds and hundreds of years
ago. Now the M&M has also been around. Only 70 years though, right? In March of 1941, Forest
Mars received a patent for the M&M. So it's actually a patented thing. But it wasn't until 2010
that the totally awesome pretzel M&M hit the shelves. That's 69 years. How come? I mean,
it's not like it wasn't a great idea. This was named product of the year in the candy category
for 2011. It's also not like the idea of putting something inside an M&M was you. A new thing,
right? The peanut M&M was introduced in 1954. That only took 13 years. And then we waited
55 more years for the pretzel. Now I imagine that some of my grandchildren are going to say,
really? There was no such thing as a raisin M&M? Oh, that's incredible. And then maybe even later,
they might say, bacon M&M. All right, now we're talking. Bacon M&M. Sounds great.
Observation 4. One big reason we don't try combinations is that the ideas don't get to
meet each other. Here's why. Where are those ideas? They're in our heads. And eventually,
they're in books and articles. But each of us can only have so many ideas in our heads. We can only
combine the ideas that exist within our own heads. Or if we meet somebody else who has one of those
ideas. But people tend to interact with people who are like us and who have the same ideas as us.
So rather than have all the ideas in one big soup and all possible combinations boiling up,
what we have instead is ideas bumping into one another only when people who have those ideas
bump into another. So this explains why some product classes exhibit lots of growth and others
do not. Now the story gets complicated, but essentially you can think of innovation
as involving either small step improvements by specialists or by breakthroughs.
Some people like to call these creeps, which are the small steps, and leaps. The leaps have two
sources, recombination, which we're talking about here, and new perspectives, which we talked about
in an earlier lecture. Now the creeps come about by people applying new, therefore,
diverse heuristics to problems. So think back to our rugged landscape model. Heuristics make
small movements up the hill, recombination, and new perspectives take giant leaps.
So we've stumbled on what's a really interesting question. Who should we have interacting with
whom? If we have lots of specialists, then we've got a lot of heuristics. So it should be able to
do lots and lots of local climbing, but we're not going to make a lot of leaps. So in the short run,
this could be really, really good, but it may not be good for the long run.
But let's suppose instead we have lots of people trying to combine ideas. Well, these people are
sometimes referred to as knowledge brokers, as they broker ideas between areas. There's a scholar
named Ronald Bird, who's a sociologist at the University of Chicago, and he calls such people
structural hole fillers. These are people who fill structural holes. So think back to our
medical images, who was also a tissue engineer from the last lecture, that person standing between
the silos. If we think of ideas being in a network, what knowledge brokers do is they fill holes in
that network of ideas by connecting disparate knowledge bases. Well, how does this work? Well,
let's suppose I have a firm that makes stoves, and our firm consists primarily of engineers who work
on the production side and marketing design people who try and figure out what people want.
So imagine there's an organizational structure, and it looks like two clusters. I've got a cluster
of marketing people over here, and a cluster of engineers over here. Now, these two clusters
might be connected by a third smaller cluster that we're going to call management.
Now, if you have all knowledge brokers in this firm, you're going to get lots of big ideas,
but they're not going to get refined. So if you want to ask, how do you drive amazing growth in
an area such as something like Silicon Valley, what most economists and strategy professionals
would say is you need lots of specialists, and the valley is loaded with PhDs in computer science
and math. And you also need lots of knowledge brokers, because the valleys may well have the
very largest concentration of venture capitalists. So these two together, people producing all this
knowledge and people linking it up, produce tremendous growth. Now, if you hire a whole
bunch of specialists and put them in isolation, they're going to be really good at doing a specific
test they were assigned, like building the atomic bomb at Los Alamos, which is one of the great
successes in the history of sequestration, but they're not going to produce novel recombinant
ideas unless they're a really diverse group. So they're not going to come up with a poached egg
toaster. Well, if they did, it was probably classified, so we won't know. Okay, observation five.
To create incentives, to produce new ideas, it's often thought that people need to own them,
at least for a while. Think about it this way. Ideas and technological breakthroughs produce
three benefits. There's a direct benefit from the idea itself. Then there's their combinatoric
benefit, which you've been talking about in this lecture, the idea that they can be combined with
other things. And then there's also their perspective benefit, because they can change how we see the
world. So the phonograph allowed us to see sound as a wiggly line. Now, the value of an idea implies
that we should create incentives for people to create them, because we get a direct effect,
the recombinant effect, and the perspective effect. So if we want to have people have incentives to
create ideas, we have to let them own them for a little while. That's why governments create
patents. The M&M, remember, was patented. That way, if you come up with a new idea,
you patent it, and people have to pay you to use the idea. In this way, people who make ideas
make money. Now, in recent years, people have come to question whether that way of thinking
makes sense. These scholars, and I, among them include, you know, several close friends of mine,
they argue that people who develop the ideas can benefit from first mover advantage. So if you
invent the M&M, you can get the M&M out there before anybody else can copy it. They also argue that
patent costs can be so prohibitive that they preclude the sort of exploration of recombinations
of ideas that could drive growth. These people also argue that we should then just set ideas free.
And I have to admit, my own thinking on this subject has changed. In the past, I was a relatively
strong supporter of patents, because I thought people should really cash in on their ideas.
But now, as I see the amazing power of recombination, I'm becoming much more sensitive to the ideas
that ideas should be free, that maybe we shouldn't have patents, sort of moving some in the other
direction. It's a really interesting thing to think about. Now, fortunately, people can't patent
the perspectives that come from ideas. So you can patent the direct use, and you can patent
the combination, but it's very hard to patent the perspective. So for example, the use of pixels
that we see in the art of someone, like, shot close, that idea can spread far and wide, and it's
sort of hard to patent that. Now, recombination is very cool. It contributes to economic growth.
In fact, many of the big improvements to our standard of living, putting wheels on steam engines
to make trains, putting engines and horseless carriages, and even putting books on the internet,
have come about by recombining ideas that already exist. And in this lecture, we've seen that any
time a new idea gets created, we not only get that idea, but we get that idea in combination
with all the other ideas. So we get regular M&Ms, peanut M&Ms, almond M&Ms, pretzel M&Ms.
So therefore, we not only need people to generate ideas, we need people who fill those structural
holes, who can broker those ideas to find new, powerful applications that can drive progress.
We also need to do something else. We need to structure society, cities, even university,
so that knowledge is produced and brokered in appropriate amounts. And each depends on the
other. If we just produce a lot of ideas, then we're missing the chance to broker them. If we
only have brokers, then we run up ideas to recombine. So it's wonderful to live in a society
where the freedom to produce and share ideas. The question is, how do we construct that society,
so we do it in the most interesting and best possible way. Now, there's some enlightened
companies that recognizing the power of ideas and recombination now give their employees a certain
percentage of their work day off or their work week off to produce new ideas, with the hopes
that these new ideas can be combined with other ideas to produce even more novel technologies,
products, art forms, whatever. Now, this freedom also generates a lot of junk. That's okay, because
we can count on market forces and information webs, wise crowds, if you will, right, to sift
through the junk and find the gems. There's a diverse crowd of people out there who can look
at these ideas. And as we know, they can help forecast what's good and, well, what's in need of
some adjustments. Now, we've also touched on, I think, is an open and often contentious question.
How do we get the most and best ideas? Do we let people own them at least for a while,
or do we set them free? I don't know the answer to this. And my own opinions about this move
is I learn more, because we all want new medicines and new products and ideas. But we also want others
to be free to improve upon them. That's an interesting thing. So let me pull back to one of my early
lectures here for a second. Remember I talked about how people in cities were more productive,
because they bumped into more ideas. Well, after these last few lectures, we've seen
a way to put more structure on that understanding, because you've got all these people walking around
in the city with different ideas in their heads. And that allows the sort of brokering of ideas,
and also the specialization and refinement of ideas that drives growth. So that's possibly why
people in cities are more productive, because they're just bumping into more ideas that can
get combined with existing ideas, which drives growth. That's something really interesting to
think about, perhaps with a little bit of bacon, even. All right, thank you.
