say, when I did, I was tired and a little exhausted. I thought maybe it would make more
sense to go back and do that again in a hopefully clearer way. Let's make this a seminar and
not a colloquium, please. So that means you can interrupt me and we can discuss the ideas
that are taking place. If I had to rename this seminar, I called it FRWCFP or something
like that. Here it is, let's see. FRWCFP or maybe FRWM, what does M stand for? Anybody
know? What does it always stand for? Absolutely. You got it. But sometimes it stands for matrix
and other things, mother, mouse. But if I was actually to rename it, I would rename
it the emergence of time. Now, that's a very pompous and pretentious title. And I'm only
talking about the emergence of time in one very, very, very special particular context.
We have lots of examples from string theory where we say that a dimension of space emerges
in this way or that way. And people have puzzled over the question of whether time can emerge
in some similar way. One of the ways that space dimensions emerge, and maybe the most
well-known, I don't know if it's the most well-known, but well-known, is through renormalization
group flow in ADS CFP. Renormalization group flow in the CFP side of things corresponds
to motion along the radial direction of the anti-decidive space. You probably all know
that's another example of a space dimension emerging out of formalism without being put
in, so to speak. The question has arisen over and over again. What about time? Why can't
we make time emerge? I'm going to show you an example when time really does emerge. But
it's in a very specific cosmological context, slightly unrealistic, but not grossly unrealistic.
Three titles, FRWCFT, maybe FRWM, and maybe something about the emergence of time. Let me
start with the sitter space, a very, very, very quick just to remind you. What is the
sitter space? The sitter space is a hyperbolic geometry which begins very big, shrinks down,
and then bounces and goes back out. The scale factor exponentially grows in both the past
and the future. Quickly speaking, the scale factor is proportional to some cost of time,
and it can be embedded as a hyperboloid in an extra dimension. So if we have four-dimensional
sitter space, five-dimensional embedding space, it would look about like that. We can take that
geometry and analytically continue it, which is a useful thing to do, analytically continue it.
It's still the Euclidean signature, and what does it become? It becomes a simple sphere,
a four-sphere in the case of four-dimensions embedded in, you don't have to embed it, of
course, but you can embed it in a five-dimensional background, and it just becomes a sphere.
Another description of the sitter space is through its Penrose diagram. Let me take a
Penrose diagram in two parts. First, slit this down the center and open it up, lay it out on
the blackboard, and then compactify it by a conformal transformation. When you slit it and
open it up, it has the structure of a rectangle, of course, the top of the rectangle and the
bottom of the rectangle, although at time like infinity and time like negative infinity, but
then you compactify it, forms a rectangle, and in fact it forms a rectangle which is twice as wide
as it is high. That's close to being the Penrose diagram. What I'm thinking about, of course,
is taking this two-dimensional hyperboloid and laying it out. We're not really talking about
a two-dimensional hyperboloid. This is strictly speaking not the Penrose diagram of anything,
because the Penrose diagram is strictly speaking what identify the point over here and the point
over here. This would be the official Penrose diagram of the sitter space. The sphere over here,
both the sphere and the hyperboloid have two poles, the left pole and the right pole over here,
which map into the left pole of the hyperboloid and the right pole of the hyperboloid over here.
Those correspond to these two edges and time like infinity, time like infinity, this is it,
and that's a rather well-known description of the sitter space. Now I want to go to the diagram or
the pictures which represent the Coleman-Delucha decay. I like to double, it's a bad thing to do,
you shouldn't really do it, but I like to double the Penrose diagram and lay it out as if it were
two-dimensional and lay out the whole thing. I'll do the same thing with the Coleman-Delucha
geometry. The Coleman-Delucha geometry is for the purpose of studying the decay of the sitter space,
or the decay of any metastable vacuum. So we imagine we have some potential, this is just a
simple cartoon of some vast landscape, but some potential which has a metastable minimum that
I'll call for now on A for ancestor, think of it as the vacuum before our own, and then a vacuum with
lambda exactly equal to zero. That's the thing I want to study, the decay to a state with lambda
exactly equal to zero. Of course I'd love to study the decay to a vacuum like ours with a small lambda,
but I don't think we have the machinery to do that. I think we have the machinery that allows
us to study the decay to a state with lambda equal to zero, and presumably that means a
supersymmetric vacuum, Olivia. I don't think there's any reason to believe that there are any
vacuums of string theory which have lambda equal to zero except those which are exactly supersymmetric.
So I'm studying a model then of a decay from a point on the landscape with a sizable vacuum energy
to a state where only modular space of vacuums of zero, that's the concept.
Oh, Raphael, I couldn't see you.
No, no, there's an instant time for it, the machinery which I'm going to explain. We certainly
have the machinery to calculate the rate and that sort of thing. No, the machinery to construct a
holographic description of it. To do what I'm going to do is the thing I'm going to do,
to give what I think is a precise description of the quantum mechanics of the system.
All right, so you start with the vacuum being an A. That's over here. In this picture here, the time
or in the common dilution, instant time calculation will flow from A to the same over here.
So you start at A over here and then you tunnel through this region which I've represented by red.
You tunnel through at the point, here's where you tunnel through on the domain wall. The tunneling
region here happens very quickly and for my purposes, I'm going to be taking it to be practically
instantaneous tunneling from the decider to lambda equals 0 and lambda equals 0 is in here.
The Euclidean description of a lambda equals 0 vacuum is just a flat plane. This of course all
has to be uplifted four dimensions but you can picture that. And this is the common dilution
instant time flowing from the ancestor vacuum to the lambda equals 0 vacuum over here.
All right, now to construct the Minkowski continuation of it, it's a little tricky but
it's not very hard. What you do is you start with a section of T equals 0. T equals 0
maps into itself when T goes to IP. So T equals 0, the waste of the diagram over here
maps to the T equals 0 in the Minkowski series. Start over here at the pole or at the center
of this here and imagine going all the way over to A. That corresponds to going from here
to A over here. You pass through the domain wall, you pass through the domain wall over here.
Just because I've doubled the diagram, you can think about it as going all the way around.
So going from the pole all the way around, reappearing over here and coming back here.
But as I said, the official Penrose diagram would only be half of this.
So Penrose diagram or conformal diagram, whatever you want to call it. It actually divides
things into several regions. Well, here they are. The decay region, in other words, the region
here is this wedge over here. That's the bubble cosmology. This is the region of bubble cosmology
which is the remnant of a decay from the ancestor vacuum here. Just one
wedge of diamond, this diamond over here. This is the domain wall. The domain wall comes in
and goes back out. And that's it. That is what the updating your computer is almost complete.
You must restart your computer for the updates to take effect. You want to restart your computer now.
Thank you. Restart later. This will come up every five minutes now, won't it?
Restart later. Okay, so that's a combindalucha instanton. The system has symmetry. And of
course, it's the symmetries which are the important features that you want to preserve under any kind
of changes in the system. You start with the pore sphere, not this combindalucha instanton,
but the pore sphere embedded in five dimensions. That obviously has an O5 symmetry. Any pore sphere,
whether it's embedded in five dimensions or not, has an O5 symmetry. By slicing off the
end of the sphere here and flattening it, you reduce the symmetry to the symmetry of three spheres.
The three spheres are the red lines here, and the symmetry goes down to O4.
Well, you can see what it does. The orbits of the O4 symmetry, the O4 symmetry, acts on these
circles, or really three spheres, and moves them around. It's just the group which rotates around
the three spheres, and that's the symmetry that's left over. You can ask, under analytic
continuation, what happens to this O4 which is left over, how does it act on the combindalucha
instanton geometry, or the combindalucha minkowski version of it? And here's the way it acts.
It acts, first of all, not as O5 and O4, but as O4-1, that's the symmetry of the full
decider space, but the symmetry of the combindalucha geometry is reduced to O3-1.
O3-1 is the motions on the three-dimensional hyperbolic plane. Here's how it acts. It acts
along space-like directions in this wedge here, also in here, and in here, in this diamond,
it acts in time-like directions. We won't be particularly interested in it,
likewise over here, and it acts back in space-like directions in here, but we're not going to be
interested in here. We're interested in this region here. So this O3-1 acts as spatial translations
and, well, it acts on space-like surfaces inside this diamond. That's the important thing to
track of, and it's a symmetry of the geometry. All right, now let me show you something else.
I have put the center. This is, you can think of this as the origin of the domain wall. The
domain wall is really over here, but the critical bubble is very small, very small critical bubble.
So the domain wall just pretty much goes out along lifelike directions. Here is where the
home in the Lucha decay takes place. The bottom half of this is unphysical. The top half of it
is the decay product of the incident problem. That's the way incident problems work. Half of them,
you describe a bounce, but half of it, you throw away, and the upper half here is the funneling
out from the sitter into whatever the case is. Okay, now this decay has taken place right at
t equals zero. Of course, t, the case can take place later, earlier. How do you get them? Well,
you just go back to the original diagram, rotate, use one of the rotations that was broken by the
symmetry. In any case, you can do a transformation which just takes the decay point and pushes it
up toward t equals infinity or down the t equals minus infinity. This would describe, it's just a
transform of the original diagram in which I push time upward so that the decay takes place right
over here. I've just chosen to throw, have the decay take place at a later time. Then you throw
away the bottom half of the diagram, and that's the description in words of the mathematics that
goes into describing the Coleman-Velucic tunneling event, in this case from the sitter space,
to a configuration with your cosmological constant. The tunneling event itself, of course,
is quantum mechanical, and I can't really illustrate it in any serious way in terms of classical
geometry. But if the tunneling process involves a very small critical bubble, then the fuzz over
here that you don't know how to think about classically is shrunk down to a very small distance,
and it just represents an outward going bubble, which is like that. The shape of the top of this
here is controlled by the final cosmological constant. If the final cosmological constant is zero,
then the shape of this are just light cones up here. As I said, if there are questions,
please blow me down and stop me, because I'm going a little bit fast, but that's okay.
All right, here's a picture, here's a blow-up of the region, of the decay region, and I told you
before what the symmetry, how the symmetry acts on it. Yeah, let's go back a step. The symmetry
acts on this in this region here as spatial translations, translations along these surfaces
here. These surfaces are just surfaces of fixed time inside the bubble, some definitions,
the vacuum that you decayed from, I'll call the ancestor, and these points over here,
which are really a two-sphere, this is a two-sphere from inside the geometry here, this is the two
sphere at infinity, it's the asymptotic sky, if you like, space-like infinity in this diagram here,
that an observer moving out along space-like surfaces, everybody would eventually get out to
this point, it's space-like infinity, it's called sigma, and it's a two-sphere, yeah.
The Lorenz screw, yeah, that's the Lorenz screw that's acting on hyperbolic,
broadcasted to Lorenz, but it's acting on these surfaces here, which are hyperboloids,
which are uniformly curved hyperboloids. All right, so let's take a look at one of these
space-like sections here, it is the uniformly curved, negatively curved, hyperboloid, what do
you call it, the uniformly negatively curved surface. All right, so I've shown this, I use
this picture in every clock I ever give, I love it so much, and it just illustrates so beautifully
what negative curvature is about, this is Escher's limit circle number four, sometimes called angels
and devils, and it is a mapping of the uniform negative curved surface, it is conformal diagram,
it's purely space-like, purely space-like, and of course by definition every angel has the same
size as every other angel, so the metric is clearly diverging near the boundary,
and metrical distance on here is basically just counting angels and devils, or just counting
there and counting along here, the metric diverges at infinity, that's the hyperbolic plane.
Here is, here is the metric of the FRW region that I drew like this, I neglected to tell you that
this region is an FRW geometry, Friedman-Robertson-Walker geometry, and its metric, this is the
space-time metric of it, is the s squared, now I've worked with conformal time, that's why the
AFT comes out of the whole expression here, AFT squared, capital T is conformal time, related
to ordinary proper time by simple transformation, AFT squared and minus dT squared plus h, plus
metric on h3, h3 is the hyperbolic three-dimensional geometry, the three-dimensional analog of the
Escher drawing here, so this is it, and the h3, if you want to know what it is, is it's just the
r squared, where r is the radial proper distance along from the from the center of the disc,
the r squared, plus not r squared the omega squared, but sinh squared r, the omega squared,
this is polar coordinates, omega is the two-sphere, unit two-sphere, and this is like polar coordinates
except that the size of the two-sphere grows exponentially, I think you all know this, and
each one of these space-like slices here is a geometry of exactly this form, okay, so that's
what the cosmology looks like, the O3-1 acts in the bulk here as spatial translations to the extent
that translations exist on a hyperbolic plane, things which move around the center, or sorry,
translations are things which move around the center, and rotations are things which keep the
center fixed, but they're just the transformations which move around the angels and devils,
with the symmetry, the same symmetry can act on the boundary, when it acts on the
boundary, it acts as conformal transformations, conformal transformations on the boundary,
just remember what the boundary is, the boundary was the thing that I called sigma,
which is asymptotic space-like infinity, so it says that the transformations, the symmetry
transformations move points around on space-like infinity according to the conformal group,
conformal group, everybody here is conformal group, and it says, aha, ADS-CFT, well, not quite, but
but you'll note that H3, or any hyperbolic plane, is the same as the Euclidean version
of anti-decider space in that same number, okay, so each spatial slice has the properties
of Euclidean anti-decider space, the boundary of the anti-decider space
just being the edge of this plane here, so maybe that should light you up a little bit,
and say, well, what should we do with that, okay, I'll come back to it, let me discuss another
concept, I'm going through some concepts quickly, just to have a language, the census taker, but
before I do that, I'd better tell this thing not to restart the computer again,
I hope it doesn't do it faster and faster, I won't do that with it, okay, all right, what is the
census taker, the census taker is just another word for an observer in this region here,
I don't know, it stands for we started calling it the census taker because we imagined somebody
looking back along their path within their last life cone and counting things, counting angels
and devils, counting civilizations, counting galaxies or whatever, uh-oh, it is going faster and faster,
it's unable to secure communication path with the pre-boot security subsystem,
please reboot, and look, I'm not going to do this, somebody, I'll blow the guts out of the computer,
what do I do? Oh, oh, it's not coming out of here, is it, just ignore it, yeah, okay,
all right, good, I won't even look at it, all right, so the census taker is just an observer,
a time-like observer who eventually arrives up at the tippy-tip of the diagram, the tippy-tip
of the diagram is p equals infinity, so eventually arrives up here, looks back, and can see more
and more of each one of these space-like surfaces, as census taker time goes on, along the census
taker's world line, he gets to see more and more of these space-like surfaces, okay, so that's the
notion of a census taker, just a counter of things, but I'm mainly going to be interested in this
past light tone, the green lines, oh no, I'm not going to let you do it,
I don't know what to do, it doesn't, it's not giving you the option, let's see, maybe I can,
maybe I can close it down, wait, maybe I can close it down,
not, won't even let me close it down, okay, so while somebody, if somebody's going to get
somebody because I don't know what to do, are there questions, no questions, yeah, let's, let's
work, yeah, yeah, it takes every point into another point, if you're on the boundary,
it takes points to boundary points, if you're in the bulk, it can move you around in the bulk,
this of course is exactly the same mathematics as the anti-decider group,
which moves around points in the period of anti-decider space, and it also has a direct
reflection on the boundary of anti-decider space moving points, and it's on the boundary that
conforms, I apologize for perimeter institute,
okay,
I said before that what I'm imagining now is the decay to a super-fine
super symmetry is broken in the answer to that in here, that will leave remnants of
super symmetry breaking in here, which will fade away at late times, so it's only at late times
that it really matters whether the cosmological constant is zero or not,
and it is believed that then, at least in string theory, that there are vacuums with
zero cosmological constant, so how we use this is another question that I had intended to discuss,
but I wanted to discuss the conceptual background first.
I suppose I'm inclined to think of them as existing all along the line,
and
that's good, wait is this, is this, which one is this that's hooked up now,
either one, this one, okay, good, all right, so there really are, that's the limit what we're
gonna do, all right, so now let's go back and look at one of these surfaces, what does this look like,
the evolution of the census taker's past light cone, that's what I'm interested in, in other
words, what the census taker sees when it looks back along with light cone of the hyperbolic plane,
and it's clear what happens is the census taker sees a ring or really a sphere, a two sphere,
which moves out from the center and with census taker time gets closer and closer to the boundary,
now for anybody who knows anything about ADSCFP this should ring a bell, what does it mean
to be moving out along this radial trajectory with a two sphere like this, well it's clearly
connected with some kind of renormalization group flow, where as you move out what you're seeing is
smaller and smaller angular structures along here, smaller and smaller angular structures in ADS
would translate into the statement that what you're seeing is deeper and deeper into the
ultraviolet of the boundary theory, now so far we haven't established that there's any kind of
boundary theory and I just, this is the moment, is an analogy, but it's a suggestive analogy
that the census taker time evolution looking back along with light cone generates a kind
of renormalization group flow in which he can see finer and finer detail on the boundary steel,
okay let me just remind you a little more about ADS and its renormalization group flow,
no, no details, I'm not going to get into technical details, the radial direction of ADS,
now we're talking about ADS, the radial direction is a kind of stand-in, at least it's a coarse,
the coarse-grain radial direction, you've got a coarse-grain it over the over a certain radius,
the ADS radius, but when it's coarse-grain sufficiently it morphs into the renormalization
group parameter, the renormalization group scale of the boundary field theory,
this is sufficiently well known that I'm mostly reminding you of things, here's the way I like
to think about the renormalization group flow, first of all you don't have to think, what you're
going to do is you're going to replace the boundary sphere where the true ultraviolet theory lives,
you're going to replace it by a sphere which has been pulled in from the boundary a little bit,
that's regularizing, that regularizes the infrared of the of the ADS geometry, and it regularizes
the ultraviolet of the boundary, there's no reason why you have to take perfect spheres to do this,
you can take geometries which have arbitrary shape and then push them out to the boundary,
and in fact we can define an r, the distance to this surrogate boundary here, which depends on
omega, I want to do that, I want to keep free the omega dependence, omega is the point on the two
sphere, the position dependence of the Cutoff scale, so we're doing field theory with a position
depending Cutoff scale, omega is the sphere out here, and as I said what is an infrared Cutoff
in the bulk becomes an ultraviolet Cutoff in the boundary field theory, okay I'm going to call
the metric on this sphere here, now this is not a real sphere in the geometry, it's a reference sphere,
it's a renormalization scale that you use the same way you use a renormalization scale in
field theory, it's a pure reference thing, there's no content to it, we're not really cutting off
the system, we're just renormalizing it at that scale, we're setting boundary conditions on that
scale, but there's nothing really going on there, we'll call the metric on this sphere the reference
metric, and what is it, it's just given by on this sphere sinh squared r, remember this is what came
into the metric on the sphere, sinh squared r the omega squared, I've just written the metric of the
hyperbolic disc and then pulled it back to this warped sphere here so that r becomes a position
dependent thing, with this definition what we're doing as we push that surface out is
we're making the geometry bigger and bigger and bigger, the geometry bigger and bigger and bigger
we can be imagining keeping the renormalization group scale, the renormalization scale fixed,
you have two things, the two ways you can think about renormalization, one of them is you can
think about smaller and smaller scales keeping the geometry fixed, the other way is keep the
scale fixed and make the geometry bigger and bigger and bigger, okay, here what we're doing is making
the geometry bigger and bigger and bigger but pushing r out to the boundary and keeping the
renormalization scale, in other words decide the cutoff scale if you like, the subtraction point
we're keeping it fixed, that's a useful way in ADS to think about renormalization, the sphere goes out
and you keep fixed the ultraviolet scale and you keep it fixed at the ADS radius basically,
unit radius, yeah, all right, so that's that's connection between renormalization group and
radial position, all of this then raises the question, is there an analog of ADS CFP that
applies to the FRW geometry in the decay product of a Coleman-Belutcher instant finding, the sphere
at infinity is a strictly Euclidean sphere, the sphere at infinity is not got a time like direction
in it, it's just the Euclidean sphere and so if there is a correspondence it will be with the
Euclidean theory on the boundary and so I asked the question now, here if we come back to the original
question that I was interested in, FR is the renormalization group parameter along this
hyperbolic plane in the same way as it is in ADS CFP, what is time, if the dual description of this
Coleman-Belutcher instant pond geometry is a pure Euclidean conformal field theory on a
boundary sphere then what the hell is time, where does time come into the game, that's mainly what
I wanted to show you, so before I do we need a few concepts, one concept is time as scale factor,
time as scale factor is known to practitioners of Wheeler-DeWitt theory, very well known,
I will remind you of it if you don't know, I can't remind you if you don't know, I will remind you
if you do know, okay let's see, yeah okay let me put this picture in first, what we're going to be
doing is thinking about Wheeler-DeWitt wave functions as applied to the universe inside this patch,
the natural way to do it is to pin the space like surfaces down at sigma here and imagine
that they can be moved up and down and then apply the Wheeler-DeWitt logic to the wave function
on such a surface, the Wheeler-DeWitt wave function is a wave function that depends only on the
space components of the metric, not on the space time or time time components of the metric, number
one, it also depends on whatever other fields, fundamental fields are on the slice, but what it
doesn't depend on is time, there is no time in the Wheeler-DeWitt formalism, it has to be, it has
to emerge, okay, let's come back, all right, so let's assume there's some Wheeler-DeWitt wave function,
the measure for, I would say probabilities except I'm going to get myself in trouble if I call them
probabilities, the measure is just psi star psi, where psi is a function of the space like components
of the metric and half, there is no time, but the wave function does depend on the scale factor,
it depends on the scale factor through its dependence on the space components of the metric,
the scale factor I will just define, it's basically the volume of the geometry,
all right, so the volume, yeah, basically just the volume of the geometry, the scale factor
increases with time in an FRW expanding geometry, and time becomes a surrogate kind of,
let's say the scale factor replaces time in the Wheeler-DeWitt equation, you can think of the
Wheeler-DeWitt wave function as a function of the scale factor and everything else, and what's known
rather easy to demonstrate is that the large 8 limit of the Wheeler-DeWitt equation, the
Hamiltonian constraint, just becomes the Schrodinger equation for everything else
with a replacing time, so in that rather trivial sense, time emerges from a Wheeler-DeWitt wave
function which has no explicit time dependence, you can also define a local scale factor,
namely just as the square root of the determinant of the space component of the metric,
and think of that as a local time, that was something that John Wheeler liked very much,
he called it many-fingered time, okay, so and this is a useful concept for later.
So here's an example where time emerges from the formalism without being explicitly put into
the formalism, and as I said the Schrodinger equation with all the right i's and everything
else appears as the limiting behavior of the Wheeler-DeWitt equation for large a when the
scale factor gets large, okay, so what question is what would happen if you applied this to
the setup that we've been discussing, now before I do what I want to say is this is this description
is a throwback to a way of thinking about quantum mechanics and gravity which personally I don't
believe, I don't believe it because it's making use to heavily of bulk concepts, and one of the
lessons that we've learned is that a good quantum theory of gravity should be holographic, in other
words it should be something which takes place on the boundary of a system, just like ADSCFK,
the precise description that we have is the boundary description, the bulk description
we don't know if it can ever be made precise, nobody has ever made it precise, the boundary
description is quite precise, and so what I would suggest is that we imagine a holographic version
of this Wheeler-DeWitt formalism in which the degrees of freedom are really imagined to be
localized far away on the boundary of space, in other words just as we do in ADS get substituted
for all the degrees of freedom in the bulk, a collection of a large number of degrees of freedom
on the boundary, psi depends on boundary degrees of freedom, that's the proposal, I think by now
it was very good evidence for it, but I may not get through it today, so that's the idea, we have
boundary degrees of freedom which are stand-ins for the bulk degrees of freedom,
well maybe they really are more precise than the bulk degrees of freedom, and they live on the
boundary of these space-like surfaces, just as in ADS it can be profitable sometimes to pull the
boundary in a little bit, to regulate it, to regulate both the ultraviolet of the of the
dual theory and the infrared of the bulk theory, I'm going to pull the boundary in a little bit,
so that remember previously in ADS I defined an R of omega, now I have to define not just an R of
omega but a T of omega, so this boundary now is defined by an R of omega and a T of omega,
that's the character of such a boundary, and that is where the degrees of freedom are,
where does this time emerge from, what is this time that I put here, how does it emerge out of a
conformal Euclidean conformal field theory on the boundary, that's the question, how can it emerge,
what mechanisms are there, all right, so now I've come to tell you that time in this description
is a Liouville field, it's a Liouville field, what is a Liouville field, let's go back a minute,
no let's not go back, it's a Liouville field, it's a Liouville field describing the boundary
geometry, it's pretty much the same thing as saying the scale factor replaces time in the bulk
description, the boundary description also has a geometry, the boundary of the geometry is also
something that needs to be specified or need to be integrated over in general, and the boundary
geometry is defined in terms of a Liouville field which is like the scale factor, it's basically
the scale factor on the boundary, and it seems plausible that time on the boundary of the boundary
description would be replaced by a Liouville degree of freedom, so let's see how that works,
I realize I'm jumping around, the problem with this seminar is there were too many little pieces
that I know that some of you may know, but some of you may not know, so what I wanted to do before
jumping into time as Liouville field was to tell you a little bit about the intuitive mathematics,
just very little, just what are the things I absolutely need, minimum things I need, what is
Liouville, and how is it connected to geometry, the application of Liouville theory, the string
theory is of course well known, but it dates back much further than most of you know, I think it dates
back to a paper by myself and Hoger Nielsen, when we were interested in string theory around
1969 or 1970, and we were starting to think of strings as somehow the description of very dense,
very complicated planar Feynman diagrams, we didn't know why the diagram should be planar,
he took patterns to run his his large N theory yet, and we simply postulated for some unknown reason
strings or the world sheet was really just nothing but a very large dense planar Feynman
diagram, in other words it was a triangulation of a two-dimensional space, and summing over those
planar Feynman diagrams would be the same as summing over the geometry of a complicated network
which we called or it's Hoger called a fishnet, and the vertices of the fishnet, of course the
vertices of the Feynman diagram, and the way we thought about this is that every such fishnet
has a natural geometry that's associated with it, the natural geometry is defined in the following
way, you first lay the geometry down, you lay the fishnet down, let's say it's a fishnet with
the topology of a sphere, you lay it down on the sphere according to a rule, and the rule is that
it should be locally isotropic, okay I'm not going to define exactly what locally isotropic is,
but I'm just going to say that wherever you are in this fishnet it more or less looks locally
rotationally invariant, I try to draw it in such a way that that any given one of these vertices
more or less has a rotational invariance around it, incidentally that's equivalent to the conformal
gauge in geometry, you lay it down arbitrarily except, except consistent with this rule of local
isotropy, then once you've done that there's a lattice spacing, and the lattice spacing will
depend on position on the sphere, in general the lattice spacing will be big holes, small holes,
once you've laid it down the lattice spacing which is a here will depend on position, define a metric
by the s squared equals the omega square that's just the ordinary metric on the sphere times the
inverse lattice spacing square, with this metric the distance between any pair of neighboring
lattice sites is one, so this is a metric in which the distance between lattice sites is one,
and it is if you like the natural metric that you identify with a fishnet,
so having done that that's the first step and the final way you go through, the second step
is to introduce a reference to this net, this fishnet is one we're going to have to integrate
over, we're going to sum diagrams or we're going to sum over geometries, so this fishnet is a
dynamical fishnet that gets summed over, describing some dynamical geometry, we don't know how to
do field theory on a variable geometry, so the trick is to introduce, this is what Liouville
theory does, you introduce a fixed background fishnet, it's fixed, it's not going to vary,
all right, you'll fix it once and for all and it's a reference fishnet, it's a reference fishnet
which defines a reference metric in the same way that the original fishnet defined what's called
the true metric, you define a reference metric which is the reference metric of these of these
larger or more coarse-grained metric, and these points are frozen, they are not integrated over,
they just define a background on which you define field theory, what you do is you average the local
real fishnet degrees of freedom over regions comparable in size to the larger fishnet space,
and you can do this in a variety of ways, there's many ways to do it, one way to do it is to define
the dual lattice, to think of this lattice as the dual to some other lattice, and then the
vertices of one lattice are the surfaces of the other lattice, and then just average over the
surfaces, but there's lots of ways to do it, but you refer averages over the original geometry,
you refer them to degrees of freedom at the sites of the more coarse-grained reference geometry,
that's what Leighville theory is, it's a field theory on the reference geometry that's doing
the same job as averaging over the geometry on a smaller size scale, the three normalization
group, the three normalization group, but of a specific kind, is the Leighville field, the Leighville
field is just the ratio of these two metrics, in other words it's the real metric as expressed
in terms of the reference metric, we could write it ds squared the real metric as e to the 2u,
that's the definition, e to the 2u, it's actually just the ratio of these things here, times dr
squared, u is the Leighville field, this is the reference metric, this is the real metric, that's
what Leighville theory does, is it takes a sum over geometries and makes a field theory out of it,
it's the field theory of this u here, this u degree of freedom, and it becomes a path integral over a
fixed metric, the metric no longer wobbles, that's it, that's what Leighville theory is,
okay, now let's go back to FRW, am I going way ahead of everybody or am I being clear,
I can't tell, if I'm being clear then I'll just keep going, okay, let's come back now
to the FRW, having told you what Leighville theory does, let me come back to the FRW and in particular
the boundary far away of that FRW, here again is the FRW, when I say FRW I'm thinking about the
geometry associated with Coleman-Deluccia Instanton, here is this metric again with some a of t which
is determined by dynamics, I'm interested in the two-sphere far away, so let me just throw away
the parts of the metric that have to do with time and radial distance, here is the metric associated
with the distant two-sphere that has coefficient dr squared there, I think I didn't do anything between
these two, that's the way that, yeah, move there over, that's the metric of the two-sphere far away,
but now I'll just change the definition, instead of calling this a of t squared, oh this is scale
factor incidentally, I think I've called a two things, one was the lattice spacing and the
scale factor the two different things, I'm sorry I apologize for that, but now let's just replace
a of t squared by something that I'll call e to the t u, it's just definition, e to the 2u
and this is the metric now on the two-sphere far away, but it's the two-sphere which is not the
two-sphere at fixed radial distance or at fixed time, but at variable radial distance as you go
around it and intersecting at a variable time which depends on omega, so in other words this is the
metric of a distant two-sphere, space-like two-sphere, which is defined by an r of omega and a t of omega
and I've called t or I called a of t e to the 2u, that's just the metric of a distant surface
and it comes in two factors, the two factors, the first factor here looks exactly like the
reference metric of the abs construction, this was the same exact reference metric that I would use
the abs, all right, times something which looks like a Liouville field, so the metric of a distant
sphere of a particular distant sphere far away at a fixed time can be replaced by the metric
of a Liouville kind of theory where the Liouville scale factor, this is the scale factor far away,
the Liouville scale factor replaces time, the logic is exactly the same as in wheeler duet
and so my claim is the time will emerge if there is a Liouville, this degree of freedom
on the boundary of the hyperbolic plane, that's the difference between abs and this
and this FRW construction, that the FRW construction has a Liouville field to integrate over and then
it's just time, it's just time on the boundary, so the metric divides into two pieces, Liouville
and reference metric, all right, let me tell you a little more about Liouville dynamics,
shall I slow down? No, okay, let me tell you a little more about Liouville dynamics and show
you how various things come out, first of all Liouville dynamics, as I said, is a way of summing
over surfaces, summing over surfaces some people call two-dimensional gravity, two-dimensional
Euclidean gravity, that's fine, you can call it that if you like even though there's no gravity
or you can call it that, the requirement of coordinate invariants, if you're more
sensitive to morphism invariants, requires a constraint on the central charges of the Liouville
theory, we're thinking now about Liouville theory coupled through some matter degrees of freedom,
now I don't mean real matter, I mean matter degrees of freedom in the same sense that ADS
has degrees of freedom which are gauge fields, they're not things which live in the bulk,
they're things that go on the boundary, we're imagining now the Liouville dynamics, whatever it
is, involves a matter sector coupled to some kind of Liouville sector, the matter sector would be
more like the gauge degrees of freedom of ADS, the Liouville sector is the extra new thing that's
there because we have to describe time, all right, this is a constraint which is necessary, these
are the central charges, the matter theory central charge and the Liouville central charge, the real
constraint is that the total central charge of a Liouville theory which is intended to be
described in surfaces, surfaces with fields of some sort on them, that the total central charge
has to add up to zero, that's the constraint of coordinate invariant, well known by string
theorists, you add Gaussian and things, makes a total central charge zero, you do whatever has to
be done, central charge must be added up to zero, all right, I will tell you later that the C of the
matter theory is nothing but the entropy of the background the city space of the ancestor
the city space, you cannot see that now, if we have a chance I'll show you how we prove that
but it is known what the matter field that a central charge is and it's the ancestor entropy,
the entropy of the background of the city space, in other words it's expected to be large and
positive, we don't know what the cosmological constant of the ancestor is but let's just
suppose we're in a semi-classical domain where the radius of the ancestor is much larger than
Planck and this is a large positive number and the result is that the central charge of the
legal sector must be negative and large, negative and large should tell you something else, large
negative legal central charge means that the legal field is time-wide, it means that it has a negative
kinetic term, negative kinetic term, the legal field has a Lagrangian which looks like this,
the hat here indicates bell inversion in the reference metric, this is the reference metric
curvature and this is the Lagrangian of the Leaville theory and it comes in with a large
negative central charge, this is large negative central charge which makes it possible to identify
Leaville with time-life instead of space-life, okay let's pursue it, there is another term,
this here, it doesn't matter what it is, it's the kinetic term of Leaville,
there's a potential piece which goes as the curvature of the background reference metric
and there's a term which is called the Fubimensinal cosmological constant,
yeah, L, yeah it should be C L, sorry, no it should be, it should be C M, C M, yeah okay,
C L is negative, it should be, it should be plus C M, thank you, yeah it should be plus C M,
it should be plus, C is a positive quantity minus C is a negative, yeah, all right, another thing
that's usually thrown at the Leaville theory is a two-dimensional cosmological constant,
this is a two-dimensional cosmological constant, square root of g times e to the 2u is just the
volume element and lambda is a two-dimensional cosmological constant, okay, what is this
two-dimensional cosmological constant, does it have anything to do with the cosmological constant
in the bulk, no, nothing at all, is it a new parameter in the theory, no it is not a new
parameter in the theory, I will tell you now what it is, the way to discover what it is is to solve
Leaville theory with this cosmological constant, you can find a homogeneous solution, the solution
in which these gradients of Leaville field vanish just by playing off this term against this term,
there is a saddle point, the saddle point is only there when this is a minus sign,
it is not there for plus sign, so with a large negative central charge, you're in a semi-classical
region of this, because the central charge is large, you can solve it and you can find the
classical geometry that's associated with a given lambda, and that classical geometry not too
surprisingly is a sphere, what else could it be, that's a sphere, it's a uniform sphere, two sphere,
it's a uniform two sphere whose geometry, its geometry, its radius is determined by the Leaville
field, Leaville field is metric, its metric size gets bigger and bigger as lambda goes to zero,
if we identify this Leaville field with time, as I've suggested, then the connection between the
time and the cosmological constant is just that this e, it's a of t, this should read a of t,
a of t is just equal to square root of lambda, in other words, what this cosmological constant is,
is it's a Lagrange multiplier that you put into the theory that scans time, go back for a minute
to wheeler do it, I've heard you before that the scale factor is to stand into time, how would
you do wheeler do it if you wanted to freeze the time at every instant and see what was going on,
well one way would just be to freeze the scale factor, another way would be to put a Lagrange
multiplier in for the action to freeze the scale factor at a certain size, that's what this is
doing, this lambda here is simply a Lagrange multiplier that allows you to zero in on a
particular value of the Leaville field or equivalently a particular value of the time,
you scan time in this theory by varying lambda, let me come back to this, let me point out
something now, I think we have the basic idea of where time comes from in this description,
but I can say it another way, there are two, does everybody want to go?
No, I want to ask, what was our hat, I thought our hat was going to be one or that was your
right? No, our hat is the curvature of the reference metric and the reference metric
is whatever I want it to be, the answers will be a marathon against changes of the reference
metric, okay, and it always just gives a sphere, but the reference metric itself,
it will give a true sphere, the reference metric itself does not have to define sphere,
it can have a sphere with lump size, okay, but when you solve the Leaville equation the answer
is always a uniform sphere, in other words the product, the reference metric and the Leaville
field will always give you the uniform sphere, and I think that's probably what you were asking
that's what negative c is, the negative c, the positive c, it just wants to shrink to a point,
the geometry, at least with a spherical topology allowing it to shrink to a point,
when a negatively curved topology came in, there was a saddle point, or the positively curved,
in other words we're talking about the sphere in the sky, we want to have a growing sphere,
that growing sphere just corresponds to the observations of the census taker, as you can
see, the bigger and bigger sphere, and what in this formalism, what's tuning that sphere is the
cosmological constant, the two-dimensional cosmological constant, if you like,
what would we do, I don't know what we would do,
I guess I don't know how non-critical string theorists think about non-critical string theory,
perhaps that's what they do, I don't know, but here, the way I discovered this cosmological
constant, I knew that Liouville theory had a cosmological constant and I said I don't want it,
I'll just throw it away, and then I got interested in trying to find a device for tuning the prime
in the path integral, by having it be concentrated at some particular scale factor, let's throw in
a Lagrange multiplier, and I worked out the Lagrangian with a Lagrange multiplier, and of course
it was just the cosmological constant term that was the Lagrange multiplier, so I would say it's
a Lagrange multiplier that you tune or that you scan to allow the system to scan different times.
No, you don't integrate over, you fix it, but then you change it if you want to get the later
time and the later time and the later time, so that kind of solves the puzzle of how renormalization
group generates an extra time, an extra variable. There are, if you like, a two-dimensional plane,
if you like, determined one dimension being r, and r is just the reference scale, you can study how
things vary with the reference scale, and that's called conventional renormalization group. There's
also another parameter, lambda, or the expectation value of phi if you put the Lagrange multiplier
into freezing, not phi u, same thing. That's the other direction, and moving around in this plane,
changing the reference scale and changing lambda is what generates the two dimensions of time and
radial distance. That's the extra origin of the extra direction, so I find that interesting,
I find that more than interesting, I find it an exciting idea that time can be generated in cosmology.
It's not that time can be generated so much that that excites me, what excites me about it is that
there's a formalism here, which is new, new in some new duality, some new connections.
All right, let me, let's see, no, we did that, let's, no, here we are. I won't go through the
calculation of the central charge. The calculation of the central charge, which is the ancestor
entropy, I would do, yeah, on the blackboard for you, but not today, so if you like, we can,
we can go a little bit further and I can show you some of the computation, real computations that
we're doing, but I'll tell you how, I'll tell you how it was done. You calculate correlation
functions in the CDL and the Coleman-Belutcher background, and then you analytically extrapolate
them to the Minkowski, and then you extrapolate them to boundary. The graviton-calga correlators
become the energy momentum tensor on the boundary theory. You calculate two-point functions,
three-point functions, and do all the tricks that operator product expansions tell you to do to
compute a central charge from matrix elements of an energy momentum tensor, and you read off the
the central charge of the theory. Central charge turns out to be the entropy of the
ancestor vector. Now, I have to say at the moment our computation has a factor of two,
I can't remember if it's twice the ancestor entropy or a half the ancestor, there's also
some pies, but I mean relative, it seems to differ by a factor of two from what I would have wanted
it to be. That may go away, I don't know, but it's of order of magnitude the ancestor entropy
within a factor of two, so that seems to work out pretty well. If, therefore, it's probably
large and positive, the entropy of the ancestor, if it's very small, we have no reason to be doing
semi-classical physics altogether. Okay, let me just finish by suggesting something. This is
much of what I have told you has been confirmed by the detailed calculations of correlation
functions. We don't know exactly what the conformal field theory description is, but, for example,
that there's an energy momentum tensor that's conserved, traceless, and so forth on the boundary,
those things have been confirmed by calculating bulk correlators and extrapolation. We'll get
very speculative. At this point, people always say, okay, now tell us really what is the fundamental
theory? What is the conformal field theory that's coupled to the Liouville field? My guess is that
it is not really a Liouville theory coupled to matter, but that it's a simple matrix theory.
A matrix theory, a matrix integral, not even a matrix quantum mechanics. It doesn't have time,
whatever it is, it doesn't have time. Time has to come out of it, and my guess is that it's simply
a matrix integral. I have little evidence for that except for some naive observations, not so
naive, but some observations that mostly come that entirely come from the past. Let me just
state them and tell you what I think. This is the M of the original slide. Let MAB be a collection of
N by N Hermitian matrices. They're labeled by what I suppose you could call a flavor index,
namely I, and there's going to be a large number of them. A and B will go from one to N, capital N,
and that's going to be very large. In fact, we're going to go to the large N limit. Why do we go
to the large N limit? Because we want planar diagrams, but the index I is some finite index,
and how big is it? Well, it can go from one roughly to the entropy of the ancestor.
If you want to take a conventional matrix integral, not a path integral, just a conventional matrix
integral, integral over matrices, and expand them in powers of the potential. The potential could
be five to the fourth, or M to the fourth, and six, whatever you like, even M cubed if you contain
and so forth, and you expand it, you will get some vertices, and you will get some Feynman
diagrams. The Feynman diagrams will involve vertices which couple the various flavors together.
For each coupling of the, here's the first, second, and third flavors coupled together,
let's call that vertex purple. The fifth, ninth, and fifteenth, some other coupling constant may
cover it, let's call it blue. There will be a whole variety of different vertices that depend on
the flavor indices, but when you go to work out the path integral, not path integral, but this
integration, of course, you will expand in powers of V and generate Feynman diagrams. What will
those Feynman diagrams be? Those Feynman diagrams will be the planar Feynman diagrams of large N
theory, but decorated with different kinds of vertices, depending on who's coming in, which
flavor is coming in, which flavor is going out. There will be a large variety of different kinds
of vertices. The vertices, well, the mesh defines a Leaville geometry. The vertices, the labeling
of them, define fields on this geometry. You can think of those fields as matter fields.
This kind of thing is well known to people who do matrix theories and matrix integrals and so
forth. One example is generating the Ising model on a quantum gravity background, the Ising model
being ups and downs of the series. You can generate a wide, wide variety of field theories living on
such a mesh by simply varying couplings and making sure the couplings are among the flavors.
My best guess is that this theory is really a matrix integral.
That's my best guess, that this theory is a matrix integral and not even the
finite count. It's just a matrix integral. We will see.
