Welcome ladies and gentlemen.
So what I'd like to do is to show you why you should never have to memorize the unit
circle.
So if you have a teacher or a friend or a parent that's saying you need to memorize the unit
circle please continue watching this video because I'm going to show you why you do not
need to memorize this unit circle as well as how you can actually solve some problems
without having it memorized just as quick or if not quicker than people that have the
unit circle memorized.
So first of all I remember when I first had to learn the unit circle and people were like
hey memorize that's the only way you just have to memorize it that's it and it was confusing
that's just what I did and I kind of went through it and just what force memorized it based
on all the angles and all the points and so forth.
Then I got into teaching and that's of course what I did I just reiterated you got to memorize
it you got to memorize it you got to know these points but the more and more I've taught
and the more and more I've worked through the problems I realized it's just a big waste
of time.
Not only is memorizing unit circle confusing you might memorize it for a couple weeks and
then sure enough two weeks later you totally have forgot everything but there's just so
much information there and it's not even all required.
The really only piece of information that you need to know from the unit circle is the
first quadrant because if you know the first quadrant as well as knowing what a reference
angle is and a coterminal angle is then you can solve the or you can evaluate any trigonometric
function using the unit circle.
It's much easier to memorize the first quadrant than to memorize the whole unit circle.
So again if you don't know what the reference and coterminal angle I'll give you just a
quick little definition and then I'll kind of work through three problems showing you
how I'd be able to do this.
So on the reference angle is basically the angle the acute positive angle between the
terminal side of an angle and the x axis and the coterminal angle is an angle that
has the exact same initial and terminal side.
So usually if I give my students an angle like sine of 2 pi over 3 and they have the
unit circle memorized they can probably actually do this problem pretty quickly.
So they could probably do this problem really quickly but once I get to negative angles
or when I get to angles that are larger than 2 pi that's where my kind of strategy starts
beating them out and it gets a little quicker.
So again 2 pi over 3 if somebody had the unit circle memorized they would just simply find
2 pi over 3 which I had that erased 2 pi over 3 and they say the sine and they know that
that is going to be square root of 3 over 2 and they'd kind of get that one covered right.
However even using my system is not too bad especially once you get a little bit more
practice.
So here's the way that I kind of break it down so you can use it for future angles as well
as speed up the process.
But I'm going to take it really slow just so I can explain it.
So the first thing if I'm graphing 2 pi over 3 I need to know where exactly 2 pi over 3
is.
If I know that half way around the circle is pi well here's pi over 3 2 pi over 3 3 pi
over 3.
So I'm traveling 2 pi over 3 that is my theta that's my angle I'm given.
The reference angle is going to be the angle from the terminal side so actually let's see
here's my initial and there's my terminal side.
The reference angle is the angle to the x axis to my terminal side.
So if here's 2 pi over 3 half way around the circle is 3 pi over 3 that means this distance
is going to be pi over 3.
Now I'm just going to label I'm just going to write these out so we can just kind of
keep track of everything.
So that's pi over 3.
Now I go to my first quadrant what is the coordinate for pi over 3?
So I go to pi over 3 and I can see the coordinate is going to be 1 half comma square root of
3 over 2.
However that is the coordinate in the first quadrant.
I'm not looking for the coordinate in the first quadrant I'm looking for the coordinate
in the second quadrant.
So it's important for me to know what's positive and negative in the second quadrant and in
the second quadrant we know that the x is negative and the y is positive.
Now let's just write it like this negative positive.
So knowing all of this information I know that my point is so pi over 3 and 2 pi over
3 and you can see look at these two points they are exactly the same.
The only difference between the two points is the x coordinate is negative.
So I just say I'm going to use this point I'm going to use that value but I'm going
to use the value in the second quadrant which is still positive so my answer is square root
of 3 over 2.
And again I want to reiterate negative angles if you had this memorized usually the circle
that people memorize is from standard position going in the positive direction.
So all I need to do is give you a negative angle and a lot of students have trouble because
that's not the unit circle that they memorized.
But if you know how to graph an angle negative 5 pi over 4 again remember half way around
a circle is pi.
So if we were to break this up into force we would say that's 4 pi over 4 and again remember
going negative direction is that way right?
Going in the clockwise is negative counterclockwise is positive.
So if going half way around circle is pi that would be 4 pi over 4 if I was going to break
that into force but I want to go negative 5 pi over 4 so I need to go an extra pi over
4 up.
So that's where my angle so here's my initial side.
This is my terminal side.
However again what we're looking for is that reference angle.
What is going to be my reference angle?
How far is it from my terminal side back to the x-axis?
You can see here I passed the x-axis so I need to see how far is it to go back.
So if here's 4 pi over 4 I want an extra pi over 4 next that means all the reference
angle is just taking me pi over 4 back to the x-axis.
So I'll say my reference angle is going to equal pi over 4.
Because now I need to go to my unit, my first quadrant and say what is the coordinate for
pi over 4?
That's square root of 2 over 2.
However looking back at my angle I see that it's in the second quadrant well again what
is negative in the second quadrant?
The x-coordinate right?
So now the cosine negative positive.
So cosine again represents the x-coordinate but since my angle lies in the second quadrant
my answer is going to be a negative square root of 2 over 2.
Alright last but not least let's go ahead and do a tangent problem.
This tangent problem is 15 pi over 6.
Now one thing I want you to look at is when we have a coterminal angle, and I'll just
kind of give you an example here, here's an angle.
If I take an angle and I draw the angle in the opposite direction you can see that these
two angles start at the same side but they also end at the same side.
Same thing, I could draw another angle and do an extra loop around the circle and I would
still start at the same side and end at the same side.
So those angles are coterminal.
The difference is their measures right?
They have different measures even though they start and end at the same side they have different
measures.
Well what is the difference between their measures?
Well think about this, think about these two blue, think about original and the one
that I went around.
I basically did the exact same angle but then I did an extra revolution around the circle
which is basically adding 2 pi and to get this first one I'm basically subtracting 2
pi.
So coterminal angles, the difference between coterminal angles is just plus or minus 2 pi.
So if I had tangent of 15 pi over 6, the first thing I want to do is, well let me find a
coterminal angle then that's between 0 and 2 pi.
So what I could do is I could rewrite this as 12 pi over 6 plus 3 pi over 6.
Well 12 pi over 6 is just 2 pi, that's just an extra revolution around the circle.
So in reality and then 3 pi over 6 really just gets reduced to 2 pi halves.
So in reality I'm trying to find the tangent of pi over 2 because the tangent of pi over
2 and the tangent of 15 pi over 6 are going to be the same because they're coterminal
angles.
They start and end at the same side.
So again I go to pi over 2 and this one you're not going to need to know so much, you're
just going to need to look at the quadrant that it lies in, sorry the x axis, pi over
2 is at 0 comma 1.
So there is no reference angle in this case, so it would be 0 comma 1.
So the equation is going to be y over x so that would be 1 over 0 which is undefined.
So there it goes ladies and gentlemen please do not waste your time trying to memorize
the unit circle.
The best and easiest thing to do to evaluate trigonometric functions for given angles is
to make sure you know the first quadrant, memorize it, just do enough practice and you'll
know it and then use your reference and your coterminal angles to identify the point or
the angle in the first quadrant, then use your quadrants to identify if it's positive
or negative and then you're all set and use coterminal angles to find angles between 0
and 2 pi.
And again I just want you to notice that the unit circle all it is is a reproduction of
the first quadrant.
When you flip it over here the x is negative, when you flip it over here the y coordinates
are negative.
When you flip it into the third quadrant the x and y's are negative.
But the main important thing is don't memorize the angles because all I need to do is give
you negative or coterminal angles and it gets confusing.
Just make sure you know how to graph any angle as well as find the coterminal and the reference.
Thanks.
