Welcome to lecture 10, energy and climate.
In the first six lectures, I laid the groundwork for an understanding, a scientific understanding
of how planetary climates are established and particularly how Earth's climate is established,
ending up with the cycling of carbon, that all-important element that is establishing
the greenhouse effect in Earth's atmosphere.
The next three lectures, which we've just completed, looked at humankind's contribution
to the global carbon cycle and to other properties of the atmosphere that result in greenhouse
warming.
So we've seen the science of climate, we've seen how human beings are altering the climate
and understand that from a scientific point of view.
In the last three lectures, we look at how human behavior might be changed in a way that
could avoid some, at least, of the global warming we anticipate.
And again, I'm not making prescriptions here for what I think human behavior should
be, I'm simply making observations about what we are doing now and how those practices
might change if we want to avoid at least some of the global warming, some of it we
can't avoid because we're already committed to it with the CO2 we've already put in the
atmosphere.
Well, why is this lecture called energy and climate?
Because of all the things we human beings do that have the possibility to alter climate,
by far the most significant is our consumption of energy.
So in this lecture, I want to talk a little bit about how much energy people use and where
that energy comes from and what we get from that energy and then in subsequent lectures
we'll look at what we might do differently.
How much energy do we use?
Well, that's a common question, but it's also the wrong question.
It's the wrong question because the issue isn't how much energy we use, but how much
energy we use in a given time, at what rate do we use energy?
At what rate?
How much energy do we use in a year?
How much on average do we use every second?
How much do we use every hour?
We're really asking a question about the rate of energy consumption and it's very common
to confuse energy, a stuff, a substance, if you will, with the rate at which it's being
used or produced or whatever and that rate is called power and that power is measured
in watts.
A watt is a rate of energy use and you know what a watt is because you know what a hundred
watt light bulb is or a thousand watt hair dryer or a fifteen hundred watt stove burner
or a sixty watt light bulb or whatever.
You have a vague feel for what a watt is.
I'm going to quantify that feel quite solidly in the course of this lecture, but I want
to emphasize that a watt is a unit of power.
It's an amount of energy per time.
In particular, in the metric system, the unit of energy is the joule named after James'
joule and a watt is a joule per second and that doesn't mean much right now, but I'll
try to give you a better feel for what it means.
So let me rephrase the question.
At what rate does humankind use energy?
And again, I'm phrasing that question because we're concerned in this lecture with how human
beings cause greenhouse warming and the dominant reason we do that is because we consume lots
of energy.
At what rate do we consume that energy?
Well we use energy at the rate of about fifteen trillion watts.
About fifteen trillion watts.
That's the equivalent of a hundred and fifty billion hundred watt light bulbs burning.
Now don't ask me, is that a fifteen trillion watts every year or fifteen trillion watts
every hour or what?
It's not any of those things because it's already a rate.
The word watt has that rate built into it.
That fifteen trillion watts is fifteen trillion joules of energy every second.
You can figure out by multiplying by the number of seconds in a year, which is approximately
the number of pi times ten to the seven by the way, to figure out how much we use in
a year or in any other time interval you want, but that fifteen trillion watts is a rate
at which we are using energy on average around the clock all the time, the entire species.
Fifteen trillion watts, the equivalent of a hundred and fifty billion hundred watt light
bulbs.
Some other equivalents, there are lots and lots of units used to measure energy, a bewildering
array of them, different countries and different specializations used, different energy units
and you just have to get used to there being several.
So let me express that in several other ways.
Energy, energy is expressed in quadrillions of British thermal units.
The British thermal unit is a unit of energy.
It happens to be about a thousand joules, not quite, but it's ten one oh five four joules.
So we express large scale energy uses like of whole countries or of the world in terms
of British thermal units per year, because again we're talking about a rate and that
fifteen trillion watts is equivalent to about five hundred quadrillion BTUs per year.
They're often called quads, five hundred quads per year.
A quad is a common unit you'll hear used for energy.
A quad is a quadrillion British thermal units.
A quad is equivalent to about five hundred quadrillion BTUs, fifteen trillion watts, five
hundred quadrillion BTUs per year, they're equivalent to about eighty billion barrels
of oil per year.
If we got all our energy from oil, which we don't, if we got all our energy from oil,
we would be consuming about eighty billion barrels of oil a year.
About twenty five hundred barrels of oil every second, one and there are twenty five
hundred barrels up in smoke.
That's the rate at which we would consume oil if all our energy came from oil.
In fact, we consume about thirty billion barrels of oil a year and that tells you that our
oil consumption is a significant fraction, not quite half, but a significant fraction
of the energy we consume is in fact coming from oil.
If you're a scientist or if you like scientific notation, that five hundred quadrillion BTUs
per year, that eighty billion barrels of oil equivalent per year, that fifteen trillion
watts, not per year because the watts got the time unit built into it, the others are
expressed as an energy per time, is also equivalent to five times ten to the twenty jewels per
year or five hundred exajoules per year, if I can use the exa prefix, which means ten
to the eighteen.
So it's about five times ten to the twenty jewels or about five hundred exajoules per
year, eighty billion barrels of oil equivalent per year, five hundred quadrillion BTUs per
year or simply fifteen trillion watts, those are all ways of saying the same thing, namely
the colossal rate at which humankind consumes energy.
Now that energy is being consumed by roughly seven billion people on the planet.
So the energy per person, the energy per capita that we're using is considerably a smaller
number, but it's still big.
That one, that fifteen trillion watts divided among a world population of seven billion
comes out to about two thousand watts per person, and don't ask me do I consume two
thousand watts every day or every year or what, because that's again a rate, you on average
as a citizen of the world consume two thousand watts, that's the rate at which you consume
energy around the clock all the time.
Now I suspect most of the people in my audience consume far more than that and I'll get to
that in just a moment, but let me focus on that two thousand watts a minute, because
I want to look at that and compare it with the energies that our own bodies can produce.
The human body metabolizing its food produces energy at the rate of roughly a hundred watts
were roughly equivalent to a hundred watt light bulb, and I want to give you a real
feel for what that hundred watt number means, so what I want to do is do a little exercise
here that will get you to feel literally in your muscles what a hundred watts means.
Now if you've seen my course physics in your life, I had a hand crank generator there and
I got a teaching company employee to crank out a hundred watts and light a hundred watt
light bulb and that teaching company employee felt exactly what a hundred watts felt like.
We're not going to do that, we're just going to use our bodies to produce energy at the
rate of about a hundred watts.
So I'm going to do some deep knee bends and if you're not driving in your car and are
sitting leisurely in front of your TV and are suitably abled, why don't you get up and
do some deep knee bends with me like this.
We're going to go down about half a meter, about 18-20 inches and we're going to do that
about once a second.
I don't know, three, four, up, down, up, up, down, up, down, up, down, I could keep doing
that for a while but I get pretty tired so my body is producing energy at the rate of
about a hundred watts.
I'm not going to calculate that for you but if you've had high school physics and know
about kinetic and potential energy you could probably do that calculation and come to the
conclusion that we're producing energy at the rate of about a hundred watts.
Now if you're a lot smaller than me it's probably a little bit less.
If you're a lot bigger than I am it's probably a bit more but it's somewhere in the range
of 50 to 200 watts or something like that that you're producing if you're doing those
deep knee bends.
And I just argued that per capita the world's population uses on average 2,000 watts, uses
energy at the rate of 2,000 watts and so what that means is the average human being on this
planet is consuming energy beyond that produced by their own body, in fact about 20 times
as much as it produced by their own body.
So if you wanted to think about sort of energy servants that were working for you during
the work of all that energy, every person on the globe has approximately 20 energy servants
that is 20 human bodies equivalent worth of energy production going on their behalf.
Now that energy consumption is far from uniform over the globe.
In the most energy intensive countries the energy consumption rate per capita exceeds
10,000 watts.
Well there's a hundred hundreds in 10,000 so that means in the most energy intensive
countries in which the United States is one the energy consumption rate is equivalent
to somewhat over a hundred human bodies worth of energy per capita.
You've got a hundred energy servants working for you if you're in the United States.
Since the average is about 20 that means there are countries that have far fewer than that
20.
So it varies enormously.
For example in Australia the average number of energy servants if you will is on the order
of about 70 to 80.
That corresponds to something like 7 to 8,000 watts, 7 to 8 kilowatts.
In the United States it's about 11 kilowatts actually about 110 energy servants.
In Saudi Arabia it's pretty high, it's almost 80 energy servants.
In Japan it's about 50.
In Poland it's about 35 or so.
It varies around the globe.
If you're a resident of Europe it's probably about half what it is in the United States
that is you use energy at about half the rate an American does if you're a European on average.
In some parts of the world in Egypt it's about 10 energy servants, about 1,000 watts.
In Congo it's about just a few energy servants, just a little bit more than the human body
can prove.
It varies dramatically.
In Switzerland it's just about half what it is in the United States and so on.
So that number varies dramatically.
And what I'd like you to remember especially if you're in the United States or North America
for that matter Canada is actually just a hair higher is that the average North American
has a body which is 100 watts worth of energy and has 100 human bodies worth of energy being
produced in your name to supply you with all the things energy does for you from transportation
to refrigeration to heating your house to whatever.
We'll look at that in just a minute.
So picture this whenever you think about energy consumption.
Picture yourself your puny little body and then 100 other human beings working just for
you with the energy output of their bodies to supply all the other energy you use.
Of course that energy isn't coming from human bodies.
There are certainly not enough people in the world to supply that energy if there were.
But that's the equivalent in human bodies of the energy you consume.
Now what do we do with all that energy?
Well, it's conventional to sort of think about four sectors industry, transportation, residential
and commercial as accounting for nearly all that energy use and to sort of divide the
energy use up into those sectors.
In the United States where we have about a hundred of these quote energy servants for
every person, you can think of the percentages as being the number of servants.
So in the United States something like 28 of your energy servants that is 28 percent
of the energy you use, they're working round the clock just to transport you and the goods
you use.
So all those trucks roaring down the highway, all those airplanes delivering federal express
packages are carrying you to the other side of the continent or whatever.
If you add up all the energy they consume and divide by the population of the United
States, you will find that about 28 energy servants, about 28 human bodies worth are
supplying you with transportation.
Another 32 of them, the biggest single chunk, are working in industry on your behalf producing
the goods that you use.
Neither of those energy servants are ones we see very obviously.
I guess we see our transportation ones when they're powering our cars but not a lot of
the trucks that are delivering you goods and so on and we certainly don't notice every
day the industrial ones but most of the energy servants who are working for you, more than
half the energy you consume in other words is in the transportation and industrial sectors.
About 18 percent are in the commercial sector.
What are they doing?
Well, they are keeping the lights on in your office buildings, they're running computers,
they're keeping the hospitals operating, they're running the banks of freezers, some of them
open to the surrounding air, very inefficient in our supermarkets, they're keeping the lights
on in the parking lots of the stores that are open till 10 p.m. and so on.
They're doing all the things that need energy in the commercial sector and about 22 of those
energy servants, about 22 percent of your energy are at work in your home.
The dominant thing they're doing is heating or cooling your house, they're making hot
water is the second most important thing or not most important but second most energy
consuming thing they're doing, they're running your computers, they're running your alarm
systems, they're running your stoves, electric or gas, they are running your water pump,
they're running lights, they're running entertainment systems, they're doing all the things you
do in the house.
About 22 of your servants are at work in your house, imagine having to cram 22 extra people
into your house for every person in your house, in your family, maybe there's four people
in your family that's 88 energy servants you've got to have in your house to keep those, that
energy going.
So that's your energy servants, again for residents of North America you've got about
100 of them, if you think of equivalent numbers of human bodies, if you want to think a little
more scientifically you're using energy at a rate of slightly over 10,000 watts, 10 kilowatts.
Again that's round the clock, those 100 energy servants by the way if they worked 8 hour
shifts you'd have to employ 300 of them, each working 8 hour shifts because they're working
round the clock for you, that 10,000 watts is a rate of energy consumption and that's
the average rate at which you consume energy round the clock.
Of course sometimes you're consuming at a higher rate, sometimes at a lower rate, if
you step in your SUV and turn the key I guarantee you're consuming energy at a much higher rate
but just for the relatively short time that you spend in your SUV.
Now who are these energy servants?
They aren't really people, cranking generators or doing deep knee bends and connected to
devices that generate electricity or something or running little squirrel cages in your SUV
to make it go.
No, they are the sources of energy that we human beings have learned technologically
how to tap.
And I like to think of the sources of energy as divided into two classes and I'm going
to talk more about these two classes in sort of fundamental resource terms in the next
lecture.
Some of them are fuels.
What's a fuel?
A fuel is a substance that stores energy, gasoline is a fuel, coal is a fuel, uranium
is a fuel.
These substances contain stored energy which we have figured out technologically how to
release and turn into the energy of motion or the energy of electricity or the energy
of hot water or whatever other form of energy we want.
Those are fuels, substances that store energy.
Others are flows.
They're tapped from natural flows of energy.
There's a natural flow of energy that comes from the sun and it is very substantial.
We've already talked about it a lot because it's what powers the climate.
We know that it delivers an average of about 240 watts or rate at which energy is delivered
on every square meter of the earth's surface.
That's one of the natural flows.
Other flows of energy are the flow of flowing water which is carrying with it the energy
of its motion and maybe its gravitational energy of its flowing from higher to lower.
That's another example of a natural flow.
That one happens to be driven by the sunlight.
It's part of the hydrological cycle that we've talked about before.
The wind also ultimately driven by solar heating is another flow of energy that we can tap.
The tides and currents which I'll talk more about in the next lecture are also energy
sources that we can tap.
So those are flows as opposed to fuels.
They're natural flows of energy that we can tap into.
Those are substances we can find, dig up, burn, fish in whatever we do to extract the
energy from them.
You'll get much more about fuels and flows in the next lecture.
Now, the mix of energy sources differs a little bit from country to country, in fact substantially
in some cases.
And I just want to review what some of these energy sources are in the case of the United
States and the world.
And so we're going to look at a graph of that and in this graph that we're going to look
at.
Eventually, I'm going to take the United States energy consumption and I'm going to scale
it so that its area on the graph represents the fraction of the energy that the United
States uses, which is just about 25% of all the world's energy.
Let's just take a look at what some of these energy sources are.
It turns out that coal supplies about 23%, almost a quarter of the United States energy.
Oil supplies 39%, almost 40% of US energy.
Gas supplies about 23%.
Those are the fossil fuels.
Add those numbers up.
You get 23 and 23 is 46, 86, 85, 85% of the energy used in the United States comes from
the fossil fuels, coal, oil, and natural gas.
Where's the rest of it come from?
In the United States, about 8% of it comes from nuclear.
That's the second biggest source of energy after the fossil fuels.
That's used exclusively to generate electricity.
It does propel a few ships, but that's negligible energetically.
Solar energy supplies about 20% of the electricity in the United States and about 8% of the total
energy in the United States.
Hydroelectric power is about 3%.
Biomass burning is about 3%.
That includes things like wood for heating, wood to generate electricity, burning of waste
material to generate energy, and then other is about 1%.
And if you're a fan of solar energy or wind energy or anything else, all those nice things
are crammed into that 1% and they constitute a rather small fraction of it.
Most of that other happens to be geothermal energy, which is not a source that we're going
to be able to get a lot out of in the future.
So that picture is one in which the energy sources for the United States, the energy
servants, if you will, are predominantly fossil fuels.
Nuclear is a distant second, hydroelectricity is in there and biomass a little bit.
In the world, the picture is just about the same.
In the world, coal is at about 24%, oil is at about 39%, gas is at about 24%, nuclear
is a slightly smaller fraction of the world's electricity at 6% and hydro is a little bit
bigger at 6% and the other for the world is also about 1%.
And again, when we show those energy sources to scale by area here, the United States energy
consumption is just about a quarter, just a hair under a quarter of the total world
energy consumption for our population of about 300 million people out of a world population
of 7 billion.
So think about that a little bit.
Now this pattern of fossil fuels dominating the energy consumption holds pretty much around
the world, but there are some exceptions and it's important to note them because it doesn't
have to be this way if a country is endowed with other energy resources or makes other
choices.
France, for example, gets nearly all of its electricity, about 80% of its electricity
from nuclear energy.
They've decided to go nuclear as a way of being energy independent.
You can argue whether that's a good choice or a bad choice, but that's a choice France
has made and so its pattern doesn't fit these graphs I've showed.
Norway, the Congo, and Brazil, rather different countries all get a large fraction of their
energy from hydroelectricity because they have big river systems that are able to supply
that energy.
Iceland gets a substantial fraction of its energy from geothermal sources because it's
sitting on a hot spot where there's a lot of geothermal activity near the surface, volcanic
activity, geyser type activity, and it can get a lot of its energy from that.
But if you take the big picture of the world as a whole and kind of forget the distinction
between coal, oil, and natural gas, which are all carbon based fossil fuels, the answer
is that the world gets about 87% of its energy from fossil fuels.
The vast majority of its energy comes from fossil fuels.
The energy we use in the United States and the energy that's used in the world, the vast
majority is fossil fuel energy.
Now what's the climate connection?
This lecture is entitled Energy and Climate.
What's the connection?
Well, the connection is that fossil fuel combustion and other activities associated with energy
are responsible for 83% of the greenhouse gas emissions that we produce in the United
States.
There are other sources of greenhouse gas emissions and they comprise about 17%.
But energy production comprises 83% or produces 83% of the greenhouse gas emissions.
The dominant effect, of course, is the production of carbon dioxide as we burn the fuels, combine
them with oxygen, and make carbon dioxide and water vapor.
The carbon dioxide that's produced in the combustion of the fuels is the dominant effect
here.
But there are other energy related effects.
Natural gas is methane, CH4, a strong greenhouse gas.
And anywhere in the natural gas distribution system where we have a leak, whether it's
near your house or whether it's in a big pipeline, that is an energy related production
of a greenhouse gas, refineries emit greenhouse gases.
That's another energy related emission, abandoned coal mines emit methane, active coal mines
do too.
Those are both examples of energy related greenhouse emissions and they're included
in that 83%.
Some of the sources that are in the 17% that isn't energy related include things like methane
produced from landfills, from sewage treatment plants, from agriculture.
When we produce cement, we work with carbon compounds and there's some carbon dioxide
released.
Cement production is a distant second to fossil fuels in causing atmospheric emissions of
carbon dioxide, so cement production.
And many industrial processes produce various gases, including carbon dioxide, methane and
others that are greenhouse gases.
So they qualify as non-energy related greenhouse gas emissions.
But again, that's only 17% of the greenhouse emissions in the United States.
And by the way, these figures also include the effects of so-called carbon sinks, for
instance planting tree plantations and so on, to remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
They're already built into this sense that 83% of the greenhouse emissions come from
energy production.
Now what does all this energy buy us?
What do we get for using energy at such a prolific rate?
Here I'm moving a little bit out of pure science, but I'm going to stay basically quantitative.
For many countries, it turns out there's a pretty direct correlation between the rate
at which that country consumes energy per capita, the rate at which its citizens use
energy, the amount of energy they use in any given time like a year, and their economic
well-being as measured by the gross domestic product.
You could draw a straight line, you could plot a graph in which per capita energy consumption
is on one axis and per capita gross national product is on another axis.
And many countries would lie on a straight line.
The U.S., Australia, South Korea, Poland, Egypt, Congo all have different amounts of
energy consumption, very different, but they have different amounts of gross domestic product
as well.
And they scale in a proportional fashion, so they all lie on a straight line if you make
a graph of per capita energy consumption.
Some other countries lie well below that straight line.
These are countries and examples of them, there are many, but examples of them include
Russia and Saudi Arabia.
They use a fairly large amount of energy per capita.
They use energy at a large rate, they should say, per capita, but they don't produce
much GNP for it.
And that means they lie below this average line and they are in some sense energy inefficient.
They aren't using their energy very efficiently if you think of energy consumption as something
that's helping us to establish a high material standard of living as measured by a high gross
domestic product.
There are other countries though, they tend to be some of the European countries, in particular
also Japan, they consume energy at approximately half the rate that the United States does
and yet no one would call those countries, you know, places to live that would be sort
of difficult because there isn't enough energy, they're not primitive societies in
any sense, they're not underdeveloped societies.
They simply are using their energy more efficiently, they produce almost as much gross domestic product
as the United States per capita and yet they do so with half the energy.
So how are energy and prosperity linked?
Well for a great many countries, they lie pretty much on a straight line.
The more energy you consume, the more prosperous you are as measured by your gross domestic
product.
Let's take a look at a graph that shows all this together in one place.
Here it is with Saudi Arabia, Russia, Switzerland, Japan and then the countries, a number of
countries that lie along a straight line.
If I were to produce a more comprehensive graph with more countries, I would still see the
same general trend.
I would see a scattering of countries, some of which are more efficient so that they produce
more GNP for a given amount of energy, some of which are less efficient, but they would
lie on a general trend that suggests the more energy you consume, the more your gross domestic
product, the higher gross domestic product.
Does that mean we all ought to be striving to consume as much energy as possible?
I don't think so.
I think we need to look carefully at the countries whose gross domestic product is high but whose
energy consumption is low because those are the countries that have learned how to do
things more efficiently.
Now there may be some reasons for the so-called inefficiencies in other countries.
For example, the United States is a very large country.
It's spread out over a big area and not surprisingly the amount of the fraction of our energy we
spend on transportation is considerably larger than in a small European country where some
other decisions about transportation like to have very high gasoline taxes or to have
very well developed railroad systems may also affect the efficiency with which that country
uses energy.
There's also a question of whether the gross domestic product is the right measure of human
well-being and here I'm venturing about as far away from science as I'm going to get
in this course, but I'm still grounded here in quantitative economics.
There are a number of economists who raise the question maybe the gross domestic product
isn't quite the best thing to measure our well-being.
That's because the gross domestic product includes all the goods and services that we
use.
For example, if there's an oil spill and we have to hire people to clean up the oil
spill, the money that we generate hiring the people to the deployment we generate hiring
the people to clean up the oil spill, that all goes into part of the gross domestic product.
And yet we would probably argue that having oil spills is not necessarily a good thing.
So is there some other indicator that provides a sense of human well-being that reflects
more accurately what things actually go into making our lives better?
And if there is, how would energy consumption correlate with those things?
Well, there are a number of forward-looking environmental economists, particularly who
are trying to formulate better indices of human well-being and to see how different
societies stack up against those different measures.
And one of the measures developed by the United Nations is the so-called Human Development
Index.
It's an alternative to the gross domestic product and the Human Development Index has
several components.
One of them is the gross domestic product, a measure of the total economic goods and
services in a country, a measure of its economic well-being, its material well-being is measured
by money, but there are several other components in the HDI, the Human Development Index.
One of them is life expectancy.
Another is adult literacy.
And another one is school enrollment.
What happens if you make the same graph that I showed you earlier of energy consumption
rate on the horizontal axis and well-being now is measured by the Human Development
Index on the vertical axis?
Well, if you were to make such a graph, you would find a rather different picture.
You would find that countries that use very, very little energy per capita have very low
human development indices.
They are not in very good condition in terms of that measure of human well-being.
But as you increase the amount of energy consumed up to a few kilowatts per capita, the Human
Development Index, that measure of factors that includes the GDP, life expectancy, adult
literacy and school enrollment rises rather rapidly.
But at a few kilowatts, 20 or 30 energy servants per capita, the graph turns over and saturates
and levels off.
And further increases in the amount of energy per capita consumed don't make any great
difference in the Human Development Index.
So if you believe the Human Development Index is a better measure of human well-being, then
you might say there's kind of a saturation effect.
Does energy help us live better lives?
Yes, but only up to a point.
And beyond that point, increases in energy consumption don't seem to increase our sense
of well-being, our Human Development Index.
Well, let me summarize this lecture.
First of all, there is a large per capita energy consumption use in the world about 20
times the human body in North America, over 100 times one human body's worth of energy.
Fossil fuels are responsible for the vast majority of that energy, and fossil fuels
are also responsible for most of the greenhouse gas emissions.
We get something important for that energy.
We get a good material standard of living.
But it looks like if we use more than 20 or 30 human body's worth of energy, we probably
don't gain additional well-being.
So that's where we stand, and next we have to look at what we could do to change that
mix of energies away from greenhouse-emitting fossil fuels.
