Welcome back. Today's lecture concerns the role of probability in descriptions of the
physical world. The probabilistic analysis of random behavior lies at the very heart
of how we understand physical phenomena, from everything from quantum mechanics to the weather.
Physics and chemistry describe the nature of matter and how matter interacts with itself.
One of the most basic features of understanding the world is that physical matter is made
up of atoms and molecules. But at the turn of the 20th century, the scientific community
was not so clear that atoms and molecules actually existed. Some scientists thought
that atoms and molecules were to be viewed merely as metaphorical concepts. That is,
they thought that atoms and molecules were abstractions and that those abstractions were
predictive as analogies rather than actually being real things. Well, it turned out that
the evidence for the existence of atoms and molecules really entailed an application
of probability. And one of the major players in that analysis was Albert Einstein. In 1905,
Albert Einstein wrote three incredibly significant papers, and the two most famous were on the
topics of relativity and light quantum, the photoelectric effect. But his third paper was
on Brownian motion, and it was his theoretical work on Brownian motion that allowed experimentalists
to do actual measurements that confirmed the reality of atoms and molecules. So, while
Brownian motion was discovered, first of all, in the early 1800s by a botanist by the name
of Robert Brown, it was in 1827 that he made some microscopic observations of grains of
pollen on the surface of water. And he noticed that these grains of pollen appeared to just
constantly move in a jittery way on that surface. And the motion seemed to just be random and
never seemed to slow down or to stop. Well, in 1905, Einstein hypothesized that Brownian
motion was caused by actual atoms and molecules hitting the grains of pollen and thereby impelling
those grains of pollen to take this random walk on the surface of the liquid. And remember,
the random walks were what we talked about in the last lecture, randomly moving from
place to place in different directions by this random motion of the molecules. Well,
Einstein wrote down a formula that basically predicted what distance a piece of pollen
would move on average per unit time. That is, how far away it would be displaced from where
it started per unit time. The kind of analysis we talked about in the last lecture, how far
away you move. And then his formula actually gave a quantitative measurement to what you
would expect. Well, anyway, his formula involved the size of the grains of pollen and the temperature
and the viscosity of the liquid. And his formula predicted visible effects of things that were
invisible, namely the atoms and the molecules. They were too small to see, but they had an
effect that was visible on these grains of pollen. So he predicted that on average a
pollen grain would be displaced from where it was at a given moment at a rate proportional
to the square root of time. And this prediction was a probabilistic consequence of the hypothesis
that atoms and molecules really existed and that their motion was just random. Well, this analysis
then created the opportunity for the theory of atoms to be confirmed experimentally. And the
experiments were actually undertaken in 1908 and beyond. And since the experiments accorded
with Einstein's predictions, the experiments were strong evidence for the actual existence of
atoms. So in a sense, Einstein's work encouraged a mode of reasoning that led later to the inherently
probabilistic nature that's involved in quantum mechanics. See, in quantum mechanics, the most
fundamental objects that make up matter are to be considered not as little round balls that are at
one place at one time, but instead they're to be viewed as a probability distribution. They
have a probability of being anywhere at any time. And this concept of the probabilistic nature of
matter that we find in quantum mechanics is a real conceptual challenge. And Einstein himself
never accepted this probabilistic nature at the root of quantum mechanics. And he had a very famous
quote that expressed his opposition to this probabilistic view. He said, God does not play
dice with the universe. To which Niels Bohr replied, Einstein, who are you to tell God what to do?
And in fact, later, Stephen Hawking added in talking about black holes, God not only plays
dice, but sometimes throws them where they cannot be seen. So in any case, probability is certainly
involved in descriptions of physics. At the chemical level, chemical interactions really are
to be viewed as the vast quantities of molecules and liquids or gases moving randomly around
and encountering each other at random moments to create the products of chemical reactions. And
the fact that there are so incredibly vastly many particles tells us that the expectations about
that what we predict probabilistically can really be completely relied upon. Because ultimately,
we're talking about the law of large numbers, that if we have so many experiments going on,
the thing that we predict is certainly going to happen. So probability plays a central role
in physical theories from quantum mechanics up the ladder of different sizes of interacting
matter up through chemistry, and then all the way up to macroscopic matters, such as the weather.
So now we're going to turn our attention to the discussion of the most familiar experience that
we have on a day to day basis about probability, which is reading in the newspaper every day,
the statement, there is a 30% chance of rain tomorrow. Now, so what we're going to do is
now turn our attention to the question of what in the world does that statement mean?
What's surprising is that that statement is a very difficult thing to understand. And if you ask
a lot of people, you'll discover that they don't really understand what it means to say there's
a 30% chance of rain tomorrow. And so we're going to start to think about this by thinking about
what we want it to mean, and then seeing what it actually means and seeing whether or not those
agree. Okay, so let's first of all see what we would, we'll take care of a couple of minor issues
that are easily resolved. So the first issue has to do with the issue of threshold, meaning
that how much rain is rain? Well, that's just decided by choosing an arbitrary amount. We say
that rain consists of, it's usually chosen to be like a hundredth of an inch. If there's a hundredth
of an inch, then that counts as rain. So the first thing is this threshold issue.
The second case that's actually simple, so we'll do this second case first, is what does it mean to
say that there's a 30% chance of rain at one specific spot? At one specific spot? What's the
chance of 30% chance of rain? Well, that means what you would probably guess, namely that if the
weather circumstances are like they are today, then in 30 out of 100 days, subsequent days, if
you're predicting the next day's weather, in 30 out of 100 of those subsequent days, you would expect
to find at least a hundredth of an inch of rain landing at that spot. That's what it would mean
to say there's a 30% chance of rain at one individual spot. Now, let's be clear. It does not mean that
it's expected to rain for 30% of the time. That's not true. It just means that if the conditions
are like today, then tomorrow, if we're predicting the weather for tomorrow, there's a 30 out of 100
days, 30% chance that it will rain at least a measurable amount at that spot. The issue comes in
of what happens when we're talking about a whole region. When we say there's a 30% chance of rain
in a region, what does it mean? The reason that it's a challenge is that there are different
points in the region. Maybe the region contains a hill where it rains more often than it does
in the valley area, where it rains less often. So we have to understand how we're going to deal
with the fact that there's some variation in the probability of its raining at one point versus
another. Well, let's start thinking about this issue by looking at the simplest case. The simplest
case is if at every point in the region, it really did have exactly the same probability of rain.
In other words, suppose that the region that we're talking about, maybe it's either very
small or very homogeneous in its character, that it literally were the case that at every
single individual point, the conditions today predict that at each of those individual points,
there's a 30% chance of rain at each point. So here I have a graphic that will show you this
situation. So if the area is homogeneous, that is to say that at every individual point in the
whole area, there is a 30% probability of rain, then we'll summarize that by saying there's a
30% probability of rain in the area. I hope that that is natural and it's correct and we all agree.
The challenge comes when parts of the area have a different probability of rain point by point
than other parts. So let's look at this example here. Suppose that we have a 100 acre tract and
at half of that area, 50 acres, at every point in that region, those points have a 40% probability
of rain for the period that we're talking about, tomorrow, from 12 midnight to 12 midnight the
next day, there's a 40% chance of rain at each of those points. But then at the other half,
the other 50 acres, at each point in those, there's only a 20% chance of rain. So you can,
if you want to envision a mountain area and then a valley area where more rain comes in the,
it's twice as likely to rain in the mountain slope than on the valley, then at each point of
the valley, there's a 20% chance of rain. Now, since we're trying to give useful information
to everybody in the region, we can't go point by point and tell each person in the region what
the probability of rain is at your specific point. We need to summarize this and we're accustomed to
doing this. We know how to summarize it. What we, the way we summarize it is we say, well, on average,
it's taking an average of what the probability of rain is over the region. One way to phrase the
taking of the average is to say it the following way. Suppose we choose a point at random in the
whole region, what is the probability of rain at that random point? If we phrase it in that way,
it becomes an expected value computation because you see, we could choose a point that's in the
40% area or we could choose a point that's in the 20% probability area. And there's a 50% chance
because half the areas are each. There's a 50% chance that will be in the 40% probability part
and there's a 50% chance will be in the 20% probability part. So, on average, the expected
probability, the expected value of the probability of rain over all the points in the region is
0.5 times the 40% probability plus 0.5 times the 20% probability which is the average, namely 30%
probability of rain. Now, so let me talk about an analogy of the kind of thing that we're doing.
Suppose we had a room full of people and we wanted to give one number that summarized the
height of the people in the room. Well, if everybody were exactly the same height, our summary would
be simple. We'd say that the height of the people in the room is whatever that height is, 5 feet,
6 inches. If everybody's 5 feet, 6 inches, no problem. But suppose that some people are tall
and some people are shorter. How would we give one number that summarizes that? Well, we'd have
to give an average, some sort of a way to average it. And one way we could say it is if we choose a
person at random in the room, what is their height? Well, what does it mean to choose a person at random?
What it would mean is that if you have, say, two people in the room and one person is 6 feet tall
and one person is 5 feet tall, then it doesn't mean that you can't choose either of those heights.
You would choose 5 foot 6 as the average height. And if you randomly chose somebody in the room,
you'd either choose the 5 footer or the 6 footer. Neither one would be correct. But on average,
if you chose a lot of times, the average of the heights that you chose would indeed be 5 foot 6,
which is your prediction. Okay, so that is what we're going to mean by the probability of precipitation.
Let's give some more examples. Here's an example. Suppose that we had two parts of our 100 acre
region, 30 acres of which definitely would get rain. At every point, it's definitely going to rain.
It rains every single day at that whole 30 acres. And at the other 70 acres, it never rains at all.
Now, it's too bad that we have to give one number to summarize the probability of precipitation for
tomorrow in this situation. But if we have to do it, how would we give a summary? We would say
there's a 30% chance of rain. Because if we choose a point at random in that 100 acres,
there's a 30% chance, 0.3 chance, that there's a 100% chance of rain. And there's a 70% chance
that it's not going to rain at all, that there's a zero chance of rain. So the expected value
of the probability of rain over all the points randomly selected in the region is 30%. So this
is the way that we're talking about how we summarize what it means to say the probability
of precipitation in a whole region is 30%. Now, here are some other examples. And of course,
you can think of all sorts of examples. Here's one where a quarter of the region, 25 acres has a 40%,
50 acres has 30% at each point, and 25 acres, 25% has a 20% chance of rain.
Once again, the expected value is 30%. So these are all just different examples of computing this
expected value. Okay, so we actually now have the definition of what it means for the probability
of precipitation to be 30% for this defined period tomorrow. There's a consequence to this
definition. And the consequence is the following statement, that on average,
on average, the average amount of the area that will get rain is 30% of the area on average.
Now, let me be very clear on what that means to say that on average, 30% of the region will get rain
on a day in which the probability of precipitation is 30%. What it means is the following.
Suppose that you imagine the rain happening many, many days. In other words, you have this
prediction of a 30% chance of rain, and then you have that exact same weather condition for many,
many days. And to be simple, let's say 10 days in a row. 10 days happens where exactly the same
30% probability of precipitation comes about. And every day, a certain fraction of your area
gets rain. Some days, none of it rains. It doesn't rain at all. Some days, it may rain over the entire
area. Some days, it rains over half the area. Some days, it rains over a third of the area.
If we took the total of all of the amount of area that got rained during those 10 days,
and then divided by 10, that's what we mean by the average area that gets rain per day.
Does that make sense? I hope that makes sense. So that's what we mean by the average.
So here we go. Let's do some examples. So here is the easiest example, is this case.
Suppose we're in the case where we have our region in which 30 of the 100 acres always gets rain,
and the other 70 acres never gets rain. Well, then in fact, every single day,
30% of the region gets rain, because those 30 acres get rain. 70 acres do not get rain.
It happens every day. So on average, it happens that 30 acres, 30% of the region gets rain.
Let's consider where the probability of rain at every single point is 30%.
The probability of rain at every single point is 30%. And in order just to help with the graphics,
let's assume our region is really, really thin so that I can draw several copies of the region
on the screen at one time. So here's this long, thin region, and I'll break it down into a lot
of little pieces. And for convenience here, I've just broken it into 10 pieces. But you can,
in your mind, think of breaking it into little square inches and have millions of them. But here
we'll just assume that we have 10 little pieces. And these are so little that either the whole
piece gets rain or the whole piece does not get rain on any given day. Now, suppose that at every
point in this region, there's a 30% chance of rain. Now, what does it mean at each point
over 10 days? What will happen? Well, if the probability at that point really works out,
and let's assume that it does at every point, your prediction is accurate. And if you'd like to,
you can think instead of 10 days that we're doing thousands of days. And so by the law of large
numbers, we expect 30% of them to get rain. So, but we'll just assume it happens in 10 days.
So that means that this point, and I'm going to draw the same region as in 10 different lines here.
And looking at one point, I have that point, and I imagine 10 future days. And at three of those
days, it rains. And notice I've drawn them blue, meaning that it got wet. So that means that this
particular sub area of our region, this little tiny part, on three of our hypothesized 10 days
in which this 30% weather prediction accrued, that on three of those days, it got wet. And then on
these other seven days, it did not. And we assume that that happened at every single point. At every
single point, you can see that if I look at a point in my region, my region is just this thin
region. And I'm imagining 10 future days after our prediction. And if I look at every vertical line,
I'm saying, okay, I have this point of the region. And I'm saying how many days did it get wet? And
you'll notice that I've carefully drawn it so that every vertical bar has three blue days,
meaning that it rained three out of the 10 days on every blue bar. One day, day four here,
it rained every single place. In other places, it rained, like here, it just rained in two out of
the two of our segments. But every vertical bar has three, because we're assuming in this case
that at each point, the probability of rain is 30%. And that over these 10 days, that each point
does get that probability of rain. Well, so what is the average rain over those 10 days? Well, the
average amount of area that gets rained over 10 days is we just sum up the total amount of area
that got rained and divide by 10. Well, since every vertical line here has three blue days,
then we have three times and we have, we've divided our area into 10. So we have 30 blue
segments. So we divide those 30 blue segments by 10 days to get an average of three blue segments
per day out of the total 10 segments in the region. So that's an average of 30% of the region getting
rain per day. So this is the fact that if you have 30% probability of precipitation,
then on average, over time, that 30% of the region will get rain. And by the way, the same thing
works if we did this example where half the region got 40% and half the region had a 20% chance of
rain per region. The same kind of analysis would show you that the number of blue squares that
you fill in, if every vertical column accords with its probability, that is on this side,
four of the vertical things are blue and on this side two, that once again, you'd get the same
number of blue squares in this whole region, 30 out of 100. And so that means that 30% of the region
gets rain on average. Okay. So we've now done two things. We showed the actual definition of
what it means to say there's a 30% chance of rain tomorrow in a region. And we've showed that one
of the consequences of that is that on average, 30% of the region will get rain on average over
many days if the probability of precipitation is 30%. This is a very tricky definition. And many
people misunderstand it. That is the definition of probability of precipitation. It's tricky because
what we're doing is we're taking an expected value of probabilities. We're averaging over
different probabilities over different places. It really is sort of tricky. And one thing that
makes it more tricky is that the official definition is at best misleading. And I would argue actually
wrong. So here is the National Weather Service definition of the probability of precipitation.
It says, technically, the probability of precipitation is defined as the likelihood of
occurrence expressed as a percent of a measurable amount, .01 inch or more, of liquid precipitation
or the water equivalent of frozen precipitation during a specified period of time at any given
point in the forecast area. And then it goes on. Forecaster normally issued for 12 hour time periods.
The salient phrase is at any given point in the forecast area. This definition cannot be true
because if your area has one point in the mountains where there's a higher percentage
probability of precipitation, then another point in the valley where it has a lower percent
probability of precipitation, it cannot be true that the single number gives you the likelihood
at any given point. Now, let me be very clear. The meteorologists at the National Weather Service
are completely clear on the correct definition of probability of precipitation. They don't have
any misunderstanding. The problem is the phrasing of this definition. They don't mean at any given
point. What they mean is that at any random point, at a random point in the region,
but then when you say a random point, you don't mean at any given point, you mean that you choose
the point randomly and then take an average. Well, people have written papers, including
modern papers written in just the last couple years, about the fact that the public misunderstands
the definition of probability of precipitation. But what was disturbing to me is that apparently
the people who wrote these papers weren't so clear about the definition either because here's an
example of a multiple choice test that was given to people to determine how well they understand
the phrase that the chance of rain is 30%. Here are the choices. A. Rain will occur 30% of the day.
B. At a specific point in the forecast area, for example, your house, there is a 30% chance
of rain occurring. C. There is a 30% chance that rain will occur somewhere in the forecast area
during the day. And D. 30% of the forecast area will receive rain and 70% will not.
Now, notice that none of these is correct. Rain will occur 30% of the day. We dispense with that.
That was not correct. B. Is the one that in the paper they said was the correct choice to make,
but it's not correct because you see they misinterpreted the phrasing in the definition
that said at any given point to say, for example, your house, but that is not true because you
house may be one place, some other place is a different place and you have different
probabilities of precipitation. It is simply false that it's saying that at a specific point in
the forecast area, for example, your house, that's just not true. Now, these other ones
aren't correct either. There's a 30% chance that rain will occur somewhere in the forecast area
during the day. That would be a possible definition for 30% chance of rain in a region,
but that wouldn't be a definition that you would want to make. The reason that you wouldn't
want to make that as a definition is suppose you had one place in your forecast area where it always
rained. You know, somehow the plants always caused a little dew to come up and it rained a little
tiny bit every single day, but most of the region had some variability. You wouldn't want to say
there's 100% chance of rain because at one little part there was a good chance of rain.
So that wouldn't be representative of the whole area and wouldn't give the information that you
want to give if you're talking about a whole region. So, C is not correct. D, 30% of the
forecast area will receive rain and 70% will not. Now, actually, D would be correct if instead of
saying will, they would say on average will receive. You see, that's what we proved that on average,
it is correct that 30% of the forecast area on average will receive rain and 70% will not.
However, if you remove probability and you say that 30% actually will receive it,
that is certainly not true because the prediction of rain is a probably inherently
probabilistic matter. People don't know whether it's going to rain or not.
So, it's a probability involved, so you can never interpret it as saying will.
Well, I found this topic to be a fascinating example of where a rather technical issue
associated with probability can really trip up people, and for good reason,
when we read things in every day in the newspaper. What does it mean for there to be a 30% chance
of rain? You have no idea how many hours I have spent talking to friends about this issue,
and it's really, really fascinating. But I'll make you a bet right now, since we're in the
probability game, I will bet a dollar that within five years, the definition, the phrasing of the
definition by the National Weather Service will change because people will, somebody will hear
this lecture and go ahead and change the definition of what it means to say there's a 30% probability
of precipitation. We'll see. I'll look forward to seeing you next time when we're going to talk
about probability as it applies to biological issues. I'll see you then.
