Welcome back. Today's lecture is going to be about probability as it applies to biology.
One of the most basic issues in the biological sciences are to describe how the characteristics
of parents are passed on to their offspring. And the basic concept of genetics is that the
genetic material from each of the parents is randomly combined. That is, part of the
genetic material of the father and part of the genetic material of the mother are combined
to become the genetic material for the offspring. And the offspring then have different traits
according to which material was contributed by the two parents. Since the contributions
from the parents had of a random characteristic to them, the concept of probability plays a
central role in how to predict the characteristics of offspring. In other words, the genetics,
which is the science of inherited characteristics, that genetics gives probabilistic answers
to questions such as how will the offspring be in relationship to how the parents are.
So in this lecture, we're going to be talking about three things. One is we're going to
be talking about the Mendelian model of genetics, and we're going to talk about then genetic
drift and talking about mutations and evolution. So let's begin by just recalling for the
basics of Mendelian genetics, which you all know from high school days. But let me just
describe it in terms of brown eyes and blue eyes. Now, of course, I know that the fact
is that the characteristic of eye color is not determined by a single gene. But for purposes
of this lecture, which is about the probability associated with genetics, it will be. So we're
going to just say that a single gene determines eye color. It doesn't, but let's just assume
that it does. And every gene, such as the one that's going to determine the eye color,
has several different possible variations to that kind of gene, which are called the
alleles. And so you could have a brown allele or a blue allele. And each individual, each
person has two alleles that make up their gene of the eye color gene. And they could
have any of the following types. They could have brown, brown allele. They could have a
brown, blue allele. Or they could have blue, blue alleles. So that's the basic genetic
makeup for each individual under this, again, hypothesis that there's a single gene that
determines eye color. Then there's the concept of dominant versus recessive. Remember that
if either of the alleles in a person's genetic makeup for eye color is brown, brown being
the dominant allele will express itself and the person's actual eye color will be brown.
So in our hypothetical world, by the way, everybody has either brown eyes or blue eyes.
And the genetic makeup of each individual in that gene consists of either a brown, brown,
brown, blue, or blue, blue combination. When we talk about offspring, here is the kind
of a chart that you often see associated with how to determine what the allele makeup will
be for the offspring. Suppose that you have a parent that has a brown allele and a blue
allele, and the other parent also has a brown allele and a blue allele in the eye color
gene. Then each parent randomly contributes either the brown or the blue allele. So if
this parent randomly contributed its brown allele and this one contributed its brown
allele, we would have two brown alleles as the genetic makeup for the offspring. If this
parent contributed a blue allele and this parent contributed a brown allele, then the
offspring would have a brown and a blue allele. But the eye color would be brown because having
a brown allele and brown being dominant means that the eye color is actually brown. Likewise,
in this quadrant refers to this parent's contributing a blue allele while this one
contributes a brown allele, eye color is brown, and only in this quadrant will both of the
alleles be blue and consequently the eye color actually will be blue. So if one has two parents,
each of whom has both of the alleles, then the probability of having a child with blue
eyes would be one out of four. Okay, so this is basic genetics and I think you understand
this. Let's look at it slightly differently, however, and look at it from the perspective
of the whole population. Instead of thinking about two individuals, suppose we have an
entire population of people and these people, some of them have brown, brown alleles for
their eye color, some have brown blue and some have the two blue alleles and are blue-eyed.
And let's just imagine that in the whole population, 60% of the alleles, not the brown
color, but the alleles are the brown alleles and 40% of the alleles in the population are
the blue alleles. And let's imagine that the parents, so there are many ways that this
could happen. For example, it could be that 60% of the people have brown, brown alleles
and the other 40% have blue, blue alleles and that's the way it's distributed. But what
we're going to think about now is suppose that randomly we select a mother and a father
and they randomly come together and mate to have offspring. What percentage of the offspring
will have the different eye characteristics and the different allele characteristics? So
we're looking at it probabilistically in the whole population rather than looking at just
two individuals. So under the assumption that there are 60% brown alleles in the population,
then the probability of choosing a brown allele from the male in the population is 60%, 0.6.
The probability of choosing a brown allele from the female is also 0.6. So the female
population is 0.6. So the way to think about it is that if you have the collection of females
in the population, each female has two alleles. Well, if you randomly choose a female and
then randomly choose which of the two alleles is going to be contributed, every allele in
the whole female population has an equal chance of being selected. So that's why we can say
there's a 60% chance of choosing a brown allele from the female population and a 60% chance
of choosing a brown allele from the male population. So here we have then the probability
of choosing getting a brown from the male and a brown from the female is the product
of 0.6 times 0.6, which is 0.36 or 36%. So that means that randomly choosing an allele
from the males and an allele from the females, if there are 60% brown alleles in the males
and 60% brown alleles in the females, then there will be the predicted percentage is
36%, a brown-brown allele combinations in the offspring, among the offspring. Likewise,
the same kind of computation, there's a 60% of getting a brown allele from the male population,
this column is the males, and a 40% chance of getting a blue allele from the females.
So the product of those two, 0.6 times 0.4 is 0.24, so 24% of the population will have
brown blue alleles by virtue of getting a brown allele from the male contributor and
a blue allele from the female contributor. Likewise, there'll be 24% that also have brown
blue, but this time the brown from the female and blue from the male contributor, and 16%
that is 0.4 times 0.4, is the probability that we'll choose a blue allele from the male
population and from the female population. So that means that 16% of the population will
have blue eyes. Well, notice that this collection of probabilities of these different proportions
of the population that have the different combinations of alleles, notice that the
proportion of the different alleles is exactly the same as it was before. For example, suppose
that there were 100 individuals in the population, then that's a total of 200 alleles, because
each individual has two alleles. Well, there would be 36 plus 36 brown alleles, there would
be 24 more brown alleles here, 24 more brown alleles here, and the total of 72 plus 24
plus 24 is 120. And the number of blue alleles, well there are 24 blue alleles here, 24 blue
alleles here for a total of 48, plus 16 blue alleles, total of 32 blue alleles here, for
a total of 80 blue alleles. So the total number of alleles in the offspring population is 120
of the brown alleles and 80 of the blue alleles, which you notice is in the same proportion
as where we started, 60% are the brown and 40% are the blue. So what this says, and this
is by the way called the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium theorem, it says that if we have a certain
proportion of blue and brown alleles in the adult population and we randomly mix the parents,
then the offspring will have exactly the same proportion of blue and brown alleles. What
this means is that even if you have a recessive characteristic, such as a recessive characteristic
such as blue eyes, you might think that as generations pass, the percentage of blue eyes
would sort of die out. But in fact, the Hardy-Weinberg consequence is that there's a stable percentage
of those recessive alleles. And so what that means is that diseases, for example, that
are rather rare, like the cystic fibrosis disease, that we expect to have a relatively
exact that on average, the percentage of people who have that disease will be exactly the
same over time. Of course, it'll die out if there's a smaller chance of reproduction,
but we'll get to that later. At this stage, we're just saying, assuming that they have
the same percentage of alleles, that is a probability of reproduction, then the percentage
of alleles dominant or recessive will tend to just stay the same over time. And that is
the consequence of the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium theorem. So at this stage, what I have tried
to demonstrate is that there is a constancy in the percentage of dominant and recessive
alleles. What I will now say is that we expect the percentage of dominant and recessive alleles
to change, in other words, exactly the opposite. And the reason is that probability is involved.
So although the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium theorem tells us that on average, that is
the expected value of the percentage of dominant and recessive alleles remains constant over
time, in reality, since probability is involved, there is a chance that the probabilities will
shift a little bit. Well, in fact, the shifting is like a random walk. You see, because when
you have an actual population that randomly comes together, it won't be the case that
the percentage of offspring exactly come out the way that the expected value tells us that
they should. Instead, they'll be off a little bit. In other words, they've drifted a little
bit. And then, the next step, they'll drift a little more. Well, here we've done some
simulations to demonstrate this. So suppose that we start out with a population as we
described before. In other words, it has a population where 16% of the population is
blue-eyed and 40% of the population, that is to say 40% of the alleles are blue alleles.
And as we saw in the previous slide, that means 16% of the population actually have
blue eyes because they have both blue alleles. And then, 60% of the alleles in the population
are brown-eyed alleles. Now, what we're going to do is do some simulations where all we
do is take that situation and have the random generation of children. So here we have a
case where we start out where there are 16% of the population blue-eyed and we randomly
have them combined to make the next generation. Now, we're thinking of an extremely small
population. That is about 25 individuals in the whole population. And look what happens.
In the first generation, instead of having just 16%, it started with 16%, but it went
up to a higher percent, maybe 18%. Then it went down, dipped below where it started.
It went down again, went up a little bit. And you can see, after a few more generations,
it has risen to be now more than 20% of the population is blue-eyed. And now it dips down
again, dips down and up. And you can see it's taking sort of a random walk, varying up and
down, by chance alone. And then after a certain number of generations, in this case, about
50 generations, it dies out and there are no more blue-eyed people. Now, notice that this
simulation has nothing to do with natural selection or survival of the fittest. We'll
talk about that later. But what this is saying is just by random chance alone, the random
walk fluctuations of the percentage of blue-eyed people is expected to change by just randomness.
And in this case, it died out. Let's just look at some other simulations of this same
feature and see what happens. So, here we've done the same simulation again, but we'll
do 20 such simulations and see what happens. In this simulation, sure enough, the blue-eyed
people die out after a few generations. In this simulation, they die out again. In this
simulation, they last for about almost 100 generations before they die out. But look
what happens in this one. In this one, just by random chance alone, the blue-eyed people
take over and there are no more brown-eyed people. So, we have by random fluctuation
and this random genetic drift, which is like a random walk, here's another example where
the blue-eyed people gained in population and pretty soon took over the entire world. Here
they died out. So, in our simulations, we can see this variety of sometimes coming to
dominate the whole population and sometimes dying out. Now, one of the reasons for the
swiftness of these changes is that we're talking about a very small population, namely just
we're talking about just 50 alleles in the whole population, a population about 25. So,
let's, and the genetic drift happens much more slowly when we're talking about larger
populations. So, let's do some simulations of larger populations. Suppose you have a
population of 2,000 people, for example, but we have the same proportion of alleles. That
is, to say, 60% brown-eyed alleles and 40% blue alleles, so that 16% of the population
is blue-eyed. Now, we're going to do the same kind of simulation again and doing these
kinds of simulations where we show the percentage of blue-eyed people, that's the blue part
of the graph, and then the brown graph is the part of the population that is homozygous
brown, meaning that both of their alleles are the brown alleles. Notice in this simulation,
the blue population, the blue-eyed people actually became more numerous than the homozygous
brown-eyed people for a while, and then dipped down, and in fact, at the end, after 10,000
generations, there were more blue-eyed people than brown-eyed homozygous people. Now, of
course, everybody's not blue-eyed as brown-eyed, but more than the percentage of those who are
homozygous brown-eyed. Remember, the percentage of people who are homozygous brown-eyed were
36% to start with, because it was 0.6 times 0.6, 0.6 being the percentage of brown alleles
in the population. Here's an example where the blue-eyed people almost go to zero. Here,
the blue-eyed people do well, but notice this example. The brown-eyed people, in fact, become
completely dominant. That is to say that there are no more blue alleles in the entire population,
so sometimes one of the alleles can actually take over by random chance alone. Now, of course,
one of the most basic parts of the strategy of genetic description has to do with natural
selection, namely that if a certain trait has an advantage in the number of offspring that a person
with that trait can produce, then that trait becomes more dominant over time. And in fact,
we can do some simulations to demonstrate how quickly such a dominance prevails. For example,
suppose that we assume that each blue-eyed parent, that is a person who has both the blue
alleles, has an extra child at each generation. Now, of course, that's a huge advantage to think
of one extra child when we're assuming that there's an average of two children per parent. So this
would be a very strong competitive advantage in offspring if one were blue-eyed. So under that
assumption, which is the kind of assumption made in evolution, although not to that extremity,
by the way, but the concept is the same, that certain traits have an advantage in reproduction,
then look what happens to our charts. The blue alleles very quickly take over the entire population.
And so in all of these simulations, that's what we would observe when we allow the blue-eyed
people to have such dominant, such an advantage in their offspring. Well, so this is one of the
features that makes natural selection and the theory of evolution work. So genetic drift, however,
has nothing to do with natural selection. It's just a result of our understanding of what to expect
from randomness. Well, there are other ways in which genetic material changes. There are other
ways in which genetic material changes, and that is through mutations. One way that genetic
material would change is if you have a particular part of the gene, and it might be hit by cosmic
ray, for example, or maybe in the transcription of that genetic material from as it's replicated,
maybe an error occurs, and you have a mutation. Now, one can experimentally observe the probability
with or estimate the probability with which a single section of non-essential DNA mutates.
There are some parts of DNA that don't seem to do much, and so those are good parts to observe
to see whether the rate at which mutations happen. And so one can estimate the probability that such
a segment of DNA will have a mutation. Then we can ask ourselves the question, for a given segment of
DNA, what's the probability that after why years, it will never have had a mutation? So p is the
probability that it does not mutate in one year, so p times p times p times itself the number of years
is the probability that it will not mutate over y years. So p to the y is the probability of having no
mutations in this section of DNA for y years. Well, if we have many sections of DNA that we look at,
and we say, okay, the probability of this section, it has p to the y of no mutation, and this one p to the y
of no mutation, this one p to the y of no mutation, then by, it's like the law of large numbers,
if you have a lot of sections, you expect that the fraction of the sections with no mutation to be equal to
the probability of no mutation. In other words, we would expect that the fraction of the sections with no
mutation would be about p to the y after y years. So on average, if you had two different individuals
that started many, many generations ago, and years past, and there are many generations that occurred, you would
expect the two individuals who had a common ancestor many generations ago, and then no further influence,
you would expect them to have approximately the same number of segments that had no mutations in these segments
of non-essential DNA. Well, you could make an estimate then for how many are different, I mean, how could you tell
if they're different? Well, some of the segments are the same, so you would say, you would guess that those were not
cases of common mutation, so you can estimate how many segments actually do observe mutation by comparing the
different organisms, and taking that fraction of the sections that have differences in the two individuals, we can
estimate that the average number of sections that are different should be counted to be about two times the probability
of getting a different mutation after y years. Now, by the way, all of this is a very simplified version of what
really happens, but the point I'm trying to make is only this, that if you have a, you can compute an expression
that associates observations of DNA and individuals living today with a number that contains things that you know,
the number P, which is something that you can deduce from observation, and then the y that you don't know.
The y is when did these two individuals have a common ancestor? So what we can then deduce from this is we can figure out
what y is to make this equal the observed fraction of different segments of DNA that we observe in these two individuals.
This kind of reasoning allows us to deduce when the most recent common ancestor of us all lived, and the answer is that doing this
kind of probabilistic interpretation and inference, we can conclude that the most, that the common female ancestor of all living
humans today lived about 150,000 years ago. So I've given a style of the argument, but of course the details are simplified,
but it gives you a flavor of how we can make such a deduction as this number of years in the past where we had a common ancestor.
I want to conclude this lecture on a different note, namely to talk about the question of universal testing for HIV.
This is an issue that comes up and it has an interesting probabilistic aspect to it that I think we might want to discuss.
If you give a test to an individual, there's a certain chance that that test is correct and a certain chance that it gives a false positive.
Some of the tests that exist today have the property that about 1% of the tests give a false positive, meaning a person who doesn't have HIV would be tested as having HIV.
And some of the tests are about 95% correct for people who have HIV. That is to say that a person who has HIV will get a positive test 95% of the time.
Well, if we do a little bit of arithmetic, we can ask ourselves the following question. Suppose that you went in to take this test,
a random person goes in to take the test and everybody in the country takes the test, and you got back a positive result.
How would you feel? What's the probability that you would have HIV?
Now, it sounds like what I've said is that you have a 99% chance of having HIV because only 1% of the time when you have a person who fails to have HIV would the test come out positive.
But let's look at the numbers and the numbers tell a different story. Suppose that we estimate the population of the United States at about 300 million,
and of those about 500,000 people actually are HIV positive.
Well, of the 500,000 who are HIV positive, 95%, which is 475,000, 90% and 5% of the time, the test will say that they have it.
In other words, 475,000 tests would say correctly that that person has HIV.
That means that there are 299,500,000 people who do not have HIV, but of those, 1% will get a positive test result inaccurately.
But 1% of this huge number, 299,000, is 2995,000 people will get a false positive on their test.
So that means that the total number of positive tests that were received would be the 475,000 correct positive tests,
plus the 2995,000 false positives for a total of 3,470,000 positive tests.
Of those 3,470,000 positive tests, only 475,000 people actually have the disease.
So when you receive a card saying your test came out positive, in fact the probability that you actually have the disease is only 475,000 divided by the 3,470,000, which is less than 15%.
So this is an example of a sort of probabilistic anomaly that is an artifact of giving universal testing where you have a rare disease and a significant possibility of getting a false positive.
In the next lecture, we're going to be talking about applying probability to the world of finance. I'll see you then.
