No course on probability could possibly be complete without a discussion of two of the
most famous examples of counter-intuitive probabilistic scenarios.
The first one we're going to do is the birthday problem, and then we're going to do the let's
make a deal Monty Hall question.
So we'll start with the birthday problem.
So here's the question for you.
You go into a room and there are 50 random people in the room.
Now you know that every one of these people celebrates a birthday on some day of the year.
So they have 366 possible birthdays on which to celebrate their birthday.
What's the probability that out of these 366 possible birthdays that two people in the
room will just by accident have the same birthday?
Will celebrate their birthday on the same day of the year?
Well, at first it seems that that's rather unlikely.
There are 366 days and only 50 people in the room.
What are the chances that two of them would have the same birthday?
Well, I often teach classes that have about 50 people in them.
And when I do this, the very first day of class, before the students know me very well,
I make a bet to them and I say, I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
I don't know you, but I'll make you an even bet.
I'll bet a dollar and somebody come down and bet a dollar and we'll just make an even
money bet.
If there are two people in the room with the same birthday, then I win your dollar.
And if there aren't, then you can have my dollar.
And you see, I'm showing them how generous I am because I'm giving them a dollar when
this, you know, and only 50 people in the room out of 366, how generous can you possibly
be?
And I might say that later in the semester, this doesn't work so well because after a few
bets that they discovered that they always lose the bets and then they change their mind.
It works the first day and maybe you can earn some money on this yourself if you try this
because it turns out that if you have 50 people in a room, that the probability that two of
them will have the same birthday, instead of being a rather rare occurrence, actually
happens 97% of the time.
It's almost certain that two people randomly selected, that two people will have the same
birthday, not choosing two people randomly, but among those 50, two of them will have
the same birthday.
Well, why in the world would it be the case that with only 50 people in a room, the probability
of their having at least one pair of people with the same birthday is so high, 97%.
Okay, so what we need to do is to think and to figure out exactly how to compute that
probability.
The first principle that we're going to use is the fact that either two people in the
room or more have the same birthday or everybody in the room has a different birthday.
Those are the two possibilities, right?
Either at least two have the same or they're all different.
It turns out that the probability of computing, the challenge of proving that all 50 have
different birth dates is a much easier problem to do, so what we're going to really compute
is the probability that all 50 birth dates are different and then one minus that gives
the probability that at least two are the same, because that's the alternative.
Remember on the very first lecture we talked about that, that one of those two things is
going to happen and if we know the probability that they're all different is something, then
the probability that there's at least two the same is one minus that.
So how do we compute the probability that all the people in the room have different birth dates?
Well, this is the way we do it.
We take the first person, we bring them up, we say, what's your birthday?
And they give us their date, you know, April 3rd.
And then we say, okay, we'll take the next person in the room and ask ourselves the question,
what's the probability that that next person has a different birth date from this first person?
Well, the answer is that there are 365 days of possible birth dates.
We're going to put February 29th in there as a possible birth date.
And to assume that they're equally likely, even though of course February 29th isn't really,
but for the sake of argument, we'll assume all 366 possible days are equally likely.
What's the probability that the second person has a different birth date than the first person?
Well, the answer is 365 out of 366.
Okay, now having accomplished those two being different,
what's the probability that the third person has a birth date different from both of those other two?
Well, this third person can't have either the first birth date, April 3rd,
or that second birth date, which let's say is March the 2nd.
Let's suppose that those are the two birth dates we got.
Well, the third person has to have a different birth date.
So the third person's possibility is only 364 out of 366.
So then we take the fourth person.
What's the probability that that fourth person is going to have a different birth date from all of these other three?
Well, they have a smaller number of possible birth dates to choose from that would be different.
So their birth dates have to be among 363 unused birth dates divided by 366.
So the product of all of those probabilities because all of them have to be true.
So the 365 out of 366 times the second person is okay.
And then the probability is only 364 out of 366 that the third one is okay.
That is different from the first two.
And only 363 over 366 that the fourth one is okay.
And you work your way down to the 50th one.
Now the last ones in the list have probabilities of only 319 over 366.
And then the second to the last 318 out of 366 and the last one 317 out of 366.
So although each one individually is very likely to have a birth date different from everybody else,
the product of all of those numbers is going to get very small.
And in fact, if you just multiply them out, just take a calculator and multiply them out,
you'll see that that product of all those 50 numbers, 49 numbers, is .03.
50 numbers if the first number is viewed as 366 over 366, by the way.
So the probability of there being all different is the product which is just .03.
It's a very small number.
Therefore, the probability that two people have the same birth date is 1 minus that, which is 97%.
Now this seems like sort of counterintuitive, but it's true and you can actually verify it.
The fun thing is that you can verify it.
Just think about groups of 50 people and just see that almost always they have, in fact,
at least two people have the same birth date.
For example, let's look at the presidents of the United States.
There aren't quite 50 of them, but if you look at all the different presidents of the United States,
there are pairs of them that have the same birth date.
Namely, Polk and Harding were both born on November 2nd.
Isn't that interesting?
And then we can look at death days.
It turns out that Fillmore and Taft both died on March 8th.
And three people died on the same day.
Adams, Jefferson, and Monroe all died on July 4th.
Now that's probably not just an accident.
There's some psychology involved there, but this is an example to show you.
We can look at vice presidents.
Vice presidents.
If we look at the vice presidents, there was one triple of vice presidents that all were born on the same day.
Now here they are.
Hannibal Hamlin.
You remember, I presume, Hannibal Hamlin.
I don't think somebody named Hannibal will be elected very soon in the United States, by the way.
But Hannibal Hamlin was born on August 27th, as was Charles G. Dawes.
Also born on August 27th.
And so here's the name we actually know.
Lyndon B. Johnson was born on August 27th.
So there it is.
Here's some other famous examples of groups of about 50, and we see these accidents.
The same birthday, Best Oscar Award winners, Ben Kingsley and Anthony Hopkins were both born on December 31st.
And there were same death days.
Humphrey Bogart and Peter Finch both died on January 14th of their years.
And of course, many people are still alive, so that's even more rare.
In fact, let me just show you a chart to show you the probabilities when we have fewer people or more people in the room.
If you have 90 people in the room, your chance of having at least two people with the same birthday is 0.999993.
So it's essentially certain, if you have 90 people in the room, that at least two of them will have the same birthdays.
And you can see the chart.
You're still at 99.99% for 80 people in the room, 99.9% for 70 people in the room.
99% still for 60 people in the room.
97% for 50 people in the room.
When you get down to 40, it's 89%.
30 still has a 70% chance, 71% chance of having two the same.
And the break-even point is 23 people.
At 23 people, you have a 50-50 chance, an even chance, roughly, that at least two of them will have the same birthday.
So this is, I think this birthday phenomenon is really interesting, and it's something that you can literally do at home.
Do at home.
So this is great fun.
Well, so that is the first, and I would say the most famous counterintuitive probability example is this birthday problem.
And it's great.
Let's go on to the next one that is also extremely famous and really wonderful to think about.
And this, it has to do with a game show that used to be on that was called Let's Make a Deal.
And Let's Make a Deal had a host whose name was Monty Hall.
And the way that Let's Make a Deal worked was this.
Monty Hall would have this whole audience full of people, and they'd be dressed up in costumes.
You know, like somebody dressed up like a raisin and somebody dressed up like a superhero and so on.
And he would say, he'd pick somebody and say, come on down, and they'd come on down.
And on the stage were three doors.
Door number one, door number two, and door number three.
And Monty Hall would say, contestant, there are three doors here.
And behind one of these doors is a beautiful pink Cadillac with these fins in the back.
And it's a gorgeous thing.
It's probably a convertible.
And it's just great.
If you have that, you'll be happy the rest of your life.
Monty Hall.
So, and the contestant is really excited.
Yes, that's what I want.
That's behind one of the three doors.
And behind the other two doors, there are other things not quite as desirable.
One is a mop, and one is a bucket.
You say bucket and mop.
So, those are behind the two other doors and Cadillac.
So, Monty Hall says to the contestant, contestant, would you rather take the thing that's behind door number one, door number two, or door number three?
And so, the contestant ponders this question.
Of course, they're all closed.
He doesn't know which one it has.
So, he's pondering this question, and the audience is helpfully giving advice.
Go for one, one.
Go for two, two.
Go for three, three.
And so, finally, the contestant says, okay, okay.
Thank you, Monty Hall.
Monty Hall, I'll take door number two.
And Hush follows over the audience in door number two.
So, Monty Hall says, I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
Before you make this final, I know you chose door number two, but I'll tell you what I'm going to do.
I'm going to open one of the other doors.
And silence reigns, and Monty Hall, carefully says, I'm going to open door number three.
And so, Monty Hall opens door number three, and behind door number three, it's a bucket, a bucket.
Ah, sigh of relief.
But of course, Monty Hall knows where the car is, and Monty Hall will never open the door with the car.
That's against the rules.
So, Monty Hall never opens the door with the car.
He knows where it is, so he chooses one of the doors that does not have a car.
So, now there are two remaining closed doors.
Door number two, the original choice of the contestant, or door number one.
And Monty Hall says to the contestant, contestant, contestant, you know, if there's a raisin, Mr. Raisin,
you say, would you like to stick to your original gas, door number two,
or if you'd prefer, you can now switch to door number one.
And now, once again, the audience gives helpful advice.
Switch, switch, stick, stick, switch, switch.
And so, the contestant is battling in a, you know, paroxysm of indecision.
Should I stick? Should I switch? Should I stick?
And so, the contestant says, I'm going to go with my gut.
I'm going to go with my original feeling.
I'm going to stick to door number two.
And so, door number two is opened, and what's behind door number two?
A mop. A mop. Very sad. It's a mop.
Now, okay, the contestant is dejected.
And so, what I'm going to tell you now is that the contestant made a mistake.
The contestant should have switched.
You see, the contestant thought there were two closed doors,
and so that it was equally likely that the car was behind either of those two closed doors,
that it was a 50-50 chance, a 50% probability of being behind two closed doors,
so it didn't matter.
So, the contestant went with his gut, the first feeling, and therefore lost the car.
Now, in fact, it's not the case that the probability is 50-50.
In fact, the probability is two-thirds that the car is behind the door that he would get by switching.
Now, the contestant would get by switching two-thirds, not 50-50. Let's see why.
When the contestant made the original choice of three doors,
the contestant had a one-third chance of correctly guessing the door that had the car.
We all agree with that, right? There are three closed doors, randomly choose one.
The probability is one-third that the contestant chooses the correct door.
Well, that's the same thing as saying that there's a two-thirds probability that the contestant chooses the wrong door.
Right? There's a two-thirds probability that the car was behind doors number one or three,
behind one of those two doors.
But after Monty Hall opens one of those two doors, what happens?
Well, if the contestant switches, the contestant will definitely get the door,
by choosing the door with the car.
In other words, all the contestant had to do to win the car should the contestant choose to switch,
is to have guessed wrong on the initial guess.
You see? So that's a way to see that the probability of winning if you switch is two-thirds.
Okay? So let's do it one more time to make sure because this is quite counter-intuitive
to think about the possibility that there's a difference in probabilities.
So let's think about it a different way.
In fact, let me just illustrate this to drive it home a little bit.
Let's do a slight variation on the Monty Hall game.
Suppose instead of just three doors, suppose Monty Hall had say a million doors on stage
and the car was behind one of those million doors.
Okay? And the contestant comes up and Monty Hall says,
well, what door would you choose?
And the contestant says, well, I would like door number 623,447.
Okay? So Monty Hall says, oh, fine.
Provisionally, hold that door, keep that door closed,
and then Monty Hall opens every other door except for one other door.
Okay? So he opens 999,998 doors,
leaving only door number 123,247 closed.
Okay? Now, don't you feel that the chance of coming home with the car
and if you were the contestant and you randomly picked this door number 623,447,
maybe, if that was the door that you originally picked,
you can't have felt very confident that you were going to drive home in a pretty Cadillac
because there's only one in a million chance that that would happen.
But then after Monty Hall opens all of these other doors except for one,
he's pointing the direction to the place that actually has the Cadillac behind it.
You see? And so you're much better off switching than to stick to your original guns.
Now, in the case of the million doors, it's more obvious than in the case of 3,
but the principle is exactly the same.
As long as you miss the guess in your first guess,
then if you switch, you will definitely win the Cadillac.
And your probability of missing on the first guess with the 3-door situation is 2 out of 3.
And therefore, you'll win.
Okay, so this is the famous Let's Make a Deal problem with the Monty Hall problem.
And this became famous because it appeared in the Maryland Vos Savante column a few years ago.
And there was such people wrote in and said,
oh, I can't believe that you should switch and stick and so on,
that switching makes any difference.
And they wrote these long letters and there was a big controversy.
In fact, even some mathematicians wrote in claiming that it didn't matter if you stuck or switched.
And so this made a splash and there was lots of controversy.
But what I'd like to do in order to make this a little bit different to show you some variety
is let's do the same problem but with a slight variation that might be somewhat intriguing.
Suppose the variation is the following.
Instead of having three doors, suppose that once again there's one big prize, a Cadillac, behind one of five doors this time.
So we'll have five doors on stage and there's one Cadillac behind one of the doors.
And the contestant once again comes up and chooses one of the doors at random.
But in this instance, Monty Hall chooses to open two of the unopened doors,
not the one that was selected by the contestant, but two of the remaining four doors,
neither one, of course, containing the Cadillac.
Now, the contestant could either stick to the original guess
or the contestant could choose one of the two remaining closed doors other than the door that was originally selected.
You follow me?
So let's be specific.
Suppose that the contestant first chose door number two.
And then Monty Hall opens doors number one and five.
So that leaves three closed doors, two, three, and four.
What's the probability that the contestant will drive home in a Cadillac if the contestant first sticks to the original guess
or switches to either door number two or to door number three?
Well, let's think about it.
By the strategy of analysis that we did before, I think we'll be able to figure this out quite clearly.
So when the contestant first made the initial guess of door number two,
that contestant had a four-fifths chance of being wrong.
Okay, so four-fifths of the time the Cadillac will be behind the other doors other than door number two.
Now, Monty Hall opens two of the other doors.
In this case, door number one and door number five.
So that means that among the two remained closed doors other than door number two,
there's a four-fifths chance that the Cadillac is behind doors number two or three.
Because, you see, there was a four-fifths chance that the door was something other than two.
And now Monty Hall says, well, it's not behind one or five, basically.
He's giving information when he opens up doors number one and five.
So that means that the Cadillac is either in door number three or four with probability four-fifths.
See, it's a little tricky.
So there's a four-fifths chance that it's behind one of those two doors.
So if you switch, what's the probability that you will get the car?
Well, there's a two-fifths chance that it's behind door number three,
a two-fifths chance that it's behind door number four,
and a one-fifths chance that it's behind door number two, your original gas.
So you double your probability of getting the car by switching.
So you can do all sorts of variations on the Monty Hall problem.
So this is the famous Monty Hall problem.
Okay, so this has illustrated some really,
I think these are delightful examples of probability questions.
Now I'm going to do another one that comes up in real life, which is in playing tennis.
Suppose that you are playing tennis or watching tennis,
and you're watching two people play tennis,
and of course the server, when the server is serving, has an advantage,
because for good tennis players, serving is quite an advantage in most cases.
So suppose that we get to deuce in a game,
and maybe we're watching at Wimbledon or something, and the players get to deuce,
and we're asking ourselves the question,
what is the probability that the server will eventually win the game?
Well, let's assume that when the server is serving,
the server has a probability of 0.6, 60%, of winning any individual point
in which the server is serving.
So the server has a better chance of winning than the receiver, 0.6.
And the question is, after you've gotten to deuce,
what is the probability that the server will win the whole game?
Well, this is a rather tricky question,
and the reason it's rather tricky is because there are really infinitely many things that could happen.
Namely, you could start at deuce, it could be that after just two points, the game ends.
Either the server wins the next two points,
by the way, for those of you who don't play tennis, let me explain
that when you're playing tennis, and in order to win a game of tennis,
if you get to, if both players get three points,
then you get to what's called deuce, and you have to win the game by two points.
So that means that in order to win, either the server has to win two points,
or the receiver has to win two points in order to be ahead by two.
Or if the server wins one, and then the receiver wins one, then you get back to deuce,
or vice versa, the receiver wins one, and then the server wins one, you get back to deuce,
and start again. That is, you have to continue until one of the two players
wins both the points and wins the game.
So the problem with it, the reason that this is a real challenge,
is because it looks like an infinite question.
It's an infinite question because there are infinitely many things that could happen.
You could come back to deuce once, you could come back to deuce twice,
you could come back three times, four times, five times.
And so in order to compute the probability that the server wins,
it looks like you have to do infinitely many things.
You'd have to first say, what's the probability that the server wins after just two points?
What's the probability that it gets to deuce, and then the server wins?
What's the probability that it gets to deuce twice, and then the server wins?
And that would be an infinite series.
And by the way, you could solve this problem using this infinite strategy.
But there's a very clever way to do it that makes this a finite problem
instead of an infinite problem.
And that is the following.
Here's the way you look at it.
The probability that the server will win in exactly the next two points
is 0.6 times 0.6.
Because remember, we're assuming that the server has a 60% probability of winning any individual point.
And so the probability of winning two in a row is the product
of winning the first one times the probability of winning the second one.
So that's 0.36.
Well, what's the probability of returning to deuce?
Well, there are two ways that you could return to deuce.
The server could win the first point, which happens 0.6% of the time,
not 0.6% of the time, 60% of the time, or with probability 0.6.
And then the receiver wins with probability 0.4.
Or the receiver could win the first point and then the server could win with 0.6.
So the probability of coming back to deuce, there are two ways to do it,
either the server wins than the receiver or the receiver than the server.
And their respective probabilities are 0.6 times 0.4, which is 0.24,
plus 0.4 times 0.6, which is again 0.24, for a total of 0.48.
In other words, just under 50% of the time, you'll return to deuce after two points.
Now, here is the clever strategy.
Instead of going on with an infinite series, the strategy is the following.
You say, okay, let P be the probability that the server will eventually win the game.
That is some definite number. There's some probability that the server will win.
And you can break it down into two possibilities.
Either the server will win in just two points, and that happens with probability 0.36.
Alternatively, the game could return to deuce, which happens with probability 0.48,
and then after returning to deuce, the probability that the server wins the game is P again.
So altogether, then, the probability of the server winning would have to satisfy this equation.
Solving for this equation dividing by subtracting 0.48 P from 1 times P gives 0.52 times P,
and that is equal to 0.36, dividing by 0.52 gives a total of 69%.
So that means to say that the probability of the server winning is 69%.
You notice that it's higher than the probability of winning in any individual point.
So this is an example where you can take what appears to be an infinite process
and condense it down to a finite one.
Now, I want to leave you, I think that the teaching company courses lack homework problems,
and so I'm going to leave you in this lecture with another famous probability problem
that for you to ponder, and that is the following thing.
Suppose that you have three sock drawers, three drawers, and in the drawers you have socks,
and in one drawer you have two blue socks, and in the other drawer you have two red socks,
and in the third drawer you have a red sock and a blue sock.
You follow me?
So these are, maybe this isn't the way you'd arrange your socks having three of each color,
but that's the way it works.
But you don't know which one of the three drawers has those various arrangements of socks.
So what you do is you stand in front of the drawer, and you open a drawer,
and you reach into the drawer and randomly pick out a sock, and that sock is red.
Now, question.
What is the probability that the other sock in the drawer is also red?
So let me summarize this one more time.
Let me say it one more time so you make sure that you understand the problem well,
and you can work on this yourself, and you can simulate it if you want, by the way,
by taking just like three cans and putting a red and a blue thing,
and two blues and a red and a red, and then mixing them up and reaching in.
So let me just say it one more time.
You've got three drawers.
One drawer, but you don't know which has two blues.
One drawer, you don't know which has two reds, and one drawer has a red and a blue.
You randomly choose a drawer, reach in and pick out a red sock.
What's the probability that the other sock is red?
This is a little bit surprising, and I look forward to your working on it,
and I hope that you will too.
In the next lecture, we're going to look at another very famous example
in probability theory that's also counterintuitive,
and so I'll look forward to telling you about the problem of having
two children who are boys in the next lecture.
I'll look forward to seeing you then.
