Welcome back. In most of the earlier lectures, we've been thinking about probability as interpreted
as a fraction of successes in a series of identical experiments or trials that we undertaken.
A paradigmatic example has been that we think about taking a die and we roll it and we ask
the question, what's the probability that the die will come out to be a four? And it's
one out of six because if we roll the die many times, about a sixth of those times the
die would come out to be a four. Well, this basic view of probability is called the Frequentist
Probability, Frequentist Probability, because it's talking about the frequency with which
a repeated event happens. But there's another sense in which we think in terms of probability
that measures really a quite different kind of phenomenon. And so we sometimes wish to
use probability to express in some sort of a quantitative way the degree to which we
believe something. So for example, I'll give you an example that might make this a little
bit clearer. Suppose we are thinking about who wrote Hamlet. Now, of course, most people
think and most of us believe that Shakespeare wrote Hamlet. But we've heard the stories
about the possibility that somebody other than Shakespeare actually wrote the Shakespearean
plays. And so we might express our confidence that it's almost certain that it was Shakespeare
who wrote Hamlet by saying that there's a 98 percent probability that Shakespeare was
the one who wrote Hamlet, but that there's some probability, some chance that somebody
else wrote it. Well, if I say that, then you'll have a sense of how strongly I believe that
Shakespeare was indeed the one who wrote Hamlet, but that there is at least some possibility
that someone else might have actually been the author of Shakespeare's plays. Well, when
we say that there's a 98 percent chance that Shakespeare wrote Hamlet, notice that we're
making a kind of a statement that is a statement about the strength of our belief of something,
but it is quite a different kind of statement from the frequentist statement about the probability
of rolling a four when we roll a die. Namely, when we say there's a 98 percent chance that
Shakespeare wrote Hamlet, we certainly don't mean anything like the following. We don't
say, we don't think to ourselves, well, if a hundred Shakespeare's were born, 98 of
them would have written Hamlet. We don't mean that. That's just silly. That's not what
we mean. So we really have two kinds of situations in which the same word, probability, is used.
And one is a measure of the strength of our belief in something. It expresses, in a quantitative
way, our sense of uncertainty about the different ways in which the world could be.
Now, so in this lecture, we're going to be talking about taking this phenomenon of life,
that is, of expressing our level of uncertainty, and we're going to make it clear. We're going
to say, okay, what do we really mean by expressing and using probability as an expression of
the degree of belief? So let's try to be very clear on what that means. Well, so what it
means is that we have in our minds some collection of potential states of the world. And for
each state of the world, we have a sense of the relative probability, the strength with
which we think it might be in this state or that state or the other state. So in other
words, we assign to each possible state of the world a probability. That is, the probability
that that state is, in fact, the way the world is. And if we want to clarify this concept,
we would want to make sure that the sum of the probabilities of the different alternatives
adds up to 100%. If we've listed all of the possible states that the world could be, then
we want our sense of belief to be distributed so that the probability is 100% that one of
them happens, but we just don't know which one. Well, let me give you a common situation
in which this exact kind of thing occurs. Namely, you go to a doctor and the doctor says,
oh, it looks at you in a cursory fashion at first and says, well, given your symptoms,
it could be one of three diseases, A, B, or C. And then the doctor can say, now, I don't
know which of those three could be, but I would say there's a 50% chance that you have
disease A, you have a 40% chance that it's disease B, and a 10% chance that it's disease
C. So you see that that statement gives a sense of the idea of what the possible states
of the world are, and gives a quantitative statement about what the strength with which
the different possible states of the world are actually the true state. So what we're
going to do in this lecture is then try to explore the concept of how to formalize this
a little bit, and then how evidence is used to change our sense of the certainty of the
different parts, different potential states of reality. Okay, so let's begin this discussion
then with a specific example to really ground our discussion. So let's imagine that we
come up to a stream, okay? We come up to a stream, and when we arrive at this stream,
we say to ourselves, well, in this stream, we don't know anything about the fish in
the stream. And let's suppose we're asking ourselves the question about what fraction
of the fish in the stream are trout. Now, before we come up to this stream, we're completely
ignorant, and we say to ourselves, I have no bias about what fraction of the fish that
are in the stream are trout. It could be between 0 and 10%, it could be between 10 and 20%,
20 and 30%, 30 and 40%, and so on, with equal probability. So this is before I've collected
any data, and I have complete ignorance about trout and so on, I have no bias. I'm completely
agnostic as to the percentage of trout in the stream. So now what I'm going to do is
I want to express that complete doubt by drawing a chart of what I mean by that. So here's
what I'm going to say. I consider that I have 10 possible hypotheses as to the percentage
of fish in the stream that are trout. And instead of saying between 0 and 10%, let's
just say 5%, 15%, 25%, 35%, and so on up to 95%. So those are the 10 possibilities that
I'm considering for the percentage of trout in the stream. And I could summarize my agnosticism
on this point by just saying that the probability of any one of those 10 is 10%. There's a 10%
chance that there are 5% of trout in the stream, 15%. There's a 10% chance that there
are 15% trout in the stream, 10% that there are 25% trout in the stream, and so on. And
so if I wanted to draw a chart to describe this, a histogram, the way I would describe
it is this, that these are the potential states of the world, that is the potential
fraction percentages of trout in the stream. And each one, I'm ascribing a probability
of 10% to each one of those possible states of the world. So at this stage, I have a description
of my sense of uncertainty. And I've specified my sense of uncertainty by saying that I have
an equal view that every possibility is equally likely. Well, now, suppose that I get some
evidence. In other words, I fish. I cast the line and I catch a fish and then I catch another
fish and I catch another fish. And suppose in doing that, I catch first a trout, then
I catch another trout, and then I catch a non-trout. Well, now I have evidence. And so
my opinion about the state of the world that is expressed as a probability of being a 5%
stream or a 15% stream or a 25% stream or a 35% stream, and by that I mean 35% of the
fish in the stream or trout. My beliefs now have altered because I have some evidence.
You know, two out of three of the fish I caught were trout. So that leads me to say, well,
it's probably more apt to be the case that I have, that the stream contains a higher
percentage of trout than a lower percentage of trout. But can we be very specific about
how that evidence alters our distribution of beliefs in these 10 possible states of
the world? Well, yes, we can. We can be very specific. And this is what I'm going to do
is to show you how that evidence can be used to update our distribution of our sense of
uncertainty, our distribution of the probability of the different states of the world. Let's
be specific about how we can use the evidence to update our distribution and get a new distribution
of the probabilities of the various states of the world. See, this is interesting because
what it is, is it's sort of specifying something that we do in everyday life. In everyday life,
we may very well have cases where we don't really know exactly the way the world is,
but when we get evidence, it alters our sense of proportion about how strongly we believe
something is true or something else is true. And this is making it very precise. Okay,
so let's see how we would use this evidence of catching trout, trout, non-trout to update
our probabilities for the different potential percentages of trout in the stream. Well,
the way that we're going to do this is we're going to do a thought experiment. And the
thought experiment consists of imagining that we have 10 different universes, one for
each hypothesis. So we have one universe in which this stream contains 5% trout. And then
we have this other universe in which the stream contains 15% trout. And then we have another
universe in which it contains 25% trout, another with 35% trout, and so on. We have 10 universes.
And now we imagine that 10 million fishermen are going to fish in these universes, one million
fishermen for each of these hypothetical streams. And because what we're doing is we're imagining
this in order that we can compute the experience of all those fishermen to see how many of
those fishermen would catch trout, trout, non-trout in their various streams. So let's
go ahead and do the arithmetic that explains this. So here we go. So we've proportioned
these 10 million fishermen one million per stream. And the reason we proportioned them
that way, by the way, was because this is expressing our sense that we don't know which
stream is the correct reality about the percentage of trout in the stream. And therefore, we're
putting a million for each one to make it even. Okay, now here we go. Each fisherman
catches three fish, and we want to know how many fishermen among these million fishermen
in the 5% stream, or lake, how many of those million would we expect to catch first a trout,
then another trout, then a non-trout? Okay, well, if you're in a 5% stream, then of those
million fishermen, you'd expect 50,000 of them to have caught their first fish be a trout.
Because you see, in general, only one out of 20 fish that are caught would be a trout.
So the first fish caught by these million fishermen, only 50,000 of those would have
caught a trout first. Of the 50,000 who catch a trout first in this 5% stream, only 5%
of them will catch a trout the next time also. Well, 5% of 50,000 is 2,500. So that's
the number of fishermen among the million fishermen at the 5% stream, only 2,500 of
them would catch trout then another trout. And then, of those 2,500 who caught first
a trout then a trout, only 95% of them will catch a non-trout the next time. Because remember,
we're assuming at this particular stream that only 5% of the fish are trout and you're
randomly taking them. So that means that 2,375 fishermen would get a non-trout on the third
time. So in other words, the hypothesis that these million fishermen are at the stream
that contains only 5% trout yields the result that 2,375 fishermen would catch a trout,
and then a non-trout. So all we're doing is looking at this hypothetical world. Now,
what we're going to do is, of course, do exactly the same thing for all the hypothetical
streams. In other words, at the 15% lake, it's going to be a different computation but
the same style. Because in the 15% lake, 15% of the fishermen will first catch a trout
instead of 5% in the 5% lake. So 15% catch a trout the first time, and then 15% of those
catch a trout the next time, and then 85% will catch a non-trout the third time. And
doing the arithmetic, we see that 19,125 fishermen will on average catch a trout-trout non-trout
in the 15% lake. Well, we just repeat this analysis for every hypothetical lake in the
entire possibilities of those 10. And in doing so, we actually have a chart, it was
pretty boring, but we have this chart that actually has computed exactly how many of
the million fishermen in each of the hypothetical 10 universes, how many of them would catch
trout-trout non-trout? And here are those numbers. Now notice that in the 65% lake,
stream, the hypothesized 65% stream where 65% are trout, 147,875 fishermen of the million
would have caught trout-trout non-trout. You see? So there are many more who would have
caught it who were in the 65% stream than who would have experienced that particular sequence
of fish catching in the 5% stream. Well, now, our goal is to update our beliefs. The way
we do that is we first total up the total number of fishermen among these whole 10 million
hypothetical fishermen, how many of them experienced the trout-trout non-trout fish
catching? Well, that's just the sum of these numbers, which is 837,500 fishermen among
those 10 million caught trout-trout non-trout. And of those, 2,375 were in the 5% stream,
19,125 were in the 15% stream, and so on. So for every stream, we can see what fraction
of the fishermen who experienced trout-trout non-trout were in the various streams. For
example, there were 2,375 out of 837,500 were in the 5% stream. That's the proportion
of the total number of fishermen with that experience who were in the 5% stream. And
likewise, 19,125 out of that number were in the 15% stream. That allows us to summarize
the new view of the world, because what we did is we were able to then calculate, let's
go to this table here, we're able to calculate, given that we have the evidence of catching
two trout and one non-trout, and we did it in all of these streams, we now see that the
fraction of the fishermen who caught trout-trout non-trout in the different streams gives us
the probability that we were in those different streams. You see? So here we go. Let me summarize
our strategy for how we update our belief system. The first thing is that we started
with an a priori assumption. And in this case, our a priori assumption before we caught any
fish was that each of the 10 hypotheses were equally likely. Then, given that we catch
two trout and then one non-trout, we calculated the probability that the hypothesis of being
in the 5% stream is correct. And that probability was 2,375 out of 837,500. And then we calculated
the probability that the hypothesis of being in the 15% stream was correct. And we computed
it, 19,125 out of 837,500, and so on. And so this gives us the probability of the streams
being the different streams, 5% stream, 15% stream, 25% stream. These then are the probabilities
of actually being in the different stream. In other words, we've updated our belief as
to what the distribution of possibilities of the world are. And now we have this new
chart that shows that we much more strongly believe that the number of trout in the stream
is much more likely to be a 65% stream or a 55% or 75% stream than it is to be a 5%
stream. So now the summary of the Bayesian procedure. So what we've just demonstrated
is the concept of Bayesian probability. We start with an a priori estimate of the probability
of each hypothesized state of the world, we gather information, and then we update our
probability estimates getting an a posteriori estimate. Now, what we're going to do is
now look and see, oh, and by the way, I should insert here that Bayes is, the Bayes is the
Bayesian probability is named after Thomas Bayes, who lived from 1702 to 1761, and he
was a Presbyterian minister and a mathematician. And so he is the one for whom Bayes' theorem
that we met in the last lecture is named and is associated with this strategy of updating
our belief system. Now, suppose that we catch more fish, and I will spare you from going
through the details of how we do the updating, but let me just tell you what happens. If
we catch now another trout and then another non-trout, we do exactly the same thing, except,
well, we do almost the same thing, except instead of imagining that we have our 10 million
fishermen are evenly distributed, a million fishermen per lake, in order to do the next
updating, we imagine that the fishermen are distributed according to our new concept of
the probability. In other words, we have in our next view of updating, we have a lot more
fishermen who are starting to fish in the 65% stream than are fishing in the 5% stream,
because our new a priori distribution has now a new bias. It's no longer agnostic and
no longer believes that it's even, we have evidence that changed our sense of the possibilities.
So after we apply the same techniques, having caught another trout and non-trout, we have
updated our beliefs and we get a slightly different shaped chart. And so if we summarize
our progress, we started with our original agnostic belief, we got evidence, it changed
to this shape, we got more evidence, catching another trout and another non-trout, we got
this shape, and then in general, if we continue to catch fish, we'll continue to update our
probability. And as we catch more fish, the evidence will dominate over our initial estimate
of our uncertainty. In other words, our initial guess will play a smaller role as we get more
and more evidence. This is reflecting the law of large numbers, that as we get more
evidence, it's going to be more compelling than our initial guess was. And let me just
demonstrate this by showing what happens if we catch 13 trout and 7 non-trout, then the
probabilities of being in a 5% stream or 15 or 25% stream become very low, and most of
the probability is centered here. If we continue to catch 26 trout and 14 non-trout, and by
the way, we're catching them in proportion of about 65%, just to demonstrate the effect
on our probability distribution as we catch more trout that are in the probability that
is indicating that it's a 65% stream. So after we've caught, after we've caught here 100
fish, 65 of which were trout and 35 were non-trout, then our estimate of the probability
that the stream is the possible percentages of trout in the stream, we have very strong
belief that it's a 65% stream, but there's still a 10% chance that it's a 55% stream
and maybe a 06% chance that there's a 75% stream. Okay, so this is the basic stream
strategy of Bayesian probability. So the two philosophically different views of probability
are the frequentist view in which probability is defined in terms of a long run frequency
or proportion of outcomes in repeated experiments versus the Bayesian probability view, which
is the view in which probability is interpreted as a measure of the degree of belief. And in
this view, the concept of probability distribution is applied to a feature of a population to
indicates one belief about possible values of that feature, even though just one of those
is actually true. Well, let's do the same strategy in a medical example, because this
is a place where it really comes up in actual practice. So suppose that you go into a doctor's
office and you talk to the doctor and the doctor has an initial guess about the possibility
of the different diseases you may have. So it's the example I talked about before. The
doctor feels that you have a 50% chance of having a disease A, a 40% chance of having
a disease B, and a 10% chance of having a disease C. That's after an initial examination.
Well, now after taking a more, you know, tests or a more thorough examination, a new symptom
is discovered. Let's call it S. Well, this new symptom has, because of the experience
of the doctor, the doctor knows what percentage of people who have disease A exhibit that
particular symptom. So this is the conditional probability of S given A. That means that
among people who have disease A, what fraction of them have the symptom S? Well, suppose
that for disease A, only 10% of people who have disease A have that exhibit that symptom.
And 30% of those who have disease B exhibit that symptom. Well, 80% of those who have
disease C exhibit that symptom. Well, we have more evidence now. And that evidence can
be used to update our initial guess of the probability. So what we do is exactly the
same thing as with the fish. We say our initial probability was 50%, 40%, 10% probability of
disease A, B, and C respectively. So we imagine 10,000 patients who came to the doctor with
the symptoms that you had when you went to the doctor. So among those 10,000, 5,000 would
have disease A, 4,000 would have disease B, and 1,000 would have disease C. Now, we use
the fact of the probability of showing symptom S. Well, 10% of those who are imagined to
have disease A would exhibit the symptom S. That's 500. 30% of those who have disease
B of the 4,000 who are supposed to have disease B will exhibit the symptom. That's 1,200 patients.
And 80% of those who have disease C would exhibit the symptom. That's 800 patients. So of these
10,000 patients who were distributed according to the initial estimate of the probabilities
of these diseases A, B, and C, we now see that of those, a total of 2,500 patients will
exhibit the symptom S and they will be distributed according to this fashion. In other words, 20%
of those will have among the 10,000 patients that we imagined to have been distributed
according to our a priori estimate of what disease that person had. 20% of the total
who also had symptom S would have actually had disease A. 48 would have had disease B
and 32% would have had disease C. So, what that has done then is it allows us to update
our probability of which of the diseases actually is the correct one. So, what we have seen
then is that the concept of having an a priori distribution about what the reality of the
world was and then getting additional evidence allows us to update that our concept of what
the possibilities are. And in the case of medical studies, this is exactly, and medical
diagnosis, this is exactly what we see when we watch the TV and they say, let's look at
the differential diagnosis. What they're saying is if we have a patient who might have disease
A, B, or C and then we find a new, we do a test that has a new symptom, we say, well,
boy, if that patient had disease B, there's less of a chance that it would have shown up
as it does. So, in this medical example then, we can exhibit it with a new histogram showing
how the old histogram is related, here's the old histogram, and we see that in the old
histogram A was the dominant possibility and that would be the disease for which you would
be treated, whereas after finding symptom S, we see that B has now become a 48% chance
of being the correct disease and C, in fact, now is more probable even than A. So, this
is an example of the philosophy of Bayesian probability. What I really like about this
whole subject is that it captures our concept of how we learn and how we have an impression
of the way the world is and that by learning, the evidence is used to modify our impression.
But then in Bayesian probability, we're very specific about saying, well, let's actually
write down what probabilities, first of all, what the possible states of the world are
that we're considering and what probabilities we ascribe to each of those different states.
In the next lecture, we're going to be talking about a conundrum of probability involving
two envelopes that presents a sort of a paradox of expected value that brings up intriguing
possibilities. I'll look forward to seeing you then. Bye for now.
