Lecture 5, The Conveyor Belt of Working Memory.
In the previous lecture, you learned most of what there is to know about our sensory
memories.
Now, those forms of memories do keep information alive, but only for very brief amounts of
time.
They're really all about allowing us to function well in the present, and they do that by ensuring
that we don't miss some bit of critical information while we're attending to something else.
In effect, they allow us to move our attention from one sense or one thought to another in
a smooth way, almost as if we move our attention to where that sense was when it grabbed our
attention.
Now, when you started watching this course, you probably didn't even know about sensory
memory and didn't think about it as a memory system at all.
Well, the next memory system we're going to talk about is called working memory.
And again, it's a memory system that you might never have thought about when you thought
about human memory.
But as you'll see, it plays a really critical role in nearly everything we do.
In fact, it's so important that William James actually called it primary memory while he
referred to everything that we now call long-term memory as secondary memory.
Now, of course, we've discussed working memory a little already in both the first and the
second lectures.
Remember the how high could you reach sitting on a camel?
Well, when I discussed that example before, I was using it to show how working memory
can be used to kind of bring together all sorts of information with the goal of solving
some new problem.
Because it seems kind of strange to think of working memory as a memory system in the
same sense that it would be kind of strange to think of your car as a form of furniture.
Sure, you can sit and relax in your car.
It certainly can serve as furniture if that's what you wish, but a car is so much more than
just furniture.
Similarly, working memory is so much more than just a memory system.
In fact, working memory may literally be that part of our mind that we are most familiar
with, the part where we seem to exist and interact with our mental worlds.
Memory is who we are in a lot of senses, but working memory is who we are right now.
Now that includes everything from whatever specific information we are holding in our
mind to how we are managing our attention.
And brain studies have shown that many areas across the cortex can be activated in support
of working memory depending on the specific task, and especially the prefrontal cortex
may be involved in maintaining attention and managing distractions so that working memory
can be more effective.
So let me give you another example of working memory to make its general power more apparent.
Let's suppose that you grew up in a detached house that you think of as home.
If no house comes to mind in that sense, think of some other relatively small building that
you know well, maybe a close friend's home.
Okay, so now pay attention to what happens in your mind as you answer the following question.
How many windows does that house have?
Try to come up with an exact answer.
Okay, so what happened?
Well, you likely experienced the sort of mental recreation of that house.
That house was somehow retrieved from your memory and rebuilt in some visual form.
You were able to then inspect it, not only inspect it, but even do things like walk
around it, looking at the various walls, counting the number of windows.
This example shows the rich processing that is possible using our working memory.
The specific process that you were using as you walked around the house is something that
psychologists call the visual spatial sketch pad.
It's that part of working memory that deals with visual elements.
It can work with numbers, it can work with words, it can work with images.
If you've ever done mental math, then you're probably using that visual spatial sketch pad
to do that.
While working memory is indeed powerful, and it's really a general purpose system, our
focus here, and especially in this lecture, is how it contributes to memory.
And in this respect, it actually has two functions.
First, working memory is a memory system that can keep information from fading away for short
periods of time.
It can hold on to information.
And it's in this respect that it sometimes has been labeled short-term memory.
But for this course, I'll stick to the more general label of working memory.
I think it's just more appropriate.
Second, as we already discussed when talking about mnemonic strategies, working memory
is also used to store information in long-term memory, making that information available
to us long after the original experience.
So working memory is both a memory system and more in and of itself, and it is also
the gateway for putting things into long-term memory.
In this lecture, we will focus on working memory as a memory system in and of itself.
So let's begin with a really simple example to let you literally feel your working memory
while working.
Unless you are driving, you may actually want to pause this recording right now to grab
some paper and a writing implement, because we're going to do a few experiments in today's
lecture, and occasionally you might want to write things down if you want to play along.
OK, so for this first experiment, I am going to read out a list of words, then I will pause
for a little while, then I will say, go.
Using just your mental powers, try to remember the words, keeping them in your mind until
I say go, and then tell me what you remember.
So you can write it down if you like, or you can just speak out loud what you remember.
I'll give you some time to think about it.
All the while, of course, pay attention to what's happening in your mind.
OK, so are you ready?
Here comes the list.
Boat, justice, speaker, keyboard, cloud, pink, mankind, carpet, hollow, thrill, and
OK, go.
If you need to pause for a little longer, go ahead and do so, but I'm going to go ahead
from here.
So how many items did you remember?
Well there were ten items altogether, and chances are that you remembered between five
and nine.
I'll get back to that in a minute, but for now, what was happening in your mind as you
tried to remember the words?
For the most part, it probably felt something like this.
The very first word I read was boat, and when you heard it, you probably began repeating
it to yourself, boat, boat, boat.
Then I read justice, and you likely repeated boat, justice, boat, justice, boat, justice.
I said speaker, boat, justice, speaker, boat, justice, speaker.
Now at some point, I had read too many words for you to continue stringing them all along
and repeating them all, so you probably just did what you could at that point.
Eventually, when I said go, you likely still had the last few items echoing in your mind.
Those items would have been carpet, hollow, and thrill, and they would have been in your
echoic memory.
Then you had to wait in silence during the pause, and during that time, you likely continued
to repeat words to yourself, but perhaps now the words may have been these latter words
given that they were freshly heard, so maybe you were saying carpet, hollow, thrill.
Now of course, a few other items might also have been in there, all of them being repeated
in your mind as though you were kind of reading to yourself.
When I finally did say go, whatever words you're repeating to yourself are the first
to be remembered.
Then you probably stopped and thought about others, and at that point, probably the items
from the beginning of the list came to mind.
They were repeated quite a lot, at least initially, so you likely remembered the last few items
in the list, some of the first items, and then maybe one or two from the middle of the list.
Okay, given all that, let me remind you what the complete list was, and you can see which
items you recalled and where they were in the list.
So the complete list was boat, justice, speaker, keyboard, cloud, pink, mankind, carpet, hollow,
thrill.
Now, maybe my description that I just gave didn't perfectly match your subjective experience,
at least in terms of the very specific items that you ended up repeating.
What I presented to you was the typical description people give, but of course people always differ
a little from that typical description, but we are individuals after all.
But I can say with pretty much virtual certainty that you did repeat words to yourself and
that you did hear some internal voice doing that.
Previously, I mentioned that one of the processes that Working Memory uses is that visual spatial
sketchpad.
Well, it has other processes that it uses too, and another one is called the phonological
loop.
Phonology is a word that refers to the sound of a word, literally.
So the phonological loop refers to the process we use to speak to ourselves within our mind,
and that's what you heard as you tried to remember those words.
By speaking the words over and over, as you did, you were able to keep them alive in memory,
at least for a little while.
It's kind of like every time we speak the word, we breathe a little life into it, keeping
it active in Working Memory and keeping it available to be recalled.
One really fascinating aspect of all of this is that a skill that we usually use for external
communication, spoken language, also has an apparent internal analog.
We use it to speak to ourselves.
We see this in small children all the time, but it's true of adults too.
In fact, in one really interesting study, a psychologist performed the same sort of experiment
that we just did, but he did it with congenitally deaf participants, participants who communicate
with one another using American Sign Language.
I'd like to demonstrate that to you, but unfortunately, I don't know American Sign
Language.
However, when those participants were trying to keep the words in mind during that pause,
they produced muted versions of the sign movements they would use when they were normally speaking.
So your quiet inner voice was their muted hand signals.
So what this suggests is that humans seem to rely on their language abilities when trying
to remember items in Working Memory, but the exact way that they do that depends on the
way that they usually use language.
So now you've felt your working memory in action.
Now let's talk about some of its characteristics as a memory system.
First, we talk about working memory as keeping information alive for a short period of time.
I told you that often it was called short-term memory, but just how short?
Well, this is one of those questions where the answer is, it depends.
I said above that each time when you read a word to yourself, it's essentially as though
you were breathing life into that word, keeping it alive for another few minutes.
Given this, if I gave you a really short list of words to remember, let's say eggs, bread,
tomatoes, and cereal, if you kept repeating those words to yourself, you could indeed
keep them alive pretty much forever, so much for short-term.
Now, of course, the problem is you wouldn't be able to do much else except walk around
repeating those words to yourself.
The system that you use for thought would be totally occupied, and therefore it would
make it impossible to think about anything else.
In fact, the main reason things leave our working memory is because we often can't help
but think about something else, and when we do, the repetition stops as we think about
other things.
The items that we had in working memory are replaced by these thoughts.
Working memory is really a very fragile form of memory.
It's easily disrupted by other events that try to capture your thoughts, and this fragility
is what makes it successful as a memory system only over very short intervals.
That's why it's called short-term memory.
How about another quick demonstration that will hopefully help me illustrate this fragility
to you?
I'll read another list, but this time, when I pause, we won't all just be silent.
Instead, at the end of the list, I'm going to give you a two-digit number, and what I
want you to do is, beginning with that two-digit number, count backwards by threes, allowed.
For example, if I gave you the number 48, you would say 45, 42, 39, 36, and just keep
doing that until I say, go.
Once I say, go, then try to remember those words.
Of course, all the while, I would like you to be introspecting.
Notice what's happening within your working memory.
Here comes the list.
Kick, corn, police, heavy, fresh, grill, jump, sick, break, whisker, 77, 74, 71, 68, 65, 62, 59, 56, 53,
50, go.
Once again, feel free to pause the tape if you need more time.
I'm going to go on.
So how did you do this time?
Well, critically, I expect that you were called far fewer items.
Which items did you remember?
Well, I suspect you remembered the first few items on the list.
Once again, let me remind you of the list.
The list was kick, corn, police, heavy, fresh, grill, jump, sick, break, whisker.
So why was this so much harder?
Well, in order to count backwards by threes, you need to use the phonological loop.
And that means it can't be used to keep repeating the items in your mind.
Without repetition, the items fade from memory.
By the way, you can also do this experiment with deaf people.
If you literally hold their hands after presenting the list, then they can't use them to sign
the words to themselves.
And they also can't remember as many.
Without signing, their memory also fades.
Now, the experiment we just performed was originally performed by Peterson and Peterson
in 1959.
They found that if you make people count backwards by threes during the retention interval, that
is, the time between when you end the list and when you give the cue to recall, then
the correct recall of a short list of items drops from 90% when recall is immediate to
under 50% after just three seconds of counting.
After 12 seconds of counting, recall is below 10%.
So when rehearsal is prevented and when one must use their phonological loop and therefore
their working memory for the backwards counting task, things disappear from working memory
quite quickly.
Now, of course, this raises the next obvious question.
How do things disappear from working memory?
Do they simply kind of fade the way we talked about for sensory memory?
Or do they get pushed out of working memory by the new information that comes in?
Now, this latter notion, the notion of getting pushed out, is sometimes described as analogous
to a conveyor belt.
So imagine a conveyor belt moving from right to left.
As the words come in, they are put on the belt.
But then as each new word comes in, we shift the words over.
So a given word keeps moving across the belt.
Now, of course, this belt can only hold so many items.
So if we load too much up, then things will start falling off the end of the belt.
In the case of that backwards counting experiment, the notion is that you load the words up when
they are read.
But then when you start counting, you need to hold on to some information to do that
task.
So for example, you need to know the number you are on so that you can count backwards
from it.
Then you need to know the number you get once you count backwards, et cetera.
So you're loading now these numbers onto the conveyor belt, which pushes some of the words
off the other end.
If we load up enough numbers, then there are few or maybe even no words left.
They have all fallen out of working memory.
OK, it's a nice analogy.
But how can we really tell if it's right or whether maybe items do just decay?
Well, it turns out it's not an easy question to answer, but most of the evidence favors
that conveyor belt notion I just explained to you.
So for example, consider the following experiment.
Participants are read a list of words.
Some of these words begin with the letter B. When a word beginning with a letter B is
presented, participants are asked to recall the previous word that began with a B. And
one of the variables that we manipulate is how many items occur between each of these
B words.
So how many intervening items are there?
Now as you might expect, performance decreases when there are more intervening items, which
makes sense according to the conveyor belt notion, because each time a new item comes
up you have to pay enough attention to it at least to know if it starts with a B. So
you have to put it on the conveyor belt.
The more items you put on the conveyor belt, the more likely that that previous B item
will have fallen off by the time you have a new one.
But of course, it also kind of fits with decay theory, because the more intervening items,
the more time that passes.
So it could just be that over time that previous B item has decayed.
So how do we know which one's correct?
Here's where the interesting twist comes into the experiment.
Sometimes the words are read at a rate of 1 per second.
But sometimes they're read at a rate of 4 per second.
I don't even know if I can do 4 per second, but it would be like this.
So they come really fast.
So after 8 intervening items, for example, in the 4 per second condition, only 2 seconds
have passed.
But in the 1 per second condition, 8 seconds have passed.
So if time is what matters, there should be less decay in the 4 words per second condition.
And that should show through as a higher recall performance.
However, the decline in recall that we see as a function of intervening items is in fact
very similar across those two conditions.
And this really suggests that time is not the important factor.
Rather, it's all about the number of intervening items.
So that kind of result really supports the conveyor belt notion.
And in a more general sense, it supports that idea I'd already suggested to you that working
memory can hold on to something until something new pushes it out.
All right.
So we know that we can use the phonological loop to keep items alive.
And if we don't, then they will leave working memory.
We're pretty sure that's because something is pushing them out.
The sort of conveyor belt notion.
Now what's implied by all this is that working memory can only hold so much that there is
some sort of limit to the number of things it can work with at a given time.
Now this raises some obvious questions.
What is this capacity?
Can it be increased?
And is the capacity of my working memory really important to my ability to function in daily
life?
Well, in the first experiment that we did, the one at the very beginning of this lecture,
you may recall that I read 10 words and then there was just a silent retention interval.
I then told you to recall the words and I predicted that most of you were called between
five and nine items.
Where did that prediction come from?
Well, a researcher named George Miller did a very famous experiment where he really
well, a number of experiments, he did that experiment we described over and over with
many different people.
And what he found is that on average, people would remember seven plus or minus two items.
So there's my five to nine item range.
In fact, following his famous title, this capacity of working memory is now often described
as the magic number seven plus or minus two.
So I suspect that for most of you, your memory fell within that range, five to nine items.
For those of you who remember 10 items, fantastic, consider yourself doing very well.
So is this capacity of working memory important?
Well, I can tell you this.
Across a number of studies, a person's working memory capacity has been shown to correlate
very well with their intelligence and with their success in life.
And if we think about it, this really makes a lot of sense.
I mean, if working memory is the system we use to kind of combine information from all
sorts of sources with the goal of solving some problems, it would make sense that a person
that can work with more information might end up with richer solutions.
Any time you make a decision, the more information you can bring into the decision, the more
accurate we would expect your ultimate decision to be.
So yes, indeed, it does seem that the capacity of working memory is important.
Well, can we increase the capacity of our working memory then?
Well, here's another one of those yes and no answers.
In a sense, you can.
You see, when Miller said we could remember seven plus or minus two items of information,
he also pointed out that not all items are created equal.
That is, if one is clever, it is possible to chunk, and I'll get to that word chunk,
several bits of information into a single item.
So those seven items may actually reflect more than seven bits of information.
Let me give you an example.
Imagine I gave you the following list of numbers to remember.
Seven, four, seven, one, four, nine, four.
So seven numbers.
Most of you could likely hold all seven numbers in your working memory, but it would likely
be a challenge.
Now think of those numbers in the following way, and it becomes trivially easy.
Big plane, two years after Columbus.
Big plane, 747.
Two years after Columbus, 1494.
1492, Columbus sailed the ocean blue.
Two years after would be 1494.
So what was originally seven numbers has become two chunks of information.
Big plane, two years after Columbus.
When Miller said we could remember seven plus or minus two, he meant seven plus or minus
two chunks.
So by chunking information effectively, one can hold on to more information.
So let's consider this notion of chunking in the context of that first list that I asked
you to remember.
Just to remind you, that list was boat, justice, speaker, keyboard, cloud, pink, mankind, carpet,
hollow, thrill.
If we think about them that way, that's ten items.
But we could combine the items in pairs and turn it into five items.
Let me show you.
Let's just go through the words.
Let's start with boat and justice.
Boat and justice.
Okay, so we might think of a judge on a boat, and we try to remember that image.
And we try repeatedly seeing that image in our visual spatial sketch pad, just as we
repeated a word before.
Cool.
Judge on a boat.
Got it.
Now, how about a keyboard with an embedded speaker?
Think about that.
Got it.
Then, well, a pink cloud.
Those two are easy.
Excellent.
Judge on a boat, keyboard with a speaker, pink cloud.
So far, so good.
Now, some vague notion which we can only kind of see as a mankind.
And he's laying on a carpet.
So mankind on a carpet.
Okay, sounds like something out of CSI.
Ah, and a hollow thrill.
Hollow thrill.
Well, that sounds like an excellent BB King song.
The thrill is gone.
All right.
So we got a judge on a boat, keyboard with an embedded speaker, a pink cloud, a mankind
on a carpet, and BB King singing hollow thrill.
Poof.
10 items are now five.
And it's relatively easy to keep five items in mind.
That's the idea of chunking.
So yes, the capacity of your working memory is indeed important, but with some work, it
is possible to effectively increase the capacity of working memory.
Increase it beyond the points that are normal for you.
Now, does this sound familiar at all?
It might remind you of the lecture on mnemonics.
In that lecture, I pointed out that with some work, you could increase the accuracy of your
long-term memory, and clearly there's a relation here.
To give you a taste of this, let me tell you about the following.
There are actually memory competitions, national memory competitions, and international memory
competitions.
Competitors in these competitions are given a range of memory tasks, all of which seem
really, honestly, very ridiculous, but they can do them and they can do them well.
One of these tasks, for example, requires the competitors to memorize the order of cards
in 10 shuffled decks.
So they have 10 decks that are shuffled, and they have to memorize the order of cards,
and they have to do this in an hour or less.
How is this possible?
First of all, it is possible.
They do it.
Well, the way the competitors do that is they first take each card in a deck, and they associate
it with three different things, a person, a verb, and an object.
Kind of like the way I used a routine in the mnemonic lecture, but it'll be a little different.
So they remember these aspects, though, prior to the competition, and these stay constant.
These cards have these person, verb, and object associated with them.
Then when they're in the competition, they take three cards and chunk them together.
So for example, when 23-year-old Grand Master of Memory, Edward Cook, saw a three of hearts,
a nine of clubs, and a nine of spades, to him that would conjure up an image of Brazilian
lingerie model Adriana Lima in a Bigel's Byplane shooting his old public school headmaster
in a suit of armor.
How's that for a nice bizarre image?
Well, bizarre and interesting.
So he's condensed the three cards into one chunk, an enormous chunk, but still one chunk,
and that frees up space in his working memory.
He obviously is making heavy use of bizarre imagery to ensure transfer to long-term memory.
So this relation between working memory and long-term memory, that's going to form the
basis of our next lecture.
Before going there, though, here are the things I hope you got from this lecture.
What we call working memory is actually a collection of mental processes that allow
us to work with information, often with the goal of solving some problem.
However, these same processes can also be used to keep information in mind for a brief
period of time.
Doing so is effortful and it's prone to interference.
Anything that pulls the mind away from rehearsing the information will bump things out of working
memory.
Working memory is also limited in capacity and that limit seems to determine how richly
we can think about things.
The limit can be increased by chunking information, so that's really the amount of information
per se.
It's the number of chunks, really, that sets the limit for working memory.
If you got all that, fantastic lecture.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
