Lecture 6, Encoding, Our Gateway into Long-Term Memory
Clive Waring was a very successful musician, a conductor, and a singer.
He married the love of his life, and apparently he was a very happy and friendly soul.
Unfortunately Clive had herpes simplex.
Now usually that just causes rashes and sporadic sores, but occasionally it can give rise to
infections, infections of the brain, and that's what happened with Clive.
Clive's infection, in fact, was so severe it resulted in damage to both his frontal lobes
and part of his midbrain called the hippocampus, and both were damaged quite dramatically.
Clive survived the infection, but he was a very different man thereafter.
When Clive describes what it's like to be Clive, he says things like the following.
Do you know that moment when you first wake up and you see everything around you and you
slowly realize who and where you are?
Well, that's what it's like for me all the time.
In fact, he keeps a journal, and in that journal he will write the time, and then he writes
something like, I'm now awake for the first time today.
Two minutes later, he crosses that out, writes a new time, and says the same thing again.
He literally lives in an eternal present.
Now, Clive is extremely lucky.
He has a devoted wife who loves him very much.
In fact, if there's one image that really captures the reality of what it's like to
be Clive, it's perhaps the following.
Each time his wife leaves the room, he forgets she exists.
But somehow, when she returns, he does recognize her, but he simultaneously feels like he cannot
remember the last time he saw her, almost as if this is the very first time he's seen
her.
So he embraces her, as we might embrace a loved one that we haven't seen for years.
And when you see it, it's very loving and very warm.
The problem is, he does this over and over again each day, every time his wife leaves
his sight.
So what did this infection do to Clive's brain?
What caused such a dramatic change?
Well, as we will discuss at a number of points in this course, the hippocampus plays a critical
role with respect to the transfer of information from working memory to long-term memory.
The damage to Clive's hippocampus has created a serious problem.
In the previous lecture, I told you that working memory plays, in fact, two roles related to
memory.
First, it can hold information itself using the phonological loop or the visual spatial
sketch pad, and our last lecture discussed working memory from that perspective.
But in addition, it also provides at least one gateway for information to enter long-term
memory.
That is, often, when we process things in working memory, they can find their way into
long-term memory.
Now for Clive, thanks to the damage to his hippocampus, that gateway was closed for good.
Other than the transfer to long-term memory aspect, his working memory seems largely intact.
But as soon as his working memory gets pulled to some new information, some new stimulus,
whatever was in it prior is gone.
Clive shows us what life would be like if information from our working memory was in
fact never transferred to long-term memory.
As his example shows, clearly this transfer is critical to how we live and who we are.
In this lecture, we will be focusing on this critical gateway function of working memory.
In a general sense, the process that gets information from the external world into our
long-term memory is called encoding.
That is, we somehow encode the experiences we have into our memory, allowing us to consciously
relive those experiences later.
Of course, that's in the case of episodic memory, and it also helps us transfer information
to semantic memory, and in that case, we just have the information.
Now, we've already discussed the role of working memory with respect to encoding when we discuss
mnemonic strategies.
In that case, the main point was that if the information was deliberately organized and
if effective associations were formed and maybe dual coding was used, then it would be much
easier to recall that information from long-term memory later.
However, most of our memories did not go through such deliberate encoding, and yet they do
still get successfully stored in long-term memory.
How does that happen?
Well, in this lecture, we'll flesh out this gateway function of working memory in a much
broader way, leaving you with a much more well-rounded notion of why certain experiences end up more
memorable than others.
In the last lecture, I read you 10 words, and I asked you to recall them after a brief
retention interval.
When you did, I suggested that you likely recall the first few words on the list and
the last few words on the list, but perhaps only one or two from the middle of the list.
I was basing that prediction on something called the primacy and recency effects in recall.
That is, it's generally true that people remember the beginning of things and the end of things
especially well.
Their better memory for the beginning is called the primacy effect, and their better memory
for the end is called the recency effect.
For example, in one study, participants were given a list of 15 items to remember.
After a brief retention interval, memory for the first three items was in the 25-30% range.
Memory for the middle nine items was down in the 15-20% range, and memory for the last
three items was up again in the 25-40% range.
So the first three items and the last three items were recalled much better than the middle
nine.
This is one of those findings that has actually found its way into the popular culture.
If it's true that people remember the beginning and end of things better, then if we're creating,
let's say, a movie or a play, and if we hope to gain some promotion via word of mouth, then
we'd better make the beginning and the end of that movie or play especially good.
A really pointed example of this were the early James Bond movies.
At that time, many movies began by rolling credits, showing credits of who was going
to be in the movie and such, but not James Bond movies.
They tended to start right away with an action sequence.
No story, no character development, just fast skiing downhills or jumping out of airplanes
and lots of guns.
Nice exciting beginning, dramatic beginning.
This is the way to maximize the primacy effect, and it's a method that's now quite common
in all sorts of situations.
Start strong, end strong, because the beginnings and endings are remembered best.
And even though most people don't watch the closing credits, you may have noticed that
some movie makers are even trying to spice up their closing credits too, trying to take
advantage of that recency effect.
Now, in the scientific context, the primacy and recency effect has been used to provide
convincing evidence for this distinction between working memory and long-term memory.
The general idea goes like this.
As the list is read, people begin to repeat the items to themselves using working memory.
The first few items will be the ones they repeat most.
So those are the items that spend most of the time in working memory.
And if working memory is really the gateway to long-term memory, then those initial items
have the best chance of getting through the gate.
The last few items are still in a Koic memory when the list ends, and so they can be quickly
transferred into working memory and then rehearsed until the recall prompt is given.
So they are well recalled because they are still in working memory at the time of recall.
In fact, when most people recall items, the first ones they recall are the items from the
end of the list, the recency effect, and then they start to think.
This thinking usually results in the first few items of the list coming to mind.
And that's theoretically again because those first few items had the best chance to make
it into long-term memory.
Now, that's a bit of a complicated story.
How do we know it's true?
Well the evidence that favors this account comes mostly from what are called dissociations,
experimental manipulations that affect one component of the memory effect, but not the
other.
For example, remember when we did that counting backwards by three's experiment during the
retention interval?
Well, if you do that, then the recency effect often disappears, but the primacy effect remains.
So you still remember those first few items, and that's of course because those are the
items that are supposed to be in long-term memory.
But the recency effect was supported by items still being in working memory, and when you're
using your working memory to count backwards by three's, it's no longer possible to hold
those items.
This dissociation also occurs in the other way as well.
If you read items more slowly, this does not affect the recency effect, but it increases
the primacy effect.
It makes it stronger.
Why?
Well the slower presentation rate magnifies the differential practice for early items
on the list.
You can get more practice in during those longer times.
So the more they practice, the longer the item is in working memory, and the better
the chance that these multiply repeated items will make their way into long-term memory.
And so if primacy effect reflects that long-term memory, that's why you see the stronger primacy
effect.
So taken together then, these findings support this distinction between working memory, which
is what's responsible for the recency effect, and long-term memory, which is responsible
for the primacy effect.
And that was very important early in science for establishing the distinction between these
two memory systems.
In addition, these findings also clarify how rote memorization works.
Remember Ebbinghaus?
Well, rote rehearsal does get things into long-term memory, but it's also prone to quick forgetting.
That is, all forms of rehearsal really are not created equally.
When you just repeat items to yourselves in working memory, that form of rehearsal is
what's called maintenance rehearsal.
It's a way of maintaining the item in working memory, but it really doesn't promote a strong
transfer to long-term memory unless a lot of repetitions are performed.
That's exactly why rote memorization is often referred to as drilling, kind of like a military
drill.
For repetition to be effective, one must drill the information into one's head by hearing
it over and over and over.
If however one thinks deeply about the information instead, and if we elaborate it on some way
then even if we elaborate in a simple way, the transfer to long-term memory can be much
stronger.
So for example, let's return again to the list I presented at the beginning of the last
lecture.
And to remind you, that list was boat, justice, speaker, keyboard, cloud, pink, mankind, carpet,
hollow, thrill.
Now instead of associating those words with a second list of mnemonic cues as I did in
that second lecture, I could instead do something a little quicker.
I could just associate them with each other and kind of make a story out of them.
Okay, so let's do this.
Alright, so there was this boat that sank, which represented a sort of justice because
the captain had mounted a huge speaker that would amplify every click of his keyboard.
The boat sank when a cloud that happened to be pink rained down a hail like it had never
been seen by mankind.
So thick that it left a carpet of hail on the water, leaving me feeling a somewhat hollow
thrill.
Alright, so there's the 10 words in a story, weird I know, but you get the sense.
I am elaborating on the information, connecting it together in some way, and this sort of
elaborate rehearsal leads to better transfer to long-term memory, better encoding.
Another way to make this distinction between maintenance rehearsal and elaborative rehearsal
is in terms of depth of processing.
Items that are processed more deeply are subsequently remembered better.
And deprocessing can sometimes be even simpler without a whole lot of elaborative rehearsal.
For example, imagine we present a list of words for people to remember, and we're going
to do so in two different conditions.
In one condition, I simply ask them to look at each word and note to themselves how many
vowels are in that word.
That's a very what we call shallow encoding.
You're just looking at the structure of the word.
Now in another condition, we just ask them to categorize each word as good or bad.
Now that good versus bad sounds innocent enough.
It sounds like an easy decision, but it actually can really produce deep encoding in a very
simple way.
So for example, imagine that one of the words on the list was rust.
In the vowel condition, someone would just say rust, one vowel.
That's the depth of their processing.
However, in the good versus bad condition, most people would probably think something
like this, rust.
And they would imagine some car with rust all over it that looked ugly, and they would
say, ooh, rust is bad.
Well, what do we have?
We have an image there, and we know imagery is good, right?
I myself might think a little differently.
I might say rust, oh, Neil Young's live rust album, hey, hey, my, my, rust is good, I like
that album.
Now, the point is it doesn't matter whether a person ends up thinking of rust as good
or bad.
What matters is that they tend to form stronger associations, maybe with images or even with
songs in their head.
So that good versus bad categorization is a really easy way to encourage deep processing,
and it will almost always lead to better memory than will a more shallow task like thinking
about how many vowels a word has.
What's more, it's fast and easy, perhaps the fastest way to enhance memory is just on the
fly like that.
All right, so we've been talking about deep encoding a lot.
And now I want to talk about some other factors that can affect the likelihood of us remembering
something that we have encoded.
Have you ever had the experience of returning to some place that you hadn't been to for
a long time, maybe your old school or something like that?
And when you get there, you experience a sort of flooding of memories.
It's like those old familiar cues and the context that you're in suddenly make it much
easier to retrieve memories that were originally encoded in that context.
Well, it turns out this is a general phenomenon of memory.
If you think of memory retrieval as recreating some past experience, it makes sense that
this recreation is performed more readily and more easily if the recreation context is
similar to the context of the initial experience.
The greater the match between your study context and your retrieval context, the better retrieval
will be.
Now, there's an interesting experiment that demonstrates this, an experiment using scuba
divers.
Scuba divers have these tablets and they can write on them.
They can write on them both on a beach or underwater.
So it makes it easy enough to do memory tests with scuba divers.
In this experiment, some of the scuba divers learned a list of items on the beach and were
tested on the beach.
Others learned underwater and were tested underwater.
So in those two conditions, the learning context and the retrieval context matched.
But in two other conditions, they mismatched.
So one group learned a list of items on the beach and their memory was tested underwater.
And the fourth group learned them underwater, memory was tested on the beach.
What you find in that study is that memory performance is better when the retrieval context,
the place where their memory is tested, matches their encoding context.
So the beach, beach, or the underwater, underwater.
It is almost like the context itself becomes a retrieval cue that you can use to effectively
pull that item out of your memory.
Perhaps even more fascinating is the fact that matches in our internal context can be
just as important as matches in our external context.
So for example, let's talk about emotion for a second.
You can use music to actually induce certain mood states and participants and psychologists
do this.
So for example, it's very hard to listen to the William Tell overture without feeling
happy and energized.
You know the William Tell overture.
That really kind of can't help but energize you.
Slower music, on the other hand, especially slower music played in a sort of minor key,
can make you feel sad.
So psychologists actually use this and they can use it to create conditions where people
are, for example, happy when they encode and happy when they retrieve, sad and then sad,
happy and then sad, or sad and then happy.
And just like the scuba study, if you're happy when you encode, you will remember better
if you're also happy when you retrieve.
So to the extent your emotional state matches, you will remember better.
Just like external context, this internal emotional context can assist you when it matches.
This is also true in other situations and generally it's called state-dependent learning.
So for example, it's not just emotions.
Generally speaking, a drunk person will not remember as well as a sober person, but a
drunk person will remember what they learned drunk better than a sober person will remember
what they learned drunk.
So again, that matching internal context when it comes to, well, alcohol or really any
other drug, marijuana, whatever.
If you match the test context with the study context, you get better memory.
And so this is another general truism of memory.
Matching helps you retrieve.
Now one thing to take from all this is the following.
If you're ever in a situation where you have to study some material for a later test, then
here are some things you should think about.
What will be your physiological state at the time of the test?
Do you expect to be very nervous and maybe pumped up on caffeine?
Well, if so, then you might want to try to put yourself in that state when you study.
Drink lots of coffee.
Do you know the context in which the test will occur?
Perhaps you want to try to recreate that context when you study, at least as well as you can.
Do you have any sense of the questions and the way they'll be asked?
Well, as you study, you might want to create your own questions of that sort or try to
find practice questions that are similar.
And of course, once you've matched your study context, your test context, both internally
and externally, then you want to encode the information as deeply as you possibly can.
Perhaps even employing some of the strategies discussed in the mnemonics lecture.
Wow, that's a lot of work for good memory.
But you know, that's really an important point and it's worth repeating.
Encoding information in a way that leads to very strong memory takes a lot of cognitive
effort.
It's true, the more that you practice deep encoding, the easier it'll get.
But you should never expect to reach a point where you can remember all of the events in
your life, even just the noteworthy events, without putting in some serious cognitive
effort at the encoding stage.
But expending even a little cognitive effort can sometimes be difficult.
So for example, at the end of a long day, we all feel exhausted.
And as a result, our ability to encode events will be impaired.
You will therefore have trouble remembering the details of the events that occurred simply
because you were exhausted.
Remember also that working memory is very prone interference.
In order to think deeply about some experience that we wish to remember, we need to really
be able to focus our mind on it.
And sometimes this can be hard to do, even when you have enough sort of mental resources
to do it.
Maybe you have some really stressful things that are going on and every time you try to
think about something deeply, those stressful things pull your mind away.
In fact, if you ever speak to someone who's stressed out in this way, you can almost sense
that they're really not encoding the things that you're saying to them.
Even when we're not stressed, the world is full of all sorts of distractions.
And so sometimes maybe we're trying to focus.
Maybe we want to study or we're doing some project.
And as we sit there trying to focus, emails come in or text messages or whatever.
The world is always trying to pull us away.
And those sort of distractions also make it very difficult to deeply process information
even when our intentions are pure.
So these are the challenges that come with successfully encoding information in our daily
lives.
It sounds really easy to say that all you need to do is think very deeply about the material
that you want to remember.
However, thinking deeply requires that you have enough mental resources, that you can
focus your working memory on that material, and that you guard your working memory against
distracting forces.
If any of these things fail, then encoding fails.
And if encoding fails, the gateway is closed.
Conversely, when all those things fall into place, then memory is on the way to working
the way we all want.
And all this really emphasizes the importance of working memory.
So at least now you have some excuses to fall back on when your memory fails.
That's something, right?
Think of this one.
Hey, I know we met before.
I can't remember your name.
I think that's because my working memory was distracted by your beautiful smile.
Keep that one in your back pocket.
Maybe it'll help you out one day.
Anyway, so far we've really been talking about encoding in a way that might generally support
retrieval anytime in the future.
If we return to our recipe card example, the one that I presented earlier, the idea is
that if we simply put information into memory well, then whenever we want it, it should
be easier to find.
But now I want to talk about a sort of special case.
Sometimes we want to do something more specific at the time of encoding.
For example, maybe we're at work and we're talking to a colleague about some book we
read and we're kind of gushing about the book and how great it is.
The friend sounds interested and so we offer to lend the book.
We feel like, hey, this is a nice thing for me to do and we confidently say things like,
I will bring that book in for you tomorrow.
Well, tomorrow comes and we forgot.
And maybe we even forget the next day and the next.
As to both our friend's annoyance and to our own annoyance, we keep forgetting to bring
in this book.
Why is it so hard to remember to do something in the future?
Well, this specific problem is sometimes characterized as the prospective memory problem.
Trying to encode some instruction to ourselves to remember to do something in the future.
It's almost like setting some device to tape a program we want to watch.
Just set the timer and all is fine.
Well, that seems to work well for mechanical devices, but it doesn't work well for humans.
We seem to have a lot of trouble with this kind of encoding for future retrieval.
One really salient example of our difficulties with prospective memory is how we sometimes
initiate an email and the whole reason for initiating that email is to send somebody
an attachment.
But we decide we also want to write them a little note and so we do so.
And then we send the email without the attachment.
We all do this commonly.
Of course, one of the things to learn from that is attach first, write the note second.
But it's a good example of our problem with prospective memory.
Even though working memory is on task, and even though the time between initiating the
email and ultimately sending it might be quite short, still we sometimes forget that primary
purpose, the reason we sent the email.
Now, if prospective memory can fail at that kind of short interval, it shouldn't be surprising
to any of us that it can be even worse when the event that we want to remember is hours
or days away.
Like for example, remembering to bring that book in for your friend.
Well, the classic remedy for this problem is of course to tie a string around your finger.
But now this is one of those remedies that you hear about but almost never see anybody
using.
Why?
Well, because for one thing the retrieval cue is with you all day and maybe all night
in the case of lending the book.
And so you do this the whole time just so that you have that cue with you when you need it.
Just annoying as all heck.
Plus, we might even become so used to having that string on our finger that it doesn't
even help us anyway.
It doesn't cue us when we need it.
So is there any way that we can do something else?
Is there any way we can use working memory to encode this sort of intent for future retrieval?
Well, what we'd really like to do is think of some cue that will suddenly appear in the
world at the time when we want to remember.
And we want to associate that cue with what it is that we're trying to remember.
So let's do the novel one.
Let's say I want to remember to bring that novel in tomorrow.
I need to think about this as I'm leaving the house.
So maybe I do the following.
Maybe I imagine the door to my house, but I imagine that door as though it was the cover
of the novel.
And so I may actually literally imagine reaching for the doorknob of this giant novel.
And maybe I want to even go a little further.
Maybe I want to imagine opening the novel, opening the door, walking through, closing
it.
And as I lock up behind me, I imagine putting my key right into the novel.
If I do all that well, if I deeply encode that image, then maybe, just maybe, that image
will come to mind as I leave my house tomorrow morning.
And if it does, then I will succeed.
So let's take stock of where we are so far.
Encoding is the gateway where the you of the present is communicating with the you of
the future.
And in so doing, building all the potential connections between your past and your future.
One of the major functions of working memory is to perform this encoding in a way that
will make life easier for the future you.
But storing the information in a way that makes it relatively easy to find later whenever
we might want to access it.
However, because working memory is such a flexible and powerful memory system, if one
takes the time to use it right, it can even be used to encode information in ways that
not only make that information available later, but that literally could cue us to remember
that information at a specific time, solving the prospective memory problem.
Now most of the time, we don't expend the effort to use it in this way.
We leave some of the abilities of working memory just frankly untapped and instead we
just put up with the annoyance of consistently forgetting.
But to the determined user, working memory has the potential to reduce these annoyances.
Well, if working memory is the gateway to long term memory, I now suggest we walk through
that gateway and enter into a discussion of long term memory itself.
So I'll meet you on the other side at the next lecture that is.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
