Lecture 12 Infant and Early Childhood Memory
What is your very earliest childhood memory?
Can you figure out how old you were at the time?
I suspect for most of you it's no younger than three years old,
because the range for most people is between two and five years.
Now, does that mean that your memory system takes three or more years to develop,
or is that just your episodic memory?
Well, in this lecture, we will address the origins and the early development of memory,
and along the way, we'll also look at some suggestions for enhancing the memory abilities
and the cognitive abilities in general of any infants that you may be interacting with.
Now, for me, the earliest memory involved meeting a man with a camel
on a family trip we took to Cyprus.
The man was willing to let me and my three older sisters ride the camel,
one at a time, of course.
All my sisters took their turn, but when it was my turn, well, I chickened out.
I really wanted to ride the camel, but it just kind of looked mean,
and I didn't like the way it stood up.
So it scared me, and when my dad forced the issue a little bit,
well, I essentially had a temper tantrum.
As we drove away, I vividly remember perhaps the very first time I really felt regret.
The only camel I had ever had a chance to ride was literally disappearing into the horizon.
But now, here is the question that might not have occurred to you.
Is that memory real?
I wonder because I have another memory that makes me worry.
The memory is of a picture in our family album.
It's a picture of our family posing beside the man with the camel in Cyprus.
It's a picture that was revisited repeatedly, along with the story of me refusing to ride the camel.
Given all that I now know about memory, that makes me question my memory of that camel.
Was it a true memory of the original incident?
Or is this all a memory created by the retellings of that incident in the context of the picture?
Well, most scientific studies of memory for childhood events suggest that very few children
have a really valid memory for any event that occurred within the first 30 months of their life.
In fact, their inability to remember events from before that age is so pervasive that we call it childhood amnesia.
And often the effective period of childhood amnesia can extend as old as three or four years old at least.
That's probably about the age I was when I passed up my opportunity to ride a camel.
Now, of course, when we talk about this sort of childhood amnesia,
we're really talking about what you and I now know as episodic memory.
That's our ability to replace some past experience in our mind.
And in fact, it does seem as though the processes and the brain structures that we need
to lay down those sort of durable episodic memories will they do take a while to develop,
and perhaps as long as two or three years, maybe even a little longer.
But that doesn't mean that all memory systems take this long to develop.
And as you'll see, that's definitely not the case.
So what we're going to do is follow the development of a typical infant,
both in terms of its behaviors and in terms of its brain systems.
And we're going to see the story that it tells us about the development of memory.
By noting the developmental milestones, we can make inferences about the cognitive development that is going on.
Already by the time of birth, our brain contains most, if not all, of the brain cells that it will ever have.
And that number, by the way, is around 100 billion.
And even during their very early stages of pregnancy, the brain cells are being produced at a startling rate,
literally about, well, about a quarter of a million per minute.
Wow, that's pretty crazy.
However, what the babies lack is connectivity between these brain cells.
And literally, as the babies interact with the world, these connections are formed.
Connections are formed between the neurons, and these connections allow the brain to perform ever more impressive feats.
Remember our discussion of neuroplasticity?
Well, a baby's brain is incredibly plastic.
The brain essentially wires itself in a way that's consistent with its early sensory motor experiences.
In a sense, the brain ultimately fits the world into which it was born.
So, for example, if a baby was born, say, with just one hand,
the brain tissue that would have been used to control the missing hand is used for something else instead.
Perhaps, for example, it may allow this baby to get more effective manipulation use out of its feet.
This is why it's so valuable to expose infants to a wide range of sights and sounds, touches and smells,
tastes, any sensory stimulation when they're very young.
The infant brain ends up forming connections more quickly,
and may also form more connections overall when the infant is exposed to lots of stimulation.
After all, at birth, babies are essentially blind.
You know, they're not just squinting their eyes because it's so bright outside the womb.
They initially cannot see.
They have to learn to see, and their visual system develops as a function of stimulation.
The first step in the development of vision requires babies to learn something called the light reflex.
And the light reflex refers to the pupils constricting when they're exposed to light.
If a baby is intentionally exposed to intermittent periods of bright and dark,
this reflex can be trained to occur, and in that way, it will occur weeks or months before it would
if we just left the eyes up to random accidental light stimulation.
Developing the light reflex is the beginning of that sensory memory we've been talking about,
and it's so important for vision.
So by intentionally training this reflex, the baby really gets a big head start in its processing of visual input,
and that could have beneficial cascade effects for other cognitive development.
Although vision almost starts right from scratch at birth, other senses are better developed.
Auditory stimuli are present long before birth,
but regardless where each of the senses begins at birth,
variable stimulation across all the senses can only be a good thing.
In fact, virtually all of the typical behavioral milestones that an infant reaches
have something to say about the development of memory systems.
Of course, the memory systems that we've been discussing throughout this course.
But there are a couple of early exceptions where some behaviors have a basis in genetics,
and they're present right from birth.
So for example, a newborn will automatically root for a nipple and will automatically suck it.
Another possible example is turning towards faces.
Despite the very poor vision alluded to before, even just minutes after birth,
a baby will show a preference to look at faces rather than other objects.
Given how little newborns can actually see, this preference for looking at faces may well be genetic,
and really not completely unlike rooting for a nipple.
Babies forming a bond with a primary caregiver as quickly as possible,
well that could be the single strongest factor that can ensure survival for that baby.
So turning towards faces may have evolutionary advantages,
even though a newborn doesn't yet have a visual system capable of seeing in any developed way.
In any case, most other behaviors gradually become acquired as muscles and brain connections develop.
And of course these things develop in an almost orchestrated manner.
As muscles become stronger and more refined,
and as the brain areas that support them become more interconnected and organized,
new behaviors become possible.
For instance, the development of hearing gets underway well before birth.
Newborns will already show a distinct preference for their mother's voice over all others,
and let's just kind of think about what this means.
The infant has heard that voice within the mother's womb.
It was exposed to those frequencies of sound very frequently,
and had plenty of time to encode the regularities of that sound.
Those regularities could result in a preference.
So this recognition of the mother's voice provides the first clear indication of memory.
And in this case, it's implicit memory of a mother's vocal characteristics.
And of course an identification of that memory as something familiar and comforting.
It's not surprising that the processes controlling implicit memory are given priority.
After all, the baby is born into a complex world full of all sorts of regularities.
Just as an example, some faces and voices will they come and go,
but others are much more consistent.
And some are linked to events that really enhance the baby's comfort.
These are the sorts of things a baby needs to figure out,
and the sooner it figures it out, the better.
Okay, so now let's move on a little bit.
Let's go to about three days of age.
Many babies by this point are mimicking some of the facial characteristics of their parents.
One of the ways we learn to do things is by watching others and doing what they do.
And this is called modeling.
So by three days of age, a baby's procedural memory system is functioning
and is learning links between certain muscle movements and stimuli in the environment.
In a sense, it is learning how to interact with the environment into which it was born.
Many developmental psychologists stress the relevance of the cognitive stage
within which babies learn that their behaviors have effects on the environment.
To some extent, this can be viewed as the baby forming a very basic foundation for semantic memory.
If our semantic memory is our knowledge of the world around us,
perhaps it is based on seeing ourselves as one who is distinct from
and yet can still interact with the world.
So to study this, psychologists have come up with some really clever ways
of measuring the development of semantic memory,
sometimes measuring procedural memory at the same time.
So let me give you an example.
In the study conducted by Carolyn Roeve Collier,
a ribbon was tied to the foot of infants as they were laid on their backs in a crib.
If the baby kicked a certain way and if they kicked with enough force,
then a colorful mobile above their face would move in a way that the babies found entertaining.
Now, this study showed that by just three months of age,
babies could learn this link and they would soon learn to kick their legs whenever the mobile stopped.
And this demonstrates semantic memory.
The fact that infants learn to do the kicking is all a further example of developing procedural memory as well.
So the procedural memory system that is capable of doing simple modeling after three days
has already grasped its ability to interact with the world through its actions by three months.
Procedural memory and semantic memory are already working together
and as a further example of the social nature of this development,
most infants will laugh aloud by four months of age.
Now, of course, infant laughter tends to cause all sorts of lavish attention being paid to the baby
and the baby learns this fact.
Laughter is simply another sort of ribbon that allows the baby to get what it likes from the world,
just in a different way.
Alright, so now let's move to five months of age.
By five months of age, babies begin acting uncomfortable around strange people.
And this is kind of an interesting extension to that notion of feeling more comfortable around
and preferring the familiar, like that mother's voice I told you about earlier.
So what begins as a mere attraction to the familiar develops into an avoidance of the unfamiliar
and this suggests the development of linkages between memory,
the sort of memory systems that allow for perceptions of the familiar
with emotional circuits that are linked to fear.
Now, we're going to discuss these links further in a future lecture
that will really focus on the links between emotion and memory,
but clearly the basis for emotional memories and for the emotional enhancement of memory begins already at this stage.
Also at five months, babies will begin to babble.
Now, critically, while they're not speaking any specific language at this point,
they are actually babbling in a language.
They babble in the language that surrounds them.
So North American babies babble differently than do Chinese or Russian or French babies.
And the sounds that they make when they babble are derived from the language they've been exposed to.
So again, this is another clear indication that their implicit memory system is functioning well.
By about eight months of age, a baby will begin imitating vocal units like mama or da-da.
By a year, they will begin mimicking the sounds of animals.
So this all suggests that the linguistic parts of their brain is listening and it's mimicking,
but the system is still pretty basic.
Muscle memory may be more of a constraint here than really semantic memory.
Some studies have shown that babies can begin using sign language from about the same age that they start to babble.
But their ability to communicate and to be understood in sign language during those early months
is typically greater than their ability to form understandable words with their mouths.
In general, infants given a non-verbal way to communicate will demonstrate memory for stimulant events far more than was realized.
A very clever experiment has also shown that babies remember for longer periods of time the older they get.
Remember that ribbon experiment with the mobiles?
Well, babies only two months old might remember how to move the mobile for about a day,
while three-month-old babies remember for three to four days,
six months old, about two weeks, and nine-month-old babies remember for six weeks.
So as they age, their memory is getting more longer term.
The increasing skills in memory correspond to a series of incredible behavioral leaps and bounds as well, sometimes quite literally.
If we kind of think about the first two years of life, for example,
by the first two months, they can hold their head up.
By four months, they can sit up with support.
And by seven months, they can sit alone.
By ten months, they can crawl.
By eleven, they can stand.
And by the end of the first year, many babies can walk.
Okay, now let's get back to memory.
By eighteen months, babies can point to objects when they're named,
thus they have clearly linked words and objects.
By twenty-one months, they usually remember the first ten to twenty words.
And by two years, they begin forming sort of two-word sentences, short sentences,
like you come or doggy barks.
And it's around this point where their language skills can suddenly really take off.
By the way, here's a tip.
Psychologists suggest that when you're interacting with an infant who's experimenting with language,
it's best to listen very carefully to the infant, look like you're listening,
and be patient and wait for a response when one is asked for.
Be enthusiastic if the infant does try to communicate verbally
and assign meanings to really any sounded others.
Also, use real-world words when talking to babies.
You should not speak to an infant and baby talk no matter how tempting that might be.
And you should never ask a question but then not wait for a reply.
And you should not imitate or make fun of the sounds he or she makes.
Essentially, the more you treat the baby like a grown-up,
and the more you encourage the baby to speak with both your attention and your reinforcement,
the more quickly the language skills will develop.
Once again, helping an infant to develop language sooner
may give that infant a real head start with respect to the development
of any other abilities that depend on language.
Okay, so now let's take stock for a moment.
We've made it to about age two.
And again, that's a time that very few of us have any episodic memory of,
a time that lies within those clouds of childhood amnesia.
As described, this seems to be a period during which implicit learning
and the development of procedural memories are reigning supreme.
During the first few months after birth,
infants are getting far more sleep than at any other time in their lives.
And the main differences seem to be that they're getting far more REM sleep.
Well, more REM sleep fits with that earlier suggestion
that the dreams are consolidating procedural memory.
So everything is fitting together.
Semantic memory is developing too, of course,
especially in the sense that the baby must learn the facts about the world
in which it finds itself,
and it must learn how to interact with that world via both movement and communication.
These seem to be the priorities of the developing brain and body during this time.
However, again, it seems that enduring episodic memories are not formed.
Why not?
Well, for one thing, it seems as though the brain areas that we need
to store such memories take about two or more years to form.
Specifically, the hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex,
while they're among the slowest areas, the slowest brain regions to develop,
neither reaching maturity until about three or four years of age.
Given the relation of these structures to both working memory
and the ability to form episodic memories,
a relation we're going to visit in depth in subsequent lectures,
it's reasonable to think of the maturation of these structures
as reflecting, well, essentially a second birth.
It's the birth of conscious thought and all that comes with it.
Luckily, the second birth is a little less painful for the mothers.
Of course, the further development of language is also part of the story.
Language learning highlights a very important aspect of cognitive development,
a notion called critical periods.
As children learn any cognitive skill,
their brain is literally reorganizing itself as a function of experience with that skill.
There are certain periods in development when the brain seems optimally able
to reorganize itself if it has exposure to a certain kind of information
and languages like this.
When a child is between the ages of two and five,
the child displays a very powerful ability to learn the regularities of language.
A child at this age can learn multiple languages if necessary
and with very little effort.
However, if the child has not had experience with language before age five,
then they will find it much more difficult to learn.
Similarly, those of us who are above age five also find it quite difficult
to learn a new language.
The ability to learn the regularities of language may reflect implicit memory,
but once language is learned,
it can allow us to learn things in a way that ultimately can lead to both semantic
and episodic memories.
After all, words represent concepts, knowledge,
and to use words well,
one must have an understanding of the underlying concepts.
A baby's vocabulary provides at least a crude reflection of how much they know,
and this vocabulary grows at just an astonishing rate during the years from two to five.
Semantic memory seems to be developing very well during this time.
This is perhaps most apparent in the fourth or fifth year when the child's favorite question is,
why?
Just think about that innocent little question, that innocent word, why?
Well, really, it is a request for knowledge, for understanding.
It's a direct plea from the system that wants to understand the world better,
and when you provide an answer, you're feeding the child semantic memory.
So, as the semantic memory develops between ages two and five,
and as the hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex mature,
we begin to see evidence of some developments that are intuitively linked
to the potential to form episodic memories.
Let's talk about those a little bit.
As early as 18 months of age, most children learn their own name,
and at this time, the first indication of struggles for independence also emerge.
So, for example, a child at this age may begin to defy his or her parents
by refusing to do things they ask,
and they may struggle if they're forced to do something that they really don't want to do.
At about three years of age, children can describe their dreams.
Now, this is important because dreams share certain tendencies with autobiographical memory.
That is, they often feature the child within some mentally created world in which events occur.
This, of course, suggests that working memory is able to perform the sort of mental simulations
that are associated with episodic memory.
The year between three and four years old might be especially important for the development of sense of self.
At about three and a half years, children begin to play cooperatively with others,
and that suggests some level of empathy or mental modeling,
the sort of thing that we would expect working memory to underlie.
At this age, children also show the first signs of being self-conscious.
So, for example, children will get angry at this stage when they're laughed at or otherwise made fun of.
By four and a half years of age, children will begin to negotiate with other children,
and that literally implies that their ability to kind of weigh the relative advantages
and disadvantages of some course of action.
By about five years, children can play games that involve rules,
but they very much like to win these games,
and they quite typically are willing to cheat to do so.
Now, of course, the tendency to try cheating is relevant
because deception is generally viewed by psychologists as a high level ability,
an ability that some animals, for example, never reach.
If you do it right, cheating can allow you to gain benefits for yourself
without the cost of social consequences.
But, of course, doing it right is key,
and a strong ability to create a mental world that includes the consequences
and the minds of others, well, that's what you need to deceive well.
And clearly, children of about five to six years of age
are beginning to play with these sorts of cognitive abilities.
Now, fortunately, we don't have to rely totally on developmental milestones
to understand the development of a sense of oneself,
because this is actually an area where some relevant experiments have been performed.
And a very important procedure that's used at this age
is something called the Rouge test, and the Rouge test works as follows.
As children are playing or otherwise distracted,
a small patch of Rouge, Rouge makeup, is put on their face at some point.
So one can almost imagine a mother coming over as they do
and pretending to lick their hands and clean something off the child's face,
but what they're really doing is applying a little bit of Rouge,
and then they leave the child alone.
Later, the children are exposed to a mirror,
and the question of interest is how they react to their reflection in the mirror.
Now, less than one year of age, all children treat the mirror reflections
as another social playmate.
They think it's another child,
and they do not recognize the reflection as themselves.
Of course, they don't try to touch the Rouge.
However, by about 18 months of age,
half of the babies do touch the Rouge mark,
and I mean the Rouge mark on their own face.
So when they're confronted with the reflection,
it seems that they know that that's them they're looking at.
That number, by the way, climbs to about 65% by two years of age,
at least according to some classical studies of him.
The more recent studies suggest it may climb even higher.
So by two, the Rouge tests suggest they're getting some sense of themselves.
Now, at about the same time, again, I mentioned that babies are learning their own names,
they're beginning to exert independence,
and the Rouge tests suggest that they're gaining a sense of themselves
and what they look like in a mirror.
Interestingly, there's a period from about 14 to 20 months of age
where many babies will actively avoid their own reflections in mirrors.
It's as though they're learning that the reflection is not another baby to play with,
but they've not yet figured out what it is.
So that reflection takes on some alien quality that they would rather just avoid.
However, once they recognize the reflection as themselves,
well, they sometimes become quite enamored with the mirror.
Some of us never lose that.
So we formed a pretty clear story now here of the development of memory systems,
and it's one that explains the phenomenon of childhood amnesia.
For the first two years of life, the brains of babies spend much of their time
learning the regularities of the environment,
and they do this using implicit learning processes that seem to be in place right from birth.
Procedural memories also develop at an astonishing rate during this time,
and they allow the baby to develop an ever-increasing behavioral repertoire.
Between two and five years old, the brain structures underlying working memory
and episodic memory slowly mature as they do language skills
and an understanding of the self and self-identity develop along with it.
Our first childhood memories occur somewhere within this range
as we get a sense of who we are,
and we embed that sense of self within other events that we can describe and remember.
By about five years old, all of the relevant memory systems appear to be online and functioning.
In fact, part of functioning well may even involve the pruning of some of the earliest memories,
which might also contribute further to childhood amnesia.
But once these memory systems are finally in place,
the clouds of amnesia finally dissipate for good.
The memories we form thereafter can be retained long-term,
and we begin piecing those memories together to create an ongoing sense of self.
There is one interesting caveat to this story of development.
Throughout, I've been focusing on the connections that are formed between nerve cells in reaction to stimulation,
and these connections support the development of memory.
However, there's another equally fascinating aspect of brain plasticity that is part of the development.
During periods of intense brain development, there's also evidence of so-called synaptic pruning,
and that's a removal of weak brain connections to make space for more new connections.
This sort of pruning is also happening during infant development,
and it goes hand-in-hand with the creation of new connections.
So brain biology giveth, and brain biology taketh away.
By the way, this sort of pruning also occurs during the teenage years,
and apparently that's allowing the brain to get ready for a final burst of learning
before it settles into the form that is less plastic in adulthood.
And that's a good thing.
After all, once we're all free from the challenges of drastic internal transformation,
we can at last take on more fully the challenges of the external world.
Okay, so now in the next lecture, we're going to take a break of sorts
as we put the development of human memory into a really broader perspective.
We're going to turn to look at the surprising features of memory across the entire animal kingdom.
