Lecture 13. Animal Cognition and Memory
An elephant never forgets. That's what they say.
Do you know why they say that?
Well, apparently it has a lot to do with elephants that destroy villages that had encroached on their lands
or elephants that specifically target individuals who had caused death to their family.
These acts of revenge apparently occurred some time after the act and gave rise to retaliation, hence the saying.
Do elephants really have strong and emotionally charged memories?
Well, we'll get back to the elephants, but let's begin with an interesting study of chimpanzees.
In a Japanese study, chimps were pitted against humans in a game of memory.
Now, to understand the study, it's first important to know that chimps can learn the numbers one through nine
and they can learn how to press them in order, even if those numbers are presented at random locations on a computer screen.
Actually, they can get really good at it.
Okay, so now with that clear, here's how the game works.
In the first part, the numbers one through nine are presented at random locations on a computer screen
and they're presented very briefly before they're covered up by just solid squares.
The task is to remember the location of the numbers and then to show this memory by touching each square in the right order.
So you press the square that corresponded to the number one and then the two and then the three and then the four, et cetera, up to nine.
Can the chimps do it?
Well, you bet they can do it. They can do it very well.
They seem to have no problem whatsoever in knowing where each number was and they can do it really fast too, kind of like this.
And the numbers come up and they just go.
Now, how about humans?
Well, they don't do it nearly as well.
Usually humans can get up to about the numbers five, six, or seven.
Does that sound familiar?
Yeah, seven plus or minus two.
And not really getting to that plus two part of the side either.
So very seldom, in fact, can humans get all nine in the order, but the chimps can.
In fact, the chimps are even more impressive in the second part of the game.
This time only some of the numbers are shown, like, for example, two, four, five, seven, and nine.
The numbers are once again covered over by squares and the task is to touch each square in the order of the numbers that had been presented, starting with the lowest and going up.
Once again, the chimps do very well and the humans do only okay.
And we're not just talking about one bright chimp either.
There were a number of chimps involved in this study.
In fact, if you were to see a video of this game in progress, and by the way, such videos are available online,
the really amazing thing is the fluency with which the chimps perform the game.
When the squares appear, the chimps respond immediately and with seemingly sure confidence.
Just bang, bang, bang, bang, bang.
The humans?
Not so fluent, not so confident.
It really seems that in this game, we cannot claim to have any sort of superiority.
Now, obviously such studies are interesting.
In fact, they're fascinating.
And they make us think about animals a little differently.
And sometimes they make us think of ourselves a little differently.
And heck, we all love it when the underdog wins.
And when it comes to animal species, any species that betters us intellectually,
well, that sure has the feel of an underdog winning.
But from a scientific perspective, these sorts of studies are interesting for two other reasons.
First, whenever we study any cognitive ability like memory,
we're always interested in the extent to which that ability is or is not uniquely human.
In the case of memory, this is an especially interesting question,
given that some of the memory systems that we've been talking about,
working memory and episodic memory especially,
have links to our subjective impressions of our self and to consciousness itself.
Could animals have a sense of self?
Do they also have the subjective sense of being conscious?
These questions are linked to the second reason why these studies are interesting.
Our society very often makes distinctions based on whether an organism is or is not human.
Even within science itself, we will conduct certain research procedures on animals
that we would never conduct on humans.
So is this double standard justified?
Well, to the extent that animals share our cognitive experiences,
especially the very high level experiences like a sense of self
and an experience of consciousness,
our understanding of such issues at least becomes much more informed.
So within this framework then, let's use what we know about memory
and use it as a window to better understand animal cognition.
Do they have a sense of self that is clearly such a big part of autobiographical memory
and in fact many of the experiences that we have in our working memories?
Do they show evidence of episodic memories?
And if so, what does this all mean?
Okay, let's begin with our human sense of self.
Clearly our memory is critical to that sense of self.
Imagine not remembering anything that had happened in your life prior to this very moment.
You don't remember your name, where you live, who you know, what you do for a living.
You have no idea which skills you have or what things you like
and you have no memories of past experiences.
Do you think you would be the same person?
To a very large extent, these are the things that define our own sense of self.
Without them, we'd feel like an empty human being, like a shell.
Our memories are what fill that shell.
They give the entity within us some sense of a continuing self that exists across time and space.
If you have any doubts about the importance of memory to our sense of self,
consider what happens to patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease.
Initially, Alzheimer's patients suffer brief bouts during which they forget who they are,
where they live, and what they were doing.
However, as the disease progresses, the memory failures become worse and worse.
In fact, patients in the latter stages can no longer recognize family members
and eventually they cannot even recognize themselves.
They've been known to literally look behind mirrors to see who that person is that's looking back at them.
A catastrophic loss of memory results in a catastrophic loss of self,
and we're going to return to a full consideration of Alzheimer's disease in a few lectures from now.
So let's return to this question now.
Do animals have a sense of self, the sort of sense that would be necessary for any kind of autobiographical memory?
Now, of course, while some animals possess what could be considered basic languages,
none use language in anything like the rich way that we humans do.
So we can't just ask them.
No, this also means that they would not have anything like the phonological loop that we use
when we verbally rehearse items in our working memory.
If they have any sort of subjective experience, it's more likely visual,
like the sort of phenomenon we have described in terms of that visual spatial scratch path.
So how could we know if they have some sort of visual sense of themselves and who they are?
Well, remember that Rouge test that I mentioned in a previous lecture?
That test was originally created by Gordon Gallup,
a researcher from the State University of New York, to test for self-awareness in animals.
Gallup created the Rouge test after a student of his decided to hang mirrors in all of the cages
of a wide range of animals that was housed in their animal research facility.
The student reasoned that animals aren't used to seeing their own reflection,
and he was curious how they would react.
Well, initially, virtually all of the animals reacted to that reflected image
as though it was a newly introduced member of its own species.
So they might be aggressive, they might be curious,
really whatever would be normal for them if another member of their species was introduced into their environment.
Some animals continued to always react this way,
but most didn't, most changed the way they reacted, and they changed in one of two ways.
Some animals, dogs are one example,
they eventually realized that the reflection was not another dog,
and further, that the reflection was essentially irrelevant.
It didn't cause trouble, but it also didn't bring anything new and interesting to the context.
So over time, dogs simply ignored the reflection completely.
This is how most dogs react to mirrors they're familiar with.
If you have a dog and you have a mirror in your home, you've probably seen this.
The process of learning that process that kind of makes us ignore stimuli
is something called habituation, and it's very much tied to that notion I mentioned,
that the stimuli result in no good consequences or no bad consequences.
It makes them just largely irrelevant.
By the way, humans also habituate to stimuli.
If you've ever been in an unfamiliar house,
you may have, the first time you were there, heard all sorts of creaking,
maybe hot water heaters, maybe floorboards, maybe stairs as people were walking on them,
all sorts of noises that every house makes.
But if you stay in that house for any length of time,
those noises would just seem to disappear.
They would no longer disturb your sleep, they would just be gone.
Again, you've learned that those noises produce no consequences.
Nothing positive follows them, nothing negative follows them.
And when that happens, our brains essentially learn to just shut out the stimulation altogether.
It's irrelevant.
So this is one way that many animals, dogs included, eventually react to a mirror.
It's like the reflection doesn't even exist.
In fact, it can be very hard to get them to even look at it.
It's like it isn't there.
Now, other animals, though, change their behavior in a different way.
Chimpanzees, for example, well, they start to use the mirrors as a tool.
They start inspecting themselves in ways that are not possible without a mirror.
For example, they might look inside their mouths, or they might turn around and look at their butts.
Okay, that's a funny image.
But hey, you're not kidding anyone if you want me to believe that you haven't done the exact same thing.
So anyway, this behavior seemed to suggest that the chimps did indeed have a sense of self
and wanted to get to know themselves better.
Okay, well, now Gallup formalized this process, and he turned it into something called the Rouge test.
And let me give you a clearer sense of how the test was employed.
In the case of animals, he would first familiarize some species with its reflection
by hanging a mirror in its cage for a while.
So let's say this camera in front of me is a mirror, and I'm a chimp,
and I've had this mirror in my cage for quite a while, and I've been allowed to kind of experience my reflection.
Do whatever I want to do with the mirror. It's there.
Okay, now, if there's some time when the animal, that's me, if I had to be anesthetized for some reason,
let's say dental surgery, well, when I was unconscious, Gallup would place a mark over a red mark,
over one eye, and over one ear lobe.
So let me kind of show you what that might be like.
I'm anesthetized. We're having marks, okay, put on me, but I don't know.
I'm out cold. Gallup was very careful to make sure that these marks didn't have any dyes
that the animal could feel or any scents that they would smell,
didn't produce any sort of sensation at all, okay?
The anesthetized animal would then be returned to the cage,
and its behavior would be recorded once it awoke.
The question is, how do chimps behave when they wake up?
Well, okay, I wake up, I'm looking around, I see my reflection, and this is the important point.
What happens? Well, what happens is this, they become very curious.
They approach the mirror, and they begin to touch the dyed spots.
In fact, what makes this a nice scientific experiment is you can compare how often they touch these spots
to a pair of control spots. That is the unmarked eye and the unmarked earlobe.
And what you will see is that they touch these spots a whole lot more.
It is as if they're saying, what the heck is on my face?
All right, well, in order to do that, you have to have a sense of my face,
and that requires a sense of self.
Okay, I'll remove my marks.
Experiments since those conducted by Gallup have now suggested an ever-growing list of animals that passed this Rouge test.
This list includes nearly all of the great apes, including bonobos and orangutans,
and recently it even includes some lower primates.
In addition, some aquatic animals have now passed the test, animals like dolphins and killer whales.
Now, the test is more complicated in that case. Those animals can't just touch their face like I did,
but they turn to the mirror and they seem to be trying to self-inspect
in ways that again suggest that they're trying to see what it is that's on their bodies in that case.
By the way, elephants pass, and some bird species pass.
Now, if you accept Gallup's test as a valid test of self-awareness,
then it seems we certainly are not alone in the sense of knowing ourselves.
And I should also point out that not all scientists view these results as definitive.
Some come up with alternate explanations, but they're certainly fascinating,
and they're at the very least very strongly suggestive of a sense of self.
If some animals do have a sense of self, then they also have the potential for some forms of conscious memory,
and that includes episodic memory.
And I should step back for a moment here to highlight the following.
Animals clearly have procedural memory.
All you have to do is watch a well-trained dog to know that it can learn new behaviors
and execute them appropriately, just as the stimulus context demands.
If you go to SeaWorld, you'll see dolphins jumping through hoops.
They learn those new procedural memories.
Those were not even natural behaviors for them. They can even learn unnatural behaviors.
Animals also show clear evidence of something like semantic memory.
So my dogs, Lola and Layla, the Wonder Dogs, they certainly know where their treats are stored, as I mentioned earlier.
They know that when we put their seatbelts on, they're going in the car,
and they know that when we sleep in rather than wake up to an alarm,
that means we're going to be going for a hike, because it's the weekend.
This is knowledge of the world, is it not?
Well, the main memory systems in doubt, then, really are working memory,
which is a whole lot like consciousness, and episodic memory,
which almost always includes a representation of the self.
And that's why the quest for evidence of episodic memory in animals
is the primary question of interest and the primary one we've been talking about.
Okay, well, we've talked about the self. Let's talk about episodic memory more specifically.
Do animals possess episodic memory?
Well, just as it was true with Gallup's work, the available evidence is not airtight,
but there have been a wide range of demonstrations that do show animals behaving in ways
that seem to imply an episodic memory.
So let me tell you about some of those.
A researcher named Nicola Clayton has recently described some truly fascinating studies of scrub jays.
Scrub jays are one of the many birds that catch food.
A lot of birds do this. When they find food, they hide it.
So any time when there's a lot of food in their environment, they find what's available
and they hide as much as possible.
And that, of course, means they have to remember where they've stored their food.
If they don't remember it, they're not going to be able to retrieve it later.
So in one experiment, Clayton provided jays with both nuts and juicy dead worms,
and they could store them both, and they did so.
Then on subsequent days, they first preferentially retrieved the worms.
But then after a few days, they switched to the nuts, even though there were some,
there's still some worms left.
But of course, the implication is that the jays could remember what had been stored where
and when it had been stored.
If the worms had been stored for too long, they weren't worth going after.
Okay, that sort of what, where, and when memory has now been demonstrated in a number of bird species.
And while researchers are often guarded, they'll call it things like episodic-like memory,
it definitely bears all the hallmarks of human episodic memory.
Of course, we can't be sure that the jays are experiencing real episodic memory
because they simply cannot tell us that they are subjectively experiencing some sort of movie in their minds.
The kinds of thing we associate with human episodic memory.
That's the sort of thing that we suspect they would need a working memory for.
However, remember when I said that working memory is used for all sorts of things other than episodic memory.
And it's also used for things like planning and worrying.
I gave you a whole list.
Well, let me also tell you this about scrub jays.
Sometimes they live in areas where other birds will steal the foods they cash.
And if they're given food in such an area, then they'll look around for thieves.
They'll look in fact very carefully before hiding any food.
This is only behavior you see when they're in one of these areas.
So again, we can't know what's going through the little bird brains,
but given they do this only when they're in areas where thieves are,
it sure seems that they're making sure that they're not being watched.
And that implies that they also can anticipate future events that will occur if they're not careful,
if they just stash a food without checking for thieves first.
So that's just the same sort of planning that humans use working memory for.
Okay, so many great apes, elephants, aquatic animals, they show behavior suggestive of a sense of self.
And birds that cash their food show behavior consistent with episodic-like memory and working memory.
Now, maybe this finding with birds surprised you a little,
but actually it turns out that birds are much more intelligent than many of us give them credit for.
Some parrots have displayed amazing cognitive feeds and are known to be deeply emotional.
That term we like to just throw around, bird brain,
well that's really not giving birds the credit they deserve.
Once we realize the potential intelligence of birds then,
well to some extent this may seem like we've arrived at the expected list of guests.
We've talked about the animals that we might most expect to be more cognitively advanced.
So maybe some animals have episodic-like or human-like, I should say, memory systems,
but just the most advanced, just the usual suspects.
Well, this is where the story takes an interesting turn.
If you will, welcome to center stage the lowly lab rat.
For many humans, the rat is sort of the epitome of a non-human species.
And it certainly is the species we see most willing to conduct even a very invasive research procedures on.
Surely the rats have nothing like a conscious memory system, right?
Not so fast.
Let me tell you about a couple of experiments.
So first of all, there's this device that you can use to probe the memory of rats.
It's something called a radial arm maze, and it looks like the following.
There's an area in the middle, and then outside of that area there's arms that go off.
So kind of think of a sun pattern.
And there may be six to eight arms radiating from this middle platform.
If you put little bits of cheese at the end of each arm, and then you take a perfectly healthy rat and put him in the middle,
this is what he does.
He will first go down one arm, and he will eat the cheese, and then he has to come back to the middle.
And then he'll go down a different arm, different being the operative word.
Every time he comes back, he chooses an arm that he has not yet been down.
So he does not tend to revisit an arm that he just recently visited, almost as if the rat knows that,
well, if there was cheese down there, I already ate it.
Okay?
So no sense going back down that arm.
That sounds like episodic memory.
Now, that can seem like a strong claim.
Perhaps you think I stretch pretty far on that one.
Well, step two.
Remember the following.
When I talked about Clive, Clive wearing that English musician and conductor,
I told you that one of the areas that was damaged in Clive was his hippocampus.
It's a structure in the very middle of the brain.
And as a result of that damage, he could no longer form new episodic memories.
Well, data from Clive and from many others provide strong evidence that the hippocampus is crucial for forming episodic memories.
So let's go back to our typical lab rat.
Let's say we take this rat, and now we intentionally damage his hippocampus,
and now we repeat the experiment in the radial arm maze.
What do you think happens now?
Well, I'll tell you.
Start the rat in the middle.
He goes down one arm.
He eats the cheese.
He comes back to the middle.
Then what?
Well, then he goes down another arm.
But critically, he makes his choice in a seemingly random way this time.
That is, he seems just as likely to visit an arm that he just recently visited
as he is to follow a new arm.
It's as if he now has no memory which arms he has visited and which he hasn't.
Essentially, by damaging the same brain area that we know is damaged in Clive wearing,
a brain area that we know is crucial for the formation of episodic memories,
we have created a rat version of Clive wearing.
Interesting.
The lowly lab rat.
Now, let's take one step even further afield.
All of the animals we've been discussing so far are what are called vertebrates.
That is, they all have internal skeletons.
Now, on its own, that fact need not make them especially impressive.
But generally speaking, animals with internal skeletons are often seen as more advanced
than those that lack internal skeletons.
So worms and snails, for example.
But there's one invertebrate that really seems to defy this rule
in a way that makes us wonder just how many forms memory systems can reside within.
And the animal that I'm alluding to is the absolutely alien and absolutely fascinating octopus.
An octopus is truly unlike any other life form.
In fact, it can change its color in seconds to match any background becoming virtually invisible.
Even a very large octopus can push its entire body through a very thin tube.
Sometimes, having no backbone can come in pretty handy.
And it moves using jet propulsion.
But perhaps the most fascinating thing about Octopi is that they can be extremely sneaky
in a very intentionally seeming way.
I mentioned previously that this ability to behave in sneaky and deceptive ways
is often seen as a hallmark of cognitive development.
I know there's something about that that kind of seems wrong.
But if you consider it in terms of working memory, it makes more sense.
Working memory is the system that allows us to solve problems, to essentially get what we want.
Sometimes we want things we're not really supposed to get.
Unless, of course, we can come up with a clever enough plan to both get what we want and get away with it.
That would mark a highly complex sort of problem solving.
Now, we know that some apes use deception.
So, for example, in a typical monkey troop, different monkeys have different jobs.
One job is to scout ahead for food sources and to let the troop know when they're found.
And another job is to look out for predators.
And really, all of the monkeys are always looking out for predators,
and they're supposed to alert the troop when they're seen.
Researchers have noticed the following.
If you take some stash of food and you leave it out for the apes to find,
most of them, if they find it, will give the food call.
But some apes will actually sound the predator alarm.
That is, they will walk up to the food, they will see the food,
and then they will signal that a predator is in the area.
While all of their troop mates run and hide, these monkeys eat the food.
Pretty clever.
Well, now let's return to our octopus in a very mysterious fishtail.
In the sea aquarium in Miami, Florida, lobsters were mysteriously disappearing.
The night watchman himself was one of the suspects,
so he was really determined to clear his name.
And yet, night after night, under his watch, lobsters went missing.
And the night watchman saw nothing.
One night, he decided to do his rounds especially quickly, much more quickly than normal,
and then he took up a position close to the tank where the lobsters were.
At some point, he thought he saw some movement in the tank,
something that didn't look right.
So he flipped on the lights, and what he saw amazed him.
The octopus that lived a few tanks over had come out of his tank,
walked over the catwalk, and was reaching in and scooping out a lobster.
He grabbed that lobster, and then he brought the lobster back to his tank.
The watchman was amazed.
When they checked the octopus's tank afterwards, they found a whole bunch of lobster shells,
but not just left in the open, the lobster shells were hidden away, out of sight.
Everyone who saw this was absolutely sure this octopus knew what it was doing,
that it was trying to cover up its crime, and heck, it succeeded for quite a few good meals.
And elephants, let's return to elephants.
They are indeed especially impressive.
The head matriarch of an elephant clan can have an especially strong memory.
She's in charge of leading the entire clan to good water sources,
something she does in a different, effective way, depending on the weather patterns.
How?
Well, the claim is that between her own experiences, typically about 40 years worth,
the things she learned from the matriarch of her own clan,
she's learned to remember how different locations react to different weather patterns.
So she can effectively steer the clan, even in years of drought that could have been decades apart.
She remembers the previous drought and steers the clan accordingly.
So yes, it is indeed the case that elephants have strong memories.
In fact, the brains of elephants are actually more densely packed than human brains.
And elephant brains have more foldings, so they can store more information.
Given how little we know about human memory,
it's safe to say that new discoveries about the memory of elephants will be made in the future.
Okay, so what are we to take from all this?
Well, if one limits the question to one of memory systems,
then the available evidence may not prove that animals possess all of the same memory systems we do,
but it certainly is not inconsistent with that notion.
In fact, to all but the most critical, it seems likely that animals do possess the same memory systems we do.
Rats may even possess episodic memory,
and octopi clearly have an ability for deep and calculated thought.
It's important to emphasize that the specifics of their memory system could be quite different.
For example, we rely very heavily on a phonological loop,
and we're constantly talking to ourselves within our minds.
It's very unlikely animals do the same.
Their working memories are likely more dominated by visual representations,
and maybe even other sorts that we don't even have.
So for example, dogs have a very superior sense of smell than we do.
Do they remember sense?
Do they think in terms of sense?
Could they perhaps show self-awareness if the test involved them reacting to their own scent instead of their own reflection?
It's certainly possible.
The point here is that by using a test that emphasizes vision, the primary sense used by humans,
we may even be underestimating the cognitive abilities of animals.
What about the larger implications of this sort of work?
Well, Rene Descartes famously described animals in purely mechanical terms.
He thought of them as simple machines,
whereas humans were machines driven by souls.
For example, centuries of scientific research has been conducted on animals without even using anesthetic.
The protestations of animals were seen as analogous to squealing tires on a heartbreaking car.
Sure, it may sound like the car is in pain, but it's really just a sound of rubber under high friction.
The car feels no pain and neither do animals.
Well, in terms of memory abilities and memory systems,
it continues to accumulate, suggesting that animals actually do have many of the abilities that we have,
as well as others that we may not.
At a more general level, the fact that the same sorts of memory systems operate within so many different species
points strongly to the importance of these systems for survival.
And of course, all of these memory systems come from brains, animal brains, human brains.
We've drawn links to the brain at a number of points in this lecture series,
and now it's time to go visit the brain more directly.
That's our next stop on this tour of memory, the human brain.
