Timu is everywhere, promising that you can shop like a billionaire buying $10 wireless
speakers, $12 sneakers, $20 drones, and other unbelievably cheap electronics, gadgets, clothes,
all backed with the promise of free shipping, 90 day returns, 30 day price adjustments,
and deliveries within 2 weeks.
But Timu isn't the first to sell generic, unbranded low quality mass produced Chinese
products online at radically low prices.
Before Timu there was AliExpress and Wish, who both went to market decades ago with the
exact same value prop, wacky advertisements, incredibly low prices, counterfeit goods,
and shady sales tactics.
It all begs the question, how exactly do these companies stay alive selling 5-10 dollar items
online, and how can this business model be sustainable?
In this episode we'll cover the business of selling cheap, Chinese made junk online
through Wish, AliExpress, and Timu, and how all of this ties back to growth, greed,
and Silicon Valley.
If you ship things, listen up, Rolo is disrupting the shipping industry.
Whether you ship one package a year or thousands a week, Rolo provides everything you need
to save lots of time and lots of money.
Since Rolo cares about saving you time, they've asked to cut this normally 3 minute long sponsorship
segment as short as possible, so here are the quick bullet points.
More than 250,000 shippers use Rolo.
There are no sign up fees and no monthly fees.
Whenever you ship it will cost you just 5 cents.
Rolo's negotiated rates with top carriers saves you up to 90% off of shipping rates.
Get the exact same service you would get at a post office or UPS store with huge discounts
directly on the Rolo app.
You can even schedule pickups from your doorstep, so you never end up waiting in line at a post
office ever again.
Most businesses can connect all their selling channels, Amazon, eBay, Shopify, Etsy, and
more, to manage and ship and track all their orders from the Rolo app.
Rolo also has a patented, sleek thermal printer that requires no ink to print.
It is an Apple Airprint certified and works with all your devices.
Rolo is giving you a complimentary $10 ship credit with code ModernMBA1.
That's code ModernMBA1 for a complimentary $10 shipping credit with Rolo.
Thank you to Rolo for supporting ModernMBA and making this episode possible.
Wish was the earliest player in the space, and while it's been long forgotten, the
company was once one of Silicon Valley's darling unicorns.
The company was an embodiment of all of tech's hottest B2C trends at the time.
Fueled by the craze of Groupon, Airbnb, Uber, and Netflix, Silicon Valley in the early 2010s
was a period of time where every startup called itself a platform.
Every founder wanted to build an online platform where all you had to do was to connect two
parties together and then take a cut on every transaction as the middleman.
Since the marketplace or the platform is made entirely of software, there would be no physical
assets or overhead to dilute profits.
The platform business in theory was infinitely scalable and that you could really capture
any transaction at any value and naturally achieve profitability at scale with enough
volume.
At the time, the shining examples of a platform business were Uber, who was applauded for
being the world's largest taxi company without owning a single car or Airbnb for disrupting
hotels with its platform without owning a single piece of real estate.
Wish sold itself as a platform that democratized e-commerce by connecting overseas merchants
to underserved low-income consumers who couldn't afford Amazon.
On Wish, you could get clothing, electronics, household goods, and other random items online
delivered right to your door at absurdly low prices.
Shipping was free, and some items were even as low as $1.
Wish was basically an online dollar store or discount store, where the main draw is
cheap prices.
Like Americans who shop at a dollar tree, consumers on Wish give up quality and convenience
in exchange for value.
The cheap prices on Wish made customers willing to tolerate the long shipping times where
products took two to four weeks or sometimes even months to arrive.
While Amazon operates its own warehouses, hires couriers, and builds its own shipping
network to ensure fast and accurate deliveries, Wish didn't want to get involved in the
logistics.
He placed that responsibility entirely on its international sellers, so Wish could
remain that lucrative platform with juicy software margins and zero overhead.
The main reason why items on Wish and AliExpress are so cheap is because a vast majority of
its merchants are Chinese manufacturers, wholesale and distributors, and the same is true over
a decade later with AliExpress and now Teemu.
Anytime an order comes in on Wish, these overseas merchants could simply grab the item, seal
it in a parcel, tack it on the customer's address, and then drop it off to the Chinese
Postal Service.
Since these merchants were A, mostly based in China with a significantly lower cost
of living, B, own cheap, rural warehouses or factories full of these generic, unbranded,
non-perishable, mass-produced products, and C, outsourced distribution to subsidized state-owned
postal services, they could still make profits selling items for one, two, or even $10 apiece.
Wish made no secret to hide this reality as you could always see from your packages when
they arrived that your products had been shipped from someone in China.
In the 2010s and before, shipping a package from China to the United States was actually
cheaper than shipping the same package from the West Coast to the East Coast.
This abnormality, or arbitrage, depending on where you stand, was the unintended result
of outdated legislation.
Mail within a country is generally run by one single public postal service, like the
USPS for Americans or La Poste for the French.
There are, of course, faster private alternatives like FedEx or DHL, but each country typically
offers a subsidized, government-owned, and run public service for its people to send
mail from one side of the country to the other.
But sending mail from one country to another is a lot more complex.
There has to be a universal language between each country's on mailing rates, limits,
dimensions, addresses, items, and so forth.
This is where the Universal Postal Union came in.
The Universal Postal Union, or UPU for short, was designed to solve this exact problem centuries
ago as an international co-op where world governments would come together every few
years to standardize and cross-border postal services so letters from one country could
be mailed smoothly to another.
That mail would still take weeks or even months to arrive, but the existence of the UPU would
ensure that those letters and packages would not simply be discarded or lost in the handoff
between each country's postal agency.
In the late 1800s before the internet and during the era of snail mail, the UPU was
essential for encouraging entrepreneurialism and international trade.
By having affordable cross-border mail, businesses and individuals in one country could seek
out import and export opportunities with individuals and businesses in another country, which would
be a net positive contribution to both economies.
Through the UPU, governments agreed on postal subsidies to keep international mail accessible
and affordable for its civilians.
The cost of sending mail from developing countries in the east to established countries in the
west was generally subsidized at the greatest levels.
The wealthy western countries were happy to foot the bill for these postal subsidies as
they had the funds to do so and they wanted to support the growth of developing countries.
One of these developing countries at the time was China, but once the internet took over
and email became the superior option in the 1990s, snail mail and the UPU by extension
became obsolete.
Nonetheless, the UPU and the postal subsidies of mailing from China to the west still persisted
and remained untouched until the 2010s.
Wish built their business on this abnormality, where merchants in China could tap into these
aggressively subsidized cross-border postal rates to ship items direct to customers in
the west at dirt-cheap rates.
But the UPU was designed for letters and not e-commerce.
They only regulated mail under 4.4 pounds.
This is precisely why products on Wish, All The Express and even Timu today are generally
simple small gadgets, trinkets, compact electronics or collapsible lightweight items that can be
stuffed into smaller packages.
It's these postal constraints that make it so Wish, All The Express and even Timu these
days in spite of their war chas, years of growth or massive advertising have never expanded
to the higher margin bigger products like furniture, home decor or appliances.
Like everything in life you get what you pay for.
Wish from its inception was intentionally hands-off in not just the logistics but also in products
and standards.
Wish was a wild west where merchants overseas were permitted to sell just about anything
that would fit within the 4.4 pound limit.
But what was most blatant was that merchants on Wish and All The Express were permitted
to use doctored, misleading or sometimes completely inaccurate photos and inadequate
product descriptions which inevitably led to huge mismatches of expectations and reality
for customers.
The harsh truth is that even if we wave aside the UPU and the artificially subsidized China
to the west mailing rates, these cheap, mostly Chinese-made, mass-produced products were
generally of poor quality.
Merchants on Wish and All The Express had to resort to these kind of tactics in order
to drive sales otherwise there would be little interest in these products in the first place.
Products sold on Wish and All The Express are generally non-essential, generic, low utility
novelty impulse purchases, which are no different from the random keychains, gadgets and merchandise
that physical retailers stock next to the candy when you check out at the aisle.
These products in short were never good enough to stand out on their own, and the lack of
branding on Wish and All The Express made it even more obvious that these products were
not really designed to last and that the merchants themselves were not in it for the long haul.
At the core, sellers on Wish and All The Express are flippers.
There are people who are just looking to move on as much volume of whatever product they
got their hands on as quickly as possible and as anonymously as possible, as their focus
is not in building a brand or forging long-term relationships with customers.
As a result, Wish could not build a platform with the same shopping experience of Amazon
or eBay where people visit with clear purchase intent and are looking to research multiple
brands at a time.
If customers did that on Wish, it would only reveal the low utility of the products being
sold, the questionable quality, and their short-lived availability on the platform.
But this is not a new problem.
Dollar stores and discount stores all around the world had solved this decades ago by turning
their shopping experiences into entertaining, unpredictable treasure hunts where customers
will happily wander shelves and dig through inventory to look for deals.
This is in contrast from traditional supermarkets where customers usually go in with a clear
to-do list and in search of a specific brand.
Wish copied the dollar store playbook by making their shopping experience also discovery-based.
When customers landed on Wish.com, they were immediately thrown into a never-ending, always-changing
feed of random cheap products of various categories to entice endless scrolling and impulsive
purchases.
But in Silicon Valley, saying that you want to build an online dollar store just isn't
sexy.
To get that billion-dollar unicorn valuation, you need buzzwords and a greater noble purpose
to show that you're not just doing it for the money.
Wish pitched itself as a disruptive startup selling affordable products to underserved
low-income populations who were too poor to either afford a computer or use Amazon.
Wish bragged about its uniquely mobile first and discovery-based shopping experience that
was built on a mode of proprietary data science capabilities.
The company boasted about harvesting millions of data points every day to fuel, store optimization
and personalization so that platform would always be adapting and present only the most
engaging, interesting and relevant products that had the highest likelihood to purchase
based on each user's interests.
And just like every platform startup of the 2010s, Wish boasted about having network effects
like Facebook, where the more users, the more data points on its platform, the stronger
its underlying data science would become, which in turn would translate to a better
shopping experience, stronger sales for merchants, and over time, organically bring in more
new users and merchants to the platform.
As we covered in the Under Armour episode earlier this season, data is not a moat, and
by itself, it can't make up for product quality.
The data science, proprietary algorithms, and shopping personalization that Wish bragged
about was fundamentally not any different from what Amazon and eBay had already accomplished
for their own platforms decades ago.
To dance around the inherent issues of product quality, slow snail mail delivery, and dodgy
sales tactics, Wish spun that the problem was you and not them.
Quote, while e-commerce grew from 3% of global commerce in 2010 to 14% in 2019, e-commerce
companies have largely focused on serving affluent customers by offering branded goods
and prioritizing convenience over price.
However, 44% of the United States and 85% of Europeans have a household income of less
than $75,000 and cannot afford many traditional e-commerce offerings.
Wish's point is that while you and I might think the products on their platform are inferior,
cheap, and crappy, we are actually blinded by privilege, and that the products being sold
are affordable, useful, and acceptable for low-income Americans and Europeans.
Silicon Valley ate up this story, and Wish skyrocketed into a multi-billion-dollar unicorn
in less than a decade, yet that same $10 billion private valuation would melt like a hot knife
through butter under the scrutiny of the public markets.
Like most, if not all, tech IPOs, Wish was essentially nothing more than a pump and dump.
Wish's valuation has dropped more than 99% since its IPO in 2020, but the venture capitalists
and founders have all made out with their riches, laughing their way to the bank as
the company burns.
The only thing keeping Wish from being delisted on the Nasdaq these days as a penny stock
has been a 30-to-1 reverse split.
While some of the company's decline in valuation can be attributed to the current recession,
the realities that Wish's numbers at IPO and even today are abysmal.
It's not a case of that the company just needs more time to execute, it's more so
that the numbers themselves are so bad that they just can't be improved.
No change in leadership or strategy could hide the reality that there was simply no
real business model.
For a platform startup that didn't own any warehouses, didn't handle any logistics,
didn't have any physical assets, and didn't really provide anything but software, Wish
was entirely unsustainable.
Like most tech pump and dumps, Wish had deflected concerns around sustainability by focusing
on top-line growth and promising that profits would naturally come over time.
The company had done just that in private, growing revenue from $144 million in 2015
to $1.9 billion at IPO.
Like Amazon, Wish makes its money as a platform by taking a 10-to-20% commission from the
merchants off every purchase.
The inherent challenge here is that taking commission off the sale of a $5-to-10 product
is a whole different ballgame than taking commission off a $40-to-60 product.
Contrary to Amazon, Wish needed to make up for its poor unit economics with sheer volume.
The VCs, Wish likely compared its trajectory to Amazon, where Jeff Bezos famously gave
up profits to reinvest into his platform.
And after enough years of investment, Wish believed that its own operating margins would
turn positive just like it did for Amazon.
The distinction here is that with Amazon, you could actually see the literal physical
output of what that money was going towards in the warehouses, distribution centers, and
offices that were popping up around the country.
Wish was just a software platform, which meant that all the hundreds of millions of
dollars that the startup was spending beyond its means wasn't going towards any capital
expenditures or long live assets.
Since 2015, Wish had posted hundreds of millions of dollars in operating losses, and these
losses were not improving.
Wish burned millions of dollars on basic operating expenses to keep its platform running.
While one might think that a self-proclaimed data science company would meant that the
company would naturally spend big on engineers, R&D made up less than 5% of annual revenue
and accounted for no more than 5% of operating expenses every year.
Companies will always invest the most in whatever they believe will lead to the highest returns.
If Wish had truly believed that algorithms and data science and personalization would
directly unlock greater spend and other business efficiencies on the platform, the company would
easily have put its money where its mouth was.
Despite being engineers themselves and openly declaring data to be its competitive advantage,
Wish's founders both knew enough not to overinvest in R&D.
But Wish, Peter Skowiski and Danny Zhang knew what Kevin at Under Armour didn't know,
which was that data science cannot unlock any substantial innovation or business value
and at best only generates marginal improvements.
Wish burned the most money every year in sales and marketing, which alone cost 70 to 90%
of annual revenue.
That means that for every $1 that Wish earned in revenue, the company was burning 70 to
90 cents of that dollar on sales and marketing alone.
The numbers get even wilder when we segment out the advertising costs, which made up over
90% of the entire sales and marketing expense.
Wish had to spend so much on advertising because convincing low income consumers who are just
surviving to buy non-essential goods with their already little disposable income is
a predictably difficult endeavor.
The poor make for low quality customers in that they're low earners, they're tiny
spenders, they don't have the room and time for brand loyalty, they generally live extreme
lifestyles and are by nature just high churned users.
This was why Amazon and other e-commerce platforms before Wish had never bothered to chase the
low income market in the first place.
Wish had to regularly spend big to reach and capture this fickle audience, but the truth
was that these customers were worth very little.
At IPO, Wish tried to show off that their platform had stickiness and that their customers
were increasing their spend over time, pointing out that the average lifetime value of their
users had grown from $10 to $30 in revenue by year 4.
A $30 LTV per user is depressingly low.
If we assume that Wish took a 15% commission, that means that a user spent on average just
$50 per year on the platform.
Wish had to keep spending big on advertising to constantly pull in new users to replace
those that had churned, and even as the number of active buyers grew from 18 million in 2015
to 62 million by 2019, the company was not getting any closer to profitability.
Looking at Wish's financials, there was still some merit to the whole platform idea.
Wish's initial gross margins were high, especially in comparison to Amazon, as its
cost of revenue was really just the cost of hosting software.
But all those gross profits were chewed up by advertising, and at the time of IPO, there
were plenty of signs that Wish's growth strategy of burning billions annually on online ads
was at a point of diminishing returns.
Despite spending $3 billion in three consecutive years on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and
YouTube ads, the number of active buyers on Wish plateaued from 2018 and 2020.
Wish was burning more cash than it was generating every year, with net cash from operating activities
and free cash flow both in the negatives.
As we covered before in the Uber and Open Door episodes, unprofitable tech startups
typically used adjusted EBITDA as a way to positively spin numbers that look horrific
under generally accepted accounting principles.
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margins are generally quite dangerous, non-regulated,
untrustworthy metrics as each company comes up with its own definition, and they get
to cherry pick whatever numbers that will make their losses look better and their margins
fatter.
But Wish's base numbers were so rough that the company had no room to even maneuver.
Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margins, metrics that Wish pushed as more accurate
representations of their business were just as bleak as the actual underlying numbers.
Even by the company's own charitable definition, Wish was losing money on every transaction
and nowhere close to profitability, despite being a software-only platform without the
costs and overhead and logistics of Amazon.
At IPO, Wish was led by its founder and CEO Peter Skowiski.
Peter's tenure was constantly overshadowed by news that were somehow even worse than
the company's numbers.
At the time of IPO, Donald Trump was the president of the United States, and he had designated
China as public enemy number one to the American economy.
His economic policy was built on the belief that other countries, most notably China,
had taken advantage of these historic trade policies and flooded the markets with cheap
imports at the expense of American businesses.
Trump's trade war extended not just to the import of Chinese goods into the US by freight,
but also to the same generously subsidized postal rates of mail sent from China to the
United States.
The US threatened to quit the UPU unless the China to US postal rates were changed.
Under intense political pressure, the rates were reformed and the average cost of shipping
mail and packages from China to the United States increased 50% overnight, threatening
Wish's entire business.
Chinese merchants could no longer maintain their same margins without raising prices
or now charging for shipping, both of which hurt Wish's ability to compete on cost as
a platform.
With such headwinds, Peter focused on involving Wish to be a platform that was less China
dependent to carry products with greater utility and to drive retention from existing users.
Under Peter, Wish expanded product categories, briefly experimented with bigger and more
expensive products like furniture and branded electronics, and recruited merchants based
in Latin America and Eastern Europe to reduce their reliance on China.
Business is fair in that you are generally compensated based on the value that you create.
If you want to make more money, you have to create more value, and you create greater
value by solving bigger problems.
When you pick only the easy problems to solve, you create and capture much less value.
Thus, if Wish wanted to stay as a passive, software-only platform with zero involvement
in logistics and product quality, the business performance in the shopping experience would
remain just as terrible as ever.
The company needed to create more value for its users and for its merchants in order to
have any chance of achieving profitability.
As a direct response to the postal changes, Wish began operating warehouses on its own
and taking on responsibility for first-mile collection and last-mile delivery.
Logistics quickly became fast-growing supplemental revenue streams where merchants would pay
to outsource delivery to Wish as the platform.
This greater control in turn helped cut down average delivery times from months into weeks
as Wish began storing more and more product inventory locally in its own warehouses.
Later even took a page from Western Union and partnered with local brick-and-mortar businesses
to serve as makeshift fulfillment centers so shipments could be batched and customers
could pick up the orders themselves to save on shipping costs.
Merchants could now also pay Wish for advertising services so that their products would be promoted
ahead of others on the platform.
These new revenue streams were all-in-truth table stakes for any modern online marketplace
and Wish was years late in this implementation, but late is certainly better than never.
By evolving beyond just one flat sales commission income stream, Wish surpassed $2 billion combined
in revenue in 2020 yet remained just as far from profitability as before.
Wish's gross margins declined dramatically as its cost of doing business skyrocketed with
the increased overhead and involvement in logistics.
Wish's margins have since continuously declined year-over-year resembling those much closer
to that of Amazon.
Wish's new gross margins, interestingly enough, as an e-commerce platform, are generally
lower than when you compared to the gross margins of product manufacturers and dedicated
wholesalers, meaning that you would probably make more money selling clothes on Wish than
you would operating Wish itself as a platform.
The IPO had shined a light on the various skeletons hiding in Wish's closet, the poor user
retention, the insane advertising spend, and the weak customer lifetime value.
At the same time, the era of cheap online advertising had come to an end.
B2C startups as well as thousands of other legacy brands flooded social media and drove
advertising costs online to record levels as demand exceeded supply.
These headwinds forced Wish to move away from its historic, reckless mindset of acquiring
users at any cost and towards a more sustainable approach of retention and expansion.
From 2019 onwards, the company dramatically cut back on its ad budget, yet it couldn't
afford to turn off the spigot.
Without the crutch of advertising to combat churn, Wish was compelled to take the first-ever
steps to clean up the wild west of a marketplace that it had created.
It was only in 2021 when Wish finally focused on quality.
They published standards for merchants to abide by, they started ranking sellers internally
based on their performance, and they incentivized merchants to think longer term with the promise
of low commission and priority placement for good ratings.
Wish was still the cheapest game in town, but the quality of users was still so dreadful
that the company had to even partner with Klarna to make its low prices and even lower
quality products more tolerable to customers.
To his credit, Peter actually seemed committed to taking on these challenges and publicly
admitted his past mistakes around personnel and strategy.
Quote, I'd like to remind everyone we're not satisfied with these results and the outlook.
We all know that we can do better.
We're taking action to improve our performance for the long term, especially with a focus
on enhancing the user experience and increasing retention.
We look forward to providing an update on our next call in November.
Yet Peter would never make it to November.
Instead, he was forced to resign as CEO by the board and just two months after being
pushed out, Peter resigned from the board as well and disassociated himself from his
own startup entirely.
In the exact same statement announcing Peter's resignation as CEO, the board publicly committed
to finding his successor in three months.
The speed at which Peter exited his own company and the equally hasty three month deadline
to find a new CEO suggests that Peter's departure was most likely unplanned, unfriendly
and chaotic.
But Peter needs no sympathy as he had already made out with his millions long before the
stock crashed.
Wish appointed Vijay Talwar, a former Footlocker executive to take over as the CEO of Wish
in January of 2022.
Vijay's qualifications and claim to fame was turning around Footlocker's online business
to become the shoe retailer's most profitable and fastest growing segment.
But these accomplishments seem a little overblown when we poke at the numbers.
Regardless, Vijay took the helm at Wish and publicly promised to turn around the sinking
platform.
Since rocket ship user growth and annual billion dollar ad spend was no longer realistic,
the company could no longer bet on volume alone to make up for its negative margins.
Vijay's first move was to lay off 15% of the company to reduce headcount and to improve
the chances of profitability.
His streamlining extended into geographies as Wish cut operations in 79 countries to
focus on better serving existing customers in North America and Western Europe.
Vijay's final contribution as CEO was to rebrand Wish to demonstrate to the world
that the platform was not the same Wild West as it was before.
Yet Vijay brought no vision of his own and was fired as CEO in September, less than one
year on the job.
And like Peter before, Vijay needs no sympathy as he got paid $6 million for nine months
of work.
Wish is now on its third CEO in two years in Jo Yan, a career professional who made
his name in Asia as the former general manager for Google and Stripe in mainland China.
Wish's business has continued to take knockout blows as the recession in the US, the war
in Ukraine, the prolonged COVID lockdown of China and inflation have all cut into discretionary
spending in Wish's customer base.
Wish had historically proclaimed itself as a mobile first platform as the only way to
sign up and buy things on Wish was through its mobile app.
Yet the company is now in a desperate state where every purchase and every user counts,
no matter from where, how little, or how few there are.
As a result, the company has had no choice but to lower the gates as customers can now
browse and transact on Wish without having to go through the mobile app.
The historic claim of Wish being a mobile first platform is now completely obsolete.
While Peter had relied on soft incentives to encourage better merchant behavior and
product standards, Joe has taken far more aggressive steps to clean up the platform
in banning low-rated sellers, capping the number of merchants on the platform, and providing
customers with quality guarantees.
Under Joe, Wish has tried to improve the core shopping experience by shortening delivery
times from four weeks to a target of two weeks, but this is only possible when products are
stored in bulk locally and not sent individually overseas.
The increased carrying costs of storing more product at more warehouses across North America
and Europe just to ship their product faster to customers' doors has only shredded the
company's margins.
Operating margins, net losses, and all the metrics by Wish's own definition have ultimately
only worsened over time.
Wish is truly an estate where they're damned if they do and damned if they don't.
They can't raise prices without alienating their core low-income customer base to improve
the unit economics, but they also can't bring in new users without modernizing the
platform logistics and improving the shopping experience, both of which are costly investments.
The harsh reality is that there is ultimately no magical strategy or solution to fixing
a business model that just simply doesn't work.
The logical question is that if Wish doesn't work as a business, then how is AliExpress
still alive?
The main difference between Wish and AliExpress is that Alibaba hasn't bothered to build
a big business out of AliExpress.
The main difference between Wish and AliExpress is that Alibaba hasn't bothered to build
AliExpress.
AliExpress was created around the same time as Wish to extend the core Alibaba platform
to help Chinese merchants sell directly to customers in other countries.
Wish targeted low-income households in prime consumer markets like North America where
e-commerce and product standards are all well-established, but AliExpress in contrast since its inception
has targeted emerging markets like Russia, Spain, and Brazil where e-commerce is limited
and product standards as a whole are underdeveloped.
AliExpress historically accounts for less than 5% of all of Alibaba's revenue and
strategically has taken a backseat compared to the company's other ventures like cloud
computing and entertainment.
But despite the minimal investment, AliExpress has come up with the exact same roadmap as
Wish over the same period of time, evolving from a Wild West marketplace with a flat
commission model into a gradually curated, localized, improved shopping experience that
provides logistics to merchants for a fee.
AliExpress's current goal, just like Wish, has been to shorten delivery times from weeks
into days and the solution is the same in needing to store more product locally on demand
rather than distributing one at a time from overseas.
Despite operating for the same amount of time and at a much smaller scale, AliExpress, just
like Wish, has never turned a profit, but it's of no concern to Alibaba as they enjoy
plenty of profits and cash flow from its other income streams to indefinitely subsidize
this B2C venture.
The most prevalent question is that if all of this is well known and public information,
then why does Timu even exist?
Why would any company throw in so much good money after the bad to chase a business model
that past companies have already proven to be largely unsustainable?
Timu is the latest venture from the Chinese e-commerce giant Pingdo-Do.
Pingdo-Do, or PDD for short, was founded in 2015 and is one of the strangest modern day
businesses.
If their numbers are to be trusted, this tiny startup somehow grew from zero to one of China's
biggest online retailers in just three years.
PDD gained popularity in China for its group purchase model where customers can pull in
friends and family into their orders so that they can increase the order quantities and
then collectively unlock greater savings.
PDD's success as a platform in China, if real, is as much a product of culture as it
is of technology.
While shopping is generally a solitary, personal, individualistic, and highly efficient activity
in the West, shopping in China is a more communal and social activity that's built
on the same collectivism and cultural isolationism of modern Chinese society.
The point here is that PDD as a platform in its design can only be successful in China.
As PDD has scaled, the company has followed the same predictable growth playbook of other
established e-commerce companies around the world.
They've used data to improve their product recommendations, to personalize the shopping
experience for users, to build out their own warehouses, to construct their own distribution
centers, to provide logistics to merchants for a fee, to sell its own private label goods
on its marketplace like Amazon Basics, and even rolling out a grocery delivery service
like Instacart.
PDD's main challenge these days is that the company has hit a ceiling in terms of what
it can accomplish by operating in China alone.
The only way to sustain its historic double or triple digit growth is to go overseas,
but the core group purchase platform is simply not translatable to the West.
More than that, it would only be foolish to go head-to-head against Amazon in its home
court competing for the same users, and especially as a foreign brand.
PDD has reaped millions of dollars year over year from the American equity markets, where
the company's rapid rise and impressive, non-regulated financials have painted the
pictures of an unstoppable, fast-growing tech rocket ship in the world's second-largest
economy.
Even though no American can even access PDD, it hasn't stopped retail investors from diving
in head-first and propelling Pindodo's valuation to even higher than that of Alibaba in less
than three years.
PDD's insane growth has fueled its radical valuation on the American equity markets,
which is in turn enable the company to sell shares at spectacular premiums, enriching
both shareholders and insiders alike.
But with their core platform now plateauing in China, the only way to keep up growth is
to enter the U.S.
But with Amazon firmly entrenched in the middle and upper end of the market, PDD's best
bet is at the bottom.
Quote, as we reach our current scale, investors should not expect us to continuously deliver
high growth.
As our user base reaches its current scale, our focus now is on how to serve our existing
880 million Chinese users and how to improve their trust and mind share.
Our team has started out roughly half a year ago, and given the early stage nature, the
financial impact from this business is relatively small.
We are entering new markets, so we need to understand customers.
Our team is laser focused on understanding and accepting different cultural preferences,
social environments, and consumer demand with the aim of creating more unique value.
Timu is young, experimental, and unproven, but that hasn't stopped PDD from promoting
it everywhere it can, even at the Super Bowl.
Like with Aliexpress and Alibaba, Timu only works today because it's subsidized by a
mature core business.
Timu's existence is fundamentally borne out of PDD's urgency to maintain its double
digit growth and to keep up its equity valuations.
In business, cost, quality, and speed are traditionally presented in the form of a triangle
where companies can realistically only achieve two of these things at a time.
No business can achieve all three, yet Timu is burning millions of dollars to challenge
this age-old paradigm by offering customers unprecedented speed, price, and value, promising
generous 90-day refunds, 30-day price adjustments, free shipping, and delivery within two weeks
or less to squash its weakening rivals.
Wish is a tale of not just another Silicon Valley pump and dump, but also a real-world
reminder that the software platform business is a myth and that online businesses are
not any more advantageous than traditional brick-and-mortar ones.
In business, we are all compensated based on the value that we generate.
When you operate as a software-only platform like Wish and like how many other startups
do, you're really only solving the easy problems.
Building a website and facilitating a transaction between two parties is ultimately not that
difficult, especially when the transaction is worth less than a meal at McDonald's.
Selling cheap Chinese junk is actually a proven business in every part of the world, whether
that's the mighty dollar store or the random peddlers that sell cheap souvenirs at tourist
destinations.
But when you try to do the same thing exclusively online, where visitors can leave just as fast
with a click of a button, where customers can't touch and feel what they're buying
and they have no intent or pressure to splurge, the work you have to do to build up that trust
and urgency virtually is monumental.
Only time will tell if Timu will be sustainable or if he'll be another flash in the pan,
but if the results of AliExpress and Wish are anything to go off of, the odds are completely
stacked against Timu.
