Screaming on roller coasters, getting splashed on log rides, ramming friends in bumper cars,
and riding on carousels with family are treasured memories for those who grew up in the 2000s
and earlier.
The amusement park just like the shopping mall and movie theater was once a seemingly
indispensable establishment for every major metropolitan.
In the eras before the internet and where availability mattered above all else, the
amusement park thrived as a provider of affordable recreation.
People of all ages could have fun at the park for an entire day which is $20-$30 and within
a 1-2 hour drive from their homes.
Yet fast forward to the present and amusement parks are a dying breed in the modern age.
In the past amusement parks were defined by their rides like how fast a certain roller
coaster traveled or how steep a drop tower was.
Nowadays what matters most for an amusement park is intellectual property.
With the emergence of the Disney adult, consumers around the world have shown a preference
for IP based theme parks like Universal Studios and Disneyland where the branded attractions,
concessions, and merchandise have fueled above average spending and immense popularity.
Consumers have shown an insatiable appetite to immerse themselves in their favorite media
franchises, paying without hesitation for $9 butter beer from Harry Potter, $10 pink
sprinkle donuts from The Simpsons, $12 Mario Strawberry Soda from Nintendo, $15 meat on
the bone from One Piece, $8 Blue Milk from Star Wars, and $7 Cheesecake Orbs from the
Marvel Cinematic Universe.
Beyond rides and concessions, the IPs come to life at these parks where visitors get to
mingle shoulder to shoulder with bubbly costume performers who behave just like their big
screen blockbuster equivalents.
While park goers soak up this magical atmosphere, underneath every costume is a blue collar
worker who's sweating buckets and being paid minimum wage to entertain thousands of strangers
every day.
The themed foods, branded attractions, exclusive merchandise, and trademark characters have
elevated experiences and expectations to the point where conventional amusement parks can
no longer compete with their generic foods, mascots, and rides.
When customers want Space Mountain, The Avengers Campus, The Millennium Falcon, Diagon Alley,
Minions, and Elsa, having the fastest roller coaster is suddenly a lot less relevant.
While the local park will always be more convenient and affordable with admissions and run-of-the-mill
concessions, compared to Disney and Universal, who charge two to five times more for entry
alone, customers ultimately vote with their wallet.
In this day and age, customers have demonstrated through their spend, attendance, and virality
that they'd rather make a special trip to Disney and Universal than go to the basic
regional amusement park.
In this episode, we'll cover the business of roller coasters through the lens of Six
Flags, the largest operator of amusement parks in the world, and the many strategies
that the company has employed to survive, differentiate itself, and to capture whatever
share that remains in this ultra-competitive market.
For older generations, the amusement park was a unique place of happiness and entertainment
in a time where mental health was taboo.
And this episode is sponsored by BetterHelp, the leader in affordable, accessible online
therapy.
In my early 20s, I grinded after graduation, like many of my peers, working long hours,
appeasing my bosses, coming in on weekends, and ignoring personal obligations just so
I could be the highest performer in corporate America.
I worked like this for years, always stressed, irritable, impatient, and cranky, but when
my products were randomly killed off and my engineering teams were fired, did I realize
I needed help?
I wanted to become a better person and to still work hard, but no longer at the expense
of family, friends, and my own mental health.
I went to therapy.
Being a non-judgmental professional and a safe environment was cathartic and healing
for me.
Just talking about my problems and recognizing them out loud was profound.
Therapy is beneficial for everyone, even 20-year-old dudes like me, and BetterHelp's
mission is to make therapy more affordable and accessible.
BetterHelp is a platform that makes finding a therapist easier as it's fully online
and remote.
By just filling out a few questions, BetterHelp can match you to a professional therapist
in as little as a few days, and if you don't click with your matched therapist, you can
easily switch to a new one at no additional cost without stressing about insurance and
networks.
If you're stressed or struggling, consider BetterHelp.
Therapy was invaluable for me and my times of need, and when you visit betterhelp.com
slash MBA, you can get 10% off your first month of therapy.
Mental health is just as important as physical health, and online therapy is one of the cheapest,
easiest, and most effective ways to take care of yourself.
Like going to the gym or having a good diet, it doesn't hurt to try therapy.
Thank you to BetterHelp for supporting Modern MBA and making this episode possible.
To understand the business of amusement parks, we can draw from Roller Coaster Tycoon.
For people who aren't familiar, Roller Coaster Tycoon is a popular simulation game where
you can build and manage your own amusement park.
You choose which rides go where, what types of rides to offer, where to place footpaths
to direct visitors from one attraction to the next, where to place the bathrooms, where
to put concession stands to optimize food and drink sales, and how much staff to hire
to keep the park running smoothly.
All while maximizing profits, guest satisfaction, park appeal, property value, and ROI from
the limited budget available.
Just like in real life, there are consequences to poor planning and bad investments.
If there aren't enough security guards, the park will become chaotic and suffer vandalism.
Guests will complain about hygiene if there aren't enough bathrooms or janitors.
If there are too many visitors, then guest happiness will decrease with the overcrowding.
If a ride is too intense, then guests will get sick.
If a ride is too fast, the chance of accidents increase.
If there aren't enough handymen to perform maintenance, then the roller coasters will
break down.
If the prices are too high, then customers won't spend.
And if the rides aren't regularly renovated, then visitors will get bored and park appeal
will decrease.
While Roller Coaster Tycoon nails that planning and maintenance are integral to the success
of any amusement park, there are a variety of other factors outside of this video game
depiction that make the overall business so uniquely difficult.
The core business model of the amusement park is fairly straightforward.
You pull in as many customers as you can, and you entertain them so they stay as long
as possible and spend as much as possible.
Once customers are inside the park, you can monetize them aggressively with high markups
on food and merchandise to squeeze more dollars from entry tickets.
At cruise ships, amusement parks are capital intensive businesses where continuous monetization
by volume and margin are necessary to offset the huge operating costs and massive overhead.
As we covered in the episode on cruises, a single cruise ship costs over half a billion
dollars.
And amusement parks are no different in that the construction of a single park falls in
the same ballpark with costs of 400 to 800 million dollars, whereas the top of the line
Disney or Universal theme park ranges in the billions.
Despite comparable capital requirements to cruises, the barriers to entry are actually
much higher for amusement parks.
The bottleneck for amusement parks is not really just the labor, engineering or material,
but rather in the land.
Parks conventionally build appeal by having one or two centerpiece roller coasters that
goes super fast, super high, and have maximum airtime.
Even if the average visitor is too scared to ride them, these thrill rides are by design
defining attractions that are super tall, super long, and super wide, so parks generally
build other attractions around them to generate atmosphere, attention, and curb appeal.
But to go fast and high, these roller coasters need lots of space, mile long tracks, and
can eat up 5 to 10 acres by themselves.
On the flip side, smaller rides like kiddie coasters are significantly more space efficient
with footprints of half an acre or less, but they're also a lot less memorable to visitors.
If a park has too many thrill rides, then the family business will be hard to attract
and capture, whereas a park with too many kiddie coasters and not enough thrill rides
will lose the teenager and adult market.
While there have been innovations in recent years with space efficient vertical oriented
roller coasters that don't require lift hills, trade-offs still remain.
These vertical rides have lower capacity, which means slower loads and longer wait time for
guests.
Another alternative are indoor rides, like the Harry Potter or Transformers experiences
at Universal, where robotic arms on a track rotate, tilt, and twist seats in movements
that are synchronized with VFX that's projected on screen in front of riders.
These rides are space efficient and even feature animatronics that blow water, heat, or air,
but are also delicate and costly systems that require top end hardware, custom VFX, and
years of intricate planning.
With all roller coasters, there's a question of build versus buy.
You can engineer your own from the ground up for maximum originality points, or you
can settle for ready-made rides from manufacturers with preset specifications.
If you want to make lots of money, you need as many rides and attractions as possible
to maximize appeal and satisfaction, which requires both capital and land, with the latter
being much harder to acquire.
The average amusement park has a footprint between 100 to 500 acres.
There is no hard rule in the industry that a successful amusement park must be over
100 acres.
There are plenty of small independent parks that are still live to this day on compact
plots of land, like the two-acre Adventure City in Southern California.
While these small parks adjust for their lesser offerings with cheaper tickets, they also
rarely attract huge crowds or high spenders as consumers can experience everything they
have to offer in half a day or less.
The fundamental difference between grossing thousands and millions as an amusement park
comes down to size and land.
In this age where demand for housing is boiling over around the world, inventory of vacant
commercial lots of 100 to 500 acres is largely non-existent.
While there are always thousands of acres of undeveloped land that's for sale throughout
the Midwest, the South, and other remote regions in the United States, these lots are generally
not zoned for commercial recreation or they're simply too far from any major urban market.
Any land in a metropolitan area these days that's still available, which could support
an amusement park, is just too expensive or worth far more being developed for residential
or commercial use.
Municipalities can also be an obstacle as any high-profile, land-intensive, privatized
recreational infrastructure like the taxpayer-funded sports stadiums of the past decade would be
subject to intense public and political scrutiny.
As an outdoors establishment, amusement parks are seasonal businesses where attendance,
engagement, and earnings are dependent on the weather.
Parks really only make money two quarters out of the year as a vast majority of business
occurs between the months of May and September.
What people often overlook is that the average amusement park is actually a regional business
that serves locals.
Disney and Universal are exceptions where their customer base are mostly international tourists
and out-of-towners making pre-planned pilgrimages.
As a result, location is even more important for conventional, non-IP-based amusement
parks as they need to be within a 50 to 100 mile radius of a major metropolitan area where
locals can get into their cars, arrive before noon, and make it back home before midnight
all in one day.
Parks scale staffing by attendance and regularly bring on hundreds or thousands of minimum
wage unskilled short-term workers to operate in the high season.
In short, there needs to be a market with enough consumers and workers close by for
an amusement park to be successful.
Even if you get all the land, capital, planning, and rides in place, the only way to grow is
to keep spending.
Since the customer base is mostly going to be locals, they'll inevitably get bored
after a few visits.
On top of non-stop ride maintenance to ensure gas safety, renovation is essential to maintaining
engagement and driving retention.
If you have the land, you can always expand by adding more to the park, but more likely
than not, your option is to remodel the existing rides into newer experiences.
While renovations are never as expensive as the initial construction, remodeling is still
significant capital expenditure that costs millions of dollars every year.
To demonstrate just how real the barriers to entry are in this industry, in the past
40 plus years, there's not been a single new regional amusement park in the United
States.
Every major market in the country is already served by an entrenched player, and burning
over half a billion dollars to chase second place is a high-risk, low-reward strategy
that very few investors are interested in.
The last entrant was the Hard Rock Park in South Carolina that lasted just one year before
going under in 2009.
Hard Rock Park is just one of hundreds of other failed amusement parks in the world,
and now nearly 15 years after its closure, only one company, FedEx, has been able to
find some use from that abandoned land.
Given how much it takes to make a single park successful, there's no established third
party arrangement in the industry like franchising, where someone else will run the park for you
and give you a royalty when they're already faced with so much overhead and day-to-day
complexity.
All these factors have made it so that legacy parks like Six Flags have been able to stay
alive simply by virtue of having built their parks in the 70s or earlier.
Six Flags portfolio consists of both amusement parks and water parks.
While the number of parks under company ownership has gradually decreased over the past 20 years,
Six Flags remains the largest regional amusement park operator in the world.
On the West Coast, Six Flags Discovery Kingdom serves the San Francisco Bay Area and Northern
California while Six Flags Magic Mountain caters to Los Angeles and the greater Southern
California.
On the East Coast, Six Flags New England serves Providence, Boston, and New Haven.
Six Flags Great Adventure in New Jersey also caters to New York City and Philadelphia,
and Six Flags in Maryland hits DC and Baltimore.
In the Midwest, Six Flags Great America and Hurricane Harbor fill demand in from Chicago
and Milwaukee.
And in the South, Six Flags over Georgia is just a 20-minute drive from Atlanta, Six Flags
over Texas, Targets Dallas, and Six Flags Fiesta Texas cover San Antonio, Houston,
and Austin.
The coverage and entrenchment of Six Flags in these leading consumer markets make the
company an established, immovable legacy player.
What's interesting is that Six Flags has only built three of these parks themselves
with the remainder being rebranded acquisitions.
In this industry, first mover advantage is a true lasting moat, and the number and distribution
of parks across the United States, Mexico, and Canada enable Six Flags not just to make
more money, but also to safeguard against the weather and the economy.
If there's a local downturn or severe rain in one region, the other unaffected parks
can pick up the slack.
Since the 70s, Six Flags has had one main strategy, to have the most legendary, spectacular,
and thrilling roller coasters in the world.
Since the company can't compete on intellectual property, the focus has been on maximizing
spectacle.
Real Capital is the official tagline given to every Six Flags park, and the company
regularly pushes the boundaries of what's possible.
Every year, Six Flags introduces groundbreaking rides, with endless examples through its history
like New Revolution, which was the world's tallest roller coaster at opening in 1976,
Superman, which was the world's tallest and first ever roller coaster to reach speeds
of 100 miles per hour in 1997, X2 was the first ever fourth dimension roller coaster
upon opening in 2002, King Dekas in 2005 remains the fastest ride in the continent and the
tallest in the world, Zumanjara is the world's tallest drop tower, while the Goliath is the
fastest wooden roller coaster, both of which opened to the public in 2014, and the Jersey
Devil in 2020 broke records as the tallest and fastest single rail coaster in the world.
Quote, we believe that you should have news in every park every year.
This is different from what traditional theme parks do, where they'll put in a big coaster
in a few of their parks, and then they'll go dark for a year or two while they put coasters
in some of their other parks.
We want to have a new ride or attraction in every park every year.
Even though there are fewer Six Flags parks today than there were 20 years ago, this continuous
differentiation on spectacle and the company's unmatched scale have kept Six Flags up as
a cheaper alternative to Disney and Universal.
Yet the construction and design costs of these rides are not trivial, and the payback
periods are lengthy, as Six Flags invests over $100 million every year in capital expenditures.
$100 million annually is roughly 9 to 10% of Six Flags gross revenue, but 30 to 50%
of operating income, which is ultimately what matters since that's the cash you actually
get after day to day expenses.
Beyond having relatively more extreme thrill rides, Six Flags has tried to adapt to changing
consumer tastes by bringing in intellectual property of its own.
In an attempt to level the playing field with Disney and Universal, Six Flags has branded
its rides and parks over the decades with iconic fictional characters like Bugs Bunny,
Batman, Tweety Bird, Superman, and the Flintstones, a healthy mix of idolized superheroes and
family-friendly animations for appeal to both teenagers and families.
Like everything in the industry that we've seen so far, the cost for just renting these
IPs come at a premium.
Every year, Six Flags pays $3 to $8 million up front as a flat fee to Warner Bros, along
with a 12 to 15% royalty on all branded merchandise in exchange for exclusive rides to license
these characters at their amusement parks.
But just like their box office performance, DC characters just don't have the same
pull as Marvel, Star Wars, Pixar, Nintendo, Harry Potter, Jurassic Park, or even One Piece.
While Six Flags has not grown at the same rate as Disney or Universal, company revenue
has been on a positive trajectory since 2002.
For the past 20 years, admissions has represented the majority of Six Flags annual revenue,
followed by food and merchandise sales inside the park, and then finally sponsorships and
licensing.
Revenue has been on a steady climb at 4% growth year over year for Six Flags, going from $880
million in 2003 to $1.5 billion in 2019 before the pandemic.
The numbers get interesting when we present them on a per-park basis.
In the early 2000s, the average Six Flags grows between $20 to $30 million every year.
In the 2010s before the pandemic, the average Six Flags park grows between $50 to $60 million
every year.
Roughly $30 million come from ticket admissions, while in-park food and merchandise sales make
up the other $20 million.
The average guest at Six Flags in the past decade spent roughly $40, with $25 going towards
entry and $17 on in-park purchases.
But before we go too far, it's important to contextualize the sleep in per-park earning
productivity.
While Six Flags has unmatched scale today, the company was operating at an even greater
scale 20 years ago, albeit unsustainably.
Starting in the 1990s, Six Flags took out over $2 billion of loans to chase first mover
advantage in any market possible, borrowing money to buy parks across the United States,
Germany, Holland, Belgium, and France.
Most of these acquired parks were not performing, hence why they had been put up first sale
in the first place.
Despite selling at multi-million dollar premiums, each park required millions more in post-sales
investment to reach their full potential, but Six Flags believed it uniquely possessed
both the capital and the expertise to quickly turn these assets around.
But many of these acquisitions were inherently constrained by being in markets that were either
too soft or already contested.
The contrast between Disneyland Paris and Disneyland Orlando to this day is a clear
reminder to the industry that there are insurmountable cultural differences.
The lifestyle-oriented and economical European just doesn't have the same appetite, demand,
and standard for amusement parks that overworked capitalist Americans do.
As Six Flags borrowed more money, bought more parks, took on more overhead, and invested
more every year to make each asset successful, the company was in reality digging itself
into a deep hole.
Debt skyrocketed to $2.3 billion and remained there for years, which was two to three times
the total revenue that Six Flags was bringing in every year.
Through the 2000s, Six Flags posted loss after loss and there were little signs that their
strategy was working.
While overall revenue increased with the addition of each additional park, costs also increased
in line at a near one-to-one ratio.
Six Flags did not generate enough cash from operating at times to even cover the annual
interest that was due on its massive debts.
Even in the years where Six Flags didn't buy parks, the company was still not grossing
enough to afford all the renovation and improvements that were occurring in its existing assets.
In a classic story of robbing Peter to pay Paul, Six Flags borrowed money from one place
to pay off debts from another, issuing millions of preferred stock to raise funds, selling
hundreds of millions of dollars worth of bonds, refinancing existing credit lines and
using all these proceeds to repay debt and to maintain liquidity.
The company even went so far as to use some of the debt to pay out dividends to investors
despite being in the red.
And when Six Flags could no longer continue this financial equivalent of Russian roulette,
the company begrudgingly sold off its European division and abandoned underperforming locations,
going from nearly 40 parks in 2003 to just 20 parks by 2007.
Overall revenue improved with the streamlining as did earnings productivity as only the best
parks remained.
The average Six Flags park grossed around $40-50 million in the mid-2000s, nearly double
compared to that of the early 2000s.
But the company continued to kick debt down the road, the losses continued, and when the
Great Recession hit in 2008, it was the straw that finally broke the camel's back.
Recession parks have long sold themselves as recession-proof defensive businesses.
While airlines, cruises, hotels, resorts, and other traditional travel businesses will
lose customers in recession, the parks industry has pushed the argument that people still
need somewhere to escape to despite cutting back on vacations, and amusement parks are
unmatched in the value and the entertainment that they provide.
Despite the industry's positioning, fewer guests came to the park during the Great Recession,
and the ones that did show up spent less than before.
This drop in attendance and by extension revenue brought Six Flags to the point of bankruptcy
in 2009, but its parks remained open.
After a high-profile restructuring, Six Flags emerged from bankruptcy in 2010 as lenders
forgave over a billion dollars of debt in exchange for full ownership.
The new owners who were traumatized from this near-death experience aggressively overhauled
Six Flags' business model and pricing strategy into what it believed would be a safer and
more reliable variant.
This decision would bring success, but it would also dig the company into a different
hole over the next decade, and one that Six Flags is still trying to crawl out of today.
Six Flags went into the 2010s with the laser focus on selling memberships and season passes
over traditional full-priced gate tickets.
Memberships on paper were sticky, recurring revenue in which customers would pay an annual
fee to get unlimited entry and perks every year.
This annual fee was typically spread out into a flexible payment plan, so customers only
needed to pay out a few dollars every month to maintain their membership.
Season passes on the other hand also offered unlimited entry and a few perks, but expired
at the end of every season for a cheaper one-time fee.
These products were advantageous for the company in that Six Flags got to collect payment upfront
at the time of purchase rather than at the time of visit.
Even if customers didn't go to the park, Six Flags would have still made money.
From a psychology standpoint, it also reversed roles in that Six Flags no longer had to convince
customers to come as pass holders and members would naturally feel compelled to visit regularly
to get the most out of their purchase.
In 2010, a one-day entry ticket to Six Flags at the gate cost $30 to $40 and parking would
set you back another $10 to $20.
A season pass that year was priced at just $70.
In 2014, a one-day ticket cost $65, but it was a much better deal to buy the season pass
for $80 or to subscribe to a membership for $100 as those products included free parking.
As long as a season pass holder visited the park at least twice a year, they were saving
$50 per person.
In theory, everyone was a winner.
The value-oriented consumer felt like they got the best deal, fans felt like they were
being rewarded for their loyalty, and Six Flags got to collect and recognize revenue upfront
in a steady, reoccurring, predictable manner.
While Six Flags product strategy was to build as many groundbreaking thrill rides as possible,
their pricing strategy was all about value.
The assumption behind the season passes and memberships is that the lost revenue from discounted
admissions would be easily made up through in-park food and merchandise sales.
In the mind of Six Flags executives, the most important thing was volume.
With such high overhead and fixed costs, they believed it was better to fill each park with
as many bodies as possible versus gatekeeping over a few bucks in admissions.
As long as people were buying something in the park when they visited, those high-margin
sales would be enough to offset the ticket subsidies.
The problem is that Six Flags went overboard, aggressively discounting season passes and
memberships to substantially cheaper price points than one-day tickets while giving away
too much for free with free parking, skip-the-line privileges, and complimentary dining.
With this new focus on value, annual guest attendance for Six Flags grew at a steady
pace from 24 million visitors in 2011 to 30 million by 2016.
If we break out Six Flags revenue into its two main income streams, revenue from park
admissions grew the most at 45% in a nine-year period, going from $452 million in 2010 to
$815 million in 2019.
Food and merchandise sales grew slower at 40% in the same time frame from $348 million
to $574 million, which was solid, but not what Six Flags had been hoping for.
The company had been making every effort to keep ticket prices as flat as possible since
the Great Recession.
In nine years, the average price of a Six Flags ticket increased in line with inflation
at 17%.
In 2010, the average ticket to Six Flags cost $21.26.
In 2019, the average ticket to Six Flags cost just $24.86, which was just $3.60 million
more than what it cost nine years ago.
On an annual basis, we can see how sensitive the company was towards raising ticket prices
and how attached they were to discounting admissions.
In any year where the average ticket price increased, like in 2014, the company would
immediately push the cost back down in the following years.
Subsidizing tickets would not be a big deal if that spend was being recaptured in the
park, but the average spend on food and merchandise per guest had gone up just $1.00 and $12.00
cents in nine years.
Guests on average were spending just $17 to $18 per visit, and it was no secret why.
People were leaving Six Flags, going to their cars, driving to the closest fast food chain
to eat, and then returning to the park, or they were already coming to the park full.
Few people wanted to get ripped off with 10 to $15 plates of frozen chicken strips, fries
and pizza.
The budget-conscious value-oriented consumers that Six Flags targeted were especially conscious
not to fall into such traps.
While Six Flags showered its pass holders and members with massive discounts and perks,
in reality the company was never going to change the nature of bargain hunters.
Rather than improving the in-park concessions, Six Flags opted to simply slap dining onto
the season pass and memberships as a way to upsell and to collect more revenue up front.
For a higher fee, season pass holders could get two free meals, snacks, and drinks every
time they visited.
Headlines were made when a California man revealed that he ate lunch and dinner at his
local Six Flags every day for seven years using just his annual $150 season pass.
This man would drive to Six Flags, drop in for lunch, while this story and individual
is clearly an extreme, it's still an entertaining representation of the excessive discounting
and generosity that Six Flags engaged in during the 2010s just to fill the parks.
There was still enough up front and recurring revenue flowing in from memberships and passes
to keep the company on its positive trajectory.
Through the 2010s, Six Flags revenue grew at a positive pace while the bottom line returned
in the black compared to the red of the prior decade.
Roughly 1.5 million people visited Six Flags every year in the 2010s compared to the sub-million
of the 2000s.
Earning productivity peaked in 2016 as the average Six Flags park grossed over $70 million
a year with roughly $37 million attributed to admissions and the remainder to concessions.
During margin returned to positive digits, which was another welcome improvement compared
to the negative streak of the prior decade.
At this point, season pass and membership holders accounted for 50 to 60% of Six Flags
annual attendance every year.
The pass model was working as desired and the only thing left to do was to slam on the
gas pedal even harder.
In 2016, Six Flags began buying up water parks within a 150 mile radius to their existing
amusement parks with the only goal of selling higher priced combo passes.
The company envisioned that existing season pass holders who were in search of getting
the best deal possible would happily pay an extra $20-40 up front to get unlimited access
to a nearby water park even if they were unlikely to visit it.
In an all too familiar pattern, Six Flags once again began borrowing large sums of money
to finance these acquisitions and long term debt crossed the $2 billion mark once more.
While the water park roll-up strategy helped ensure top line growth, company profits largely
stagnated under this two park strategy as in-park spend remained flat.
To alleviate investor concerns, Six Flags leadership spun a growth story to Wall Street
that international licensing was this fast emerging, high margin, service based, asset
light revenue stream that could quickly help pay down this growing debt.
We did a study a couple years ago that looked at our brand awareness outside the United
States.
Six Flags brand recognition was very, very high, even higher than Universal and Disneyland.
People look at us and say that we at Six Flags have the success and expertise to open up
amusement parks.
We don't invest any of our own money into these deals, we're basically working with
partners who have access to land and funds to build parks.
We're paid for design and development, we get a set fee and once the park is opened
up, we get an ongoing revenue stream and management services and royalties generated
from the park.
There's no capital investment for us.
We start making money on day one.
The company proudly announced it had secured deals with partners in Dubai, Vietnam, Saudi
Arabia and China who had deep pockets and ambitions of their own to build tons of Six
Flags parks in their countries.
When something sounds too good to be true, it usually is.
Like most private cross-border ventures, every single one of these partners turned out to
be either extremely naive or pure snake oil salesman.
The Vietnamese partner Navi Entertainment, an offshoot of a supposed plastic glove factory
vanished overnight just months after the announcement.
The Dubai partner pulled the plug on the Six Flags deal as they found out that they were
already losing too much money on their existing resorts and the Chinese partner defaulted as
soon as payments were due.
And while every other amusement park operator like Cedar Park, Disney and Universal have
all rebounded from COVID, Six Flags remains laggard as attendance and revenue have remained
below pre-pandemic levels.
The pandemic, for better or worse, accelerated the once reliable, value-oriented season
pass holders to critically rethink their spend with Six Flags.
Under the pressures of declining attendance, $2 billion in debt and a non-existent growth
Six Flags candid's longtime CEO in 2022.
His successor didn't mince any words, pointing the finger at the company's long-time discount
strategy as the primary culprit for Six Flags' present-day struggles.
Quote, literally, we have discounted too much, and the philosophy of filling parks was not
the right strategy.
At the end of it all, people did not have a good experience, it was not an experience
that people were willing to pay for.
We only got the discounter, and Six Flags became a cheap daycare center for teenagers
during breaks and summers.
We've eliminated many of our historical discounts, including free or ultra-low price
tickets, and are settling on an approach that balances attendance and revenue.
We have reset our strategy and operational priorities, and at a high level, we're focused
on providing a premium guest experience and will charge prices that are in line with the
value we deliver to our guests.
We believe we have pricing power, but only if we deliver an exceptional guest experience.
The average revenue per guest, both in in-park spend and admissions, skyrocketed in 2023
as going to Six Flags became a lot more expensive under the new CEO.
The reality was that while Six Flags focused on spectacle to win headlines and grab attention
and season past sales to keep the numbers up, the company completely neglected the core
guest experience.
Parks had become overcrowded with too many value-oriented pass holders who weren't spending, parking
lots were congested as too many people had free parking, restaurants inside the park were
taking up to an hour to serve their orders, concession quality had plummeted since food
had mostly been given away for free to drive season past sales, and restrooms were always
dirty since the park was always at maximum capacity.
Everything that wasn't a shiny new roller coaster was just old.
For instance, Six Flags is just now putting in digital screens that will display the real-time
waits for rides and restaurants, which is technology that Universal and Disneyland have
had for years.
There are several lessons from Six Flags worth reinforcing.
One is that it's a mistake to interpret every dollar and every customer as a win without
considering the quality of the dollar and the quality of the customer.
The former CEO ignored years of internal data that showed that guests who came in on discounted
tickets simply did not spend as much time and money as those that paid full price yet
took up the same park capacity.
This learning is applicable even in the world of media, where outsiders and brands tend
to equate every view as the same.
When the lens of either a creator or an advertiser is getting millions of views really a win
if most of those views are actually from teenagers who treat the content as a commodity for them
to kill time with.
In the case of content, the quality of the viewer should matter more than the overall
view count.
Traditional business thinking teaches that losing a customer is a huge negative that
should be avoided at all costs.
But in practice, churn in itself can be healthy.
Businesses will get better by accepting customer attrition rather than bending over backwards
to get customers to stay.
Discounting to keep customers paying or to get first timers in the door is an easy way
out that brings in short term success at the expense of long term sustainability.
With discounting, brands get diluted, the core high value users get neglected and all
the attention goes towards appeasing fickle, low value customers.
Yet discounting remains today a rampant practice across consumer and enterprise sectors as
companies continue to throw everything these days, bundles, perks and discounts just to
unlock the next subscriber or to secure that upcoming renewal.
In the case of Six Flags, the quality of the customer should have mattered more than the
number of customers at the park.
And despite 60 years of operating history, Six Flags is just now trying to quantify for
the first time what the real value of its parks are to the modern consumer, all while
Disney and Universal continue to raise the bar higher and higher every year.
The second lesson here is that the cost to generate any $1 of revenue is just as critical
as the conventional measures of margins and profits.
When we look at Six Flags' top line and bottom line, it looks respectable with healthy double
digit margins and billion dollar revenue.
Given the wary reception by the public markets, Six Flags has no choice but to lean on debt
over equity to maintain liquidity.
And the worst part is that every capital improvement in the amusement park industry, whether in
the form of ride renovations or food overhaul, will naturally be an expensive endeavor.
In the case of Six Flags, debt is not a lifeline or contingency or growth accelerant like it
is for traditional businesses.
Instead, debt is like an IV bag where the steady drip of funds keeps the company alive
even in non-recession, fair weather climates.
There is no lean methodology that can be applied to this naturally bloated and capital intensive
business.
And lenders will continue to let Six Flags borrow as the company's assets, notably
its land, still carry high book value.
From the outside, Six Flags has a seemingly powerful moat.
As no one can get into this industry, and if they do, they'll never be able to reach
their scale in 100 years.
But at the same time, the reality might also be that no one wants to.
These days, a startup will happily boast that they've reached $5 million or $10 million
in ARR, but if they also need to spend two to five times that amount to reach that milestone,
their business is likely not as robust or as momentous as they're making it out to
be.
And the only difference here is that the startup uses equity as their runway and has no collateral
to use debt.
The third lesson is that despite what Wall Street says, reoccurring revenue does not
inherently make for a better or stronger business.
Subscription revenue makes a financially safer business as churn is more gradual, revenue
is more predictable, and forecasts can be more sound, which are all things that only
investors care about.
If your product or service isn't good enough, people will still churn regardless of whether
or not they're paying $10 a month or $100 upfront every year.
The final lesson is that headlines never last.
Six Flags put millions of dollars every year towards building the fastest, tallest, scariest
rides for decades and spent millions more on making sure everyone knew about it.
The reality is that like all splashy marketing announcements, these record-breaking rides
all had relatively short-lived impact and were regarded by the public as one-time novelties.
Yet the mainstream spotlight and the continuous headlines over the decades gave Six Flags
leadership the false confidence that the company branding was so strong they could get away
turning a blind eye towards the core guest experience.
Attention is overrated, fame is fleeting, and the real value in business and in life
is always from the mundane, unglamorous, quiet work behind the scenes that you never see
on camera.
When you're not the mouse or the wizard, you usually don't get a fairytale ending.
But for Six Flags, they'll keep getting chances to write their own as no one else will be
entering into this industry anytime soon.
