Hello. If you have found the ideas I discuss interesting and useful, perhaps you might
consider purchasing my recently released book, Beyond Order. 12 more rules for life, available
from Penguin Random House, in print, or audio format. You could use the links we provide
below or buy through Amazon or at your local bookstore. This new book, Beyond Order, provides
what I hope is a productive and interesting walk through ideas that are both philosophically and
sometimes spiritually meaningful, as well as being immediately implementable and practical.
Beyond Order can be read and understood on its own, but also builds on the concepts that I
developed in my previous books, 12 rules for life, and before that, maps of meaning.
Thanks for listening and enjoy the podcast.
I'm pleased today to be talking to Dr. Ian McGillchrist. I met him in 2018 in London, and
we had the good fortune to have a relatively brief conversation, which was taped and put on
YouTube, and it was very productive. And so now I get to talk to him again, and hopefully for a
longer period of time. Ian is a psychiatrist. Dr. McGillchrist is a psychologist, a psychiatrist,
a former fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, an associate fellow of Green Templeton College,
Oxford. He's lectured all over the world. He's published a number of scientific papers.
He's most well known for his book, The Master and His Emissary, and I think you have a copy of that.
I asked you to get that so that you could show people. The Master and His Emissary,
the divided brain in the making of the Western world, which is an analysis of hemispheric
specialization and its philosophical and scientific significance. And he's working on a new book,
which I have and have started to read a long ways into it at the moment, called The Matter of Things,
which will be forthcoming at some point in the future, and we'll shape some of our discussion
today. He's published broadly, scientifically and publicly, a study of paintings on
of subjects with psychotic illnesses that's coming out, I believe. I'm planning that.
And a series and also forthcoming a series of essays about culture and the brain.
So welcome. Thank you very much for agreeing to talk to me.
That was a huge pleasure, Jordan. Thank you very much.
So one of the things I was rereading the introduction to your new book this morning,
and I was struck by many different topics, but I was particularly interested in your
conception of attention. And so you talk about attention as something that in some sense brings
things into being. I don't think that's a misreading of your writing. And maybe I could
get you to expound on that a bit and to tell me what you think attention is, because I've had a
hell of a time differentiating it from, well, from fluid intelligence, for example, or from
consciousness. It's a word that makes sense when you hear it in the context of a bunch of other
words, but when you extract it out from that context and try to grip it, it falls apart in
your grasp. So I think one could say that attention is the way in which the individual disposes
his or her attention. It's a disposition of one's consciousness. So attention is how you
dispose your consciousness towards the world. And when I discovered, when I was researching
the master and his emissary, the book that's now 10 years old,
I came across this fascinating thing that one of the most fundamental differences
between the hemispheres is their way of attending. And it didn't entirely hit me at the time how
important it is. But we can talk about that later. But you were asking the rather sort of
interesting philosophical question about how attention helps to bring things into being.
And I think it does both generally and rather in a very particular sense in the left hemisphere.
Generally, what I mean is that how you attend to the world depends,
you know, on that depends what world you find. The qualities of the world that comes to your
attention is determined by the quality of the attention you bring to it. And
that's a very significant statement. I was talking to someone the other day who's somewhat
theologically minded. And he was also very interested in the role that attention played on
in constituting the world. I mean, you pay attention to things that you value one way or
another. And what that means is that the world tends to manifest itself in relationship to
your value structure. And that that's a very troublesome idea, in some sense, with regards
to our conceptions of the objective world, because it's not easy to it's not easy to parse out what's
objective, when what manifests itself to you is dependent in large part on what you value.
It's very complicated to sort that all out.
Well, possibly very much later, we can come to the question of what objective and subjective
mean and how one can, I think it's a mistaken dichotomy. I think one can interpret the words
interpret the words in important ways that give them meaning. But I think to think of the just
being an objective world out there and a subjective world in here is one of the problems with
modern Western philosophy. But to come back to the creation of the world, I was going to say that
not only does it sort of bring into the world the world that you know, which is after all by
definition the only world you will ever know. But it also changes who you are. So the quality of
the attention you pay changes you, the attender. So it's a very profound difference. And in the
first book, the master and his emissary, one of the things I was expounding was how this business
of attention creates a whole distinct world. So the hemispheres have evolved to two different
sets of values. You mentioned values, and it's very germane. They have different
reasons for existing and therefore have different things they respond to.
And what I have tried to explain in that book is that this gives rise to a whole way
of seeing the world in a whole world, which is not just for the individual, but also
at times it becomes the way of looking at the world for a whole culture. Because of course,
as individuals, never entirely distinct from our culture. We're partly created by our culture and
make it what it is. So it's a very fundamental thing. Well, you take pains in the master and his
emissary to promote the idea or to call attention to the idea that something extremely mysterious
is going on in relationship to hemispheric specialization. So it's a very ancient phenomenon.
Many creatures or most creatures with developed nervous systems have a bifurcated brain.
And the hemispheres differ substantially in terms of their neuroanatomical structure.
And the question arises, why is it necessary, assuming that that differentiation of structure
reflects some profound differentiation of function, why is it necessary to look at the world,
so to speak, in two ways? And why is it so necessary that that bifurcation is conserved
across evolutionary history? You'd think that one way would be sufficient, but it doesn't seem to be.
And so the first question is, why do you have to look at the world in two ways?
And the next question might be, well, what are those two ways? One of the things you outlined
that's particularly fascinating to me is that the right hemisphere seems to be specialized
more for what you don't know, whereas the left hemisphere is specialized more for what you do
know. And I've sort of defined knowing pragmatically, you know something if you undertake an action and
the outcome is what you specified. And you don't know something if you undertake an action and
the outcome is other than what you specified. And that sort of reflects that novelty visualization
division that was Goldberg, I believe, that originated that, that the neuropsychologist.
Well, Jordan, you've raised a whole bunch of points there. So I need a little bit of time to
to explain that. First of all, every neural network that we know of is asymmetrical,
going down to the very most basic network that we know, and the most ancient one that we know.
Nemetostellavictensis, a CNM and E that is 700 million years old is already asymmetrical in its
neural network. And that's the earliest neural network we know of. And it's true of insects,
it's true of worms, it's true of, you know, all the way up to human beings. And the three questions
that really got me going on this was if the brain is there for making connections and its power is
largely lies in the question, the connections it can make, why is it divided down the middle,
whoppingly divided? I mean, most people don't realize quite how big this this differentiation
is and if they haven't actually seen a brain. The second thing is why is it asymmetrical?
Because if you just need to grow this brain, you'd grow it symmetrically, the skull that
contains it is symmetrical. And the third thing is why is the connection, the principal connection
between the two hemispheres at the base of the hemispheres, the corpus callosum, why is it at
least as much if not more in the service of inhibition than facilitation? So it's as though
there's something really important about keeping two things apart. Now, my hypothesis,
and it's just that, is that this results from something that all creatures need to do.
All creatures without exception need to eat and not be eaten. They need to live and to manipulate
their environment, to get food, to catch something, to pick something up quickly,
deftly, to pick up a twig, to build a nest. In other words, for all the kind of day to day stuff,
food, shelter, they need to be able to manipulate the world very precisely. But at the same time,
they must pay a precisely opposite kind of attention, which is sustained, vigilant, open
without presupposition to as to what it may find. And so on the whole, the way in which this has
been addressed by evolution is that there are two neuronal masses that can direct attention at the
world. And the left hemisphere tends to specialize in targeted precise attention, and the right hemisphere
in a much broader, vigilant kind of attention, which actually sustains the being of the world.
Nothing about these tiny fragments that are isolated, disconnected, meaningless
gives you any idea of their meaning. It's only when you see the broad picture, and you understand
that they're not actually things that go to be put together to make that broad picture,
but are things that are isolated out of an already connected picture. So that's the
basis of that. I just wanted to pick up your thing about, because I don't think it's quite right to
say that the left hemisphere is about what you know, and the right's about what you don't know.
Somebody, I can't remember who, some philosopher said, that knowledge is what we're uncertain of.
The things we're certain of are things that we don't really know properly. I think there's a
good deal of truth in that. The left hemisphere tends to jump to conclusions. It's much more
quick and dirty than the right hemisphere. The right hemisphere is the one that says,
hang on, wait a moment, you may be getting this wrong, because it wants to get things quickly.
Its job is to manipulate. Its job is to get. It's to catch. It's to grab stuff. It's the
one that controls the right hand that does all the grabbing. So the left hemisphere tends to
price certainty, and it's very uncomfortable when there's ambivalence. Whereas the right
hemisphere- Well, what is that ambivalence you can't act?
Exactly. Whereas the right hemisphere seems to appreciate the possibility that we have to hold
multiple views, multiple possibilities together. And so it has a quite different
take on reality. It's more interested in discovery and exploration rather than capture.
The left hemisphere is more interested in capturing a thing that it thinks it knows, often,
you know, not in any deep way. It's just identified an object it needs. But to understand things,
the right hemisphere is better. And the idea of the master and the emissary is,
I won't go through the myth of it. I've explained it so many times, but the basic idea is that the
master, the right hemisphere, knows that it needs an emissary to do the sort of functional
administration work. So it's aware that the stuff that it mustn't get involved with and that it
can't know. Whereas the left hemisphere knows everything as it were in its eyes, because
it only knows a tiny bit, which is explicit. And, you know, there it is in broad daylight,
down in black and white, no shades of meaning, no nuances, nothing implicit about it.
So it thinks it knows it. And if you like the downfall of the left hemisphere, and therefore,
I would go with the society, the civilization, as it once was that we belong to, is that the
left hemisphere doesn't know what it is it doesn't know. It's, you know, it's, you know,
the famous thing they're done in Kruger effect. The more you know, the more you think you don't
know. And the people who know least think they know everything. It's a little, that's not quite
fair, but there's something of that about it. Yeah. But can I pick up something that I touched on
earlier? We're talking about creating the world through attention. And I think that is, that is
true. And there's a very big question there about what I mean by that. Do I mean just as you say
subjectively or objectively? And maybe we should part that for the moment. But I don't mean either
in a very simple way. But what is fascinating is that the right hemisphere, as I say, knows that
there are things that it's not aware of. But the left hemisphere seems to take the attitude
that if it's not attending to it, it doesn't exist. This is very dramatic in clinical neurology.
So people who've had a right hemisphere stroke, they not only, as it were, don't now pay attention
to something, but they deny that that thing ever existed. There's a wonderful, you know,
very rich accounts of patients. One of the ones that I really like is an experiment done by,
who was it, Biziak and Lutsati, I think, back in the late 1970s, where they got a couple of highly
educated people with right hemisphere strokes. And they were in Milan at the time. And they said,
you know, these people lived in Milan. And they said, imagine you're standing in the Piazza del Duomo
in front of the cathedral and looking at the square. Describe all the buildings in the square.
And they would describe only the ones on the right side that the left hemisphere only pays attention
to. Whereas you know, but I need to say for the viewers that the right hemisphere pays attention
to both halves of the world. So when you have a left hemisphere stroke, the world is relatively
preserved globally. But after a right hemisphere stroke, you're only relying on this left hemisphere
who's interested in the bit of space which it can manipulate, the bit on the right. So they named
the buildings down the right hand side of the view of the square they had then.
And then the experimenters had asked them to go to the other end of the square and look at the
cathedral facade and name the buildings. And this time they named all the ones down the other side
of the square, but didn't mention any of the ones they just mentioned. So there's something,
it's been commented by one philosopher that it's almost like there's an ontological landslide.
Things come in and out of existence for the left hemisphere. And when it was pointed out to these
people what they'd missed, they became angry, irritable and frustrated, which is a typical
left hemisphere emotional town, impatient to dismiss this. So I think that's intriguing. I mean,
it's just one image. I mean, the very dramatic one is to do with denying that you have parts of the
body. And as was pointed out by Pritz Langler, I think way back in the second decade of the 20th
century, they don't only deny after a right hemisphere stroke that they have the left
half of the body, which is not functioning because of the right hemisphere stroke,
they will become very irritable if questions are asked about it or they will just go blank.
I mean, they will be talking perfectly coherently and then they're asked about that and they will
go stum, or they will become very irritated. And if you force them to recognize that they have a
body on that side, although they're perfectly intelligent people, they know they must always
have had a left half of their body, they will deny it. And he says it's as though they never had a
left half of the body. It's not only that it's not there now, it never was for them and never will
be. Now that's what I mean when I say that there are different levels of creativity of the world
or the creation of the world through attention, I should say, in the two hemispheres.
Now you're in your new book, and to some degree in the master and his emissary, you're also making,
you're mixing your neurological analysis with philosophical speculation and you're trying to
solve a problem. So maybe you could tell us what the problem is and then we can discuss the solution.
Well, I suppose the problem is the one that I mentioned, that there is a puzzle about why
brains are set up in this rather odd way. But you're also pointing to a kind of philosophical
malaise, right? So there's a conceptual problem, but also an emotional or broad-scale philosophical
problem. And there is, there is indeed. And indeed, if I may say so, the book that I hope will come
out fairly soon called The Matter with Things, which is a pun on several levels, because I think
it's a critique not only of the way we think now, but of our obsession with thinking of the world
as composed of things and that only matter exists. But anyway, in that book, what I'm really trying
to do is marry science and philosophy again. They never should have been separated. Science
cannot properly be done by philosophy without philosophy. Many scientists and philosophers
have commented on this over the years, and the divorce has been disastrous for them both.
You get a mindless kind of science that jumps to very naive conclusions that everything is
mechanical. And you get a kind of philosophy that thinks it's above dirtying its hands with science.
Now, I think each of these parties can benefit from a rapprochement, which is long overdue.
And it's that that I try to do in this very big book to show how strands of neurology, philosophy,
and physics, and even of world mythologies come together to show the same very similar pictures,
the same Gestalten, the same differences between a world such as the world brought into being by
the left hemisphere and a world such as is brought into being by the right hemisphere.
And perhaps if we're going on any further, you did invite me earlier to say something about
what those differences are. Well, to try and sum it up very quickly, what I'd say is for the left
hemisphere, things are known, familiar, literally things that are unfamiliar are better dealt with
by the right hemisphere until the left hemisphere can go, oh, I see, it's one of those and put it
in the category box. They're more distinct. In fact, they're probably entirely fragmentary or
isolated in the left hemisphere, whereas there the right hemisphere sees that nothing is ever
ultimately unconnected from everything else. Things in the left hemisphere are frozen.
They don't move. They don't change. Things in the right hemisphere are constantly flowing and changing,
although flowing and changing and remaining the same are not necessarily
an opposition. As we know, Heraclitus, my favorite philosopher, said, by changing, it remains the
same, which is the image of a river which is never, ever still for a moment, but the river
outside my house that was there at breakfast time is probably there now. So in that sense,
it's remained. And we're all, I believe, like these rivers are all living beings are. In fact,
probably everything that exists is as Heraclitus pointed out. So what are the things? The left
hemisphere abstracts. It tends to abstract from the body. It tends to abstract from the context.
And something I learned very early on in life was the importance of context, how it utterly changes
anything that somebody says or any image. And this is particularly true, of course, of literature,
which I studied and taught for a certain while when I was a young man,
that once you start paraphrasing a poem and taking its sentiments out of the context,
they've utterly changed themselves and no longer what they were. And the left hemisphere is more
interested in categories, the right hemisphere in the unique case. So it sees that you're not just
a member of a certain group, you take certain boxes, you fall into that category,
but that you're massively complicatedly different. And I mean, this has a very real basis, you know,
when you look at neurological patients, people who have right hemisphere strokes or examples,
to I know of that both come from the same research group in Switzerland, but involve
a farmer who used to know all his cows by name. And after the right hemisphere right parietal stroke,
he couldn't really, well, he not only couldn't tell his cows one from another,
but he could hardly tell a cow from a horse. And another woman who very plaintively
commented after a right hemisphere stroke, she'd spent her whole life studying the birds of
Switzerland, she was an authority on them. And she said, all the birds look the same.
So that's what happens in the left hemisphere world. Quality is replaced by quantity,
uniqueness is replaced by the category. And then again, the left hemisphere
tends to see things as inanimate, where the right hemisphere will see them as animate.
Well, a category implies in some sense that the members of that category are indistinguishable,
right? Because otherwise you don't have a category, you just have particularity. And so
you could imagine that, I mean, to understand this completely, you have to understand to some
degree what categories are for, or what categories are for, at least in part, you put things that you
can act towards the same way in the same category. And so young children might think of cats and
dogs as dogs, all of them as dogs, because they're cuddly, pettable entities, not because they have
four legs or because they have fur, but because you interact with them the same way. Then you can
differentiate cats and dogs as you get a little older. But the first category, dog, which is pettable
things, is a perfectly reasonable category. And you can imagine that once a categorical structure
has been imposed, that it's easy just to see the category. I wrote an essay in my new book,
which is called Beyond Order, about the function of artists. And I believe that part of what artists
do, and I think this is maybe, you can tell me, but I think it might reflect the differences that
you're talking about. When I was a kid, I lived in a small town, and I can remember all the houses
on my block. I can remember them in detail. They're familiar to me as individual entities, but
now that I'm an adult, I've lived on this street for like 20 years, but the houses are indistinguishable
to me. I can't see them as different entities. And I think it's because I'm so familiar with the
category house, which is a practical category, that I can't see beyond the category. And it's
very efficient, because I know what houses do. They sit there. You don't have to pay attention to
them. And so it's really a useful perceptual shorthand just to see the category. But what
an artist will do is take you outside the category and make you see that the particular is, again,
that you're missing. And I guess that's partly the context, to remind you of what's beyond
what your memory forces you now to see. And is that akin to this distinction that you're
making between the left and the right? Well, it is a distinction. It's a related distinction,
but not exactly the same distinction. I mean, interestingly, it relates to the difference,
a very important difference. In fact, I think probably the single most important difference
of all, which doesn't first strike people, partly because they're so used to living in a world of
representations. That is the distinction between the presencing of something as it comes into being
for you and your mental representation of it, which is like a caricature, or a category thing,
or a verbal sign, so that the left hemisphere's addiction, if you like, to understanding things
via language is very important. Because after all, language makes everything the same. As
Nietzsche said, it makes the uncommon common. Because when you say somebody's got brown hair
or something, then you've got everything just like in a category. But when you see that person,
there's something quite different about the way their hair is and so forth. And you'd find that
out if you painted it. Because you wouldn't paint it with brown paint. You'd paint it with a multitude
of colors if you were really looking at it. And you'd see that it wasn't brown. And I mean,
artists play with, was it Manet who painted the haystacks or Monet, I don't remember,
at multiple different times of the year? And the haystack, I mean, the shape was the same,
but the haystack was completely different. And that's really, in some sense, what he was portraying
was the category is haystack, but the reality is extraordinarily complex. But the category
seems to have functional significance. So you dump things together that you can act towards the same
way. And then a word is labeled on top of that to serve as an even further compressed shorthand
for that category. So you have a complex world, it's multitudinous, and too complex to even see.
And then there's a perceptual act that categorizes that into like a perceptual image house, say,
and then there's a further compression and eradication of information that enables that
to be represented by a word. Well, the Greek philologist Max Muller said,
it's interesting that we read encyclopedias, we have dictionaries, we read books, and we are
with all these words, but none of the things that these words represent actually exist,
because in the act of being represented, they are no longer the thing that was present,
the very fact of representing it suddenly stops the presence of the thing. For me,
this is very vivid in Wordsworth. And this comes back to some of the things you were saying about
the liveliness of the childhood mind, that when he was a young man, and 50 years a boy,
rambling in the Lake District, the world was very much still alive to him and coming into
being for him, but that as a man, he went back there and as it were, couldn't avoid seeing
the landscape as, oh, a picturesque mountain, a picturesque lake, one of those if you like.
And this is what he means by the phrase, the shades of the prison house,
closing round the growing boy in his intimations of immortality on reflection in early childhood.
So this is from this book. There was a time when Meadow groven streamed the earth and every
common sight, to me did seem appareled in celestial light, the glory and the freshness
of a dream. Yes. That's it. This is what I'm referring to. And this really is one of the
more important differences. I would say probably the core difference, that as it were, one world
is real, vibrant, unknown in part, only known ever to a degree, and ever more coming into being,
and ever more coming into knowledge for the right hemisphere. And for the left hemisphere,
already cold, finished, known, dead, put in a book, stuffed on the shelf, filed away.
And we now live so much in this virtual, represented world, partly because they're
very much cut off from nature, which constantly reminds you of its vivid, uncertain liveliness.
It confronts you with its audacious beauty and vitality all the time, partly because we've
learnt to cut our minds off from our bodies. And so we think in this enormously abstract way,
and partly because of city life, partly because of technology, which means we interact with two
dimensional screens, rather than the three dimensional depth, which is in a room when
you're with someone, which is why, as you know, and I know, because we've both helped patients
in our time, that it's very important to be in the room with the patient. It's a completely
different thing that happens from anything you can do on the telephone, or even like this.
So part of the philosophical case that you're making is, I believe that,
while we have a terrible conundrum as human beings, we need, in some sense, for the purposes of
efficiency to move towards the most efficient representations possible. And this has real
bearing on the nature of perception itself. So I know, for example, that even in the primary
visual cortex, so in principle, you know this, but I'm going to explain it for people who are listening,
as the signals, as the pattern signals from your retina move back towards your brain,
they move upwards, so to speak, through a hierarchy of processing units. And even at the first stages
of that processing, there's still more top down input from other brain centers than there is input
from the retinal structures themselves. And so what that implies is that even at the beginnings
of perception, you know, if you think about it as being built up from perceptual elements up
towards the whole gestalt, which isn't exactly accurate, but it'll do for now, even at the
beginnings of the visual process, there's more input from what's inside than there is from the
external world, so to speak, or at least as much. And then what seems to happen as we age is that,
perhaps, is that increasingly, that perception becomes solipsistic. And so we're only seeing
what we know. And that's extraordinarily efficient, because it's very hard to build up a new perception.
You have to really investigate something in detail to see it anew. Whereas if it's the
same old thing that you've seen 10,000 times, you can already use what you know. And it's not
surprising you'd be annoyed if you were forced to jump out of that, because there's a tremendous
amount of work that has to be done if you want to see something for the first time again.
Well, as we both know, people would rather deny obvious truths than let go of a cherished belief.
So that's certainly right. And we don't perceive the world as, you know, in a naive way. We come
to the world with our history, with our vast range of experience. And so, as you say, this top-down
effects on the lower end of things, of the lower end of perception, from higher cognitive functions.
But that's an image of something very important to the philosophy I try to put across in the
matter with things, which is that in order to understand any element in experience,
it's at least as important to see what holes it goes to make up, or potentially can go to make up,
as it is to see what it turns into when you break it down. In fact, often it's not very revealing
to find out what happens when you break it down. And so, in a way-
Psychology suffers from that. Psychology is a discipline that consists, at least in its present
form, mostly of disparate experiments, which demonstrate very particular things about how
people behave in very particular circumstances. But there's very little that unites that back up
to something that isn't merely fragmentary observation. And so, it's very difficult to get
a grip on. And there's billions of potential separate observations. And they're not that
helpful in some sense. Well, it's all part of the world picture, which from the philosophical
point of view is the purpose of the long book, which I sent to you in manuscript, The Matter
with Things. And effectively, I can state quite simply that I want to give a considered
response to the philosophy of our age, which is that there is only matter, and that things
are understood by reducing them to their parts, unless it doesn't change them. It's a very naive
philosophy. It's simplistic, and it's immoral, because it changes the way we treat the world
and other people and nature. It changes our idea of who we are in a very damaging way,
ruling out things that other traditions have traditionally held as very powerful.
And coming back to your comment about how people cling on to things that they believe,
and it's much more difficult to try and see something in a different way, especially with age.
This is why, of course, most traditions of spiritual growth
enjoin on the person paradoxes, to see things in a completely new way that violates all the
ways that they thought they knew. So I use paradox in this new book, but not in some blind way.
In fact, I show that what we mean by a paradox is that the view of the left hemisphere of something
and the view taken of the right hemisphere of the same thing can never actually completely
marry up. They have different qualities, and if you push the comparison or the desire to make
them logically come together too far, you end up with a paradox. And this started happening
early on in the ancient Greek period of philosophy with Xeno. This is where the first
paradoxes come from, and I have a whole chapter on paradox, which I see as generated by the desire
of the left hemisphere to say it must be this or it must be that, clinging on preferentially to the
very fragmentary view of the left hemisphere. See, the left hemisphere is not good at understanding.
That sounds a very blanket statement, and it is. But the whole of the first part of that book,
the new book, is massively more thorough neuropsychology than is in the master and his emissary.
So it's about as thorough as I could possibly make it. And what I do is I look at the ways
in which we have any chance of getting an idea of what the world is. What are the portals of entry
of, if you like, information about the world to us? And I take it that it depends very much on
our attention, how we dispose our attention, perception, the judgments we form on the basis
of perception, the ways in which we apprehend what we're dealing with, rather than comprehend it,
in other words, grasp it, as we say, with the right hand of the left hemisphere, take it, use it.
And how we understand it in terms of emotional intelligence, which is not a small thing,
it's the whole way in which we understand everything human by emotional, I don't mean
sort of in some, you know what I mean, I'm talking about social and emotional understanding,
the sort of thing that is absent in people with autism. And cognitive intelligence,
this may surprise people, but that all these things and creativity, so creativity,
intelligence of the cognitive kind, IQ kind, emotional and social intelligence, apprehension
is a separate case, I'll come to that in a second, perception and attention and judgment,
all these are better performed by the right hemisphere, only apprehension is better performed
by the left hemisphere. So the only thing the left hemisphere is better at is getting a hold on
either an idea, very precise, clear one, or on a thing that it wants to use, but all the manifold
complexity, which our intelligence brings to bear in order to understand the world, all of that is
better done by the right hemisphere. And I can say that on the basis not just of experiments in
normal subjects, but on seeing what happens when you have either left hemisphere damage or right
hemisphere damage, to summarize a vast chunk of information, which I hope will be there for
people to read very, very soon. To summarize that very briefly, what one would say is that when you
have damage to the right hemisphere, your grasp of reality is the main thing that's impaired,
you don't understand it, you don't connect with it, your ability to understand what's going on,
disappears. Whereas when you have a right hemisphere, sorry, when you have a,
that's when you have a right hemisphere, when you have a left hemisphere stroke,
the main things are you have difficulty speaking and using your right hand, they're
practically very important, but essentially the understanding of the world, the grasp of the
meaning of the world, so we have to use these words grasp again, but the overall comprehension
of the world is sustained by the right hemisphere. Okay, so let me ask you a question. Can I,
sure, go ahead. All right, okay. All right, okay, let me just make this point. Because I want to,
people might say, well, okay, but so what? We've both got right and left hemispheres,
so we're not missing anything, so does it matter? Well, yes, it matters very importantly for my
philosophical project, because as I show in the second part of the book, where I look at the proper
contributions to understanding made by reason, science, intuition and imagination,
what I can show is that in those attempts to grasp, we can see the world, we can see the
signature of the right hemisphere or the signature of the left hemisphere on a particular model.
So if we have two possible models of a certain action or an aspect of reality or space or time,
which I deal with in the third part of the book, and indeed in philosophical history and in the
history of physics and so on, there have tended to be opposing views of the world. Once you know
how the left hemisphere sees it and how the right hemisphere tends to see things, you can see the
hallmark of the left hemisphere's understanding on a certain philosophical standpoint, on a certain
scientific take of the world, and you can see the hallmark and the imprint of the right hemisphere
in certain other ways of reasoning and of science and philosophy. So this is very important,
because up till now, we've never been able to judge between these two. We've got A, we've got B,
we just have to go, hmm, can't tell, we can't reconcile them, we can't do without either of them.
That's true, ultimately that's true, but we can get a very sharp idea, I believe now,
of which of these is fallacious, which one is going to lead us down a blind alley, which one
is out of touch with reality and which one is more in touch with reality. I just wanted to say that,
because it's behind the whole philosophical drift of my book, which is how do we know who we are?
I asked Plotinus his question, who are we? That's effectively the question, what is the cosmos,
what is nature, and how do we all relate? Sorry, I hand over to you. No, no, that's good. Okay, so
to do something, you have to zero in on it. So let me lay something out for you, and then I'm
going to ask you a specific question about it. So imagine that I'm concentrating on the computer
screen, I'm attending to it, I'm writing a book. Okay, so the question might be, well, what am I
doing while I'm writing that book? What is it to write that book? Well, at the most focused level
of my consciousness, the most focal level, that involves voluntary control of my fingers. I'm going
to be typing single letters, and there are muscle movements that are associated with that, but I
don't really know what the muscle movements are, I know how to move my fingers, that's the highest
level of resolution I can manage. I can press T with my left hand and H with my right hand,
with these two fingers. And so that's sort of where the pedal hits the metal, in some sense,
that's where my intent meets the world. Okay, so, but I'm not typing letters, sorry, I am typing
letters, but at the same time I'm typing words. And at the same time I'm typing words, I'm typing
phrases. And then I'm typing sentences, and I'm typing paragraphs, and I'm typing chapters,
and then I'm typing books. And then the book itself is an artifact that's nested inside
higher order structures. So, well, I'm writing the book, but the reason I can write the book is
because I'm imagining a world within which the book is nested. And so I'm focusing on something
very specific, like I can't write the book without pushing the letter T with my left index finger,
but I also can't write the book without apprehending the book as a whole. And, you know, when I edit,
I edit not letters because I can spell, but I edit words, I substitute one word for another,
I edit phrases, I edit sentences, I edit at the paragraph level, like all of these levels actually
exist. Now, is it reasonable to suppose? So, sorry, I'm going to add one more level outside
that. So you might ask, well, why am I writing a book? And it might be, well, because I'm a
practicing scientist, and why is that important? Well, I'm a dutiful citizen, let's say, trying
to uphold my moral responsibility. And you might say, well, why is that important? And I would say,
well, that's part of my proper moral engagement with the world. And then I can't go further
outside than that. Now, is it reasonable to suppose, if you think about that whole structure as a kind
of lens that focuses us in the world, is it reasonable to suppose that it's the left hemisphere,
so to speak, that's concentrating on the T's and the H's, and that as you move up that hierarchy
to broader and broader levels of conceptualization, that the manner in which those higher levels
are conceptualized shifts more and more to the right, or is processed more and more by the
right, is that a reasonable way of looking at it? I think you could, but I'd need to sort of gloss
it a bit. And what you've beautifully described is what the right hemisphere knows, and which
John Muir summarized by saying, if you try to get hold of any one thing and pull it, you find that
bring with it the whole of the rest of the universe, yet that sentence you're writing
is informed by your personal history and the history, therefore, of your culture,
and therefore, and so on and so on and so forth. So everything that has gone to make you is present
in that business of the book. And so you're not, of course, at any one time aware of more than a
tiny bit. But there's a very fallacious and superficial argument that if you're not conscious of
it, in that sense of the word conscious, then somehow you're not doing it. But of course you are,
the whole thing emanates from what I call the field of view. Now, suppose rather than, you know,
we can take the example of the typing, but you wouldn't be able to type at all if you were
thinking about what your fingers were doing. And, you know, but nonetheless, it would be stupid to
say that you're unconscious while you're typing. Of course, you're not unconscious.
Somebody playing a Bach fugue has got to use all their fingers and their hands, you know,
and their feet at the same time. And if they concentrated, they could only concentrate and
focus on one finger. Of course, that would stop the whole music for a start. But they're, they're
conscious, of course, they're just as conscious when the whole thing's happening as they are if
they think about the finger and stop it. So what this illustrates is what Alfred North Whitehead
was keen to point out that as soon as we master something, we relegate it to another part of
the mind that we don't any longer have to focus on. And the focusing of tension is costly. He said,
it's like cavalry charges in battle. It should only be done rarely. You need fresh horses and it
comes at a high cost. So that's a good analogy. Because you build a you build a little machine,
the things, the things, the things that the things that we do unconsciously are in no way
inferior stuff. So for example, the Bach fugue is not inferior. When a surgeon is learning,
he or she has to be very conscious of what he or she's doing, the actual business of the hand
cutting. But when the surgeon is very skilled, he can hum, listen to the radio chat with colleagues,
and it's all happening. Similarly, a chess player, a bad chess player has to be conscious of every
move, but a really good one is not unconscious. It's very, very highly conscious, but it's not
focused. Now, my distinction to sorry, finally answer your question is that is that focused
attention, this focal attention on the detail is what the left hemisphere does. It can only
take in about three degrees for the attentional art. So it's incredibly limited. And as as Whitehead
says, it has its uses in an emergency. But really, it's not a satisfactory way for living. And what
I think is happening is that we are now more and more saying anything that I'm not actually focusing
on right now doesn't exist. All the implicit stuff, all the unconscious stuff, all the things that go
to make up the richness of our both cognitive and emotional and embodied cells, isn't really
important. We focus down on this tiny bit that the relatively unintelligent left hemisphere
knows about and is aware of. So when I say conscious and unconscious, I like to say,
don't think of these as two separate realms, like, you know, two tanks with perhaps a trap and things
can pop up from the lower tank into the higher tank or whatever. But instead, think of it like
a stage, and there's a spotlight. And the spotlight may just illuminate one part of the
stage, but the rest of the stage hasn't gone anywhere. It's still there. And you just need
to move the spotlight. And suddenly it's there again in the middle of what you're thinking about.
That's how I would see that question. Okay, so let's go back to this typing example again. Just
so when you learn to type, you're going to be paying conscious attention to pushing the T's and
the H's. As you learn to type, you start perhaps being conscious more of maybe you're attending
at the level of the phrase. Like, you don't have to be consciously attentive to those things you've
built automated machinery for. Now they say when kids learn to read, it isn't enjoyable to begin with
because it's effortful to learn to process the letters, and it's effortful to learn to process
the words. And it's not until they can automatize the letter and word processing, and so they can
read the word at a glance, that they start to be able to be conscious of the phrase and the sentence,
and that's when they get the meaning from the text, and that's when it starts to become
enjoyable, right? It's not just effortful. And then, so the consciousness of a reader isn't
consciousness of letters, and it's not consciousness of words. It's consciousness of something like
the interplay between sentences and paragraphs. And it's like your consciousness floats above
the highest level of automatization that you've been able to manage. Does that seem reasonable to
you? Well, I mean, when you're playing a musical piece, for example, you don't pay attention to
what you've practiced because you've got that. You pay attention to the sequencing of what you've
practiced. And the greater a musician you are, the higher up in the abstraction hierarchy,
you can focus because you've automated all the lower stuff. Well, yes, and that comes back to
what, I'm sorry. No, I was, I was, I'm trying to get the relationship between that and the
hemisphere specialization. Well, I think I've done my best to point out that the right hemisphere
is the one that is able to attend to the whole Gestalt ultimately is dealing not in
fragmentary entities that have to be put together, but in Gestalt and that already exist and are
nested so that you go down from one level and you find another, you know, famously you can go from
the, from the body to the organ to the tissue to the cell to the organelle to the, you know,
and each of these at each stage is a whole that has its own qualities and its own rules
really and works in a semi-autonomous way. So there's always freedom between the levels of
understanding. There's always space. It's rather like the gaps in the structure are where the light
gets in. You know, if you tighten everything up, then you've got total darkness. So what we're
trying to do all the time is to know enough to be able to act, but to leave it open so that we
can know more and really understand where we are and what we're doing when we're acting. So I think
these are significant differences between the left hemisphere which is utterly goal directed
and very direct in the way in which it achieves or aims to achieve its goal and the right hemisphere
which is sustaining this and also seeing the goal in a wider whole. You know, the reason of typing
these letters is not just to make the keys go up and down and to have a bit of paper at the end of
it, but because you want to influence minds that are now unaware of this but will know about it
soon. So I think it's the difference between this very, again, Whitehead says there's a
civilization advances by the number of actions that can be made automatic or below the level.
Sorry? Without thinking. Without thinking. Because thinking is very complex thing,
isn't it? I mean, what is it? And a number of people have commented rather along the lines
that I'm saying that it's not so much right to say I think as in Kogito, but in the words of
Lichtenberg, the 18th century German philosopher and physicist, esdenkt, esdenkt in mir, something
is thinking in me. And that is the me. It's not separate and it's not unconscious in the sense of
it has no life, it has no meaning, it has no purpose, it has no direction. Absolutely not,
it has all those things. And one of the things I'm trying to argue in the last part of,
may I say something just about the structure of this book? I started off on it, this new book
and I'm just going to say a little bit more about it. Yeah, yeah. So I've explained the first part.
Yeah, well we're trying to grasp something large going through its parts and it's not such a simple
thing to do. It's not a simple thing to do. So the first part of the book I've explained,
it gives one an insight into a simple fact that in terms of having access to the reality of the
world, the right hemisphere is better than the left. And it has a special take, if you like,
which we can recognize so that when we're having to choose between two opposites, we can choose one
if we want to over the other. And then the second part of the book, I'm looking at the
pathways to knowledge, using attention, perception, judgment, intelligence, how do we put them to use?
Well, I think the main ones are science, reason, I think most people would say they're important,
I would say intuition and imagination are also vastly important. Now none of these is infallible,
none of these can say that it can deal with everything. There are proper limits to science,
otherwise you're peddling untenable naive scientism. But it is a very important thing
for us to respect and to do honorably. Reason is enormously important. I use science and reason
as the basis of my book. But again, reason, as Pascal, famous mathematician and philosopher said,
reason is poor if it cannot see its own limitations. And so it has limitations,
but it can achieve a very great deal. And the same actually is true of intuition. It's had a
very bad press in recent years, because I think, again, psychologists, I think you've alluded to
this, they like things that can be taken down into bits and shown them, we can find the mechanism.
Intuition is a bit hard for that. And imagination has been, again, relegated to the sort of children's
playbox that this is something to do with fantasy. Whereas in fact, I argue that quite the opposite,
but whereas fantasy may be an interesting decoration on things that we already know,
and the left hemisphere can do that. Imagination is actually how we go to meet the world and
understand it. And we have to imagine it into being. There is no alternative. If we are not
imaginatively engaged with the world, we just can't see a lot of things that are there.
So we need to use all of these faculties together, not just one or two as we now do. Sorry, Carol.
Well, I wanted to comment on your discussion of imagination and the manner in which it brings
the world into being. So we've already discussed the fact that the realm of your experience is
dependent to some degree on your attention, and that that's associated with intent. And intent
seems to me to be it's future oriented to have an intent. Intent means to attempt to move from one
place to another. And hypothetically, it's a better place because why move otherwise. And so
to act in the world with intent means that you're playing out something that's imaginative because
to posit that one thing is better than another, and therefore want to move towards it, you have to
have imagined up a better world. And so what that means in some sense is that we're always meeting
the world in a way that imposes our imaginative attempts to make it better upon us, upon the
world. But that also brings the world into being. And so and I guess I'm saying that because I'm
trying to grapple with the why of your book again. You're implying throughout and more than implying
that we have a paucity of viewpoint that's demotivating and dangerous. And you're implying as
well that that has something to do with our obsessive concentration or utilization of left
hemisphere functions. And that that reminds me of Heidegger to some degree and his claim that
moderners use the world as produce, you know, that we tend to reduce everything to its functional
utility insofar as it can be exploited. And like I have some sympathy for that because we have to
the world to live. But yes, it it it. So let's say we do lose something by being specific.
And narrow, we gain something which is functional utility. What do we do about that?
You're trying to understand it and why it is what do we do to fight against it?
Well, that's a whole separate question. But at the moment, I'm trying to unpack
what the problem is. Okay, well, I won't push past that. Yeah, I mean, I mean,
quite what we do about it is the million dollar question. And we may not be in a position
unless we radically alter the way in which we think about the world, understand it and feel
it and experience it and interact with it. We may not have a world in which to live. So it's
a pretty important topic. But in so having sort of more or less, as it were, gone over what are
the portals to understanding, what are the paths to understanding, I then in the part three, which
is really, if you like, the reason we've had parts one and two, you can't get to part three without
them. But when you get there, we want to know, so what is the world like? And so I look at the
structure of the world, the theories about it and what we can tell from physics and from
the hemisphere hypothesis, what parts of it we may be perceiving with the left hemisphere and what
we may be seeing with the right. And I look at the structure in the sense of the coming together
of opposites and the very interesting philosophical question of the relationship between the one
and the many. And then in the rest of the book, I look at time, space, motion, meaning largely flow,
but all kinds of motion, matter and consciousness, value, purpose, and the sense of the sacred.
Now, I argue that these elements like consciousness are not secondary, they're not
derivative, it's actually irrational to suppose they are. Reason is on the side of the fact that
they are ontological primaries. And I argue that actually also unpack that for people because it's
there's a lot, but it would take a very long time. Well, I can unpack the phrase what I mean by
ontological primary is that it can't be reduced to other terms. It can't be said that as long as
you look at a brain in a certain way, you can work out what consciousness is. Consciousness is
sui generis. It is of its own kind. It is not something that is derived from anything. It has
to be a primary constituent of the universe. This is not a particularly any longer controversial view.
It's held by many philosophers now in the form of panpsychism in which something like consciousness
is in the cosmos and the cosmos perhaps exists inside consciousness, not my consciousness, but
a consciousness field. And there are plenty of neuroscientists who say this too.
Colin Blakemore, not known for being kind of away with the fairies, but they say this too.
But I would also argue, and it's a perhaps harder thing to make comprehensible in a very short
space, but that actually values are things that are there. They're not things we make up. They're
not things that are like, I rather like that. They are built into the drive of everything.
And I think that the cosmos has drives. You can describe them in all sorts of ways. It has
the fact that it changes and moves in certain ways according to, quote, laws, which may actually
not be laws, but maybe temporary habits. We don't know. They may be evolving too. But the very fact
that this thing has this energy to evolve, to differentiate, to produce differentiation
within union, this is a value of a kind. You can't get behind these. And most of our values,
other than those of utility, this is good for me and I want to have more of it, which is what
the left hemisphere is devoted to. Most of those other values are not reducible to share in the
material greed or feathering your own nest. They're often actually the things that are vastly
important. Probably the whole point of the being consciousness at all is to come to appreciate
the meaning of truth, goodness and beauty, to have a sense of something awe-inspiring, which is
really what we mean when we talk about the sacred, that we're humble enough to say we don't know
everything and we probably will never know. I mean, why should we? That's also a totally irrational
idea that our brains are so constructed that we should know everything. I mean, a mouse might
think that if it could think that much, you'd think it knows everything, but it doesn't.
So, and we're evolving. There may be creatures in the future who think, what the hell did
homo sapiens in 2021 know? So, I just want to get back into the frame that not all the things
that matter to us, they are enormously important aspects of a universe that is not dead and static,
unless given a push, not without purpose, not without meaning, not without value. These things
are in the grain, in the warp and the weft of the cosmos. Of that I'm certain. And the job is
for us to find this. And most philosophers, wise people, sages, whatever you like to call them,
in the past, have adopted a view of the cosmos, which is exactly the one that one would expect
the right hemisphere to hold, which is one in which things are not always certain or known,
they're changing, they're interconnected, but the whole thing has a meaning. It is
not a heap of fragments that don't mean anything. The modern malaise. So, that's really where I'm
driving at, if you see, that's the philosophical goal, is to help people see something that I
think they already intuit. I mean, that was a response to the master and his emissary.
Apart from people enormously movingly writing to me, saying things I never thought I would ever
hear from writing a book, like your book changed my life, and I'm sure you've had this too.
But, you know, people saying, what you're saying, I kind of knew, I've known this, but I couldn't
find any way of articulating it. Well, there's a reason why you couldn't find a way of articulating
it, and that is articulation in language is controlled by the left hemisphere. It developed
very good tools for mapping out the world in a way that is very useful to its purposes.
But the important things are hard to articulate in words. They're implicit meanings,
all the deep things like love, religion, poetry, music. How do you say these in words? How do you
say them in language? But they have extraordinary meaning and power. They're the things we live for,
not for the things that we can say put down in a notebook, if you know what I mean.
So what's driven you in this direction, do you think? I mean, you made a very large number of
claims in that last section of thought. For example, you've come to the belief that value
is somehow implicit in the structure of being. That's what I understood what you said, and correct
me if I'm wrong, and that it's unfolding across time. I mean, I've been thinking about this
exact issue an awful lot. It's very difficult to formulate this question. So imagine that we're
drawn towards an ideal. Human beings are drawn towards an ideal. Imagine that you can detect
that draw by your own dissatisfaction, in part, is that you don't feel you're living properly,
or your conscience is bothering you. You feel that there's something more to be attained.
You're embarrassed at your insufficiencies, right? So there's this ideal that's pulling you onward
and judging you at the same time. And that ideal might be, well, the ideal human being,
that's one way of thinking about it. And that's partly why I got so interested in hero mythology.
I mean, is it a reasonable conclusion of your line of thinking that the notion of the ideal
human being is somehow built into the structure of the cosmos? Because the class, I don't know how to...
No, it's not. No, I don't think that at all. I want to scotch that immediately.
Okay, well, how do you scotch that if you start with your presuppositions?
Well, because I don't... My presuppositions have nothing to do with an already conceived plan
that is just being acted out. This takes us back to the bad...
No, it wasn't applying. It wasn't necessarily...
Oh, all right. Well, okay. But let... All right. Okay. Well, I'm glad you weren't.
But a lot of people think that if I say these things, I must be positing an engineering god
who sort of tinkers with things and makes things happen according to his purpose.
Yeah, okay. That's fair. I mean, I was implying that in some sense. I mean,
I thought you might... I guess the question would be, where does your insistence that values are
part of the structure of being? Like, where does that find its limit? Because the classic limit
of that is something like... In fact, the definition of the utmost place of value in some sense is
almost indistinguishable from the claim that there is a god. And so...
Well, a god is not the same as an engineering god. And I take enormous pains in the book.
It costs me more than anything I've ever written to write the chapter called The Sense of the Sacred,
in which I try to help people to a place where they can understand why people use this
extraordinarily difficult word, God. You know, it's not a satisfactory term,
but it's the term we have to have to name an aspect of our experience that if we don't name it,
disappears from our lives. And that's not to say that there isn't something there that is,
that merits whatever we mean when we say divine. I mean, we haven't defined what we mean by divine.
And we're back in the nets of language. We're trapped in the nets of language, as Shelling said.
But what I'm suggesting is that, as Whitehead suggested, and come on, Whitehead was also the
co-author with Russell of the Principia Mathematica. He wasn't a fantasist. He had this, I think,
incredibly deep idea that whatever one likes to call the divinity god, whatever, is the thing that
the cosmos has relation with. Relation is at the core of being. I even argue that relation is prior
to the relata, prior to the things that are related. That sounds nonsense. How can you relate,
how can you have a relation if there isn't anything yet to relate? But there's a wonderful image called,
in Indian mythology, called Indra's net, which covers the universe. And in it, the idea is that
the filaments of the net exist before the net, before the crossing points, which are the things
we see. And on those crossing points, there are little gems, which reflect every other gem in
the net. Now, that would take a very long time to unpack, but perhaps it can set things going
in people's minds. But the idea I have is that relation is prior to anything at all, really.
And that therefore, whatever you mean by god, and whatever we mean by the cosmos,
are in some sort of dynamic relation, which is an evolving one in which the outcome is
excitingly not known. If it were known, it would all be some horrible, possibly sadistic
play by an almighty, all-knowing god. I mean, look, I'm going to be talking to Rowan Williams
shortly, but I don't want to go into all that I mean by that. I don't think god is omniscient and
omnipotent, but I don't think he's not either. Just in the same way, I don't think he's green,
and I don't think he's not green. I think the terms are wrong, but we can go there if we want,
and later or another day. But the thing, what I'm really saying is that God is discovering,
becoming unfulfilling whatever god is through the relationship, which classically in most
religions is described as love, which is after all just like a form of gravity in the world of
life and emotion rather than just in the world of the so-called inanimate.
So that therefore, we are coming into being, god is coming into being, and we're necessary to
one another's coming into being. It's not that god does a bit to us, and then we do a bit back
to god. It's like, I've read a very good book, I keep mentioning it by a young microbiologist
in America called Critishama called Interdependence, and she argues very importantly that it's not
just that, certainly it's not just that an animal or an organism molds its environment,
nor is it just good enough to recognize that while an animal
affects and shapes its environment, the environment shapes the animal or the organism,
but that this is not a, you know, turn-by-turn process. It's not that the animal shapes the
environment, it should then, in its turn, shapes the animal. It's an entirely
simultaneous process of coming into being, of co-creation, if you like. Now this idea of
simultaneous coming into being is an ancient one, but I think it's a very deep one philosophically,
and a very important one. So that accounts for your objection to the idea of the omniscient determining
god? Absolutely, absolutely, because the god would have no creation. Creation is not really just
the unfolding of something that's already there. What's the name of the book? What's the name of
the book by the microbiologist? It's just called Interdependence. It's by Kriti Sharma.
Can you spell her last name? S-H-A-R-M-A. It's quite a short read. I'm mentioning her quite a lot
these days. Okay, so let me ask you a question. So now I'm going to try to pack up what you're
doing, and so again, tell me if I'm wrong. So we have these opposed viewpoints of the world,
paradoxical viewpoints. They're expressed, they make the hemispheric differences necessary, or
there are consequences of the hemispheric differences. If there wasn't a paradox, we wouldn't need the
two hemispheres. We need these two different ways of looking at things. We've tilted, we're in danger
of tilting too far to a left hemisphere view, and that's keeping us from, from what? It's keeping us
from apprehension of the relationship with the sacred that you're describing, the co-creation
relationship. Is that, is that reasonable? Well, it's ruling out so much. I mean, I can't begin to
tell you, but you can imagine all the things that this very reduced abstract schematic bureaucratic,
essentially it's a bureaucratic, you know, you push something, it has an action on something else,
and you know, we can predict the outcome, we can organize it. That's the left hemisphere's vision
of the world, inanimate stuff that it can move about. Very much the Industrial Revolution was a
kind of acting out in the outer world of the world picture of the left hemisphere in some ways. I
talk about that more in the master and his emissary, but it's ruling out, it's ruling out, it's ruling
out everything really. It's ruling out our ability to understand, to see, to see at all. I mean,
a number of very important people, one of them Goethe said, you know, thinking is good, but seeing
is so much better. And I think we just don't see things anymore, because we don't expect them,
we don't understand them, we've ruled them out from the word go, because our world picture
just doesn't contain them. And if you stop doing that and start attending in a more flexible way,
you find there's a massively complex and fascinating, rich, nourishing response to your
attention. It's the absence of that that causes the meaning crisis, which is constantly being
bounded about. Well, the Egyptians, you know, the Egyptians knew that, the ancient Egyptians
knew that, because they, they, they, um, they're, the God Horus is the eye and its attention. And
it is Horus that revitalizes Osiris and he's the God of structure. And they saw the, the, the,
the proper sovereignty was a combination of attention and structure, a dynamic combination
of attention and structure. Well, this is absolutely brilliant. Well, I quite agree,
but this is where we come to, I need to make a correct, a possible misapprehension.
There is absolutely nothing wrong with the view of the right hemisphere. It's in fact necessary.
It's part of a, of a dialectic backwards and forwards between these two ways in which things
can be built. You can't have the one in a way without the other. You're quite right. We need
them both, but, but we live in an age which is completely obsessed with the idea of equality as
some eternal sort of truth about the cosmos. I have, I can see no evidence for this idea. It's a
lovely idea, a humanly invented idea, which is, which is a good one in society, although it can't
be realized and it may actually not be necessary or even good for it to be ultimately realized.
It might lead to a horrible kind of totalitarianism, as many 20th century philosophers pointed out, but,
but these two things don't have to be. That's the problem with elevating one virtue above all
else. It's a left hemisphere problem. Exactly. Well, it's an ideological problem. No, well, no, the
point is this. We need the left and the right, but we need the right to be in control. Now,
this is very important. This is the image of the master and his emissary, the emissary and the
master are not equal. The master needs the emissary and knows he needs the emissary. The emissary
being inferior doesn't know that he needs the master. So the emissary is good as long as he's
under the control of the master. Now, that image is extraordinarily important for understanding
this picture of the cosmos. And it's actually present in ancient Chinese, Navajo, not Navajo,
Iroquois, mythologies and so on, this idea of the being an unequal pair, that one has to be the
guardian of the other. And as long as the one that is, as it were, a potential problem remains
under the supervision of the wiser one that sees all everything works well for everybody. And that's
why in the master and his emissary, I suggest with three periods in the West, in early Greek
civilization, in the peak of Roman civilization, and again at the Renaissance in the West,
where these were working well together. But in every case, it slid further to the viewpoint of
the left hemisphere. And in every case, the civilization has crumbled. And I see the evidence
for that all around me now. So I'm not saying that we just need these two things. I'm saying we
definitely need them both. Neither of them is bad. But what is bad is for the
the inferior one, the one that sees less to take control. And it's very easy for it to take control
because like the less intelligent person that thinks it knows everything, he thinks I've got it,
I've understood it. There's no more, you know, we do three more experiments and we've cracked
the universe, you know, it's all just a matter of, you know, a few years of science and we'll
understand that. Let me let you in on some of the things I've been grappling with here. So
I talked, I talked to Matt Ridley and Bjorn Lauburg recently, and their enthusiastic
Enlightenment rationalists, I would say there, they look at what's happened as a consequence of
the Industrial Revolution and the tremendous technological advances that that's produced
and the immense increase in human well-being. And they say we can continue with that into the
future. We can produce a world and perhaps are already producing a world where poverty is
increasingly going to be a thing of the past. And we can bring the rest of the world up to the
standards of living that characterize the West and and we can continue to expand the pie. And
I'm not interested in discussing whether that's possible or not, because it's possibly possible
and possibly not. But it's a particular vision, right? It's a vision of the extension of material
comfort to everyone. And that comfort has been extended tremendously over the last two or 300
years. It's absolutely amazing. And I would say in large part, it's a consequence of that left
hemisphere reduction of the world to manageable bits and the manipulation of it. And this is
not to say anything negative about your thesis whatsoever. But one of the things I've noticed
is that that materialistic utopian vision, and I'm also not insulting Ridley or Lambert, who I
admire greatly, that materialistic vision of incremental material progress has very little
motive power. It isn't an exciting story for some reason. What do we want? Incremental
improvement. When do we want it? In due time. It's not a gripping story. It's lacking something. And
you seem to be pushing towards something that might be the medication for that lack.
There's nothing in that vision that speaks of a grand destiny for the individual, for society.
And there are many religious traditions that insist that human beings exist in a relationship
with the divine, and that it's only in living out that relationship that life is imbued with
the proper kind of meaning. And proper means sufficient to keep you from malevolence, I suppose,
and sufficient to be in love with life. Now, you posited in some of your statements a while back
that we're in this co-creation relationship with the divine. And that isn't too far off from my
understanding of many classical religious propositions that human beings participate in the
act of creation. Whether we participate in the act of creating God is a whole different question,
but we can leave that aside. So then the question is, what's the question that arises out of that?
I'm still trying to drive down at exactly what the main point you're making. You've worked on
this book for a tremendous amount of time. Something's driving you hard. And it's the revelation of a
solution to a very important problem. And the revelation seems to be something like an attempt
to explicate a higher-order vision, something that we can aspire to. And
the drive to this is that I don't think that we live in an enlightened
era. We live in what David Bohm called an endarkened era, in which what we think is enlightening us is
in fact inducing misery. The strange thing is that, unarguably, when people are enormously
poverty-stricken, and of course one needs then to define what poverty is, are people who lead
the lives that their ancestors have lived as hunter-gatherers. Are they poor? Or do they only
become poor when their whole world is ripped apart and they're brought into the nearest large
industrial slum and have no bearings on the life, no relationship with the world, no pride,
and their health suffers and they kill themselves. So what is poverty? That is a very
important question first. But also remedying poverty, extreme poverty, is of course enormously
important. No feeling person could argue against that. But it's not enough. One rather well-known
historical figure said, man cannot live by bread alone. And the thing is that there's only bread
in this story. But that leaves out everything. Peter Cook, he plays the part of a publisher who
says, the trouble with your book is that it lacks everything. And I feel that this kind of philosophy
lacks absolutely everything. It's got nothing whatever to offer. Now let me just put some
facts to this because it may sound, you know, it's just my opinion. What do we know? Well,
fortunately, going back to the 30s, school children in America in a certain system have
been asked the same questions about their happiness in life at the same age, going back now 70 years.
And Gene Twenge, who has looked at this data, which avoids all sorts of problems of defining
what you mean by happy and, you know, retrospector scopes and all the rest, you've got the data from
the 1930s, the 40s, the 50s. And nowadays, the numbers of children that would qualify by a very
well authenticated and commonly used standard as being depressed is five to eight times what it was
in the 1930s when poverty was a big issue. So five or eight times, not five or eight percent more.
So there's something horrendous we're doing to ourselves. Suicide rates are going up,
particularly among women who register much greater dissatisfaction with life now than
they did 20 years ago, interestingly, because one might think that a number of things that
would have made life hard for them have been removed. But it just shows how complicated it is
knowing what works well for people. And three things overall, three things seem to be incredibly
important for human fulfillment and happiness. And one of them I touched on at the end of the
master and his emissary, which is feeling socially connected, being bound into a meaningful community
of trust. That's one. The second is being in the presence of nature. Just going off for half an
hour into a forest and being quiet has an effect on your blood pressure, on your physical health,
and so on. And these effects, if practiced, are greater than those in going to the gym.
And the thing that really struck me is there in Oxford, there is the Oxford Handbook of Religion,
I think it's called, but it looks at enormous bodies of evidence about the well-being of people who
are adherents to a religion and those who are not. And not only, as you very well might expect,
the people who are not adherents to religion, much more prone to anxiety, depression, drug
addiction, they cope less well with crisis, they're more vulnerable generally. But
they're actually physically not so well. So for example, rates of stroke, of heart disease,
are comparably better amongst the believing group than the unbelieving group,
with the difference between those who do cardio exercise for several hours a day.
And even smoking, it's a more powerful effect than smoking. Social connectedness is more
powerful than smoking. Being in nature, I think, is more powerful than smoking. And
being a part of a religious community that worships and even holding spiritual or religious views,
to some extent, is a mitigator against unhappiness and illness. So is that any answer to your question
of why, you know, why I don't think that Matt Ridley's idea of it's totally left-handed idea,
we just sort of crank out some more government departments, do some marvelous technical things
and everybody gets to be living in a fantasy land of happiness. I don't believe this.
Well, I don't think he believes that. I mean, he's a complicated person and
he's more concerned with applying material resources where they could be most effectively
applied. I think the question of what material comfort and plenitude needs to be embedded in
is a different question. I think it's reasonable to say, well, we should do what we can to alleviate
destitution and catastrophic poverty. We should improve child nutrition. We should eradicate
tuberculosis. Obviously, right. The question is, what does that have to be nested inside for it to
be worthwhile? And so that's what you're aiming at. And I believe, what does that need to be
nested in to make it worthwhile? And you've come to this conclusion, was this a shock to you over
the years that you came to the conclusion that, okay, why not? I mean, the reason I'm asking is because
it isn't an everyday occurrence, in some sense, for a committed scientist to point out that
the scientific viewpoint needs to be embedded inside a broader, what, value oriented viewpoint?
It's something I believe, but it isn't an everyday occurrence for that to be stated forthrightly. And
as a scientist, it isn't necessarily the first thing that would come to mind. Like, have you always
thought this way or have you come to this as a consequence of your thinking? Well, I have the
advantage of having come to science from a fairly thorough grounding in the humanities. So I had a
philosophy of life that was based on reading, thinking, talking. And I was a relatively
aged customer when I started to study medicine, compared with most people who do that,
at least in this country. So I brought a background which has always been my passion,
an interest in philosophy, but not just a kind of forever analytic philosophy in which you
is more or less like sort of angels dancing on a pinhead and breaking everything down to
the tiniest parts. This doesn't really particularly interest me, but a kind of more human philosophy
which doesn't become theology, but which is open to the idea that there is more
in the world than we can know or understand. But it does sound like it is, that it has become
theology. This isn't a critique. Like, it's an attempt to observe what you're telling me. It's
not a critique at all. I'm trying to understand this. Well, it depends what you mean by theology.
I don't think the most important part of a relationship with God is necessarily theology.
I'm not disrespectful of theology, but I've read a lot of, for example,
the Kabbalah. I've acquainted myself with Buddhist philosophy and I've always been very interested
in Taoism, Hinduism, and the deep wisdom of these things, including, as I say,
North American native people and even circumpolar people. I mean, the wisdom is embodied in their
mythologies. We think of these as somehow childish myths, but in fact, these myths contain, and in
fact, are the only way of containing or not containing because they're not ever contained,
but of transmitting, bringing into being for other people the things that are the deep truths.
And it's that that motivated me. I'm not going to be alive much longer. I mean, I'm not in
imminent danger of dying, but I mean, we're all actually here for an extraordinarily short time,
and there was great wisdom in the past in having a memento mori on your desk, a skull.
And we're not here for very long. And it behaves us to behave and to understand the world in the
most fruitful way for human fulfillment and happiness and for the greater fulfillment
of whatever it is that we sense in whatever is around us, in the being of the world. And,
you know, the word cosmos keeps coming to mind, which also in its root means beautiful, because I
think what one sees when one looks at the natural order is that it is as scientists and
mathematicians are constantly saying it's outstandingly beautiful, complex and orderly.
Why? Where does that come from? Well, I don't pretend to have an answer, but I see the difference
is between people who think they know the answer and people who don't. I'm one of the people who
don't think they know the answer. So please don't ask me what the answer is. I think I would disqualify
myself from having anything worthwhile to say if I thought I had the answer. The difference in life
is not between atheists on the one hand and believers on the other, but it's between fundamentalist
believers and fundamentalist atheists on the one hand and people who often call themselves honest
diagnostics on the other. That openness of mind, that willingness to acknowledge that one doesn't
know everything, that one's reaching and searching for something is far more fruitful and spiritual
to me than saying I know it, it's written down in this book and these are the rules.
The, I want to go back to the, I listen to all of that and I want to go back to the
this co-creation idea, because that's not a trivial idea. That's an overwhelmingly
massive idea. And it, see, I've, the audience, I've talked, the audiences I've talked with,
I've talked about the necessity of a vision of life that's sufficiently demanding, meaningful
to justify the trouble of existence. And you, it seems to me that it's necessary psychologically
to be in pursuit of a noble goal. And there isn't a goal that's more noble than the one that you
outlined virtually by definition, right? I mean, if, if you're co-creating the cosmos, but also
if you're in a co-creating relationship with God, that involves you at the highest level of being,
with the structure of being. Well, I, you know, again, because we're talking
inevitably in shorthand because this is why this book is so colossally long. I mean,
it's apparently as long as the Bible. The reason I had to do that is that I'm, what I'm doing is,
is nothing less than this. I'm saying the whole way in which you are taught by your education,
by science, popular science, not by, you know, quantum physicists who have a very much more
sophisticated grasp of philosophy, but by the sort of 19th century mechanism who still dominate
biology unhappily, a version of some engineering, if you ever like. This is not a good way to think.
This is not even likely to be true. It doesn't answer to any aspect of experience of the world,
except the most tinnily detailed. So for example, what I think is that the whole structure of things
is infinitely complex and has many recurring loops in it. And when you try, and it just an organism
is like that, or even a cell, or even, you know, part of a cell, an organelle, is amazingly complex
that the number of interactions, the number of chemical reactions that are going on there is
colossal and they all have cascades that interact with one another. However, if you take from this
very large picture right down to the tiniest, tiniest bit of light, you can see a little chain of
arrows. This leads to that, leads to that. You can't see that all kinds of other things going on.
And you can identify that. And that's what we're good at doing. And we say, if I interfere in that,
I can cause something to happen, which might be beneficial, for example, to somebody who has a
health condition. So I'm not saying there's anything wrong with any of this. Again, I come back to
there's nothing wrong with the left hemisphere. There's only something wrong with it when it
adopts the hubristic cloak of knowing everything. And when you said scientists are not often heard to
voice the sort of things that I'm saying and that you are saying, I'd like to say that physicists
very often do, but that biologists relatively less often do now, although in the early part
of the century, there were many great biologists such as J.B.S. Haldane, his father, John Scott Haldane,
Conrad Havre, Wollington, Ludwig von Vettelansi in Austria, who saw a very sophisticated vision
of the living world of biology. But what happened was, because there were great
successes in molecular engineering after the war, this vision, which as I say is technically
correct, that you can interfere as a detail and do something very valuable. But the mistake is to
extrapolate from that, to say this is the structure of the whole thing we're looking at. It's not,
it's not like that. The least eight or nine ways in which an living being is not like a machine.
So I am sorry that scientists diminish themselves by adopting this very narrow vision
of what life is. Because after all, the whole point of science as Schrodinger said
is to answer the question, who are we? And if it's not answering that question, and it's not
assumable into an answer to that question, it's not really getting us to what the meaning of our
life demands from us. That we have not an answer to the question, who are we? Not an answer to the
question, what is the meaning of life? Of course, by definition, there isn't one. But the very knowledge
that we have to strive for it and not lose sight of it is very, very important. There's a saying in
the Midrash, you are, you're not obliged to finish the work, but you are not permitted to cease from
it. And I think that is, I mean, I would say that is my vision of what I do. I think it's what all
seekers after truth have to do, whether they're philosophers or scientists. And you know, I
would love science to be more scientific. The curious thing is I honor science deeply. And I
think that it has nothing to lose by making, you know, being a little bit humbler than it is by
accepting that there was a lot that is deeply puzzling and that the more we know about physics,
for example, the more we understand what we don't know. And it's not scientific to rule out certain
ways of thinking to say that thinking in terms of organic holes in terms of gestalt, gestalt and so
forth is somehow not scientific. No, it's just not the way that a certain very narrow form of
sciences practice. And I want science before I die to become more open as science should be,
to be more questing, more imaginative. You know, in writing this book, I've had a lot to do with
the story of how scientists made their discoveries, how mathematicians made their discoveries. And
they very rarely, if ever, as George Gaylord Simpson himself said, you know, one of the great
mainstream molecular biologists of the last century, it's very rare that they make them by
following the scientific method. The scientific method is a retrospective thing that is fitted
on to what actually happens, which is extraordinary insights of intuition, seeing shapes, testing
them out, of course, which is a scientific method, of course. But it's not this kind of boring,
rule-bound thing that it's often made out to be.
Well, I think with that statement, that's a good place to end for today.
It was a nice conclusion, gone for an hour and a half or so. And I appreciate...
It's all right with me.
Very much you talking with me. Hopefully we can do this again. I want to get further through your
book. I'll keep everybody posted as to the progress of the book and to where they can obtain it
when that becomes possible. Is there anything else that you wanted to mention today
that you want to bring up before we close?
Well, no. I mean, I want to say first of all, which I haven't really had an opportunity to say,
how enormously glad I am that you are back in debate with us all. And long may that be.
And I do... I think the conversations we have are good. I hope other people may think that too.
Well, we're going to put that to the test.
And I'd like to just draw people's attention to the fact that in the last six months,
it is six months, I think, six or seven months, we've developed something called Channel McGilchrist,
which is a place on the internet where you can find out more about my stuff. You can see
talks, lectures, podcasts, things I've done, what I'm... And generally keep up to date. There's a
forum there where you can enter into and discuss my work. There's a place where you can ask questions
off me. So once a month, I answer four questions out of a list of things that members of the...
Because you can either be a non-member or a member. But if you're a member, you can ask me
a question, which I will then spend a quarter of an hour answering. So that's my attempt to try and
give back something that isn't just the odd book every 10 years. So...
Well, we'll make sure that we put the links and all of that in the description of this video.
And with any luck, we'll get a chance to talk again in the future after we've both digested this
and this conversation. It was really good to see you again.
Oh, and you. Thank you.
