It's the Hebrews created history as we know it.
You don't get away with anything and so you might think you can bend the fabric of reality
and that you can treat people instrumentally and that you can bow to the tyrant and violate
your conscience without cost.
You will pay the piper.
It's going to call you out of that slavery into freedom even if that pulls you into the
desert.
And we're going to see that there's something else going on here that is far more cosmic
and deeper than what you can imagine.
The highest ethical spirit to which we're beholden is presented precisely as that spirit
that allies itself with the cause of freedom against tyranny.
Yes, exactly.
I want villains to get punished.
But do you want the villains to learn before they have to pay the ultimate price?
That's such a Christian question.
That has to do with attention by the way.
It has to do with a subsidiary hierarchy, like a hierarchy of attention which is set
up in a way in which all the levels can have room to exist, let's say.
And so these new systems, the new way, let's say the new urbanist movement, similar to
what you're talking about, that's what they've understood.
It's like we need places of intimacy in terms of the house.
We need places of communion in terms of parks and alleyways and buildings where we meet
and a church, all these places that kind of manifest our community together.
So those existed coherently for long periods of time and then the abundance post-World
War II and some ideas about what life could be like causes big change.
And that change satisfied some needs, people got houses, but broke community needs.
And then new sets of ideas about what's the synthesis, what's the possibility of having
your own home but also having community, not having to drive 15 minutes for every single
thing and some people live in those worlds and some people don't.
Do you think we'll be smart?
So one of the problems is why were we smart enough to solve some of those problems?
Because we had 20 years, but now, because one of the things that's happening now, as
you pointed out earlier, is we're going to be producing equally revolutionary transformations
but at a much smaller scale of time.
What's natural to our children is so different than what's natural to us, but what's natural
to us is very different from our parents.
So some changes get accepted generationally really fast.
So what's made you so optimistic?
Hello everyone watching on YouTube or listening on associated platforms.
So I'm very excited today to be bringing you two of the people I admire most intellectually,
I would say, and morally for that matter, Jonathan Pazio and Jim Keller, very different
thinkers.
Jonathan Pazio is a French-Canadian liturgical artist and icon carver known for his work featured
in museums across the world.
He carves Eastern Orthodox among other traditional images and teaches an online carving class.
He also runs a YouTube channel, This Symbolic World, dedicated to the exploration of symbolism
across history and religion.
Jonathan is one of the deepest religious thinkers I've ever met.
Jim Keller is a microprocessor engineer known very well in the relevant communities and
beyond them for his work at Apple and AMD, among other corporations.
He served in the role of architect for numerous game-changing processors, has co-authored
multiple instruction sets for highly complicated designs, and is credited for being the key
player behind AMD's renewed ability to compete with Intel in the high-end CPU market.
In 2016, Keller joined Tesla, becoming vice president of autopilot hardware engineering.
In 2018, he became a senior vice president for Intel.
In 2020, he resigned due to disagreements over outsourcing production, but quickly found
a new position at TENS Torrent as chief technical officer.
We're going to sit today and discuss the perils and promise of artificial intelligence, and
it's a conversation I'm very much looking forward to.
So welcome to all of you watching and listening.
I thought it would be interesting to have a three-way conversation.
Jonathan and I have been talking a lot lately, especially with John Verveke and some other
people as well, about the fact that it seems necessary for us to view for human beings
to view the world through a story.
In fact, when we describe the structure that governs our action and our perception, that
is a story.
And so we've been trying to puzzle out, I would say, to some degree on the religious
front, what might be the deepest stories.
And I'm very curious about the fact that we perceive the world through a story, human
beings do.
And that seems to be a fundamental part of our cognitive architecture and of cognitive
architecture in general, according to some of the world's top neuroscientists.
And I'm curious, and I know Jim is interested in cognitive processing and in building systems
that in some sense seem to run in a manner analogous to the manner in which our brains
run.
And so I'm curious about the overlap between the notion that we have to view the world
through a story and what's happening on the AI front.
There's all sorts of other places that we can take the conversation.
So maybe I'll start with you, Jim.
Do you want to tell people what you've been working on and maybe give a bit of a background
to everyone about how you conceptualize artificial intelligence?
Yeah, sure.
So first, I'll say technically, I'm not an artificial intelligent researcher.
I'm a computer architect.
And I'd say my skill set goes from somewhere around the atom up to the program.
So we make transistors out of atoms, we make logical gates out of transistors, we make
computers out of logical gates.
We run programs on those.
And recently, we've been able to run programs fast enough to do something called an artificial
intelligence model or neural network, depending on how you say it.
And then we're building chips now that run artificial intelligence models fast.
And we have a novel way to do it, the company I work at.
But lots of people are working on it.
And I think we were sort of taken by surprise what's happened in the last five years, how
quickly models started to do interesting and intelligent seeming things.
There's been an estimate that human brains do about 10 to the 18th operations a second.
It sounds like a lot.
It's a billion, billion operations a second.
And a little computer processor in your phone probably does 10 billion operations a second.
And then if you use the GPU, maybe 100 billion, something like that.
And big modern AI computers like OpenAI use this or Google or somebody, they're doing
like 10 to the 16th, maybe slightly more operations a second.
So they're within a factor of 100 of a human brain's raw computational ability.
And by the way, that could be completely wrong.
Our understanding of how the human brain does computation could be wrong.
But lots of people have estimated, based on number of neurons, number of connections,
how fast neurons fire, how many operations a neuron firing seems to involve.
I mean, the estimates range by a couple orders of magnitude, but when our computers got fast
enough, we started to build things called language models and image models that do fairly
remarkable things.
So what have you seen in the last few years that's been indicative of this, of the change
that you described as revolutionary?
What are computers doing now that you found surprising because of this increase in speed?
Yeah, you can have a language model read a 200,000 word book and summarize it fairly accurately.
So it can extract out the gist?
The gist of it.
Can they do that with fiction?
Yeah.
Yeah, and I'm going to introduce you to a friend who took a language model and changed
it and fine tuned it with Shakespeare and use it to write screenplays that are pretty
good.
And these kinds of things are really interesting.
And then we were talking about this a little bit earlier.
So when computers do computations, a program will say add A equal B plus C. The computer
does those operations on representations of information, ones and zeros.
It doesn't understand them at all.
The computer has no understanding of it.
But what we call a language model translates information like words and images and ideas
into a space where the program, the ideas and the operation it does on them are all
essentially the same thing.
We'll be right back with Jonathan Pageau and Jim Keller.
First we wanted to give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new documentary, Logos in Literacy.
I was very much struck by how the translation of the biblical writings jump-started the
development of literacy across the entire world.
Literacy was the norm.
The pastor's home was the first school and every morning it would begin with singing.
The Christian faith is a singing religion.
Probably 80% of scripture memorization today exists only because of what is sung.
This is amazing.
Here we have a Gutenberg Bible printed on the press of Johann Gutenberg.
Science and religion are opposing forces in the world, but historically that has not
been the case.
Now the book is available to everyone.
From Shakespeare to modern education and medicine and science to civilization itself.
It is the most influential book in all of history and hopefully people can walk away
with at least a sense of that.
A language model can produce words and then use those words as inputs.
It seems to have an understanding of what those words are, which is very different from
how a computer operates on data.
About the language models, I mean my sense of at least in part how we understand a story
is that maybe we're watching a movie, let's say, and we get some sense of the character's
goals and then we see the manner in which that character perceives the world and we in
some sense adopt his goals, which is to identify with character.
Then we play out a panoply of emotions and motivations on our body because we now inhabit
that goal space and we understand the character as a consequence of mimicking the character
with our own physiology.
You have computers that can summarize the gist of a story, but they don't have that underlying
physiology.
First of all, it's a theory that your physiology has anything to do with it.
You could understand the character's goals and then get involved in the details of the
story.
Then you're predicting the path of the story and also having expectations and hopes for
the story.
A good story kind of takes you on a ride because it teases you with doing some of the things
you expect, but also doing things that are unexpected and possibly that creates an emotional
...
It does.
It does.
In an AI model, you can easily have a set of goals.
You have your personal goals and then when you watch the story, you have those goals.
You put those together.
How many goals is that?
The story's goals and your goals, hundreds, thousands, those are small numbers.
Then you have the story.
The AI model can predict the story too, just as well as you can.
That's the thing that I find mysterious is that ...
As the story progresses, it can look at the error between what it predicted and what actually
happened and then iterate on that.
You would call that emotional, excitement, disappointment ...
Anxiety.
Anxiety.
Yeah, definitely.
A big part of what anxiety does seem to be is discrepancy.
Some of those states are manifesting your body because you trigger hormone cascades
and a bunch of stuff, but you also can just scan your brain and see that stuff move around.
Right.
Right.
The AI model can have an error function and look at the difference between what it expected
and not, and you could call that the emotional state if you want it.
I just talked with the ...
That's speculation.
No, no.
That's accurate.
We can make an AI model that could predict the result of a story probably better than
the average person.
One of the things ...
Some people are really good at ... They're really well educated about stories or they
know the genre or something, but these things ... What they see today as the capacity of
the models is, if you say start describing a lot, it will make sense for a while, but
it will slowly stop making sense.
That's possible.
It's simply the capacity of the model right now, and the model is not well grounded enough
in a set of goals and reality or something to make sense for a while.
What do you think would happen, Jonathan?
This is, I think, associated with the kind of things that we've talked through to some
degree.
One of my hypotheses, let's say, about deep stories is that they're metagists in some
sense.
You could imagine 100 people telling you a tragic story, and then you could reduce each
of those tragic stories to the gist of the tragic story, and then you could aggregate
the gists, and then you'd have something like a metatragity.
I would say the deeper the gist, the more religious-like the story gets.
That's part of ... It's that idea as part of the reason that I wanted to bring you guys
together.
One of the things that what you just said makes me wonder is, imagine that you took Shakespeare
and you took Dante, and you took the canonical Western writers, and you trained an AI system
to understand the structure of each of them, and then now you could pull out the summaries
of those structures, the gists, and then couldn't you pull out another gist out of that?
So it would be like the essential element of Dante and Shakespeare, and I wanted to
get biblical.
Jonathan said so far, and then ... So here's one funny thing to think about.
You use the word pull out.
So when you train a model to know something, you can't just look in it and say, what is
it?
No.
You have to quarry it.
Right.
You have to ask.
Right.
Right.
What's the next sentence in this paragraph?
What's the answer to this question?
There's the thing on the internet now called prompt engineering, and it's the same way.
I can't look in your brain to see what you think.
Yeah.
I have to ask you what you think, because if I killed you and scanned your brain and
got the current state of all the synapses and stuff, A, you'd be dead, which should
be sad, and B, I wouldn't know anything about your thoughts.
Your thoughts are embedded in this model that your brain carries around, and you can express
it in a lot of ways.
And so ...
So you could add ...
How do you train ... This is my big question is ... I mean, because the way that I've been
seeing it until now is that artificial intelligence, it's based on us.
It doesn't exist independently from humans, and it doesn't have care.
The question would be, why does the computer care?
Yeah, that's not true.
Why does the computer care to get the gist of the story?
Well, yeah, so I think you're asking kind of the wrong question.
So you can train an AI model on the physics and reality and images in the world, just
with images.
And there are people who are figuring out how to train a model with just images, but
the model itself still conceptualizes things like tree and dog and action and run, because
those all exist in the world.
So ... And you can actually train ... And when you train a model with all the language
and words, so all information has structure, and I know you're a structure guy from your
video.
So if you look around you at any image, every single point you see makes sense.
Yeah.
Right?
It's a teleological structure.
It's a purpose laid in structure, right?
So this is something we talk about.
Yeah, so it turns out all the words that have ever been spoken by human beings also have
structure.
Right.
Right.
And so physics has structure, and it turns out that some of the deep structure of images
and actions and words and sentences are related.
Mm-hmm.
Like, there's actually a common core of ... Imagine there's like a knowledge space, and sure there's
details of humanity where they prefer this accent versus that.
Those are kind of details, but they're coherent in the language model.
But the language models themselves are coherent with our world ideas, and humans are trained
in the world just the way the AI models are trained in the world, like a little baby.
As it's learning, looking around, it's training on everything it sees when it's very young,
and then its training rate goes down, and it starts interacting with what it's learning,
and interacting with the people around it.
But it's trying to survive.
It's trying to live.
It has ... Like, it has the infant or the child has ...
Neurons aren't trying ... The weights in the neurons aren't trying to live.
What they're trying to do is reduce the error.
So neural networks generally are predictive things, like what's coming next?
What makes sense?
How does this work?
And when you train an AI model, you're training it to reduce the error in the model, and if
your model's big ...
So let me ask you about that.
Well, first of all ...
So babies are doing the same thing.
Like, they're looking at stuff go around, and in the beginning, their neurons are just
randomly firing, but as it starts to get object permanence and look at stuff, it starts predicting
what it'll make sense for that thing to do, and when it doesn't make sense, it'll update
its model.
So basically, it compares its prediction to the events, and then it will adjust its prediction.
So in a story prediction model, the AI would predict the story, then compare it to its
prediction and then fine-tune itself slowly as it trains itself.
Okay, so ...
Or at a reverse, you could ask it to say, given the set of things, tell the rest of
the story, and it could do that.
And the state of it right now is there are people having conversations with us that are
pretty good.
Mm-hmm.
So I talked to Carl Friston about this prediction idea in some detail.
And so Friston, for those of you who are watching and listening, is one of the world's top neuroscientists.
And he's developed an entropy enclosure model of conceptualization, which is analogous to
one that I was working on, I suppose, across approximately the same time frame.
So the first issue, and this has been well-established in the neuropsychological literature for quite
a long time, is that anxiety is an indicator of discrepancy between prediction and actuality.
And then positive emotion also looks like a discrepancy reduction indicator.
So imagine that you're moving towards a goal, and then you evaluate what happens as you
move towards the goal.
And if you're moving in the right direction, what happens is what you might say, what you
expect to happen, and that produces positive emotion.
And it's actually an indicator of reduction in entropy.
That's one way of looking at it.
And the point is that you have a bunch of words in there that are psychological definitions
of states, but you could say there's a prediction and an error prediction, and you're reducing
error.
Yes, but what I'm trying to make a case for is that your emotions directly map that, both
positive and negative emotion, look like there's signifiers of discrepancy reduction on the
positive and negative emotion side.
But then there's a complexity that I think is germane to part of Jonathan's query, which
is that...
So the neuropsychologists and the cognitive scientists have talked a long time about expectation,
prediction, and discrepancy reduction.
But one of the things they haven't talked about is it isn't exactly that you expect things.
It's that you desire them.
You want them to happen.
Because you could imagine that there's, in some sense, a literally infinite number of
things you could expect.
And we don't strive only to match prediction.
We strive to bring about what it is that we want.
And so we have these preset systems that are teleological, that are motivational systems.
Well, I mean, it depends.
If you're sitting idly on the beach in a bird flies by, you expect it to fly along in a
regular path.
Right.
You don't really want that to happen.
Yeah, but you don't want it to turn into something that could peck out your eyes either.
Sure.
But you're kind of following it with your expectation to look for discrepancy, right?
Yes.
Now, you'll also have a, you know, depends on the person, somewhere between 10 and a
million desires, right?
And then you also have fears and avoidance.
And those are context.
So if you're sitting on the beach with some anxiety that the birds are going to swerve
at you and peck your eyes out, so then you might be watching it much more attentively
than somebody who doesn't have that worry, for example.
But both of you can predict where it's going to fly and you'll both notice a discrepancy.
The motivations, one way of conceptualizing fundamental motivation is they're like a priori
prediction domains, right?
And so it helps us narrow our attentional focus because I know when you're sitting and
you're not motivated in any sense, you can be doing just in some sense, trivial expectation
computations, but often we're in a highly motivated state.
And what we're expecting is bounded by what we desire and what we desire is oriented as
Jonathan pointed out towards the fact that we want to exist.
And one of the things I don't understand and wanted to talk about today is how the computer
models, the AII models, can generate intelligible sense without mimicking that sense of motivation.
As you've said, for example, they can just derive the patterns from observations of the
objective world.
So again, I don't want to do all the talking, but so AI generally speaking, when I first
learned it about it, it had two behaviors.
They call it inference and training.
So inferences, you have a trained model, so you give it a picture and say, is there a
cat in it?
And it tells you where the cat is.
That's inference.
The model has been trained to know where a cat is.
And training is the process of giving it an input and an expected output.
And when you first start training the model, it gives you garbage out, like an untrained
brain would.
And then you take the difference between the garbage output and the expected output and
call that the error.
And then they invent the big revelation was something called back propagation with gradient
descent.
But that means take the error and divide it up across the layers and correct those calculations
so that when you put a new thing in, it gives you a better answer.
And then to somewhat my astonishment, if you have a model of sufficient capacity and you
train it with 100 million images, if you give it a novel image and say, tell me where the
cat is, it can do it.
That's called, so training is the process of doing a pass with an expected output and
propagating an error back through the network.
And inference is the behavior of putting something in and getting an output.
I think I'm really pulling.
But there's a third piece, which is what the new models do, which is called generative,
it's called a generative model.
So for example, say you put in a sentence and you say, predict the next word.
This is the simplest thing.
So it predicts the next word.
So you add that word to the input and I'll say predict the next word.
So it contains the original sentence and the word you generated.
And it keeps generating words that make sense in the context of the original word in addition.
This is the simplest basis.
And then it turns out you can train this to do lots of things.
You can train it to summarize a sentence, you can train it to answer a question.
There's a big thing about, you know, like Google every day has hundreds of millions
of people asking it questions and giving answers and then rating the results.
You can train a model with that information so you can ask it a question and it gives
you a sensible answer.
But I think in what you said, I actually have the issue that has been going through my mind
so much is when you said, you know, people put in the question and then they rate the
answer.
My intuition is that the intelligence still comes from humans in the sense that it seems
like in order to train whatever AI, you have to be able to give it a lot of power.
And then say at the beginning, this is good, this is bad, this is good, this is bad, like
reject certain things, accept certain things in order to then reach a point when then you
train the AI.
And so that's what I mean about the care.
So the care will come from humans because the care is the one giving it the value, saying
this is what is valuable, this is what is not valuable in your calculation.
So when they first, so there's a program called AlphaGo that I learned how to play go better
than a human.
So there's two ways to train the model.
One is they have a huge database of lots of go games with good winning moves.
So they train the model with that and that worked pretty good.
And they also took two simulations of go and they did random moves.
And all that happened was is these two simulators played one go game and they just recorded
whichever moves happened to win and it started out really horrible and they just started
training the model and this is called adversarial learning, it's a particular adversarial.
It's like, you know, you make your moves randomly and you train a model and so they train multiple
models and over time those models got very good and they actually got better than human
players because the humans have limitations about what they know, whereas the models could
experiment in a really random space and go very far.
Yeah.
But experiment towards the purpose of winning the game.
Yes.
Well, but you can experiment towards all kinds of things that turns out and humans are also
trained that way.
Like when you were learning, you were reading, you were saying, this is a good book.
This is a bad book.
This is good sentence construction.
It's good.
It's going.
So you've gotten so many error signals over your life.
Well, that's what culture does in large parties.
Culture does that.
Religion does that.
Your everyday experience does that.
Your family.
So we embody that.
Yeah.
And we're all, and everything that happens to us, we process it on the inference pass
which generates outputs.
And then sometimes we look at that and say, hey, that's unexpected or that got a bad result
or that got bad feedback.
And then we back propagate that and update our models.
So really well trained models can then train other models.
So the human trained now are the smartest people in the world.
So the biggest question that comes now based on what you said is, because my main point
is to try to show how it seems like artificial intelligence is always an extension of human
intelligence.
It remains an extension of human intelligence.
And maybe the way to- That won't be true at all.
So do you think that at some point the artificial intelligence will be able to, because the
goals recognizing cats, writing plays, all these goals are goals which are based on embodied
human existence.
Could an AI at some point develop a goal which would be uncomprehensible to humans because
of its own existence?
For example, there's a small population of humans that enjoy math.
And they are pursuing adventures in math space that are incomprehensible to 99.99% of humans.
But they're interested in it and you could imagine like an AI program working with those
mathematicians and coming up with very novel math ideas and then interacting with them.
But they could also, if some AIs were elaborating out really interesting and detailed stories,
they could come up with stories that are really interesting.
We're going to see it pretty soon like all of our- Could there be a story that is interesting
only to the AI and not interesting to us?
That's possible.
So stories are like I think some high level information space.
The computing age of big data, there's all this data running on computers, the only humans
understood it, the computers don't.
So AI programs are now at the state where the information, the processing and the feedback
loops are all kind of in the same space.
They're still relatively rudimentary to humans.
I guess some AI programs in certain things are better than humans already, but for the
most part they're not.
But it's moving really fast.
And so you could imagine, I think in five or 10 years most people's best friends will
be AIs and they'll know you really well and they'll be interested in you and it's-
Unlike your real friends.
Real friends are problematic.
They're only interested in you when you're interested.
Yeah, yeah, real friends are-
The AI systems will love you even when you're dull and miserable.
Well there's so much idea space to explore and humans have a wide range.
Some humans like to go through their everyday life doing their everyday things and some
people spend a lot of time like you, a lot of time reading and thinking and talking and
arguing and debating.
And there's going to be I'd say a diversity of possibilities with what a thinking thing
can do when the thinking is fairly unlimited.
So I'm curious about, I'm curious in pursuing this issue that Jonathan has been developing.
So there's a literally infinite number of ways, virtually infinite number of ways that
we could take images of this room, right?
Now if a human being is taking images of this room they're going to be, they're going to
sample a very small space of that infinite range of possibilities because if I was taking
pictures in this room in all likelihood I would take pictures of objects that are identifiable
to human beings that are functional to human beings at a level of focus that makes those
objects clear.
And so then you could imagine that the set of all images on the internet has that implicit
structure of perception built into it and that's a function of what human beings find
useful.
No, I mean I could take a photo of you that was, the focal depth was here and here and
here and here and here and two inches past you and now I suppose you could.
There's a technology for that called light fields.
So then you could, if you had that picture properly done then you could move around it
and imagine and see.
But yeah, fair enough.
I get your point.
Like the human recorded data has our biology built into it.
Has our biology built into it but also unbelievably detailed in coding of how physical reality
works, right?
So every single pixel in those pictures, even though you kind of selected the view, the
focus, the frame, it still encoded a lot more information than your processing.
And if you take a large, it turns out if you take a large number of images of things in
general, so you've seen these things where you take a 2D image and turn it into a 3D
image.
Right.
The reason that works is even in the 2D image, the 3D image in the room actually got embedded
in that picture in a way.
Then if you have the right understanding of how physics and reality works, you can reconstruct
the 3D model.
Okay, so this reminds me.
But you could, you know, an AI scientist may cruise around the world with infrared and
radio wave cameras, and they might take pictures of all different kinds of things, and every
once in a while, they'd show up and go, hey, the sun, you know, I've been staring at the
sun in the ultraviolet and radio waves for the last month, and it's way different than
anybody thought because humans tend to look at light and visible spectrum.
And you know, there could be some really novel things coming out of that.
But humans also, we live in the spectrum we live in because it's a pretty good one for
planet Earth.
Like, it wouldn't be obvious that AI would start some different place, like visible spectrum
is interesting for a whole bunch of reasons.
Right.
So in a set of images that are human derived, you're saying that there's, the way I would
conceptualize that is that there's two kinds of logos embedded in that.
One would be that you could extract out from that set of images what was relevant to human
beings, but you're saying that the fine structure of the objective world outside of human concern
is also embedded in the set of images, and that an AI system could extract out a representation
of the world, but also a representation of what's motivating to human beings.
Yes.
And then some human scientists already do look at the sun and radio waves and other things
because they're trying to, you know, get different angles on how things work.
Yeah.
Well, I guess it's a, it's a, it's a curious thing.
It's like the same with like buildings and architecture, mostly fit people.
Well, the other, there's a reason for that.
The reason why I keep coming back to hammering the same point is that even in terms of the
development of the AI, that is developing AI requires immense amount of money, energy,
you know, and time.
And so that's a transient thing in 30 years, it won't cost anything.
So it's, that's, that's going to change so fast.
It's amazing.
That's a, like supercomputers used to cost millions of dollars and now your phone is
the supercomputer.
So it's the time between millions of dollars and $10 is about 30 years.
So it's like, I'm just saying it's like the time and effort isn't a thing in technology.
It's moving pretty fast.
It just, that's just, that just says the date.
Yeah.
But even making, even making, let's say, even, I mean, I guess maybe the, the, the
this is the nightmare question.
Like, could you imagine an AI system which becomes completely autonomous, which is creating
itself even physically through automized factories, which is, you know, programming itself, which
is creating its own goals, which is not at all connected to human endeavor.
Yeah.
I mean, individual researchers can, you know, I have a friend who I'm going to introduce
you to him tomorrow, he wrote a program that scraped all of the internet and trained an
AI model to be a language model on a relatively small computer.
And in 10 years, the computer he could easily afford would be as smart as a human.
So he could train that pretty easily.
And that model could go on Amazon and buy 100 more of those computers and copy itself.
So yeah, we're, we're 10 years away from that.
And then, then why, like, why would it do that?
I mean, what does it does?
Is it possible?
It's all about the motivational question.
I think that that's what, what even Jordan and I both have been coming at from the outset.
It's like, so you have an image, right?
You have an image of, of Skynet or of the matrix, you know, in which the sentient AI
is actually fighting for its survival.
So it has a survival instinct, which is pushing it to self perpetuate, like to, to, to replicate
itself and to create variation on itself in order to survive and identifies humans as
an obstacle to that.
You know?
Yeah.
So you have a whole bunch of implicit assumptions there.
So, so humans last I checked are unbelievably competitive.
And when you let people get into power with no checks on them, they typically run them
up. It's been a historical, historical experience.
And then humans are, you know, self regulating to some extent, obviously with some serious
outliers, because they self regulate with each other and humans and AI models at some
point will have to find their own calculation of self regulation and tradeoffs about that.
Yeah. Because the AI doesn't feel pain, at least as we, if that we don't know that it
feels.
Well, lots of humans don't feel pain either.
So I mean, that's, I mean, the humans feeling pain or not, didn't, you know, doesn't stop
a whole bunch of activity.
I mean, that's, I mean, it doesn't, the fact that we feel pain doesn't stop.
It doesn't regulate that many people.
Right.
I mean, there's definitely people like, you know, children, if you threaten them with,
you know, go to your room and stuff, you can regulate them that way.
But some kids ignore that completely and adults are.
And it's often counterproductive.
Yeah.
So, so right, you know, you know, culture and societies and organizations, we regulate
each other, you know, sometimes in competition and cooperation.
Yeah.
Do you, do you think that we've talked about this to some degree for decades?
I mean, when you look at how fast things are moving now, and as you push that along,
what, what, when you look out 10 years and you see the relationship between the AI
systems that are being built and human beings, what do you envision?
Or can you envision it?
Well, can I, yeah, like I said, I'm a computer guy.
And I'm watching this with, let's say, some fascination as well.
I mean, the last, so Ray Kurzweil said, you know, pro, progress accelerates.
Yeah.
Right.
So we, we have this idea that 20 years of progress is 20 years.
But, you know, the last 20 years of progress was 20 years and the next 20 years will
probably be, you know, five to 10.
Right, right, right.
And, and.
And you can really feel that happening.
To some level, that causes social stress, independent of whether it's AI or, or Amazon
deliveries, you know, what, you know, there's so many things that are going into the, the
stress of it all.
Well, there's, but there's progress, which is an extension of human capacity.
And then there's this progress, which I'm hearing about the way that you're describing
it, which seems to be an inevitable progress towards creating something which is more
powerful than you.
Right.
And so what is that?
I don't even understand that drive.
Like, what is that drive to, to create something?
Which can supplant you.
So look at the average person in the world, right?
So the average person already exists in this world, because the average person is halfway
up the human hierarchy.
There's already many people more powerful than any of us.
They're, they could be smarter.
They could be richer.
They could be better connected.
We already live in a world like very few people are at the top of anything.
Right.
So that's already a thing.
So basically the drive to make someone a superstar that's there, the drive
to elevate someone above you, that would be the same drive that is bringing us to
creating these ultra powerful machines because we have that.
Like we have a drive to elevate.
Like, you know, when we see a rock star that we like, people want to submit
themselves to that.
They want to dress like them.
They want to raise them up above them as an example, something to follow, right?
Something to, to, to subject themselves to.
You see that with leaders.
You see that in the political world and in teams.
You see that in sports teams, the same thing.
And so you think we've always tried to build things that are beyond us.
You know, I mean, I mean, it's about, are we building, are we building a God?
Is that the, is that what people, is that the drive that is pushing someone towards?
Cause when I hear what you're describing, Jim, I hear something that is extremely
dangerous, right?
Sounds extremely dangerous to the very existence of humans.
Yet I see humans acting and moving in that direction almost without being able
to stop it, as if there's no one now.
I think it is unstoppable.
Well, that's one of the things we've also talked about is because I've asked
Jim straight out, you know, because of the hypothetical danger associated with
this, why not stop doing it?
And well, part of his answer is the ambivalence about the outcome, but also
that it isn't obvious at all that in some sense it's stoppable.
I mean, it's the, it's the cumulative action of many, many people that are
driving this along.
And even if you took out one player, even a key player, the probability that you
do anything but slow it infinitesimally is, is quite.
That because there's also a massive payoff for those that will succeed.
It's also set up that way.
People know that at least, at least until the AI take over or whatever, that
whoever is on the line towards increasing the power of the AI will, will
rake in major rewards.
Right?
Well, that's what we do with all cognitive acceleration, right?
Yeah, I could recommend Ian Banks as an author, English author, I think he
wrote a series of books on the, he called the culture novels.
And it was a world where there was humans and then there was AIs, the smartest
humans and AI's that were dumber than humans.
But there were some AIs that were much, much smarter and they, they lived in
harmony because they mostly all pursued what they wanted to pursue.
Humans pursued human goals and super smart AIs, pursued super smart AI goals.
And, and, you know, they, they communicated and worked with each other.
But, but they, they mostly, you know, they're different.
When they were different enough that that was problematic, their goals were
different enough that they didn't overlap.
Because one of the, one of the things that that would be my guess is like these
ideas where these super AIs get smart.
And the first thing they do is stomp out the humans.
It's like, you don't do that.
Like, like, you don't wake up in the morning and think, I have to stomp
out all the cats.
No, it's not about.
The cats do cat things and the ants do ant things and the birds do bird things.
And, and super smart mathematicians do smart mathematician things.
And, you know, guys who like to build houses do build house things.
And, you know, everybody, you know, the world, there's so much space in the
intellectual zone that people, people tend to go pursue the, in a good society.
Like you tend to pursue the stuff that you do.
And then the people in your zone, you self-regulate.
And you also, even in the social stratus, we self-regulate.
I mean, the, the, the recent political events of the last 10 years, the, the
weird thing to me has been why have, you know, people with power been overreaching
to take too much from people with less.
Like that's bad regulation.
But one of the aspects of increasing power is that increasing power is always
mediated, at least in one aspect by the military, by, by, let's say, physical
power on others, you know, and we can see that technology is linked and has been
linked always to military power.
And so the idea that there could be some AIs that will be our friends or whatever
is maybe possible, but the idea that there will be some AIs, which will be
weaponized is, seems absolutely inevitable because increasing power is always,
increasing technological power always moves towards, towards military.
So we've lived with atomic bombs since the 40s, right?
So the, I mean, the solution to this has been mostly, you know, some form of
mutual assured destruction or attacking me, like the response to attacking me is
so much worse than the.
Yeah, but it's also because we, we have reciprocity.
We recognize each other as the same.
So if I look into the face of another human, there, there's a limit of how
indifferent I think that person is for me.
But if I'm hearing something described as the possibility of superintelligences
that have their own goals, their own cares, their own structures, then how much
mirror is there between these two groups of people, these two groups?
Well, Jim's objection seems to be something like we're, we're making,
we may be making, when we're doomsaing, let's say, and I'm not saying there's
no place for that, we're making the presumption of something like a zero
sum competitive landscape, right?
Is that the, the idea and the idea behind movies like, like the Terminator is
that there is only so much resources and the machines and the human beings
would have to fight over it.
And you can see that that, that could easily be a preposterous assumption.
Now, I think that one of the fundamental points you're making, though, is also
there will definitely be people that will weaponize AI and those weaponized
AI systems will have as their goal, something like the destruction of human
beings, at least under some circumstances.
And then there's the possibility that that will get out of control because the
most effective systems at destroying human beings might be the ones that win,
let's say, and that could happen independently of whether or not it is a
true zero sum competition.
Yeah.
And also the, the effectiveness of military stuff doesn't need very smart
AI to be a lot better than it is today.
You know, I used to, you know, like the Star Wars movies where like, you know,
tens of thousands of years in the future, super highly trained, you know,
fighters can't hit somebody running across the field.
Like that's silly, right?
You can, you can already make a gun that can hit everybody in the room
without aiming at it.
It's, you know, there's like the, the military threshold is much lower than
any intelligence threshold, like for danger.
And, you know, like to the extent that we self-regulated through the nuclear
crisis is interesting.
I don't know if it's because we thought that the Russians were like us.
I kind of suspect the problem was that we thought they weren't like us.
And, but we still managed to make some calculation to say that any kind of
attack would be mutually devastating.
Well, when you, when you look at, you know, the destructive power of the
military we already have so far exceeds the planet, I'm, I'm not sure, like
adding intelligence to it is the tipping point.
Like that's, I think the more likely thing is things that are truly smart
in different ways will be interested in different things.
And then the possibility for, let's say, mutual flourishing is, is, is really
interesting.
And I know artists using AI already to do really amazing things.
And, and that's already happening.
Well, when you, when you're working on the frontiers of AI development and you
see the development of increasingly intelligent machines, I mean, I know
that part of what drives you is, I don't want to put words in your mouth,
but what drives intelligent engineers in general, which is to take something
that works and make it better and maybe to make it radically better and
radically cheaper.
So, so there's this drive toward technological improvement.
And I know that you like to solve complex problems and you do that
extraordinarily well.
What, but do you, do you, is there also a vision of a more abundant form of
human flourishing emerging from the, from the development?
So what, so what do you see happening?
Well, you said it years ago, it's like, we're going to run out of energy.
What's next?
We're going to run out of matter.
Right.
Like our ability to do what we want in ways that are interesting and, you know,
for some people, beautiful is limited by a whole bunch of things.
Cause we're, you know, partly it's technological and partly with, you
know, we're stupidly divisive, but, um, but there is, there's
also possible that there's also a reality, which is one of the things
that technology has been is of course, an increase in power towards desire,
towards human desire.
And that is represented in mythological stories where let's say technology
is used to accomplish impossible desire, right?
We have, you know, the story of the story of building the, the McCann,
the bull around the king of Meno, the, the wife of the king of Meno's, you
know, in order to be inseminated by, uh, by a bull, we have the story, the, the,
we have the story of the, um, sorry, Frankenstein, et cetera, the story of
the golem where we put our desire into this increased power.
And then what happens is that we don't know our desires.
That's one of the things that I've also been worried about in terms of AI is that
we act, we have secret desires that enter into what we do that people
aren't totally aware of.
And as we increase in power, these systems, those desires,
let's say the, the pot, like the idea, for example, of the possibility
of having an AI friend and the idea that an AI friend would be the best friend
you've ever had because that, that friend would be the nicest to you,
would care the most about you, would do all those things.
That would be an exact example of what I'm talking about,
which is it's really the story of the genie, right?
It's the story of the, the genie in the lamp where the genie says,
what do you wish?
And the, and the person, and I have unlimited power to give it to you.
And so I give him my wish, but that wish has all these,
these underlying implications that I don't understand all these underlying
possibilities.
Yeah, but the, the cool thing, the moral of almost all those stories is
having unlimited wishes will be, lead to your downfall.
And so humans, like, if you give, you know, a young person an unlimited amount
of stuff to drink for, for six months, they're going to be falling down drunk
and they're going to get over it, right?
Having a friend that's always your friend, no matter what,
it's probably going to get boring.
Well, the, the, the literature on marital stability indicates that.
So there's a, there's a sweet spot with regards to marital stability
in terms of the ratio of negative to positive communication.
So if on average, you receive five positive communications
and one negative communication from your spouse,
that's on the low threshold for stability.
If it's four positive to one negative, you're headed for divorce.
But interestingly enough, on the other end, there's a threshold as well,
which is that if it exceeds 11 positive to one negative,
you're also moving towards divorce.
So there's, so, so, so there might be self-regulating mechanisms that,
that would in sense take care of that.
You might find a yes man AI friend extraordinarily boring, very, very rapidly.
But as opposed to an AI friend that was interested in what you were interested in,
it was actually interesting.
Like, you know, we go through friends in the course of our lives,
like different friends are interesting at different times.
And some friends we grow with, and that continues to be really interesting
for years and years.
And other friends, you know, some people get stuck in their thing
and then you've moved on or they've moved on or something.
So, yeah, I tend to think of a world where there was more abundance
and more possibilities and more interesting things to do is an interesting.
Okay, okay.
And modern society has let the human population,
and some people think this is a bad thing, but I don't know.
I'm a fan of it.
You know, modern population has gone from tens of 200 million to billions of people.
That's generally being a good thing.
We're not running out of space.
I've been in, you know, so some of your audience has probably been in an airplane.
If you look out the window, the country is actually mostly empty.
The oceans are mostly empty.
Like, we're, we're weirdly good at polluting large areas.
But as soon as we decide not to, we don't have to, like technology.
Most, most of our, you know, energy pollution problems are technical.
Like, we can stop polluting.
Like, electric cars are great.
So, so, so there's so many things that we could do technically.
I forget the guy's name.
He said that the earth could easily support a population of a trillion people.
And trillion people would be a lot more people doing, you know, random stuff.
And he didn't imagine that the future population would be a trillion humans and a trillion AIs,
but it probably will be.
So it will probably exist on multiple planets,
which will be good the next time an asteroid shows up.
So what do you think about, so, so one of the things that seems to be happening,
tell me if, if you think I'm wrong here.
I don't think it's germane to, and I just want to make the point of, you know,
where we are compared to living in the Middle Ages, our lives are longer,
our, our families are healthier, our children are more likely to survive.
Like many, many good things happened.
Like setting the clock back with and be good.
And, you know, if we have some care and people who actually care about
how culture interacts with technology for the next 50 years,
you know, we'll get through this, hopefully more successful than we did the atomic bomb in the Cold War.
But it's, it's a major change.
I mean, this is like, like your worries are, you know, I mean, they're, they're relevant.
But, you know, but also you're, Jonathan, your stories about how humans have faced abundance
and faced evil kings and evil overlords.
Like we have thousands of years of history of facing the challenge of the future
and the challenge of things that cause radical change.
Yeah.
And you know, that's, that's very valuable information.
But for the most part, nobody's succeeded by stopping change.
They've succeeded by bringing to bear on the change our capability to self-regulate the balance.
Like a good life isn't having as much gold as possible.
It's a boring life.
A good life is, you know, having some quality friends and doing what you want
and having some, some insight in life.
Yeah.
And some optimal challenge.
And, you know, and in a world where a larger percentage of people can have,
well, live in relative abundance and have tools and opportunities, I think is a good thing.
Yeah.
And I don't, I don't want to pull back abundance.
But what I have noticed is that, that our abundance brings a kind of nihilism to people.
And I don't, like I said, I don't want to go back.
I'm happy to live here and to have these, these tech things.
But I, but I think it's something that I've also noticed that increase of, of the capacity to
get your desires when that increases to a certain extent also leads to a kind of nihilism
where exactly that.
Well, I wonder, Jonathan, I wonder if that's partly, partly a consequence
of the erroneous maximization of short-term desire.
I mean, one of the things that you might think about that could be dangerous on the AI front is that
we optimize the manner in which we, we interact with our electronic gadgets to capture short-term
attention, right?
Because there's a difference between getting what you want right now, right now, and getting
what you need in some more mature sense across a reasonable span of time.
And one of the things that does seem to be happening online, and I think it is driven by
the development of AI systems, is that we're, we're assaulted by systems that parasitize our
short-term attention and at the expense of longer-term attention.
And if the AI systems emerge to optimize attentional grip, it isn't obvious to me that
they're going to optimize for the attention that works over the medium to long-run, right?
They're going to, they're going to be, they could conceivably maximize something like
whim-centered existence.
Yeah, because all of virality is based on that.
All the social media networks are all based on this, on this reduction, this reduction of
attention, this reduction of desire to, to reaching your, your rest, let's say, in that
desire, right? The like, the click, all these things, they're...
Yeah, now.
Yeah, exactly.
So, but, but that's something that, you know, so for reasons that are somewhat puzzling,
but maybe not, you know, the business models around a lot of those interfaces are around,
you know, the part, the users, the product, and, you know, the advertisers are trying to get
your attention.
Yeah, yeah.
But that's something culture could regulate. We could decide that, no, we don't, we don't
want tech platforms to be driven by advertising money. Like, that would be a smart decision,
probably. And that could be a big change.
And what would you see as an alternative?
See, well, the problem with that might be that markets drive that in some sense, right?
Yeah.
And I know they're driving that in a short-term way.
We can take steps, like, you know, at various times, you know, alcohol has been illegal.
Like, you can, society can decide to regulate all kinds of things.
And, you know, sometimes, some things need to be regulated and some things don't.
Like, when you buy a hammer, you don't fight with your hammer for its attention, right?
A hammer is a tool. You buy one when you need one.
Nobody's marketing hammers to you.
Like, like that, that has a relationship that's transactional to your purpose, right?
Yeah, well.
Our technology has become a thing where, I mean.
But there's a relationship between human, let's say, high human goals, something like
attention and status. And what we talked about, which is the idea of elevating something higher
in order to see it as a model. See, these are where intelligence exists in the human person.
So when we notice that in the systems, in the platforms, these are the aspects of intelligence
which are being weaponized in some ways, not against us, but are just kind of being weaponized
because they're the most beneficial at the short term to be able to generate our constant attention.
And so what I mean is that that is what the AIs are made of, right?
They're made of attention, prioritization, you know, good, bad.
What is it that is worth putting energy into in order to predict towards a telos?
And so I'm seeing that the idea that we could disconnect them suddenly seems very difficult to me.
Yeah, so I'll give you two. First, I want to give an old example. So after World War II,
America went through this amazing building boom of building suburbs. And the American dream was,
you could have your own house, your own yard in the suburb with a good school, right?
So in the 50s, 60s, early 70s, they were building like crazy. By the time I grew up,
I lived in a suburb in dystopia, right? And we found that that as a goal wasn't a good thing
because people ended up in houses separated from social structures and then new towns are built
around like a hub with places to go and eat. So there was a good that was viewed in terms of
opportunity and abundance, but it actually was a fail culturally. And then some places it modified
and continues and some places are still dystopian, you know, suburban areas and some places people
simply learn to live with it, right? So that has to do with attention, by the way. It has to do with
a subsidiary hierarchy, like a hierarchy of attention, which is set up in a way in which all
the levels can have room to exist, let's say. And so, you know, the new systems, the new way,
let's say the new urbanist movement, similar to what you're talking about, that's what they've
understood. It's like we need places of intimacy in terms of the house. We need places of communion
in terms of parks and alleyways and buildings where we meet and a church, all these places that
kind of manifest our community together. Yeah, so those existed coherently for long periods of time
and then the abundance post-World War II and some ideas about like what life could be like
caused this big change and that change satisfied some needs, people got houses, but broke community
needs and then new sets of ideas about what's the synthesis, what's the possibility of having your own
home, but also having community, not having to drive 15 minutes for every single thing and some
people live in those worlds and some people don't. Do you think we'll be smart? So one of the problems
is if we're there, we'll see. Well, why were we smart enough to solve some of those problems?
Because we had 20 years, but now, because one of the things that's happening now is we're,
as you pointed out earlier, is we're going to be producing equally revolutionary transformations,
but at a much smaller scale of time. And so, Mike, one of the things I wonder about, I think it's
driving some of the concerns in the conversation, is are we going to be intelligent enough to direct
with regulation the transformations of technology as they start to accelerate? I mean, we've already,
you look what's happened online, I mean, we've inadvertently, for example, radically magnified
the voices of narcissists, psychopaths, and Machiavellians. And we've done that so intensely,
partly, and I would say partly, as a consequence of AI mediation, that I think it's destabilizing
the entire world. It's destabilizing part of it, like Scott Adams pointed out. You just block
everybody that acts like that. I don't pay attention to people that talk like that.
Yeah, but they seem to be raising the temperature. Well, there are still places that are sensitive
to it. Like 10,000 people here can make a storm in some corporate person, fire somebody.
But I think that's like, we're five years from that being over. Corporation will go 10,000 people
out of 10 billion. Not a big deal. Okay, so you think at the moment that's a
learning moment that will re-regulate. What's natural to our children is so different than
was natural to us, but what was natural to us was very different from our parents.
So some changes get accepted generationally really fast.
So what's made you so optimistic? What do you mean optimistic?
Well, most of the things that you have said today, and maybe it's also because we're pushing you,
I mean, you really do. My nephew, Kyle, was a really smart, clever guy. He called me a
what did he call it, a cynical optimist. Like I believe in people.
Like I like people, but also people are complicated. They all got all kinds of nefarious goals.
Like I worry a lot more about people burning down the world than I do about artificial intelligence
just because, you know, people, well, you know, people, they're difficult.
Right. And, but the interesting thing is in aggregate, we mostly self-regulate.
And when things change, you have these dislocations. And then it's up to people who talk and think,
and while we're having this conversation, I suppose, to talk about how do we re-regulate this stuff.
Yeah. Well, because one of the things that the increase in power has done in terms of AI,
and you can see it with Google and you can see it online, is that there are certain people who
hold the keys, let's say, and then who hold the keys to what you see and what you don't see.
So you see that on Google, right? And you know it if you know what search is to make where you
realize that this is not, this is actually being directed by someone who now has huge amount of
power in order to direct my attention towards their ideological purpose. And so that's why,
like, I think that to me, I personally think it would, I always tend to see AI as an extension
of human power, even though there is this idea that it could somehow become totally independent.
I still tend to see it as an increase of the human care and whoever will be able to hold
the keys to that will have increase in power. And that can be like, and I think we're already
seeing it. Well, that's not really any different, though, is it, Jonathan, the situation that's
always confronted us in the past? I mean, we've always had to deal with the evil uncle of the
king, and we've always had to deal with the fact that an increase in ability could also produce
a commensurate increase in tyrannical power, right? I mean, so that might be magnified now,
and maybe the danger in some sense is more acute, but possibly the possibility is more
present as well. Well, because you can train an AI to find hate speech, right? You can train an AI
to find hate speech, and then to act on that hate speech immediately within, and now it's only,
we're not only talking about social media, but what we've seen is that that is now
encroaching into payment systems and into people losing their bank account, their access to
different services. And so this idea of optimization. Yeah, there's an Australian bank that already has
decided that it's a good thing to send all of their customers a carbon load report every month,
right? And to offer them hints about how they could reduce their polluting purchases, let's say.
And well, at the moment, that system is one of voluntary compliance, but you can certainly see
in a situation like the one we're in now that the line between voluntary compliance and involuntary
compulsion is very, very thin. Yeah, so I'd like to say, so during the early computer world,
computers were very big and expensive. And then they made many computers and workstations,
but they were still corporate only. And then the PC world came in. All of a sudden,
PCs put everybody online, everybody could suddenly see all kinds of stuff, and people
could get a Freedom of Information Act request, put it online somewhere, and 100,000 people could see
it. It was an amazing democratization moment. And then there was a similar, but smaller revolution
with the world of smartphones and apps. But then we've had a new completely different set of companies,
by the way, from what happened in the 60s, 70s, and 80s to today, it's very different companies that
control it. And there are people who are worried that AI will be a winner take all thing. Now,
I think so many people are using it, and they're working on it so many different places, and the
cost is going to come down so fast, that pretty soon you'll have your own AI app that you'll use to
mediate the internet to strip out the endless stream of ads. And you can say, well, is this story
objective? Well, here's the 15 stories, and this is being manipulated this way, and this is being
manipulated that way. And you can say, well, I want what's more like the real story. And the funny
thing is, information that's broadly distributed, and has lots of inputs, is very hard to fake the
whole thing. So right now, a story can pull through a major media outlet. And if they can control the
narrative, everybody gets to fake story. But if the media is distributed across a billion people,
who are all interacting in some useful way, somebody standing there, some, yeah, there's real
signal there, and if somebody stands up and says something that's not true, everybody goes,
everybody knows that's not true. So a good outcome with people thinking seriously would be the
democratization of information and objective facts in the same way. The same thing that happened with
PCs versus corporate central computers could happen again. The problem is that the increase in power,
the increase in power always creates the tooth at the same time. And so we saw that increase in
power creates first, or it depends in which direction it happens, it creates an increase in
decentralization, it increases in access, it creates all that. But then it also at the same time
creates the counter reaction, which is an increase in control and increase in centralization. And so
now, the more the power is, the more the waves will, the bigger the waves will be. And so the
image of the image that 1984 presented to us, of people going into newspapers and changing the
headlines and taking the pictures out and doing that, that now obviously can happen with just a
click. So you can click and you can change the past. You can change the past, you can change
facts about the world because they're all held online. And we've seen it happen obviously in
the media recently. So does decentralization win over centralization? How is that even possible,
it seems? I mean, and it's also interesting, when Amazon became a platform, suddenly any mom and
pop business could have Amazon, eBay, there's a bunch of platforms, which had an amazing impact
because any business could get to anybody. But then the platform itself started to control
the information flow. But at some point that will turn into people go, well, why am I letting
somebody control my information flow? And Amazon objectively doesn't really have any capability.
So like you point out, the waves are getting bigger, but they're real waves. It's the same with
information. Information is all online. It's also on a billion hard drives. So somebody says,
I'm going to raise the objective fact, a distributed information system would say,
go ahead and raise it anywhere you want. There's another 1,000 copies of it.
But again, this is where thinking people have to say, yeah, this is a serious problem.
Like if humans don't have anything to fight for, they get lazy and a little bit dopey,
in my view. We do have something to fight for. And that's worth talking about. What would a great
world with distributed, inhuman intelligence and artificial intelligence working together in a
collaborative way to create abundance and fairness and some better way at arriving at good decisions
than what the truth is. That would be a good thing. But it's not, well, we'll leave it to the
experts and then the experts will tell us what to do. That's a bad thing. So that's...
Well, so is it the model that you just laid out, which I think is very interesting?
I'm not so much optimistic about that. Well, it did happen on the computational front.
It happened a couple of times both directions. The PC revolution was amazing. And Microsoft
was a fantastic company. It enabled everybody to write a $10, $50 program to use. And then at
some point, they're also, let's say, a difficult program company. And they made money off a lot
of people and became extremely valuable. Now, for the most part, they haven't been that directional
on telling you what to do and think and how to do it. But they are a many-making company.
Apple created the App Store, which is great. But then they also take 30% of the App Store
profits and there's a whole section of the internet that's fighting with Apple about their
control of that platform. And in Europe, they've decided to regulate some of that,
that should be a conversation, that should be a social cultural conversation about how should
that work. So do you see the more likely, certainly the more desirable future is something like
a set of distributed AIs, many of which are under personal, in personal relationship in some sense,
the same way that we're in personal relationship with our phones and our computers. And that that
would give people the chance to fight back, so to speak against this. And there's lots of people
really interested in distributed platforms. And one of the interesting things about the AI world is,
you know, there's a company called OpenAI and they open source a lot of it. The AI research is
amazingly open. It's all done in public. People publish the new models all the time. You can try
them out. People, there's a lot of startups doing AI in all different kinds of places.
You know, it's a very curious phenomena. And it's kind of like a big, huge wave. It's not like a,
you can't stop a wave with your hand. Yeah. Well, when you think about the waves, there are two,
actually in the book of Revelation, which describes the end or describes the finality of all things
or the totality of all things is maybe a way for people who are more secular to kind of understand
it. And in that book, there are two images, interesting images about technology. One is
that there's a dragon that falls from the heavens and that dragon makes a beast. And then that beast
makes an image of the beast. And then the image speaks. And when the image speaks, then people
are so mesmerized by the speaking image that they worship the beast ultimately. So that is one
image of, let's say, making and technology and scripture in Revelation. But there's another
image, which is the image of the heavenly Jerusalem. And that image is more an image of balance. It's
an image of the city which comes down from heaven with a garden in the center and then becomes this
glorious city. And it says, the glory of all the kings is gathered into the city. So the glory of
all the nations is gathered into this city. So now you see a technology which is at the service of
human flourishing and takes the best of humans and brings it into itself in order to kind of
manifest. And it also has hierarchy, which means it has the natural at the center and then has the
artificial as serving the natural, you could say. So those two images seem to reflect these
two waves that we see. And this kind of idea of an artificial intelligence which will be ruling
over us or speaking over us. But there's a secret person controlling it, even in Revelation. It's
like, there's a beast controlling it and making it speak. So now we're mesmerized by it. And then
this other image. So I don't know, Jordan, if you ever thought about those two images in Revelation
as being related to technology, let's say. Well, I don't think I've thought about those two images
in the specific manner that you described. But I would say that the work that I've been doing,
and I think the work you've been doing too in the public front, reflects the dichotomy between
those images. And it's relevant to the points that Jim has been making. I mean, we are definitely
increasing our technological power. And you can imagine that that'll increase our capacity for
tyranny and also our capacity for abundance. And then the question becomes, what do we need to do
in order to increase the probability that we tilt the future towards Jerusalem and away from the
beast? And the reason that I've been concentrating on helping people bolster their individual
morality to the degree that I've managed that is because I think that whether the outcome is the
positive outcome, that in some sense Jim has been outlining or the negative outcomes that we've been
querying him about, I think that's going to be dependent on the individual ethical choices of
people at the individual level, but then cumulatively, right? So if we decide that we're
going to worship the image of the beast, so to speak, because we're mesmerized by our own reflection,
that's another way of thinking about it. And we want to be the victim of our own dark desires,
then the IA revolution is going to go very, very badly. But if we decide that we're going to aim up
in some positive way, and we make the right micro decisions, well, then maybe we can harness
this technology to produce a time of abundance in the manner that Jim is hopeful about.
Yeah. And let me make two funny points. So one is, I think there's going to be continuum,
like the word artificial intelligence won't actually make any sense. So humans collectively,
individuals know stuff, but collectively we know a lot more. And the thing that's really good is
in a diverse society with lots of people pursuing individual, interesting ideas, worlds, we have
a lot of things, and more people, more independence generates more diversity. And that's a good thing
where it's a totalitarian society where everybody's told to wear the same shirt. It's inherently
boring. The beast speaking through the monster is inherently dull. But in an intelligent world,
where not only can we have more intelligent things, but in some places go far beyond what most humans
are capable of in pursuit of interesting variety. And I believe the information, well,
let's say intelligence is essentially unlimited, right? And the unlimited intelligence won't be
this shiny thing that tells everybody what to do. That's sort of the opposite of interesting
intelligence. Interesting intelligence will be more diverse, not less diverse. That's a good future.
And your second description, that seems like a future we're working for and also we're fighting
for. And that means concrete things today. And also, it's a good conceptualization.
I see the messages as my kids are taught, don't have children and the world's going to end,
we're going to run out of everything, you're a bad person, why do you even exist? These messages
are terrible. The opposite is true. More people would be better. We live in a world
of potential abundance. It's right in front of us. There's so much energy available. It's just
amazing. It's possible to build technology without pollution consequences. That's called
externalizing costs. We know how to do that. We can have very good, clean technology. We can do
lots of interesting things. So if the goal is maximum diversity, then the line between human
intelligence, artificial intelligence that we draw, you'll see all these really interesting
partnerships and all kinds of things. And more people doing what they want, which is the world
I want to live in. To me, it seems like the question is going to be related to attention,
ultimately. That is, what are humans attending to at the highest? What is it that humans care for
in the highest? In some ways, you could say, what are humans worshiping? And
depending on what humans worship, then their actions will play out in the technology that
they're creating, in the increase in power that they're creating. And if we're guided by the
negative vision, the sort of thing that Jim laid out that is being talked to as children, you can
imagine that we're in for a pretty damn dismal future. Human beings are a cancer on the face of
the planet. There's too many of us. We have to accept top-down, compelled limits to growth.
There's not enough for everybody. A bunch of us have to go because there's too many people on
the planet. We have to raise up the price of energy so that we don't burn the planet up with
carbon dioxide pollution, et cetera. It's a pretty damn dismal view of the potential that's in front
of us. The world should be exciting and the future should be exciting. Well, we've been sitting here
for about 90 minutes, bandying back and forth both visions of abundance and visions of apocalypse.
I've been heartened, I would say, over the decades talking to Jim about what he's doing
on the technological front. And I think part of the reason I've been heartened is because
I do think that his vision is guided primarily by desire to help bring about something
approximating life more abundant. And I would rather see people on the AI front who are guided
by that vision working on this technology. But I also think it's useful to do what you
and I have been doing in this conversation, Jonathan, and acting in some sense as friendly
critics and hopefully learning something in the interim. Do you have anything you want to say
in conclusion? I just think that the question is linked very directly to what we've been talking
about now for several years, which is the question of attention, the question of what is the highest
attention. And I think the reason why I have more alarm, let's say, than Jim, is that I've
noticed that in some ways human beings have come to now, let's say, worship their own desires,
they've come to worship. And that even the strange thing of worshiping their own desires has actually
led to an anti-human narrative. This is a weird idea. It's almost suicidal desire that humans
have. And so I think that seeing all of that together in the increase of power,
I do worry that the image of the beast is closer to what will manifest itself. And I feel like
during COVID, that sense in me was accelerated tenfold in noticing to what extent technology
was used, especially in Canada, how technology was used to instigate something which looked like
authoritarian systems. And so I am worried about it. But I think like Jim, honestly,
although I say that, I do believe that in the end, truth wins. I do believe that in the end,
these things will level themselves out. But I think that because I see people rushing towards
AI almost like lemmings are going off a cliff, I feel like it is important to sound the alarm once
in a while and say, you know, we need to orient our desire before we go towards this extreme power.
So I think that that's mostly the thing that worries me the most and that preoccupies me the
most. But I think that ultimately in the end, I do share Jim's positive vision. And I do think that
I do believe the story has a happy ending. It's just you might have to go through hell before
we get there. I hope not. So Jim, how about you? What have you got to say in closing?
A couple of years ago, a friend who's, you know, my age said, oh, kids coming out of college,
they don't know anything anymore. They're lazy. And I thought, I work at Tesla. I was working
at Tesla at the time. And we hired kids out of college and they couldn't wait to make things.
They were like, it's a hands-on place. It's a great place. And I've told people, like, if you're
not in a place where you're doing stuff, it's growing, it's making things, you need to go somewhere
else. And also, I think you're right, the mindset of if people are feeling this is a productive,
creative technology that's really cool, they're going to go build cool stuff. And if they think
it's a shitty job and they're just tuning the algorithm so they can get more clicks,
they're going to make something beastly, you know, beastly, perhaps. And the stories, you know,
our cultural tradition is super useful, both cautionary and, you know, explanatory about
something good. Like, and I think it's up to us to go do something about this. And I know people
are working really hard to make, you know, the Internet a more open place to make sure information
is distributed, to make sure AI isn't a winter take-all thing. Like, these are real things and
people should be talking about them. And then they should be worrying. But the upside's really high.
And we faced these kind of technological, like, this is a big change. Like, AI is bigger than
the Internet. Like I've said, this publicly, like, the Internet was pretty big. And, you know,
this is bigger. It's true. But the possibilities are amazing. And so with some sense, we could
utilize them. Yeah, with some sense, we could achieve it. And the world is interesting.
Like, I think it'll be a more interesting place. Well, that's an extraordinarily
cynically optimistic place to end. I'd like to thank everybody who is watching and listening.
And thank you, Jonathan, for participating in the conversation. It's much appreciated as always.
I'm going to talk to Jim Keller for another half an hour on the Daily Wire Plus platform. I
use that extra half an hour to usually walk people through their biography. I'm very interested in
how people develop successful careers and lives and how their destiny unfolded in front of them.
And so for all of those of you who are watching and listening, who might be interested in that,
consider heading over to the Daily Wire Plus platform and partaking in that. And otherwise,
Jonathan, we'll see you in Miami in a month and a half to finish up the Exodus seminar.
We're going to release the first half of the Exodus seminar we recorded in Miami on November 25th,
by the way. So that looks like it's in the can. Yeah, I can't wait to see it.
The rest of you? Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. I'm really excited about it. And just for everyone
watching and listening, I brought a group of scholars together. About two and a half months
ago, we spent a week in Miami, some of the smartest people I could gather around me,
to walk through the book of Exodus. We only got through halfway, because it turns out there's
more information there than I had originally considered. But it went exceptionally well,
and I learned a lot. And Exodus means ex-hodos. That means the way forward. And well, that's very
much relevant to everyone today as we strive to find our way forward through all these complex
issues, such as the ones we were talking about today. So I would also encourage people to check
that out when it launches on November 25th. I learned more in that seminar than any seminar
I ever took in my life, I would say. So it was good to see you there. We'll see you in a month
and a half. Jim, we're going to talk a little bit more on the Daily Wear a Plus platform. And
I'm looking forward to meeting the rest of the people in your AI-oriented community tomorrow
and learning more about, well, what seems to be an optimistic version of a life more abundant.
And to all of you watching and listening, thank you very much. Your attention isn't taken for
granted, and it's much appreciated. Hello, everyone. I would encourage you to continue
listening to my conversation with my guest on DailyWirePlus.com.
