Hi all, it is of course completely presumptuous of me to dare to write and broadcast a video
entitled Message to the Christian Churches, but I'm going to do it anyway because I have
something to say and because that something needs to be said.
I've been speaking to and watching and listening to audiences all over the Western world for
the past four years, in person and in virtual form, and have learned a few things in consequence.
It all started in some sense with the lectures I did on Genesis in 2017.
My family and I took a risk and rented out a theatre in Toronto on the off chance that
there might be an audience for what might be described as a psychological approach to
our ancient stories and, lo and behold, and Miracle of Miracles, there was.
I completed 15 or so lectures walking through the first Biblical book, sold out the theatre,
and attracted, surprisingly, millions of viewers, Christians, Jews, Muslims, and atheists,
and most of the people who attended lives, and the majority of those who watched online
were young men.
That is not a phenomenon that can be easily accounted for, but let me try.
Now in the West, because of the weight of historical guilt that is upon us, a variant of the sense
of original sin in a very real sense, and because of a very real attempt by those possessed
by what might be described as unhelpful ideas to weaponize that guilt, our young people
face a demoralization that is perhaps unparalleled.
This is particularly true of young men, although anything that devastates young men will eventually
do the same to young women.
And that, in this era of anti-natalism and equally reprehensible nihilism, is precisely
the point.
When they are children, boys are hectic for their toy preferences, which often include
toy weapons such as guns, and they're more boisterous playing style, as boys require
active rough-and-tumble play, even more than girls, for whom it is also a necessity.
When in grade school, boys are admonished, shamed, and controlled in a very similar manner
By those who think that play is unnecessary, particularly if it's competitive, and who
value a docile, harmless obedience above all, shades of Dolores Umbridge, following all
that, because that's not enough, even when pursued assiduously for total demoralization,
is the inculcation of an extremely damaging ideology, which essentially consists of three
accusations.
Number one, human culture, particularly in the West, is best construed as an oppressive
patriarchy, motivated by the desire, willingness, and ability to use power, defined as the compulsion
of others against their will, to attain what our purely selfish and self-serving ends.
This is true at every level of analysis.
Marriage is akin to slavery, friendship to exploitation, political disagreement to war,
and business arrangements to deception and theft.
And this is true not only of the current social arrangements that characterize our culture,
particularly in the West, but also the fundamental reality of history itself.
Number two, human activity, particularly that undertaken in the West, is fundamentally
a planet-disspoiling enterprise.
The human race is a threat to the ecological utopia that existed before us, and that could
hypothetically exist in our absence.
We might well be construed even as a cancer that threatens the very viability of the complex
systems that make up the ecosystem of the Earth that shelters and supports us.
We are facing a Malthusian catastrophe of overpopulation and biosphere degradation.
And we have to place extreme limits on our wants, even our needs, so that survival itself,
even in a much reduced form, can be guaranteed.
Number three, the prime contributor both to the tyranny that makes up the oppressive patriarchy
and structures all of our social interactions, past and present, and the unforgivable dispoiling
of our beloved Mother Earth is damnable male ambition, competitive and dominating,
power-mad, selfish, exploitative, raping and pillaging.
You might think that I'm overstating the case.
Think again, sunshine.
We in the West are facing an all-out assault at the deepest levels on what that old Joker
Jacques Derrida deemed the foul, logo-centric conceptual structure of civilization itself.
To take that apart, that's a society centered on the encouraging, adventurous, masculine
spirit and that privileges that hated word of all things, the divine logos.
And what should we worship and celebrate properly other than that, deconstructionists, the words
of that mass murderer Karl Marx?
And it is precisely those young men who are deeply conscientious, capable of guilt and
regret, who have come to believe in pain that every deep impulse that moves them out into
the world for the adventure of their life, even that impulse drawing them to women, is
nothing but the manifestation of a spirit that is essentially satanic in nature.
This is not only wrong, theologically, morally, psychologically, practically and scientifically.
It is literally anti-true.
It's not a mere misstatement about the nature of reality, a minor conceptual error, but
something that literally could not be farther from the truth, and something that distant
from the truth comes from a place that cannot be distinguished from hell.
The Christian Church is there to remind people, young men included, and perhaps even first
and foremost, that they have a woman to find, a garden to walk in, a family to nurture,
an ark to build, a land to conquer, a ladder to heaven to build, and the utter terrible
catastrophe of life to face stalwartly in truth devoted to love and without fear.
Invite the young men back.
Say literally to those young men, you are welcome here if no one else wants what you
have to offer.
We do.
We want to call you to the highest purpose of your life.
We want your time and energy and effort and your will and your goodwill.
We want to work with you to make things better, to produce life more abundant for you and
for your wife and children and for your community and your country and the world.
And we have our problems.
In the Christian Church, we are more abundant, sometimes far too often corrupt, and sometimes
deeply so.
We are outdated, as are all institutions with their roots in the dead, but still often wise
past.
So join us.
We'll help fix you up, and you can help fix us up, and together we'll aim up.
But here is a message to those young men skeptical about such things.
What else do you have?
You can abandon the churches in your cynicism and disbelief.
You can say to yourself, narcissistically and solipsistically, the church does not express
what I believe properly.
Who cares what you believe?
Why is this about you?
Do you even want it to be about you?
What if it was about others?
What if it was about your duty to the past and to the broader community that surrounds
you in the present?
What if it was incumbent upon you and vital to your health and willingness even to live
to rescue your dead father from the belly of the beast, where he has always resided,
and to restore him to life?
Once again to the churches, Protestant, you're the worst at the moment, Catholic, Orthodox.
Invite young men, put up a billboard, say, young men are welcome here.
Print some flyers and put them in a box by the billboard.
Signal the existence of those flyers with an arrow, with the words, more information
about attending here.
Tell those who have never been in a church exactly what to do, how to dress, when to
show up, who to contact, and most importantly, what they can do.
Ask more, not less of those you are inviting.
Ask more of them than anyone ever has.
Remind them who they are in the deepest sense and help them become that.
For churches, for God's sake, quit fighting for social justice.
Quit saving the bloody planet.
Attend to some souls.
That's what you're supposed to do.
That's your holy duty.
Do it now, before it's too late.
The hour is nigh.
