It's the Hebrews created history as we know it.
You don't get away with anything and so you might think you can bend the fabric of reality
and that you can treat people instrumentally and that you can bow to the tyrant and violate
your conscience without cost.
You will pay the piper.
It's going to call you out of that slavery into freedom even if that pulls you into the
desert.
And we're going to see that there's something else going on here that is far more cosmic
and deeper than what you can imagine.
The highest ethical spirit to which we're beholden is presented precisely as that spirit
that allies itself with the cause of freedom against tyranny.
Yes, exactly.
I want villains to get punished.
But do you want the villains to learn before they have to pay the ultimate price?
That's such a Christian question.
One of the reasons why I started working on the equipment is the way cattle were being
handled was horrible.
Electric prods on 100 percent of them falling down and crashing into things, people screaming
at them.
Cattle handling in the 80s was terrible, absolutely terrible.
And I saw that as something that I could fix.
Now I talked to a lot of young people today that want to do activism about some specific
thing and it's way too broad.
I want justice in the world, for example.
Right, yes, yes.
It might be something they would say.
Yes, yes.
And I say, why don't you do something more targeted, like using DNA to show that this
prisoner was falsely accused?
You see, now that's something a lot more targeted that you can actually do.
Yes, absolutely.
I think that is a huge problem with the way that kids are trained morally in universities
is that that grandiose, vague activism replaces the actual practicalities of problem-solving
that you're describing that actually make a difference.
Hello, everyone.
I'm usually excited to have whoever I'm talking to that day on my show because I pick people
I'm excited about talking to.
But I'm particularly excited about my guest today, Dr. Temple Grandin.
Temple Grandin revolutionized the animal handling industry over the last 40 years and has done
more for animal welfare in a practical sense than anybody that I know of and perhaps anybody
on the planet.
I think you could make a case for that.
She's a remarkable person.
I saw her first in Tucson, Arizona.
I'll talk about that a little bit in our interview.
She gave one of the most compelling presentations I'd ever seen in an academic setting at a
conference on consciousness and saw that about 15 years ago.
And ever since then, I'd really been wanting to meet her and I got to do that today, so
that's so exciting.
So I'll just give you a brief bio and we'll pop into the interview.
Dr. Temple Grandin is a professor of animal sciences at Colorado State University.
Facilities she has designed for handling livestock are used by companies all around the world.
Her work has been instrumental in implementing animal welfare auditing programs, now used
by McDonald's, Wendy's, Whole Foods, and many other major corporations.
She has appeared on numerous shows across platforms such as 2020 Larry King Live and
Prime Time.
Dr. Grandin is also an accomplished author with books such as Thinking in Pictures,
Livestock Handling in Transport, and The Autistic Brain.
A few of her other publications, Animals in Translation, as well as Visual Thinking,
have even made it to the New York Times bestseller list.
In 2017, Dr. Grandin was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame, and in 2022,
she was honored once again as a Colorado State Distinguished Professor.
We're going to walk through her book today and we're going to learn what she has to
say now about thinking.
Let's start with Visual Thinking and Language.
So do you want to tell people about your realization and about different thought patterns?
When I was in my 20s, I thought everybody thought in pictures the way I thought.
I didn't know that other people thought in words until I was in my late 30s.
Now you've already mentioned how do I categorize?
Well, I explain as a child how I learned to categorize, categorizing with individual pictures.
So as a very young child, I categorized cats, dogs, and horses by size because in our neighborhood
at that time, there were no cattle and there were no small dogs.
Then a doxxant came into my neighborhood and she's the same size as a cat.
And I remember looking at the doxxant, she was a black doxxant, and trying to figure
out now what features does she share with the dog she barks.
Her nose shape is the same as a dog and she smells like a dog.
So I had to take other sensory-based things like smell and what the dog sounded like to
put the doxxant in the dog category.
So the way I formed categories is I have to have a bunch of information.
Let's take the cat category and you look at a leopard's face, a lion's face, and even
a house cat's face, there's similarities and they also smell all the same too.
If you go to the zoo, you can smell how they are different.
So the first step for abstract thinking is put making categories.
So when I finally figured out that other people did not think in pictures, if I asked most
people, visualize your own home, your dog, or your car, you will do it because you're
so familiar with that.
But one time at an autism conference, when I was in my late 30s, I asked a speech therapist
think about a church staple and I was shocked that all the only image she saw was a very
vague two lines like this, where I see specific churches.
They come up like a series of back then 35 millimeter slides, now the PowerPoint slides.
And then I can start as I see more and more of these churches, I can put them into New
England type category, stone cathedral type.
Looks like a warehouse and it has a little plastic steeple type.
I can make finer categories as I get more and more specific images.
It's bottom-up thinking and I learned that that's exactly how an artificial intelligence
program diagnosis melanoma cancer.
It's given a training set of 2,000 melanomas and another training set of every kind of
skin rash and mosquito bite and infected whatever.
And then it learns to categorize melanoma from non-melanoma.
And that was very insightful to me when I learned that that's how the simple type of
artificial intelligence programs work, diagnosing something like melanoma.
So let me ask you, when I'm thinking something through, now I can think in pictures and if
I'm building something or trying to design something to build, then I tend to think in
pictures.
But I would say 90% of the time my proclivity is to think in words and I would say in part
that's because my word thinking is so dominant, it just suppresses the image thinking.
And so a lot of my thinking, I would also say, takes the form of something like internal
argumentation.
So I'll ask myself a question, I'll think up an answer in words and then I'll think
up a bunch of reasons why that answer isn't sufficient and then I'll conduct an internal
argument.
And that's occupying me continually, like 16 hours a day non-stop.
And it's been like that ever since I was two years old, except for those times, let's say.
So yeah, so how do you conduct internal arguments or what accounts for the...
So part of the creativity in my thinking is the outcome of these arguments.
What you're thinking in pictures, so you're not having internal arguments, what's the
stream of your thought like?
Well, when it comes to things like designing equipment, I often will kind of, a lot of
equipment design, someone gets an idea from something else.
And one of my other books I wrote about the inventor of Velcro and he saw how Burdock
stuck on his clothes, cockled birds on those kind of things stuck on his clothes.
And that's where he got the idea for making Velcro.
That would be visual thinking.
The Burdocks and Velcro, they've got similarities on how they stick together.
In designing equipment, I can just see how it operates.
I worked with welders that had 20 patents each that barely graduated from high school,
but they could build any kind of a machine and invent industrial machinery.
They just see it in their head.
Right now, will you see, okay, so I read Nikolai Tesla's biography a long while back and it
was extremely interesting and he claimed, and I have no reason to disbelieve him, that
entire inventions, machines would pop into the theater of his imagination, detailed out
to the point where he knew the angles on the screws that held the metal together.
And he would try to write them down in something, draw them out in something approximating,
something that you could make a blueprint out of, let's say, in that much detail.
And sometimes a new invention would pop into his head so quickly that it would obliterate
the previous one.
He had to work very quickly to keep up.
And so there's that incredible fluency in visualization.
But then, as I said, in the verbal world, I'll think of an argument and counterarguments.
When you're thinking of industrial design, do you think of the object that you're attempting
to design and then multiple variants of it and test them against each other, or does
it just come to you as a solution for a given problem?
It almost sort of just pops into my head.
I also see mechanical abnormalities.
I remember walking in and someone had made a cardboard, old-fashioned locomotive.
The wheels have those links between them, and I go, they drew that wrong.
Wheels are not going to turn.
It was just a cartoon train for a party.
But I immediately noticed that they didn't draw it right.
The other thing is, is my thinking is associative.
All right.
Give me a key word, pretend I'm Google for images.
Not something I can see in here with books and papers all around and photography equipment
and stuff all around me, but something kind of a creative key word.
And I'll tell you how I access my memory for that key word.
Start the new year off right with black rifle coffee.
Black rifle has all the best brewing gear, thermos, mugs, and apparel designed for folks
who love country and coffee.
Black rifle sources the most exotic roasts from around the globe.
All coffee is roasted here in the U.S. by veteran-led teams of coffee experts.
Every purchase you make with black rifle helps support veteran and first responder causes.
Go to blackriflecoffee.com and use promo code Jordan for 10% off coffee, coffee gear, and
apparel.
Or join the black rifle coffee club for automatic deliveries to your door on your schedule.
Save 10% with promo code Jordan.
That's blackriflecoffee.com, promo code Jordan.
Black rifle coffee, supporting veterans in America's coffee.
So and with regard, so my wife has a very powerful visual imagination.
She's able to do all sorts of remarkable things with it.
And one of the things that strikes me as highly probable is that her capacity for visual imagery
is a lot more intense than mine.
And so like I was a fairly vivid dreamer for years, especially when I was reading Carl
Jung's work in graduate school.
Don't seem to dream much now or not, well, I don't remember them much now.
When I do think in pictures, it's not as vivid as seeing the real world.
It's maybe 5% of that.
It's sort of, it's, it's, well, it just doesn't have that intensity.
What about, and you, and you?
Oh no, it's very, very vivid.
And, and while I was, while you were setting up all the camera equipment, here I found on
here's a whole bunch of papers.
More papers I've found online supporting the, a lot of the things that are in the book.
I just got surfing around and boy, you can sometimes find some great stuff when you look
at the citations.
No, but it's very, very vivid.
I don't know, it's, it's completely vivid.
Now when you mentioned the word imagination, I remember going to a long time ago, Disney
World, a kind of a ride that had imagination with people and dirigibles and things like
that.
You know, then I visited a studio where they, where Disney made a whole bunch of their stuff.
I'm now seeing that.
Yes, I'm now seeing a non-disclosure agreement.
So I can't tell you what I did there.
And I, but I, now I'm seeing a very interesting discussion we had about designing things where,
where you're designing things, there's the decoration part of it.
And then there's, then there's a mechanical part of, of a machine.
Of course, at an amusement park, you want to have decorations, but you also, the rides
have to mechanically work.
They're kind of two separate things that were kind of done by two separate departments.
You also spoke in your book about your ability to see things out of place.
And so one of the things that characterizes autism is the fact that at least some autistic
people are not very happy when they walk into a room, say that they're familiar with
and one thing is out of place.
So for example, an autistic child might walk into a dining room and one of the chairs is,
you know, tilted 45 degrees to the right or to the left instead of being put straight
in.
And what seems to happen, correct me if, if you feel that I'm wrong, is that the fact
that that chair is now askew means that the entire room is different in some important
and emotionally significant way.
So there's this response to anomaly.
I don't have that issue.
That's not an issue for me, but if there's one pixel off on an electronic sign, I will
notice that.
I remember one time walking into the airport with somebody else and the United Ticket Counter
sign was a whole row of television monitors.
And there must have been 20 TV monitors making the word United over and over again.
And one of the screens was scrambled, the whole screen.
And I immediately saw it and I said to the person beside me, did you see that that sign
was messed up?
No, they did not see it.
They were right beside me when we walked in.
I immediately saw it.
Now that it upset me, no, I just noticed that the sign was scrambled.
Right.
But it didn't upset you.
No.
So yeah, so that's that interesting.
So for me, I think I can detect anomalies visually.
So for example, one of the things I learned to do when I was setting up my house and renovating
places and setting up my offices, like arranging my local environment, was to sit in the room
and become meditative in some sense.
And then to feel out what was bothering me about the room, like what ugly feature might
pop out, what part of it needed to be attended to.
Right.
And I think I was tuning myself to detect what was abnormal in relationship to the underlying
aesthetic or the pattern of the room.
But that pops out for you almost instantaneously.
For me, anomaly detection is mostly verbal.
Again, it's like all think up an argument and then think up counter arguments.
And if one argument and the other don't jive, if they're contradictory, then that pops out
for me.
Well, it's sort of like I fly all the time to like I know when the pilots do the checklist.
And like we push back, and we just take too long to turn, I'm going, uh-oh, we're going
to have an air traffic control delay.
And I can often predict that before they announce it.
And I also can, I'm very conscious of on the biggest airplane, when they start the little
gentle push to push it back from the gate, I can feel it on the biggest aircraft there
is.
Right.
And I just want to get there and I'm going, oh, please push back.
But it's sort of like I don't get upset about it.
It's just anything that's not routine.
I instantly notice it and I go, oh, crap, I see a vest that says tech ops.
We may have a delayed flight.
Now that brings up another thing I want to talk about.
In the last month, I've had, okay, a mechanic come on a plane twice and both mechanics had
gray hair.
And this brings up a major issue that's in my book about skill loss, especially skill
loss with mechanical things.
I've been on a lot of questionable elevators and escalators lately that definitely needed
servicing.
And what's happening, and this is in my screened out chapter, is the kids are getting screened
out of these trades because they've taken the shop classes out of the schools 20 years
ago and we have so many higher math requirements that you don't need for something like fixing
elevators that the kids are playing video games in the basement on an autism diagnosis
instead of fixing elevators.
There's a relationship here between what goes on with industrial things and what's going
on at school, which is a major, major thing that I'm interested in talking about.
Yeah, so let's talk about that a little bit.
That's one of the things that popped out for me from your book.
So I was trying to think that through.
So you make the claim as you just laid out that our education system and maybe our entire
culture as it's hypothetically deindustrializing is actually working against the best interests
of those who think mechanically, those who think in pictures, and those who can do hands
on work.
And here's a paper I just dug off of Google Scholar on visual objectability, a new dimension
of nonverbal intelligence.
And what a lot of educators don't understand is that object visualization, especially on
solving mechanical problems, it is a different way of thinking.
I worked with people that barely graduated from high school, stutterers.
They'd be labeled autistic to date.
They'd be in special ed, but they had big metal working shops and 20 patents each for
mechanically complicated equipment that they are selling around the world.
And this is something that educators just don't get it.
And the reason why I wrote this book, I'll tell you what was the reason.
In 2019, just before COVID shut everything down, I went to four places and I realized
the magnitude of the skill loss.
The first one was a pork processing plant where most of the equipment came from Holland.
I went to another pork processing plant, equipment coming from Holland.
Then I went to a poultry processing plant where all of the specialized equipment came
from Holland, 100 shipping containers.
And then I went to the Steep Jobs Theater and the structural glass walls are from Italy
and Germany.
Then, after reading more stuff, I found out that the state-of-the-art electronic chip-making
machine comes from Holland.
And that goes back to their educational system.
They don't stick their nose up at the high-end skilled trades and look at it sort of like
a lesser form of intelligence.
When the kids get to about ninth grade, they can go university route or they can go tech
route.
They're going to emphasize high-end skilled trades where you're really using that visual
thinking for mechanical devices.
So I was trying to think through why this might be happening.
So let me offer some hypotheses to you and you tell me what you think about this.
So first of all, we have learned and you draw on Simon Baron Cohen's work in your book.
We have learned that there is a difference and we can try to map this on to verbal thinking
versus imagistic thinking.
Simon Baron Cohen talked about systemizing versus empathizing and he considers that something
akin to the continuum between autistic thinking and normal thinking.
So the autistic types are more systematizing and my suspicions are they're also the ones
who are more likely to think in images in the manner that you described.
Wait a minute.
Now we've got two kinds of thinking in images.
And there's a nice paper that just came out relatively recently, seeing and thinking in
pictures, a review of visual information processing that came out in 2018, I'd like to keep my
stuff up to date.
Now I think in photorealistic pictures where the more mathematical type of thinking thinks
in patterns.
See in your brain you've got circuits for what is something.
OK, so I see a dog and I go, yeah, that's a dog.
Or I've got some china ceramic cattle on my coffee table here.
OK, and I just look at the animals and name them.
Then the visual spatial is where is something?
Where are you located in space?
There are actually two different kinds of visualization.
And I have a whole chapter in visual thinking book about this and research to back this up.
Now the visual spatial type pattern thinking or sort of where is something in space, those
kids do well in math, so they're going to stem right.
But let me tell you what's going on out in the food processing plants.
The people I've worked with in the big steel shops now that a lot of us closed down, we
are paying the price now for taking out the shop classes on designed mechanically clever
equipment.
The people I've worked with in May, we never worked on boilers or refrigeration, we don't
understand that stuff.
That requires a lot more mathematical thinking or this load on the roof so the factory doesn't
fall down if we get two feet of snow.
You see then I have seen this division of engineering labor in every single meat company
I have worked with.
They're all the same.
So do you think that's a matter of like let's say something approximating focal depth?
So is it possible that the first kind of people that you talked about are dealing at the object
level itself?
So they're dealing say with a boiler or with a particular piece of equipment whereas the
other types are dealing with the relationship between pieces of equipment?
No, you don't think that's it?
No, I think it's just real simple.
You just see the objects and then after you work, you see an object visualizer gets better
and better at designing mechanical equipment, the more things you go out and see.
When I started working my designing cattle handling facilities, I went to every feed yard
in Arizona and I worked cattle and I go this kind of a design doesn't work, this worked
so then I took all the good bits and like recombined them.
It's bottom up thinking.
The more stuff I get exposed to, okay, whether it's cattle handling facility or maybe I'll
look at how water flows through something and then you watch how cattle move.
I'd like to look at drone footage and a lot of that resembles water flow and the visual
spatial, they see patterns.
It's actually very different and what we're losing is the object visualizer.
That person that can just, you see, I'm very aware of things like I go in an elevator now
that hasn't been serviced and it's scraping in the shaft, you better believe it.
I hear it and I go, they haven't serviced that elevator.
I was at a fancy hotel recently and the bell hop goes, oh, it skips that floor.
We have to get that floor on the way down.
Yeah, real nice hotel, major city.
Right, right.
Okay, so let me, I don't quite understand that distinction yet so I'm going to, I'm
going to push a little bit more on that.
So on the visual side, you have the visual spatial types, if I'm remembering this correctly,
and that's the category that you fall into.
And then you have people who are, what are they, higher up on the abstraction chain in
some sense, the ones who can think more mathematically?
No, but basically, object visualizers, I can tell you this from experience, we're good
at mechanical devices, art, photography.
I have talked to many, many photographers because I do a lot of interviews, find out
they're dyslexic, they're about flunked out of school, and fortunately somebody introduced
them to photography.
And the other thing that my kind of mind's good at is animals.
Then your visual spatial, mathematics, algebra, I can't do algebra.
There's nothing there to visualize.
Mathematics, calculus, I took a computer programming course when I was in college.
I couldn't do it, I had to drop it.
I was exposed to the same exact computer that Bill Gates had, and he could do it and I had
to drop the class.
These are the things that the more mathematical pattern thinking mind is good at.
And some of these really smart kids, they can just look at algebra formulas and just see
it.
They don't have to do it step by step, they just see it.
And that's how they think, and then the teachers try to make them do it step by step.
That gets the kids frustrated.
They don't think the same way.
And so my thinking is also associative, I tend to jump around.
But there's a logic to the association.
And I think the best way to illustrate that associative kind of thinking is give me a
single keyword, like I'm Google for images, and think of a creative keyword.
And I will tell you exactly how my mind associates and how my mind can get off the subject, but
there is a logic to the getting off of the subject.
So give me a keyword, a single keyword.
Okay, how about rows?
Okay, I'm seeing rows bushes that we had in our backyard when I was a child.
And we had a lot of thorns on them.
And we also like to dig around in the grass that was back there.
So now I'm seeing the grass behind our house, we used to go play in it and catch some insects
sometimes.
Okay, now you can see how it's jumping around.
I don't have that big a visual library of roses.
So then I tend to then go to something else.
But how about cows?
What?
Cows.
All right, now I'm seeing like 10 cow statues right here in front of me.
And so obviously those are coming up in my mind.
Just recently, I tend to bring up recent memories.
I visited with a black Angus bull, it was a pet, and he wasn't very happy with us because
we didn't bring him any carrots.
So my friend gave him one of those disgusting soy protein bars and he goes, not going to
eat that.
I wouldn't eat it, no matter how much we tried to feed it to him.
And he was annoyed because we didn't bring him any carrots.
Okay, now I've got the carrot word in my head.
And when I was in fourth grade, I used my singer Sohandi to sew green crepe paper so
students could be carrots.
And I made the green carrot tops out of green crepe paper.
So that's how I got the cattle to carrot.
So talking to you that way reminds me very much of what used to happen in my therapy
sessions when I was helping people interpret their dreams.
And so dreams have the same quality of thought that your thought had when you just put it
on display there.
So because the dream tends to be an intermingling.
So imagine there's a center category and the nature of the category is somewhat unclear.
Maybe that's partly what the dream is trying to puzzle out.
What you get is a web of associations, some of which are autobiographical, that are sort
of circulating around a main theme.
And partly what you do when you analyze a dream is you walk through all the associated
images.
You also ask the person to let their mind loose to generate more associations.
And then you try to use the associational web to triangulate on the central theme and
to haul out the gist.
And the gist of that array of images would be something like the interpretation of the
dream.
If you get it right, then it snaps into people.
They think, oh yes, that's definitely what that was about.
But the dream is attempting to put something together that has a central category of structure.
Well, now there also are sensory things because I have some balance issues.
So I often get dreams where I'm riding a bike down a hill that's super steep like that.
And I wish I wasn't doing that.
And I know that that has to do with the fact that I have balance issues.
I don't think it means anything, but I'm always up on some high place that I wish I wasn't
up on and I've got to try to walk down it.
And then I have other dreams where I can see it might have some meaning and other times
of where it doesn't.
But the other thing with my thinking, when I'm working on design work, I can control
the associations.
I can control them.
I've had before, there's now 3D simulations.
Okay, let's say the company that's building this plant wants to show off how the equipment
works.
They can do a 3D simulation showing how the equipment works.
I can remember sitting in a conference room when we were trying to discuss how to do some
conveyors.
And the other guys there are coming up with ideas for the conveyors and going, no, no,
if you do that, you're going to yank the rails out of the ceiling.
Oh, no, no, no, that won't work.
They were almost using my mind like a 3D CAD program that was animated.
And I could test run in my head on these different conveyors.
Men, is it time to stop mindless scrolling?
Time to finally gain that higher quality of life you know you're missing out on?
If this sounds familiar, then on January 9th, join thousands of men all over the world to
embark on a 90 day journey together in search of a better life.
It's called Exodus 90 and it was built to help men enjoy the freedom of becoming who
they were truly made to be.
Exodus 90 guides you in removing the attachments that are holding you back from a better life.
And it actually works.
Independent research shows that Exodus 90 men report considerable shifts after the first
90 days, including stronger satisfaction rates in their marriages, more meaningful prayer
lives, and dramatic decreases in time spent on their phones.
For the past seven years, Exodus has helped more than 60,000 men build a roadmap for living
with virtue in a culture that offers far too many paths to self-destruction.
Is it time for your Exodus?
We start January 9th.
Find resources to prepare for Exodus at Exodus90.com slash Jordan.
That's Exodus90.com slash Jordan.
So let's go back to the issue of, say, taking sharp class out of school.
So Baron Cohen talked about systematizers versus empathizers.
Yeah, but what Baron Cohen did, he left out the object visualizers.
He was looking more at the mathematical visualization pattern thinkers.
I agree with him about systematizing and verbal, but the object visualizer.
But he didn't differentiate.
He didn't differentiate the systematizers properly.
That should be more differentiated.
Yeah, he didn't.
The systematizers would have two categories, the object visualizer and the visual spatial.
And a big mistake in a lot of perceptual studies is that they're not differentiating them.
And some people, there's some verbal people in psychology that don't want to believe this
stuff exists.
Just while you were setting up the cameras, I downloaded six new abstracts that aren't
even in my book on this that show that they are different.
Right.
Got them right here on my lap.
So Cohen also talks about gender differences in relationship to this continuum.
So we can break the continuum into two parts on the one end.
And it is the case that autism tends to be preferentially a male disorder, although there
are females as well.
But so that systematizing mode of thinking that you've differentiated into the two categories
also tends to be gender stereotype to some degree at a biological level.
I avoid that issue as controversial because right now, I'm interested in one thing at
the age of 75 of helping the students who think differently get into really good careers
where they can have satisfying lives.
And I avoid the controversial stuff.
Yeah, well, I'm not so much interested in the controversy.
I'm interested in trying to address the issue of why shop courses, for example, have been
taken out of schools.
Now we do know that schools are predominantly run by women, and women are more likely to
be empathizing.
No, I think it's a reason why they talk it out.
So I'm wondering if there's a gender issue going on there and a prejudice against a certain
way of thinking.
Okay.
What's that?
One of the reasons they took out the shop classes, they kind of just go, everybody's
going to go the university route and cost.
Good shop classes cost a lot of money.
Now people are starting to put shop classes back in, and you know what they're finding?
They can't find anybody that teach the shop classes.
I just heard about a brand new beautiful welding shop built here in Colorado at a community
college and they can't find somebody to teach it even after they dropped the university requirement.
And I can tell you right now, we need people that can do these things before the power
grid and the water systems fall apart.
I'll tell you that stuff I care about.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Yeah.
Well, do you think virtualization has also played a role in this?
I mean, the systematizing types.
You can't.
Some of the 3D drawings, I see a block.
And that's not going to fix some of the serious problems we've got with infrastructure right
now.
And you need both kinds of thinkers.
Like one of the things I've got in my book is where a bridge fell down in Minneapolis.
And the workers were complaining.
They were worried that when they were working on this bridge it was going to collapse.
Well, I looked up that bridge collapse and I saw all the twisted metal and I took one
look at that and I went, it's too light.
It's too cheap.
That was just from looking at the pictures.
And I found the engineering report on why that bridge fell down.
And they cheated on the gusset plates that hold the beams together and they were way
thinner than the spec.
But I had already looked at the pictures and said that bridge is too light, it's cheap
before I read any engineering report.
So how was it in your life that you attained the practical knowledge necessary to facilitate
your thinking?
So we're talking about how kids who take in the vision.
I'll tell you how you do it.
It's real simple.
You got to get out and experience all kinds of stuff because the more information you
put in the database, the better you get.
And going back to teaching a computer how to diagnose melanoma, you had to give it like
a couple of thousand melanoma examples and a couple of thousand mosquito bites, infected
boils and everything else, examples.
In other words, the more, as I got older and I got more and more information in my database,
I could think better and better and better and I could make smaller categories of things.
Now a lot of the people that I worked with in construction that build equipment for me,
that's used in every large beef plant now in the US, some of them started and some of
them would definitely be autistic.
One of them started out working on cars, another one took a single welding class and now he's
selling mechanical equipment all over the world, started with a tiny shop that then
grew into a big shop.
And what's happening now is the little shops are not forming and that's why we're importing
all this equipment from Holland and Italy because when you look at their educational
system and I looked it up again recently online, Italy actually has three routes, university
route, tech route, mechanical and art route, you know like for their fashion industry and
the Holland and Netherlands you can go either university route or tech route and that's
why they're making the state-of-the-art chip making machine that we don't make.
Right.
And I'm not talking potato chips, I'm talking electronic chips.
Right.
I wonder if this is also a consequence of people increasingly moving away from farms.
No, because when you're on a farm you'd have to do a lot of hands-on stuff, you have to
do a lot of fence repair, you've got to take care of your own machinery and as you move
into the urban environment everything in some sense even in the real world is virtualized
because you can always call on other people to do the day-to-day things that you need
to keep the infrastructure in place for example.
Well, I agree.
A lot of kids are growing up today totally removed from the practical.
And one of the things I talk about in the visual thinking book is I talked to a doctor
and he told me he had trouble training interns to sew up cuts because the interns had never
used scissors as a young child.
I had a student in my class that had never used a tape measure to measure anything.
And they're totally removed from the world of the practical where those kids that came
off the farms, yes, they had to figure out how to fix things, absolutely.
But I think what's happening now in the schools is things are getting so verbal and they're
going absolutely crazy on math requirements because I know people with 20 patents and
they could basically do sixth grade arithmetic that I could do because I can relate that
back to real things and things like.
Do you know of any research pertaining on how the people who visualize objects might
be assessed for their ability?
Yes.
And there's a whole chapter in here.
There's a whole chapter in here and I never can pronounce their names, Blank and Culver
and I never can say the names correctly.
But I have a whole list of references in there where the difference between the object visual
analyzer and the visual spatial is being assessed.
And there's a whole bunch of references on that.
Now I have to look these names up because I can't pronounce them correctly.
Let me find the reference list here for chapter two, okay, it's Blazhenkova.
I've got one, two, three references in here from Blazhenkova on types of creativity and
then the other big reference, I have lots of references, would be Kozhevnikov if she's
got trade-offs, object versus spatial visualization, reviewing the visual verbal dimension, evidence
for two types of visualizers, that's another paper, spatial versus object visualization,
a new characterization of visual cognitive style.
There's three papers right there from Kozhevnikov that are in my reference list and I've got
a lot of references where their actual tests were done.
When I go through the citation lists, I just went in and we're working on the children's
edition of the book right now and one of the copy editors had a query about a reference
and I had to look that up and then I decided to just type in object visualizer, visual
spatial into Google Scholar again and find the same old papers and then I found some
citations, it's kind of a cool paper here in the journal Cognition, it's an old paper
actually, visual objectability, a new dimension of nonverbal intelligence.
I know from working in factories, I spent 25 years in heavy construction and that is
something that I don't think many teachers have done that and seen how these guys think.
Big complicated Cargill plans, IBP plans which are now Tyson, Monfort plans, that company
is now JBS, figuring out complicated things with equipment.
It's a different type of intelligence and I think when I worked on the book with Betsy
Lerner, my super verbal co-writer who helped me organize things and she had someone come
in to fix a bunch of stuff in her house and after we had discussed this, Betsy was telling
me, well I watched how he figured out how to fix the stones on the chimney.
I had never really thought about it before but she watched how he did things and then
she started to understand there's a form of intelligence there that's absolutely not
verbal.
When she watched a person, she hired to fix stuff in her house.
Right, right.
Yeah, well you can imagine something and this did pop into my mind visually, can imagine
somebody who's trying to put together a stone chimney has to rotate stones to make sure
that they're going, like a Tetris game, that's a good way of thinking about it.
I was thinking then again, because I'm thinking in images now that we're talking, I was thinking
about my young grandson, he was only two years old, he had his Legos laid out in front
of him and when I was a kid, I played a lot with Legos and I played a fair bit with this
mechano set that was like a junior engineering set and it was certainly the case that working
with Legos was non-verbal because you're rotating shapes in space and having them fit into one
another towards some design end and that's a nice kind of hands-on learning and exposure
to different mechanical principles and so do you have recommendations for people who
want to help their children train their visual spatial and object visualization abilities?
Let's get them out building things.
The big mistake I see with a lot of kids is they're super good with Legos, they don't
think to introduce tools.
I was using tools by second grade, I was not using a saw, but I was using hammer, screwdriver
and pliers, I was taught how to use them safely, I've got another book of children's projects
called Calling All Minds where I describe bird kites that I spent hours with tinkering
to get them to work, to agree with parachutes to get them to open up more easily, kids today
are totally separated in the world of physical things.
They're not getting out and observing stuff out in nature, this is part of the problem
and I just went to a veterinary school where the students are so far removed from practical
things that to give them dexterity skills and surgical skills they have these plastic
tote boxes and they put children's puzzles inside them and they've got to just reach
in and by feel put these children's puzzles together because when they were in kindergarten
they never did this.
Right, right, right.
Yeah, well my parents told me that when I was four my favorite toy was a screwdriver
and that I used to take all the cupboard doors off the cupboards in the kitchens.
And so I was introduced to tools at a very early age and that there's a real practical
utility in that too because now if I visualize a project in my house shelving or something
like that or any construction project of any sort, well I can visualize the array of tools
that's necessary to make that come about and then I have the tools at hand and I know how
to use them and that is a, well, it's also, I really find that kind of work calming and
engrossing.
We'll be back in one moment.
Next we wanted to give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new documentary, Logos in Literacy.
I was very much struck by how the translation of the Biblical writings jump-started the
development of literacy across the entire world.
Illiteracy was the norm.
The pastor's home was the first school and every morning it would begin with singing.
The Christian faith is a singing religion.
Probably 80% of scripture memorization today exists only because of what is sung.
This is amazing.
Here we have a Gutenberg Bible printed on the press of Johann Gutenberg.
Science and religion are opposing forces in the world but historically that has not been
the case.
Now the book is available to everyone.
From Shakespeare to modern education and medicine and science to civilization itself.
It is the most influential book in all of history and hopefully people can walk away
with at least a sense of that.
Well the problem is is we got kids growing up today totally removed from the world of
the practical.
They don't use tools.
They don't use scissors.
I had a student in a class who had never used a ruler or tape measure to measure anything
ever.
I think that's a problem because if you haven't done practical things then you don't understand
how to fix things.
Okay like two years ago they had the horrible mess where the power you know like a bunch
of different power stations froze.
Well I never heard so much abstract gobbledygook about that because the way I would work on
fixing it would be all right let's look at each power station what piece of equipment
actually froze.
I never saw anything written in the press that described okay what froze in this plant.
What froze in this plant because my inclination would be to kind of rank them on okay a turbine
haul that froze I can build a building over it that's an easy one you know a whole bunch
of gas wells froze that's gonna be like really difficult to fix but you see nothing's abstract
because okay if I'm gonna try to figure out how to fix it I don't really want to argue
who owns them I'm not interested in the politics I would just rank the power stations on expansiveness
and difficulty to winterize and say exactly what piece of equipment froze and you know
how I can find out you let me loosen there away from the managers I'll find the maintenance
shop they'll show me everything.
And I know enough about equipment that they can't BS me.
Right so maybe part of the advantage to that more visual form of processing is also its
association with that kind of practical particularization that's right that's right now on the other
hand I have no idea how to balance a power grid that's a job for the mathematicians you
see this is where we need to work together and in a complementary factor in a complementary
way and I tell people in big corporations that I've done a lot of talks for businesses
your first step is that you've got to recognize different kinds of thinking exists and let's
take another example recently I visited two really nice dairies up in Quebec Canada that
have the robotic milking machines where the cow can go in she decides one she wants to
get milk and get fed and on both dairies it actually made some good mechanical modifications
on that equipment which the equipment company finally adopted but one of the dairy producers
said to me I stop at the computer stuff I don't mess with the program that's somebody else's
job to work on the software but the mechanical parts of the device they figured out ways
to improve it yeah it's like a it's like a hierarchy man you can imagine a hierarchy
of generalization with the highest resolution lowest level being the particulars of a given
machine then you can imagine people but specialized to operate at different levels of the hierarchy
maybe the verbal types are operating at the high well that's right they are but they lose
that particularization that's right that's basically right because the verbalizer tends
to overgeneralize one of the papers that are reviewed in my book on visual thinking was
an interesting study where on high school students that came life for school specializing
in the arts another school specializing in the sciences and another one especially in
the humanities which would be more verbal on those teams of students and their assignment
was to create a new planet so the art students heavily visualizing they made a planet with
crystals on it another one made a skyscraper planet and then the more mathematical science
students just painted a round made a round ball and described the gravity and the atmosphere
you know kind of boring pictures and the verbal thinkers started write it down and then they
go oh wait a minute we're supposed to draw the planet so they made kind of splotchy stuff on it
but the thing that was interesting is that the art minds more my kind of mind and the mathematical
minds they had big planning sessions on how to design their planet where the verbal thinkers
on they didn't do any planning you see this is the problem the verbal thinker would get big
broad concepts or something we need to do right but how do you actually implement those concepts
yeah right there's no detail there now in food safety we have a thing that I really like it's
called hazard analysis critical control points so let's say I'm out there in a sea of of things
I can do well I can't do all that stuff you see now the critical control point let's say in food
safety in a food factory I can't measure microbes and bacteria on everything in that plant I have
to pick out the places where I'm most likely to have contamination that would be the critical
control points and one of them is doorknobs yeah that's why some places food factories have
automatic doors because that gets rid of touching the door yeah well one of one of the things that
I always found a relief in working with engineers is that they were good and I can see it in the
terms that you're describing they were very good at rank ordering practical priorities right and
that that seems to be part of this particularization so I have this company it's a software company
that sells personality tests and and writing programs for people to help them plan their lives
and my business partners and engineer and although he's also very intelligent verbally he's more
intelligent non-verbally and he knows the systems right from the from the code upward at every level
of the machine instantiation and so the huge advantage to that is that if anything ever goes
wrong he knows exactly what goes wrong and he knows exactly how to fix it it's particularized
down to the point where that makes action possible eh and that's part of the problem with the with
the verbal abstraction is that it makes sense conceptually but that doesn't mean that it's
detailed to the point where it's actually implementable and then it it's like a pseudo knowledge
right because it sounds like you've got the picture right but when you actually try to
implement it you find out that that that it's really a hollow a hollow shell of conceptualization
well I kind of look at like this is why when I learned about the food safety concept of
hazard analysis critical control points or let's just call it critical control points
so I've got a big sea of stuff out there what's the really important thing okay now I I only think
in specific examples so let's take frozen Texas power stations the critical control
point is and I want it like in two sentences what great piece of equipment froze and then
you can very easily figure out the ones that'll be easy to winterize and I've actually talked to
somebody who installs gas wells and I only cost $5,000 to winterize a well when you build it
to retrofits a complete mess he also said you have to have someone who knows how to turn the
valves he said that's me right I call him the guy in the pickup and that person in that pickup
truck is not getting enough credit he knows how to turn those valves right yeah so if you
conceptualize that verbally you end up saying something like a bad winter storm took out the
Texas power grid and that sort of sounds like you've said something but it's nothing like saying
well the grid is made out of 200 different uh like industrial assemblies each of those
is made up of a variety of parts that's differentially susceptible to winter all right well that's
still gobbledygook because first of all they wouldn't have 200 separate power stations you know it's
more like 10 something like that and and I would just let I listen well write down the name of the
station because I don't really care who owns it and what we used to do with meat packing plants when
we were doing welfare audits is we'd always call them by their town names because you're auditing
that particular plant next I will this power station at a frozen turbine hall that's an easy one to
fix on then there was a coal fire that froze well as they freeze up the where you have a cold
bump sand that's probably really easy to fix and if you know 50 gas wells froze up the feet of plant
that's going to be a mess to fix on but you see as I talk about these things I see it and I happen
to know what some of the equipment looks like you see that also makes me a better troubleshooter
you know if I know what stuff looks like you see this is where you've got to put things in my database
but I but I worked 25 years out in factories on heavy construction stuff so I know what a lot
of stuff looks like right so so it means in some sense that to solve the problem is you take the
verbal representation so the verbal representation is a storm took out the texas power grid and then
you say well there's 10 key components to that's okay our grid so that differentiates that and then
you say in each of the 10 systems there are critically vulnerable points that are specifically
sensitive to cold weather we need to differentiate and find out what those key ones are then we
have to differentiate that further you see now okay now when I first started my work there was no
Google Earth well the first thing I do probably Google Earth and Street View the power stations
and the other thing I've learned if I want to get accurate information I don't you don't talk to the
managers you got to get down in the shop and and then the shop guys have to be not worried about
getting fired that's another right right nasty issue that I'm going to have to deal with
but you know let's say I get three shop guys together and we have okay my industry say when
we get rid of all the suits you know that's going to be the managers and the verbal thinkers
they won't talk in front of suits they're afraid they're going to lose their jobs
you know and this is something I know from all the years I've worked in this stuff
and then they'll take you out there and show you what froze and then oh there's creative things I've
talked to a guy I worked in a power plant and there was this one sensor very important electronic
sensor and it gets cold and when it got cold he put plastic garbage bags over it and I'm going
right well I think we need to have something a little more permanent to keep that sensor warm
than black plastic garbage bags that's what I told him yeah so so that that issue that the the guys
with the hands-on knowledge have to worry about being fired is interesting too because it seems
like so they have this extremely detailed knowledge that's practical about how these systems operate
and what happens is if they bring that knowledge up the abstraction hierarchy what they're doing
in some sense is is pointing out the manner in which their superiors their hypothetical
well that's the problem and a very big problem I've had is um I they're they're worried about
losing their jobs yeah and and but you really want to solve the problem they need to be able to
talk to you freely because they're the ones that tell you exactly what froze
right well the question is why would their attempts to bring their practical reality to bear
as they move information up the information hierarchy why would that threaten people to the
point where they would be intimidated in relationship to their job I mean why is there this gap the
psychological gap between the practical and the abstract I mean you'd think that the managers
would be calling on these people all the time you got to drag those suits out of the office too
just when things are working normally and so they get a better understanding of what the
practical people are doing now my animal welfare work on one of the things where I made some of
the biggest difference in animal welfare work is auditing programs I helped develop with McDonald's
Wendy's and Burger King back over 20 years ago and in this situation we were taking vice president
level managers out to the plant and they'd have these undercover boss moments just like that show
I'll never forget the day when the McDonald's vice president saw a half-dead dairy cow go into
their product and he goes yeah we got some things here we have to fix you see before it was all an
abstraction spreadsheets numbers okay animal welfare give it to lawyers give it to the public
relations department but when they came out of the office and they saw something bad now it was real
now they had to act it was no longer abstract anymore there seems to be a kind of pride in that
abstraction in some sense I mean I've also noticed that highly intellectual people and maybe those
are ones who think primarily in words tend to be rather dismissive of the intelligence of more
practical people like working people and that's I come from a working class environment so although
I've hung around verbal people most of my life so I can see that dichotomy do you have any sense of
why it is that the more abstract thinkers are have a well because they used to say okay the kids
that are like failing in high school stupid kids go and shop well I can tell you right now
right exactly I worked big metal fabrication companies owned by these so-called stupid people
and what they they were inventing equipment they had 20 patents and they were very proud of their
patents and one of them made posters out of them put them up all over his place it's a different
kind of intelligence and and it's not you know there's things they can do that the verbal thinkers
can't do and what I what I'm really interested in is we need all the different kinds of minds
because one of the problems with my kind of thinker since I'm associative is the point in a company
let's say I had a metal fabrication shop I'd have to hire a verbal thinker just to run the business
the payroll ordering materials things all of that part of it do you think it's a competition
do you think it's a competition for status between different forms of neurodiversity
I mean if I can claim that my intelligence is paramount that that increases my social status
in some sense right you can imagine there's a competition for that broadly going on in society
what I have found is when you got the verbal thinkers out in the field their eyes got opened
that the important thing is you got to drag the suits out of the office I've done a whole lot of
that and let me tell you they changed okay I've done a lot of work on supply chain management
and when there's supply chain disasters like a factory burning up and a clothing industry
disgusting industry they need to clean up a lot of stuff and a factory burns up a hundred people
selling bluejanes well the suits didn't get out of the office and see what was going on in these
factories until there was a disaster the one they should have been preventing a disaster like that
right well yeah so once you build up hierarchical organizations it's very easy for the people who
are operating near the top of the abstraction chain not to pay attention to the details and
hopefully the details are working out so well that you don't have to pay attention to them I mean
that's in some sense the point of building a hierarchical organization but but what you need to
do obviously the manager can't be you know doing every job out there in a plant but they need to
have enough contact with the field and I'm going to use the field be like the factory floor farming
you know waterworks any of these kind of things so they they understand the difference
there can be things bad going on but I tell business managers and I've talked to many big
corporations computer companies steel companies on pharmaceutical companies that the first step is
realizing that different kinds of thinking exist and that they can work together in complementary
ways and you actually need the whole team you need the whole team because we're kind of
disorganized and associational and I'm going to need a verbal thinker if I got a really big
business to you know keep the business going so what do you think what do you think of the
suppositions and you talk about them a bit in your book that the visual versus verbal modes of
cognition map to some degree on to hemispheric specialization well that the right is more
oriented towards your kind the right hemisphere is more oriented broadly speaking towards
speaking broadly so it dominates your mind yeah but broadly speaking that's true you know
they're accept they're exceptions to some of that that stuff but I'm the thing that I want to talk
about is is right now I'm seeing too many kids that are dyslexic autistic or whatever I'm
ending up playing video games on a disability check when they could be photographers I got
four person crew here right now doing this filming and that's an interesting career
or they could be designing mechanical equipment and they never get an opportunity to do photography
art or mechanical equipment because it kind of looked at these stupid kids
right right okay so there's a privileging of this semantic and that's partly because it's
cheaper it's easier it's detached from the world in some sense how do you think we should redesign
schools for say kindergarten kids and elementary kids in some practical way you tend to think
practically what do you what do you think would be a good start well like in the 50s when I went
to school we had all kinds of craft projects I was learning to use little blunt scissors probably
in first grade I'd be putting all the hands-on classes back into schools and that's going to
include theater music cooking sewing when I went to elementary school I loved art sewing and wood
working and if I hadn't had those classes I would have hated elementary school and I loved sewing
and I'm what I was in fourth grade I had a singer sew handy a toy sewing machine that
actually sewed and it was one of my favorite things because I could make things with it
kids are not doing enough of that kind of stuff today right okay so there's a return to the there's
there's a need for a return to the practical on in some sense on both sides of the gender
everybody on every way with and I would now I went when I was doing a book signing for visual
thinking I went to on a physics lab in Harvard this room's labeled physics lab and they had all
kinds of 3d printers on there but they also had a sewing machine and they also had a station for
crocheting this is the building labeled engineering department at Harvard maybe they're realizing
they've got to get them doing some hands-on things this is when I did the book signing
for this it was part of the book tour the other thing I've noticed I stayed I got into some
interesting places I stayed at this hotel where where they is in Evansville Illinois where they had
textbooks in the rooms from the 1930s I wish I'd had more time to look at it and I pulled out an
electrical engineering book and it had a lot of math in it but it was much more applied they'd
say well this is how this is the generator works this is the math that goes well but it would
describe how the generator actually worked it was much more applied and I now the physiology book
that I had in the 70s you know explain how the kidney works how the heart works and then explain
the chemistry now I look at a physiology book and it's much more verbal a lot more math and
chemistry but how does the kidney actually work I still have my old Duke's physiology of domestic
animals from 1970 and I want to go back and compare that to the Duke's physiology now and
and it's like we're taking the practical out I just got an email yesterday from the UK that they
wanted to take a technology and design course out of a high school you see I think this what's
happening now is mathematics is totally taking over yes we need mathematics because my kind of
mind is not going to touch boilers and refrigeration in that food processing plant that's a job for
the mathematicians but what we're losing is the object visualizer right right right yeah well I
wonder I wonder too if part of this is the fact that you know for a long time in our society
a lot of this practical machinery just worked and so we could afford to ignore it in some
abstract sense right because our cars worked and our power grids worked and we could take all of
this low-level infrastructure for granted now that meant there were a lot of people on the shop
floors who were busily working making sure it worked but it did mean that we had the luxury to
engage in abstract specialization and maybe we could fall prey to the psychological tendency
to just dismiss all that well you see when they first started about 20 years ago is when they
started taking shop classes out of the schools well you can get away with that for a while
and then the people I worked with on gray now are retiring they're retiring out and they're not
getting replaced that's happening with elevator and escalator mechanics that's happening with airplane
mechanics and I'm seeing that more and more and more and more as I travel these are free things
that I see all the time and they are getting gray right right so yeah the retirement problem's going
to be the retirement although there's when it comes to industry there's two gigantic mistakes
that were made shutting down in-house engineering shops 20 years ago we had a huge metalworking
shop called the Montfort fab shop and it was part of the engineering of a company called Montfort so
no longer exists now well that's been shut down and then at the same time we took out shop classes
now in the short run it was cheaper for these companies to just farm out engineering work they
need to do in their plant yeah that works fine until the shops retire out and now what's happened
like I can't go in the name give you the name of the company but I have a client right now
where the one shop that's left is ripping people off at five times the price and that's happening
right right do you see any positive consequences of computer technology for object visualizers
and for the for the people who are working more in the visual spatial end of things well it's
definitely useful to you know like the visualization and stuff you can do on computers but that doesn't
replace real things let me tell you power grid I lay awake at night about that and that's so fragile
that I'm not I'm not going to go into any detail because it's too fragile and I'm not going to
discuss the things that I visualize and lay awake at night about the power grid because it's just
okay um okay I'm curious about that why not discuss them because I don't want to give I don't want to
give people that have bad intentions any information on how to hurt the power grid okay okay okay I see
I see that is the reason right because it's very easy so when you and I don't want to give out any
information that would help somebody damage the power grid so I don't discuss the details here
but I'm seeing them right now right right right yeah well that's part of that ability to think about
critical points of failure well there's I know exactly I'm engineering mind I know where the
critical points of failure are and I'm not going to discuss them right right so we can all be thankful
that you're not a terrorist yeah I'll be thankful I'm not a criminal yes exactly exactly yeah well
I've always often been afraid when thinking along the same lines that you're describing of just exactly
how fragile things are in that regard and how much someone with a good imagination how much
damage they could do if they targeted things properly it is really quite frightening to apprehend
well that's why there's certain things about the power grid I am not going to discuss and I'm seeing
three big fat critical control points right now I'm seeing them in my mind and they make me cringe
right so so could we talk a little bit about the specifics of your work I remember one of the
stories you told at this Tucson conference was about you talked about cows that they would do
such things as go into a field and look at if you look left a briefcase on the field for example
the cows would eventually come and look at it yeah that's right a cow's in a in a line might be
stopped by something like a coke bottle in their path and so you used your ability to think like
animals to design systems for animal handling that were much more humane so could you walk us
through that a little bit well the first work I did with cattle was in the 70s in Arizona I
when I didn't even know that I had was a visual thinker and other people were not a visual thinker
and I noticed that if there was a coat hung on the fence the cattle would stop
on if there was a shadow or reflection off a vehicle so I got down in the shoots to see what
they were seeing and I would take pictures down inside the shoot and people thought that was kind
of crazy but now I'm like right just recently did start up at a really big plant and at 10 o'clock
in the morning everything was working fine and then at three o'clock in the afternoon a big shadow
appeared I called the spider monster and it was just a shadow and these cattle decided they weren't
going to walk over that so they'll have to build a roof over the facility so that the cattle can't
see the spider monster on the other thing I'm I show I show people how to do is watch your lead
animal your lead animal will come up and stop and look at the thing they don't like the same plant
on the night shift okay the shadow monster wouldn't be there they either the guy calls me and he goes
they go halfway up the shoot and stop all right what do I do I said now bring up a nice calm bunch
of cattle watch your leader really carefully he'll look right at the thing he doesn't like
and there's an LED light on the corner of a building and they took that down and then everything
worked fine how do you identify the leader well there's always a leader when when all right let's
say I take a 20 head of cattle out of a pan there's a lead animal that walks out first usually one
of the more bold animals not the dominant animal the dominant animal that pushes the others away
from the feed trough he's in the middle of the herd or she's in the middle of the herd but the
leader will come out of the pen first and the other cattle follow and it's just the first animal in
the group it's a leader it's that simple you see as we're talking about that I'm seeing it
okay so so is that leader stable across instances of leadership and is that associated with this
ability to find what's anomalous and to deal with well in cattle that have lived together for a while
tend to stay in the same order you know years ago when your tags came out that were sequentially
numbered in other words you could just buy a package of ear tags labeled one through 200
and they put them on their cattle and one of the things that surprised ranchers when maybe 200
cattle came back the following year to go through the shoots to get vaccinated and they were coming
to in almost the same order now that's a group of cattle that live together okay is there something
okay so you made the observation that the lead animal will stop and look at the thing that he
doesn't like and so are the other animals and but it also that lead animal wasn't the physically
dominant animal he's got some other characteristics the animal it's dominant at the pushing others
away from the water trough or the feed trough but the but once the lead animal walks the other
cattle usually will follow same thing was shaped the other animals will usually follow right so you
remove the distractions that the lead animals reacting to and and at this particular plant
we had two things we had to get rid of we had to get rid of the shadow the spider monster shadow
and we had to get rid of an led light that was on the corner of a building
so do you have any sense on of why the other animals come to rely on the lead animal like what's
the lead animal being selected for or is it just a first mover well the leader of this lead animal
you see there's different levels of fear in animals genetically some animals are more bold
other animals are more shy or you can call those high and low fear and the animal that's more bold
is more likely to be the leader than the animal that's more anxious and and and you know if you
down with a bunch of cattle that have lived together all the time you know that there'll be
certain animals that tend to be the leaders and then you've got the big one with the giant horns
and she shoves everybody else away from the feed trough there's something that's very profound
about that because you're laying out the fact that it isn't the dominant animal that leads no
and that it's the animal that's exploratory and that's somewhat willing to take risks that
that's right but also absolutely also that the that the lead animal will spot anomaly right like
the spider monster that you're describing and so it's not like they're they're so bold that
they're completely without fear they're still acting cautiously in some sense all right so you
can walk the lead animal down a chute and you can see what it's going to see and you can actually
do that because you go down there and do it but you also think that way you've got to bring your
cat up really calmly to see because if you bring him up at a run then the leader just turns back
and you don't know what it's reacting to oh yeah i said to him now bring him up nice and calm watch
the leader come up the chute and when he stops he'll look right at the thing he doesn't like and
he looked at the led light on the corner of the building then they texted me a picture of it and
they got rid of that and that fixed the problem now have you have you have you developed some sort of
picture of the class of things that stop cats yes yes i have the spider mode okay so tell me what
sort of thing i have him to stop cattle i have pictures i have checklists of things to look for
reflections on water at this particular plant there was a gate handle a gate handle that jiggled
and it was right by the chute entrance i said that needs to be fixed so this gate handle doesn't
vibrate so what's common do you what's common about the things that stop cattle in their tracks
or or can you extract out well let's look at let's look at cattle's a prey species animal
so you're looking for things that might be a danger some little little bits of rapid movement set
them off and and something that's sort of like shouldn't be there like you can put a white plastic
bottle in the entrance of the chute now about shut a meat plant down
i they'll just keep turning back away from it turning back away from it right so they're looking
for something that doesn't fit the environmental pattern and that's probably doing something like
activating predator detection well that's right it's like that you know they they're looking for
stuff that you know a movement in the bushes maybe that's a mountain lion or a wolf some
little movement in the bushes the other thing about new experiences if you take something
like camera equipment cattle love camera equipment you put an expensive camera in the middle of the
pasture they will come up and knock it over and lick it to death that's what they will do
see things that are novel are attractive when the animal can voluntarily approach and scary if
you suddenly shove it in their face you suddenly shove it in their face then it's scary right and
so the best way that's a introduce new things to cattle is to let them voluntarily approach it
i don't know how many times people say to me my horse was fine at home he went crazy at the show
well you've got a lot of novel stuff they're like flags for example so you better get your horse used
to flags before you go there and the best way to get them used to flags would be to decorate the
pasture with flags and let your animal walk up and voluntarily approach them right right well you
know that's exactly what you do in psychotherapy when you're trying to help people overcome
aphobia right so if someone's afraid of an elevator and won't get in it that often happens
with agoraphobia what you do is you say to them okay um let's start by imagining elevators so that's
going to make you a bit nervous but imagine an elevator at some distance that doesn't make you
uncomfortable okay okay and then you say okay well now you've done that see if you can move yourself
in your mind closer to the elevator door and then you keep doing that but it has to be voluntary
it's 100% absolutely necessary for it to be okay so maybe you run them through this
imaginal exposure therapy and then you say okay for our next session what we're going to do is
we're going to go out in the hallway you know that elevator you wouldn't take we're going to go out
in the hallway we're going to stand 200 feet away from the elevator and you're just going to look at
it if you can't and so they'll do that has to be voluntary and then you can get them 150 feet away
and 100 feet away and soon they'll be right up to the elevator door I was very anxious
I you know my 20s and I got terrified of airplanes because I was an extremely scary
emergency landing when I was a senior in high school they put the slides down and the whole thing
very very scary and one of the ways I got over that is I had to make aviation interesting
and when I got the ride in the cockpit of a plane flying on Holstein Hefers to Puerto Rico
that made it interesting you make something scary interesting because I know another thing they do
on the elevator phobias is they show them how the safety mechanisms work that the elevator is not
going to fall down the shaft yeah well you you you know you even compel that interest to some
degree so for example one once you get a phobic person inside an elevator what they'll tend to do
is look at their feet and so you say to them look quit looking at your feet look at each corner of
the elevator look at all the numbers look at the display panel like you have to facilitate their
voluntary visual exploration okay and to some degree what you're doing is you're calling out
their interest to say attend to all of these things as if they're interesting and then that's
how they familiarize themselves with the elevator and they also note that well they're in there
because you have to look at the elevator to know you're in an elevator right literally you have to
move your eyes and point at all the different parts of the elevator and the more that you can help
people do that at a high level of detailed resolution voluntarily the more likely they are not not
only to become less afraid of the elevator is that that actually isn't what happens is you actually
train them in a form of exploratory bravery because what you teach them is that if they use
their eyes voluntarily to scan what they're afraid of they'll become braver and then that generalizes
to all sorts of other instances too so if you train someone to be less afraid of an elevator
they're much less afraid of other things as well well that's right and the thing that we're saying
I'm seeing now in dogs you know we have very strict lease laws here and there's more problems with
dogs being afraid of the veterinarian because they haven't been out experiencing enough stuff
like strange people touching them for example just going to lots of different places you know this is
the reason why when they train service dog puppies you take them everywhere so that there's almost
nothing that will frighten them yes yeah well that that that's the same argument you were making
earlier about the fact that to train people practically we have to put them in a lot of
different practical hands-on situations and so that they can generalize across all those instances
and so experience that's too narrow is too is too restrictive well when I get worried that
we're going to have people making policy on all kinds of important stuff on when they're so far
removed from the world of the practical you see we need to have both because all the problem with
us practical people is we're not organized enough that's where just about every tech company
has to hire a suit eventually just to keep the company organized somebody's got to pay the payroll
somebody's got to pay the taxes somebody has to make sure the rent is paid you know if they need
more office space then they've got to go out and go shopping for office space you know they there's
uh and we really do need all the different kinds of minds well when I look at the ideological
solutions that are being put forward to the world's problems continually I do wonder the same thing
you're wondering about which is is this empty ideological representation a consequence of
the fact that the people who are doing this have no practical experience at all it's like
they're not thinking at the level of detail well I think that it's a problem because when I worked
originally this is over 20 years ago with McDonald's Burger King and Wendy's and they took the top
managers out into the field and implemented the auditing program it was interesting to see how the
animal welfare uh issue went from an abstraction give it to legal give it to public relations
to something real that they really needed to address you know half-dead animals going into your
products not okay right right right uh broken stunning equipment is totally terrible and not
okay and that's mainly a management problem and failure to do maintenance and and I and and and
and when I worked on that 1999 I got five journal articles published on this and I saw more change
than I'd seen and and in my whole career when these big companies were inspecting these plants
but I figured out a very simple scoring system if you couldn't shoot 95 of those cattle dead on
the first shot you failed the McDonald's audit it was that simple some very simple critical control
points if you had more than three percent of your cattle beller in their heads off when you're
handling them you failed the McDonald's audit okay so why why why did that turn out to be the critical
issue well the broken stunts were a big issue now on the handling I figured out a way to score
that that's very simple vocalization if you're poking cattle with too many electric prods or you're
slamming doors on them or whatever they're going to be beller in their heads off and I better not
hear any beller in coming out of the place where they kill them right here beller in coming out of
there somebody needs to get kicked off the approved supplier list it's that simple that's one of the
critical control right so you used so you used animal distress as an indication of that's right
efficiency of process okay can you can you walk us through some of your designs
I mean you designed these these circular cattle enclosures as well to calm them down
the circular designs are really nice but I'm also very proud of the fact there were 75 plants
on the McDonald's approved supplier list only three had to buy fancy expensive equipment
everybody else we fixed with management yeah three managers had to be removed I call that
manager ectomy on a lot of non-slip flooring had to go in because one of the things we measure
is slipping and falling and lighting cattle are scared of the dark on training people to move
smaller groups of animals and and put a solid side up so they don't see the vehicles passing by
and these very simple changes we were able to fix some of the older places and I'm very I used all
my design ability to figure out how to make some of the older facilities work even though they did
not have the fancy new equipment and then we had three science only three plants had to do a front
end remodel that was very very expensive that's three out of 75 I'm really proud of that oh yeah
that's all a big port yeah yeah plants in the US right so so tell me tell me tell me tell me what
your goals were okay so let's walk this through at the level of detail so why don't you tell people
about how these cattle handling plants work broadly speaking from from the time the cattle arrived
till the time they're processed let's say and then how were you brought in to fix them well
unloading a truck make sure you have a non-slip unloading ramp open the gates up let them out
you do not need to scream at them pound on the vehicle or stick electric prads in through the
holes in the side of the truck so let the cattle just get off and they will and then they should
walk quietly out of the truck if they got a scale weigh them on the scale and then quietly walk into
a holding pen get a drink of water maybe a lay down then when it's time to go up to the plant
somebody should come down bring a group of 20 out not a group of 50 and you quietly walk them up
the alley to where they get to where the round crowd pen is and the whole thing should be a calm walk
without slipping and falling and without moving and bellowing and and almost no electric prads
that and it should all be very calm walking is what it should be
right and and how many plants did you go analyze we had 75 plants on the on the approved supplier
list and only three of them had to have extensive renovations but we did have three plants where
the plant manager had to be removed right and so in those cases yeah why did you remove the managers
well the ones where we're able to get rid of the plant manager were the corporate ones
on the plant then we had one plant we used to call the problem child and manager was family and we
couldn't get rid of it and that plant would like you know fail on audit and then pass an audit and
but management has to decide that they're going to do things right you can have the best equipment
and it's not going to work if it's not managed in fact before we started these audits i had a
lot of equipment out in the field lots of equipment half my clients tore it up and wrecked it and one
that what the customer inspections and audits did is force the plant to manage the stuff they had
either brand new fancy stuff or older stuff and so how broadly did your innovation spread and how
rapidly and what were the consequences of that for the meat handling industry in general
well the auditing program was within six months as in the year of 1999 was adopted by mcdonald's
wendys and burger king and that covers just about all the big beef plants and i saw more
improvement than i'd seen in a 25 year career prior to that people were no longer using broken
equipment they were moving smaller groups of animals things were kept repaired and
and employees were better supervised and boy it made a big difference
so why do you think you were able to do this i mean you obviously can solve the problem
practically but how are you able to um make your way in the corporate world in a manner that actually
resulted a in people listening to you and b in changes actually being made because that's
that's quite a remarkable combination of unlikely achievements all right let's start off i started
out with equipment this was in my 20s and i found that selling equipment was much easier than getting
people to manage equipment correctly and early in my career i made the mistake that a lot of young
engineers make i thought i could make a self managing cattle handling facility that is bs and i got a
lot of systems out there the other thing that helped me to get systems out into the industry
is i wrote about them and i wrote about them in the meat industry and cattle industry trade press
wrote all kinds of articles just about how to do it so now i had a lot of equipment out there
center track restrainer and lots and lots of these big plants had one it's a piece of equipment i
developed with the guys in the shops that i've talked to you about earlier but half my clients tore
it up and wrecked it then i worked with a lady named janet riley at the american meat institute
and i came up with this very very simple scoring system for evaluating meat packing plants
and we wrote it up in our guidelines nobody used it for two years then mcdonald's approached me
to implement their animal welfare auditing program and it started out taking vice president level
managers out of the office they saw some bad stuff and it started out as a little training program
they already had food safety auditors in the plants auditing them that was already being done
and so i took the trains of food safety auditors to do the animal welfare audit
and within six months i saw more change that i had seen in my whole career prior to that
then wendy's got on board then burger king got on board and i made sure that everybody used the
exact same score so it was absolutely clear it was like traffic rules you know you know they
measure speeding we measured how many vocalizations the cattle did we measured how many animals
fell down those things were measured and the plants had to make certain numbers it was
absolutely clear there were five critical control points and they had to do all five of them to
pass the audit i kind of sometimes can't believe i pulled it off it worked me on my wildest dreams
but it was absolutely practical right right yeah well it did it is it is quite a remarkable
thing to pull off to to be able to make that kind of change in the corporate world so quickly that's
that's really quite remarkable the other reason i was able to make change i i practiced reverse
conflict of interest i had a lot of expensive equipment already out in the plants i've been
over backwards in the older facilities to figure out how to make that older facility work without
buying expensive equipment let me tell you non-slip flooring it can work wonders you know we did quite
a lot of that right but that's not that's not expensive equipment and i'm really proud of the
fact that i took some of the older facilities and we made them work and then we did have three
only three out of 75 plants that had to build an expensive front-end remodel and that was very
expensive so what would you say if if you had to put it into a few phrases you you weren't obviously
pursuing mere narrow profit at that time not there's anything wrong with profit you you were
serving some other goal i was serving the goal of improving animal welfare and i've been over
backwards to do reverse conflict of interest and i tried to take some of those older facilities
right some of them a bit shabby and make them work with simple changes like repairs non-slip
flooring changing the lighting and three plants had to have the plant manager removed and that's
great so what why were you why were you so concerned with animal welfare and how would you
define animal welfare why did that become paramount in your in your hierarchy of goals
well one of the reasons why i started working on the equipment is like the way cattle were
being handled was horrible you know electric prods on 100 i'm falling down crashing into things
people screaming at them uh cattle handling in the 80s was terrible absolutely terrible
and i i saw that as something that i could fix now i talked to a lot of young people the day
that want to you know do activism about some specific thing and it's way too broad
i want justice in the world for example right yes yes might be something they would say yes yes
and i say why don't you do something more targeted like using dna to show that this prisoner
was falsely accused you see now that's something a lot more targeted that you can actually do
yes absolutely and i think that is a huge problem with the way that kids are trained
morally in universities is that that grandiose vague uh activism replaces the actual practicalities
of problem solving that you're describing that actually make a difference why do you think it
was that animal suffering stood out for you is it is it partly because you you can think like
animals like what why do you think well you would how would you like to get shocked to electric
prods and be slipping and falling and crashing and defenses and things like that you'd be terrified
um and my goal was to improve how the cattle were treated when i talked to students about you
know activism i said what i worked on wasn't everything bad happening to animals i worked
on something targeted the thing that i'm seeing now with young people that want to make a difference
they say i want to have justice in the world or i want to like animals are treated terrible we got
to do something about it and i'm saying you're going to be more effective if you pick out something
relatively targeted i worked on cattle handling to start with that's not everything to do with animals
yes exactly or the example of using dna to show that this criminal was innocent that's something
much more doable and targeted that you can actually do right so how was it that the suffering of
animals in meat tracking in meat packing plants came to your attention to begin with so you said
the suffering you found that unbearable first of all it started out when i went out to the feed yards
handling cattle back in the 70s there's a lot of really horrible cattle handling
and i i made a mistake in the beginning that a lot of young engineers make they think technology
can solve all their problems and i mistakenly believed that i could build a self managing
cattle handling facility that's nonsense i know that now that's nonsense good equipment makes
good handling better but it doesn't replace management and what the auditing program did
is it forced people to manage the facilities and why why were you at the cattle handling facilities
to begin with i mean was this part of your academic training or was this part of the fact
that you'd grown up on a farm well i got interested in got to going out to my aunt's ranch and
this brings up the other thing students get interested in stuff they get exposed to
it's that simple in in one of the people i profiled in visual thinking was michael angelo
grubby little 12 year old dropped out of school but he was running around all the churches seeing
great art and he grew up with stone cutting tools okay that's the exposure then he started
making some stuff and then an artist took him in as an apprentice that's mentoring
good careers start first with exposure and the other reason why i'm so concerned about
taking all the hands-on stuff out of the schools is those things like let's say theater for example
exposed students i didn't care about being in the play but i loved making scene rate and costumes
that i love to do it now that's something that can become a career so let me let me we're running
out of time on this segment let me ask you one more question and then maybe i'll sum up our
discussion for everybody or try to extract out the gist you think primarily in pictures but you're
also an extremely effective verbal communicator i mean you've written a number of books you can
obviously talk your way into corporate environments and help people walk through the complex process
of restructuring say animal handling on a pretty much on a national scale how did you
how do you think you've been able to develop your verbal ability like what what did you do to
manage that all right it goes back to when i was seven years old and in my neighborhood all the
kids when they were seven when the parents had a party you had to put your good clothes on greet
the guests and serve the snacks be little hosts and hostesses that's what you had to do um i sold
candy for charity that helped me on talking to people the other thing i figured out very early on
is backdoors into jobs and most people don't see this in the hbo movie temple grand and there's a
scene where i go up to the editor of our state farm magazine and i get his card because i knew if i
wrote for that magazine that would help my career that's a back door writing i did a lot of writing
this how to handle cattle how to design facilities and i was so happy when one of my very early
articles got picked up by two other magazines you know it had made the national scene of course this
is all you know pre-internet and then that press pass got me into all kinds of meetings that helped
me to get into my next self-made internship with a swift plant i've recognized the back doors most
people don't recognize the back doors but lots of good jobs are gotten through the back door
right so you allied your ability to concentrate on focal details practically with the ability
and the willingness to communicate on at all sorts of different levels verbally
you were able to bring both that's getting too abstract for me i just go okay i got the card
within a week i i may i had done a master's thesis on cattle behavior in different types of
squeeze shoots and i i sent them a good article and they published it then i went back to them and
said maybe i could just write something for you every month i just walked into the office and
asked that job so i did that as a volunteer for about three or four months and then they started
paying me i wasn't shy to walk up and ask right right so so you developed a communication
communication expertise and a communication network at the same time that you were trying to
implement your practical solutions and both of those facilitated each other well in the very
beginning i wasn't even designing facilities and then i was just visiting all these feed yards
and writing for the magazine and that press pass got me into all kinds of places
i recognized the value of that press pass it got me into meetings in the 70s with $600
registration fees i was no way i could have afforded that this is 70s right right right
so what are what are you working on now you finished this this new book that came out in 2022
what are you doing now well i'm very interested in seeing the kids who think differently
get into good careers and that's going to be a major emphasis of the things that i do now be a
lot of speaking engagements a lot of you know interviews like this because i want to see those
kids that are different get into good jobs okay if they're visual object visualizer like me maybe
art job maybe photography job or a job building things if they're the more mathematical visual
spatial a good programming job a good on mathematics or chemistry job where you need the
mathematics there's too many kids that think differently i'm some of them just kind of going
nowhere i want to see them get into good careers and do things that will be constructive in the
world do something constructive so we're we're going to switch over to the additional half an
hour that i produced for the daily wire plus platform to delve into some of the biographical
details of your life before we close i'd like to just sort of wander over the territory that we've
covered and see if there's anything else see if you think this is a reasonable summary and if
there's anything else you want to add i've been talking with dr. temple grand in today
who's who's developed a spectacular career in modifying animal handling and also managed a lot
on the more purely intellectual front as well in terms of conceptualization of information
processing she's uh we talked a lot today about the difference in in in the ways that people think
concentrating mostly on the distinction between visual thinkers who tend to be more practical
and detail oriented and who are can be broadly differentiated into two categories and those
would be object visualizers and people who think more visually and mathematically contrasting them
with people who think more verbally we talked a fair bit about the prioritization of more verbal
and abstract thinking at the cost of this practical thinking and training in that practical thinking
we discussed how that's affected the school system and broader culture we discussed the dangers that
poses to the integrity of our society as we lose the people who have the hands-on knowledge
we talked about the psychological danger that poses to people who think more practically
concretely and and visually who are in school systems that are optimized for the verbal thinkers
we talked about temples um career at the detail level um ameliorating the suffering of animals
that across like nationally and internationally as it turned out partly because she decided
not to chase mere generalities but to focus on an actual problem which was the suffering of actual
animals in actual plants was willing to focus her um emotional concerns on something that was
practical and to marry that with a strategy that involved particularization and visualization
and verbal communication and practical interactions with corporations and also we closed
that with a discussion of the fact that what she's doing now is trying to bring to people's
attention in podcasts like this the fact that we seem to be um working contrary to our own
best interests by not um building educational facilities that help optimize the ability of
visual thinkers to function but also for society more broadly to take advantage of the
talents and skills of those people in the in innovation and in the maintenance of the infrastructure
that we already have around us and so I think that about summarizes what we talked about today
is there anything you want to add to that that definitely you know kind of um kind of summarizes
that we need all the different kinds of minds and they can when we understand that different
people think differently they can work in teams where they can collaborate and have complementary
skills I think that's that's uh something that's really important also right right right the thing
I want to one thing I would do with the schools is I'd put a lot of the hands-on classes back in
like art sewing woodworking shop welding auto mechanics theater because these are all things
expose kids to to things that can become possible careers too
right and those are all things that have to be done they're in an embodied sense you actually
have to it's not purely abstract any it's not abstract none of those things are abstract
yeah well that's I suppose a danger of moving so much education online as well as that it's going
to increase the degree well that's right the other thing when I went to did the book signing
for visual thinking I told you about the electrical engineering book from the 30s I found in this
unique hotel room but I also got put in the office of a professor in political science
and I looked at some of those books and it was so abstract theories about politics I I didn't
even understand it it had nothing to do with right or left it had to do with just abstractions
that were so abstract it made no sense to me now I'm going oh I wouldn't want this person in charge of
figuring out with the power bread you know I remember at this Tucson conference where I first
saw you speak after you spoke very practical talk very much like the one that you you delivered
today when we were talking a philosophy student got up because there were a lot of abstract thinkers
at this consciousness conference and asked you something extremely abstract and philosophical
and you did exactly what I would expect a good engineer to do which was to say you know I really
don't understand anything that you just said I don't know how to associate it with anything
practical and I'm completely unable to answer your question which I thought was just it was
ridiculously comical and I also thought um what would you say well targeted because it was the case
that you know you had been talking about real practical realities your ability to think like
an animal the fact that you had taken these practical set steps to ameliorate animal suffering
and that that had been so consequential and and so of obvious worth and then you were faced with this
flight into abstraction and and did what engineers always did do which is something like well yeah
but I don't understand that what does it mean practically which is a really good question
that you know it's a question that should be asked of abstract thinkers all the time what are the
devils in the details here that you're overlooking how much do you know about the systems that you're
abstractly representing and the answer to that is usually almost nothing well it's sort of like
you know we need all the three different base you know different kinds of minds you need the
object visualizers you know we're going to get the arts mechanical and photography and animals
you need the visual spatial mathematicians computer programmers chemists things that require
mathematics and we need the verbal thinkers because they're going to help organize things
you see you need yeah all three different kinds of minds and they should work together in a
complementary fashion all right well that's a good place to end this segment I would say I'm going
to go thank you thank you to everyone on YouTube and the associated podcast for your time and
attention I hope you found this discussion interesting and engaging and practically useful
as well I'm going to switch switch over to the daily wire plus platform and I'm going to talk to
dr. temple grand and a little bit more on the biographical and I want to lay out how her
her interest in the issues that she did pursue professionally made themselves manifest in her
life hello everyone I would encourage you to continue listening to my conversation with my
guest on dailywireplus.com
