Andrew Doyle is with me today. Andrew is a British comedian, playwright, journalist,
political satirist and author who co-created the fictional character Jonathan Pye and the equally
or perhaps even more fictional character Titania McGrath. He recently published his first book,
Free Speech, Why It Matters, which came out in 2021, but previously published two more
as the aforementioned Titania McGrath. The first of those was Woke, a guide to social justice
published in 2019. And the second was my first little book of intersectional activism published
in 2020. I haven't met Andrew before. I'm looking forward to talking with him about Free Speech and
about his satire and about the intersection between those two and whatever else comes up.
Thank you very much for coming on today. I'm looking forward to speaking with you.
Thanks so much for having me.
So, shall we start perhaps with the discussion of your book? I finished it yesterday.
I've become notorious, I suppose, for my particular take on Free Speech. And so,
it was a book that interested me. Tell me why you wrote it and what you learned and all of those
things. Well, it's not the sort of book I ever envisaged that I would have to write. I think
if you go back 10, 15 years, the idea that Free Speech, which is obviously the seedbed
of all our liberties, would be something that we would have to defend, would have probably
seemed a little bit ridiculous to me because I basically took it for granted. I thought that
everyone was on that side. But I fear that something has happened, particularly over the
past 10 years or so. And it is connected, I feel, with the rise of this social justice movement,
what we might call critical social justice, or however we want to call it. A lot of people call
it the woke movement. However you want to label that ideology, which at its heart has a real
mistrust of Free Speech. And you hear it all the time in the kind of phrases that the activists use,
phrases like words are violence or this kind of language normalizes hate or legitimizes hate or
all this kind of thing. And there's a real genuine mistrust of the power of language to effectively
corrupt the masses. And what I wanted to do, I suppose, was try and marshal a defence
for this principle that I had always taken for granted. But at the same time, attempt to grapple
with the concerns that people might have. Because my worry with the culture war, as we call it,
is that you have two sort of extreme polls arguing against each other. And most people
are caught in the middle. I think most people are broadly for the idea of Free Speech, but they
have a few reservations, for instance, when it comes to demagogues espousing hate or hate against
a particular minority group or something like that. Or people are concerned about the ways in which
language can cause harm. And I don't think anyone would deny that words can be hurtful. So most
people, I think, are somewhere in between and are open to persuasion. And I think my point,
my principal argument in the book, is that absolute freedom of speech is always going to be
better. And in fact, by promoting free speech, you're doing something to help those very people
that you are concerned about. So recently, the Scottish Parliament passed a hate crime law
that has its supporters and also its detractors. And I'd be interested in your feeling about that.
Now, you said, I believe in this book, if I remember the statistics correctly, that
there have been 120,000 incidents of police investigated speech hate crime in Britain in
how long? That's been over the last five years or so?
It's worse than that. The statistic, I quote, is between 2014 and 2019, there are 120,000 recorded
incidents of non-crime. They call them non-crime hate incidents. And this is something which is
now routine in the UK. I mean, obviously, I'm going to be talking about the UK and the US and
Canada is a very different kettle of fish, I'm sure. And I'm sure a lot of the people who are
watching won't be familiar with the problems we have in the UK. Of course, we don't have
constitutional protection for free speech. We don't have a First Amendment. We don't have anything
like that. So we are particularly vulnerable. And at the moment, unfortunately, in the UK,
the police who are trained by the College of Policing who do issue very specific guidelines
about this. And anyone can check this because if you go to the government's website on hate crime
and hate speech, they make very clear what they're talking about. What they say is that there are five
protected characteristics and these fall into race, gender, sexuality, gender identity and
disability. I think I might misquote that, but there's one missing. But anyway, there are five
protected characteristics. And if a victim, and they do use the word victim rather than complainant,
if a victim perceives that any speech or crime was motivated by hatred towards any of those
five protected characteristics, then it qualifies as a hate crime if it's criminal. If it's not
criminal, if it's just speech or something like that, it qualifies as a non-crime hate incident.
Police will investigate that. They will record that. And although non-crime incidents don't
lead to prosecution, they do go on a criminal reference check that many people take. We call it
disclosure and barring service here. So it can affect your employment prospects.
And is that without a trial? That's recorded without a trial?
Of course. So you get a quasi-criminal record.
You get something flagged up, particularly if you're applying for a teaching job,
say something like that where you're working with children, it's very important. And you get
this thing flagged up. So it does have serious ramifications. But even beyond that, we have
hate speech laws which are encoded into the Public Order Act, which is one example. But the
main example is the Electronic Communications Act 2003. In this country, and I do quote the
statistic in the book as well, we have roughly 3,000 people arrested a year for offensive things
that they have said online. So in other words, nine people a day, roughly, the police in the UK
are arresting. And people in the UK will be familiar with this, because if you see the Twitter
accounts of various police forces, various police departments across the country, they often put
things out like, you know, make sure you don't say anything offensive or thoughtless online,
or we will be knocking on your door. They say these very kind of frightening things. There was a
recent police display outside a supermarket in the UK. It went viral, this image. It was them
next to a big digital billboard. And the slogan on the billboard was being offensive is an offense.
And this was flanked by police officers who were socially distanced, but they were there and their
masks, which made it seem slightly more sinister. They got in a lot of trouble for that, because
people were saying, well, being offensive surely isn't a crime. But actually, the problem with
that is that the police clearly thought it was a crime. And they, you know, they were acting on
that basis. They'd obviously hadn't just concocted this billboard out of nothing, they'd really
considered what it should say. And more to the point, actually, they were right. In this country,
you can go to prison for jokes, for offensive remarks. And people have gone to prison,
have been arrested routinely for causing offense. And of course, the notion of offense
is incredibly subjective. In fact, in fact, the legal stipulation in the communications act
is that you will have broken the law if the judge and jury deem that you have
communicated material that is quote unquote, grossly offensive. Well, I don't know how you
define that. I wouldn't know. And also, who defines it is the real question, as far as I'm
concerned. I mean, I've looked into this legislation to some degree. And one of the things that struck
me about it was that it seems to be purposefully left up to the hypothetical victim to define
offense, which has become a subjective reality. And you can understand why that might be to some
degree, because how would you define hate? And how would you define offense without, especially
the latter, without making recourse to someone's subjective experience? But then, of course,
well, we'll delve into that in a moment. I should start with the hard question, I suppose, which is,
well, clearly, people can say hateful things. And those things can be damaging psychologically and
physiologically, I suppose, if people are stressed enough. And the borderline is very
difficult to identify. Why is it that people shouldn't just assume that you're a mean loudmouth and
that they shouldn't pay any attention to you at all, because you're concerned about this?
I mean, which is that's the general criticism of critics of hate speech, let's say. And so,
why in the world aren't we aren't the people who are putting this forward just trying to make the
world a nicer place? What's the big problem here? Well, I think a lot of people do assume that I'm a
mean loudmouth. I think they assume that about most people who defend freedom of speech. And I'm sure
the latter part of your question is absolutely right. Insofar as I imagine a lot of the people
who are skeptical about free speech are, in fact, trying to make the world a better place. I don't
think that's mutually exclusive. I mean, the problem here is that the legislation as it currently
stands here means that, for instance, if you say something critical about me, and I perceive
that it was motivated by hatred towards me on the basis of my sexuality, for instance, I could phone
the police and that would be recorded and would appear on hate crime statistics in this in this
country, because it's all about perception. That word is used about five or six times within the
one passage in the in the hate crime legislation, the word perception of the victim. And again,
I say victim, not complainant, which suggests a complete disregard for due process. But I suppose
we can leave that aside. But the most common, the most common and the most frightening misconception
I have found when it comes to people defending free speech is that they are doing so because they
want to have the right to say appalling things about people with no comeback whatsoever. And
they want to go back to some imaginary good old days, you know, where you could just be casually
homophobic and racist and sexist and all the rest of it. And no one would call you out for that.
Now, I don't know anyone who falls into that category. And most people who are,
you know, advocating for free speech are doing so precisely because they are aware
that in countries where free speech protections are meager, minorities tend to suffer the most.
And in fact, there is a it seems to be a corollary to me that those who are genuinely
for free speech are also for equal rights and protecting the vulnerable in society. And this
perception, which I really find unpleasant, this perception that if you are standing up for this
most foundational of principles of freedom of speech, if you're standing up for that,
you can only be doing so if you have a nefarious motive. I mean, what a horribly pessimistic
view of humanity. And it seems to be... Well, it seems to be a direct derivation of the hypothesis,
for example, that all Western social organizations, particularly Western, are based on power and
are best conceived of as tyrannical. And so if that's your view, why would you not assume that
most use of speech is essentially an exercise of power in the service of tyranny?
But then why would you assume that the government in control of any particular
country isn't part of that tyranny that you're describing? It seems odd to me to be
mindful of the potential for tyranny, but then to outsource all your individual liberties to the
state. It seems contradictory to me. Well, I guess the way that that is
elided over is by allowing the hypothetical individual victim to define the offense.
This is the problem, though. I mean, the problem I've run into, and this is partly why I appreciated
your book, is that increasingly, people are called upon to defend fundamental assumptions
that were so taken for granted that virtually no one has an argument that's fully articulated at hand.
When no one questions free speech, no one has to defend it thoroughly. As soon as it's questioned,
well, it becomes an extraordinarily complicated problem. The same with gender identity. When
no one's paying attention to it, it's obvious, but as soon as you have to think it through,
it becomes a rat's nest to say the least. When I was in the UK a few years ago, I saw a number
of things that I felt were disturbing. People seem to have accepted the omnipresence of CCTV
cameras to a degree that I found horrifying. Frankly, I don't like CCTV cameras. I don't like
the message they portray, which is that everyone is criminal enough so they should be
surveyed all the time and someone needs to be watching. I noticed, too, in London in particular,
that many buildings had instituted airport-level security so that you had to pass through a
metal detector and have your bags checked, et cetera, while you were moving in and out of
buildings. It struck me as quite horrifying given that, as far as I'm concerned, Great Britain and
its legal and parliamentary traditions are at the epicenter of Western freedoms. I mean,
you could make a case for France, I suppose, but not a strong one, as far as I'm concerned.
Your citizens seem to have accepted this with virtually no problem. Now, on the heels of that,
we have this multiplication of hate crime. That's as much a surprise to me as it is to you.
You won't have seen all of the CCTV cameras believe. Apparently, they're absolutely everywhere. You
can't walk anywhere in the UK without being potentially monitored. I'm not saying someone's
watching you all the time, but things are being recorded and digitized. It's interesting to me,
because I remember back in the early 2000s, when the government was trying to push through its ID
card scheme and, broadly speaking, the left were unanimously against it. They didn't like this idea
of living in a society where there's someone on the corner saying, papers, please. No one really
wanted that. But we've become very docile and very accepting of the idea that we need to be
coddled and monitored by the state. I mean, I know there's a recent debate about vaccine
passports, and people seem very blasé about this idea that we might have to have our ID
embedded and encoded onto a card to get anywhere or to do anything. I think there's
something going on there and it is connected with what you've brought up in terms of hate
crime legislation. We've just become accustomed. I mean, you mentioned specifically the problem in
Scotland. And seriously, it relates very closely to what you're saying, because the SMP, who are the
only really party with any clout in Scotland, that's the Scottish National Party. And it's never a
good idea, is it, when you have one political party, which doesn't really have an opposition.
They have a reputation for quite nanny, statious policies. They introduced a,
what was it called, the named person scheme. It didn't go through in the end, but they wanted to
assign every child born in Scotland with a state guardian. They effectively didn't trust
the parents to raise their own kids. They have other examples, minimum pricing on alcohol or
ban on two-for-one pizzas, because they don't trust poor people not to gain weight. So all
sorts of these sorts of policies. But in this current hate crime bill, which has just sailed
through because there's no opposition, Humza Youssef, the justice secretary, has pushed through,
he specifically included an element to this bill, which says that they can criminalize you for things
you say in the privacy of your own home. I mean, that's just a given. I would have never thought
that anyone in this country would not consider that to be an incredible invasion on individual
liberty. You can make a strong case for Scotland as the ground zero for many of the, developing
many of the concepts that undergird the entire Western notion of freedom. And to see that emerging
in Scotland is absolutely stunningly terrifying, as far as I'm concerned.
Think of Mill Gibson with a face covered in woad shouting freedom as he's executed in that
in Braveheart. You do think of Scotland as being associated with it, but honestly,
Scotland for some reason, and I don't know what it is, and it might be to do that it's
effectively this one party state, it seems to have this incredible sense. And they've really
brought into this idea that unless they can police the thought and speech of their citizens,
then they will just run a run a mock. It's there's another element to that bill. I don't
know if you know about this. There's a specific element on the bill, which talks about the public
performance of a play. So they've effectively said that they will criminalize public performances.
So say if it can be deemed that those performances were designed to stir up hatred, that's the
formulation stir up hatred. I'm not quite sure what that means necessarily. But the when when
Humza Yousef was questioned about this in parliament, he actually said, well, theoretically a neo Nazi
or someone from the far right could get together with a group of actors and put on a play to to
recruit people to his cause. And as I said at the time, you know, I don't know any neo Nazis,
but they're not into amateur dramatics. That's not their thing. They don't do that. They wouldn't
get involved. And yet he's got this idea in his head that that is a feasible. I mean, it seems
ridiculous. But it's not really because the ramifications are quite a quite serious. And
the way it's just gone through without any opposition really, really troubles me. I mean,
there have been modifications, I should say, in fairness. In the initial bill in the initial
draft of the bill, they had said that you could be criminalized irrespective of intention. In
other words, yes, if that was terrifying, awful. And you know, if you wrote a play that then
stimulated someone to join the far right, then you were still responsible whether you intended
it or not. Now the problem is, you know, with theatrical representation or any kind of artistic
representation is sometimes you want to represent the worst aspects of humanity.
Because that's part of drama and literature and all the rest of it. I mean, you would be,
there would be no artistic freedom if that went through. So fortunately,
that element of the bill was modified. Well, and also the attempt to reverse the idea that intent
is important is that's even that's even more catastrophic. It's always been a miracle to me
that our legal system ever became psychologically sophisticated enough so that intent rather than
outcome was what mattered. Because you have to be a sophisticated thinker to see that someone has
done damage to someone else. But and so the damage is real and market and troublesome and costly,
all of that painful. But because the intent wasn't there, the severity of the action is
dramatically mitigated. That's a sign of maturity and sophistication to note that. And the fact
that it's built into the legal system is nothing short of remarkable. And then to remove that and to
make the felt consequences, the arbiter of the reality of the situation is
a dreadful assault on the integrity of the law as such, as far as I can tell.
Well, moreover, it's something that everyone intuitively understands. We all understand
the difference between murder and manslaughter. You know, we all understand that intent actually
does, like you say, escalate the severity of a crime. And it's bigger than that, isn't it?
Because this idea that intention doesn't matter is actually built into
so much of this what we call social justice discourse. If you think of critical race theory,
it's just a given that there are racist structures and you can be racist without
intending to be racist. And I really do dispute that, because I think in order to be racist,
intention has to be at the heart of that. Otherwise, it's incoherent to me. But this is really
a degraded view of humanity, I feel, where we are effectively like marionettes,
and that we're just being played, and that we don't have any agency anymore. And therefore,
we can't be responsible for our own words, not just our actions. We can't be responsible for our
own words and the ramifications. So we have to be controlled and we have to be stifled by the
state. And it makes me very nervous. So I've been thinking through the importance of free speech,
I suppose, from a psychological perspective. And it seems to me that, well, we can walk
through some axioms and you can tell me what you think about them, if you would. So I mean,
the first thing we might posit is that it's useful to think. It's better to think than not to think.
That might seem self-evident, but thought can be troublesome and stir up trouble,
and your thoughts can be inaccurate. So it's perhaps not that unreasonable to start the questioning
there. But I think it was Alfred North-Whitehead who said that thinking allows our thoughts to die
instead of us. And so he was thinking about the evolution of thought in some sense from a biological
perspective. So imagine a creature that's incapable of thought has to act something out,
a representation of the world or an intent. It has to be embodied. And then if that fails,
well, it fails in action. And so the consequence of that might be death. It might be very severe.
Whereas once you can think, you can represent the world abstractly, you can divorce the
abstraction from the world, and then you can produce avatars of yourself, sometimes in the
image like in dreams, let's say, or in literature and fiction and movies and so on, produce avatars
of ourselves that are fictional, and then run them as simulations in the abstract world and
observe the consequences. And we do that in our stories. We do that when we dream. We do that when
we imagine in images and depict a dramatic scenario playing itself out. But then we also do that in
words because we encode those images. It's one more level of abstraction. We encode those images
into words, and those words become partial dramatic avatars, and then the words can battle
with one another. So thought seems to work, let's say verbal thought. You ask yourself a question.
You receive an answer in some mysterious manner. There's an internal revelation of sorts. That's
the spontaneous thought. When you sit down to write a book, thoughts come to you, perhaps because
you pose yourself a question. And no one knows how that works, but we experience it, that thoughts
manifest themselves in the theater of our imagination. So that's the revelatory aspect. And then
there's the critical aspect, which is, well, now you've thought this and perhaps you've written it
down. Can you generate counter positions? Are there universes that you can imagine where this
doesn't apply? Are there situations where it doesn't apply? Are there better ways of formulating that
thought? But I would say with regard to critical thought, and to some degree with regard to productive
thought, an indeterminate proportion of that is dependent on speech. I don't think it's unreasonable
to point out that thought is internalized speech, and that the dialectical process that constitutes
critical thinking is internalized speech. So you and I are engaging in a dialectic enterprise.
You'll pause at something and I'll respond to it and you'll respond to that. And we're in a kind
of combat. There's some cooperation about it as well. And we're attempting to formulate a truth
more clearly, at least in principle, if we're being honest. We do that when we're speaking.
So our thought, the quality of our thought is actually dependent on our ability to speak
our minds. Absolutely. And then, so go ahead. Well, I couldn't agree more because I think
speech is the way in which we collaborate on our thoughts. That's how it works. You
refine those thought processes that you've described. I mean, I'm no psychologist, but I
understand this basic premise that we have these various thoughts that are continually in conflict
within ourselves, unless we're able to articulate them and to engage in others through that process,
through that transactional process of speech, then those thoughts are never refined and they
remain in this kind of infancy. And this is why- Yes, well, they're as refined as we can make them
as individuals. But that's also assuming that you even have the words, which you also learned
in the dialectical process. Right, exactly. It's not as though the truth is ever fully graspable,
but we can get nearer to it through that collaborative process of speaking and
articulating the thoughts. And in fact, even in the act of, like you say, writing or articulating
yourself, with your self-authoring program, for instance, the act of writing things out
is what clarifies the points of view for you. I've actually found that the way that I think
about these issues now is largely a product of the fact that I've written so much about it.
And changed my mind through the act of learning how to express myself on these points. And the
consequence of not having that opportunity, I think, is something I would barely want to
contemplate. And I think to give an example of the moment, which is that because any kind of
attempt to have a discussion or debate about the perceived conflict between trans rights and gender
critical feminism, because to even attempt that discussion at the moment will have such
grave social consequences. And certainly in terms of career prospects, major consequences,
people will not have that discussion. I have people I know in politics, in the media, and they
say to me quite honestly, I will not talk about this. I have concerns, I have qualms, I want answers
to questions, but I absolutely will not open my mouth about this. And if you don't do that,
that this is why no one understands the issue. This is why no one has reached any kind of consensus
on this issue. All we have is a sense in which to have the quote unquote wrong opinion makes you a
pariah. And therefore I better not have that opinion. Well, then that's not a sincerely held
conviction. That's just that's just if the definition of wrong is continually transforming
and in an unpredictable manner, then it's best just to sidestep the issue entirely. And then
that leaves it murky and ill defined and assuming that you believe that thought has any utility.
And so when you're sitting down to write, when I'm sitting down to write,
and I produce a sentence, you know, it might have come from some theoretical perspective,
maybe I'm approaching something from a Freudian perspective or a Marxist perspective or a
enlightenment perspective, etc. I mean, it's a psychological trope, I suppose, that
we all think the thoughts of dead philosophers, right? We think we have our own opinions, but
that's really very, very, very, very rarely the case. It's not that easy to come up with something
truly original and generally make incremental progress at best. And so your ability to abstractly
represent the world and then to generate avatars that can be defeated without you dying is dependent
on your incorporation of a multitude of opinions. And that in itself is a consequence of
I mean, that works to the degree that communication is actually free and that you can get access to
as much thought as you can possibly manage. So I can't see how you can deny the centrality
of free speech as a fundamental right or the fundamental right, perhaps,
unless you simultaneously deny the utility of thought. But maybe if you are also inclined to
remove the individual from the central position of the political discourse, then maybe you can also
make the case at least implicitly that individual thought doesn't matter and that mostly it's just
causing trouble. But I think individual thought is key. And actually, even in the outline you've
described there, there is individual agency in reaching a conclusion that has been articulated
before insofar as if you are engaged with a multitude of writers and philosophers and
artists and ideas and you've come out with a perspective. Well, that perspective may not
be original to you, but the process that you've gone through to reach that viewpoint is individual
to you. There is a power in that. There's something important about that.
No, there's something crucial. If you're a practicing psychotherapist, one of the things
you have to learn is to not provide people with your words too much. What you want is for them
to formulate the conclusion. And you can guide them through the process of investigation. You
talked about the self-authoring process, which is online at selfauthoring.com, that it steps people
say through the process of writing an autobiography, of analyzing their current virtues and faults and
making a future plan. The utility of all of that is dependent on the person who's
undertaking the exercise, generating their own verbal representations. And that seems to cement
it somehow as yours if you've come up with the words. And so it's the uppermost expression of
personhood, the ability to have the words that you should speak reveal themselves to you and to
have the right to express them as you see fit. Yes. In which case, if you are merely repeating
an accepted script, then to what extent can you even say to be an individual at all?
I think that's part of the philosophical conundrum is that if you believe that all people do is repeat
predigested scripts, especially if your view is that the fundamental human motivation is power
and the entire social landscape is nothing but a competition between equally,
what would you say, selfish and single-minded power strivers, then there is no individual.
There's no individual in that conceptual world. And it seems to me that that's the world that
we're being pushed to inhabit and are criticized for on moral grounds for criticizing. And I'm
still trying to get my hands around this. I mean, when I went to Britain, I saw the CTTV cameras
and the increased security, and it isn't clear to me how that's related to the social justice issues
that so-called social justice issues that we're discussing. But they seem to me in some very
difficult to comprehend way, part and parcel of the same thing, the same dangerous thing.
Well, I think it's probably connected just in terms of this distrust of humanity or this
belief that people need to be shepherded, otherwise left to their own devices, chaos will reign.
I think that's the connection. It's not directly connected as far as the issues relating to liberty
and CTTV, obviously predate what we now call whatever the current social justice movement
is called. But I think there is something there. I mean, the censorship, the impulse
to censor what people read, and this is something that particularly hits home to me in the arts,
is based on this view that ultimately the people are or the populace is liable to corruption
if they're exposed to the wrong materials. And what's very interesting to me about that,
I mean, you've written a lot about the way in which literature, for instance, informs our
experiences because it is, in a sense, like when you read philosophers, you're feeling your way
through other lives and other experiences that are trans-historical and cross-cultural,
and they inform the way that you react in your own individual experience. But if you start to say,
as an artist, no, you can only represent for a start what you personally are or have experienced,
and you cannot represent anything which is morally problematic to use the phrase that they
absolutely adore, then art fails to, and literature in particular, fails to function in the way that
it should because you can't explore those things. This is why I often, when it comes to censorship
of the arts, I often go back to what Oscar Wilde said about this. He said, there's no such thing
as a moral or an immoral book. Books are well written or badly written. That is all. And that
actually art and morality sometimes are not, in other words, art shouldn't just be about promoting
whatever the ethical trend is of any given time. It's much bigger than that.
Well, it's not art at that point at all. As far as I'm concerned, if you can state the purpose
of the art in explicit terms, especially if it's in accordance with, let's say, an ideology that's
shared by a multitude of people, it's not art at all. It's propaganda.
It's totally banal. I mean, this is why so many people are getting sick of Hollywood,
I mean, to bring it down to a different level, that people are sick of the entertainment on their
TV, on their streaming services, and on Hollywood, because they have this constant feeling that they're
being hectic by some moralistic person in a studio saying, you know, our focus here is on
diversity, our focus here is on the right moral message, that the message of the story is one
that would be approved by a group of intersectional activists, and you get this all the time seeping
into mainstream entertainment, and people get really, really sick of it. It's not that when
you see a lesbian kiss in Star Wars, that that offends you because you're a homophobe, most
sci-fi fans, they've never had a problem with diversity or anything like that. What bothers
them about it is this sense of someone saying to them, we think you're all evil bigots and you
need to be educated, and that's why we're going to shoehorn in a lesbian kiss into the end of this
film. That's why people have a problem. I mean, you had it yourself recently with that ludicrous
Marvel comics thing, where you became the Red Skull, and that to me was a perfect example of the
banality of an artistic endeavor that becomes an exercise in political pedagogy, because that
was quite clearly, I mean, you couldn't even say it was satirical, because it cannot be satirically
effective if the thing that they are comparing you to is the precise opposite of the thing you
believe. I mean, of all the sort of public figures I can think of, you have the most clear track
record of opposing tyranny in all its forms, which anyone who knows anything about your work will
know. You've spent years lecturing about the evils of authoritarianism, including Nazism. So the idea
that you would then become this super magic Nazi is propagandistic. It's totally banal artistically.
Firstly, you can't, it's not satirically, right? But also it's just, it's just, it's just,
do you know what it reminds me of? Actually, I don't know if you, if you remember after the Fatwa
against Salman Rushdie, there was a film made in Pakistan called International Gorillaz,
where they turned Salman Rushdie into this evil villain playboy who was colluding with the
Israeli military services. And at the end of the film, these flying copies of the Quran float down
and shoot laser beams into his head and kill him off. But it, and that is such a ridiculous,
laughable film, you know, you put your enemy as the main villain, and you just misrepresent him
in that way. Well, that's just what they did to you. It's as banal as that. And that's, I think
people are sick of that. Well, the response thankfully seems to indicate that, you know, it
didn't, did people, it didn't do me any harm as far as I can tell. I mean, it was very
shocking to me that it happened. It took me about 12 hours to sort of regain my composure,
because I actually couldn't believe it to begin with. I was sure that it was a fabrication,
especially, but then it was even more shocking when I found out who had authored it. You know,
it wasn't, it was someone who had an intellectual reputation. And so.
But he's an activist, isn't he? He's a, he's an intersectional activist.
He definitely, his opinions definitely place him on the radical,
on the side of the radical left. So it's very difficult to, so there's an attack on
the essence of free speech. I mean, I remember reading Derrida. Derrida criticized our culture,
Western culture as phallogocentric. Yeah. And it's really actually quite a precise word.
So the phallic part of it is masculine, obviously related to the phallus to the,
and logos is, well, that's the central concept of Greek rationalism,
but it's also the central concept of Christianity. And the logos is
something like the magical power of genuine and true speech. It's something like that. And
there are representations of the magical power of speech that predate Greece and Christianity.
You see it in Mesopotamia that this, the equivalent to the savior and ancient Mesopotamian
religious thinking was Marduk and he could speak magic words. He had eyes all the way around his
head, which meant that he paid attention to everything, but he could speak magic words. And
and so that idea of the centrality of speech to the, and its association with the very fabric of
reality, that's been an idea that has strived to make itself manifest for thousands and thousands
of years. I mean, in the Judeo-Christian tradition, in the biblical tradition, the word is given
cosmological status as the thing that brings habitable order out of chaos and it's identified
with divinity itself. And so the assault on free speech is an assault on a principle that's
fundamental beyond, say, its centrality, its central importance to the enlightenment.
And it's an assault on the, on the idea of the logos itself.
I agree. This is why I always mistrusted the, the post-structuralist. So when I was studying
for English, it was the Derrida and Foucault and Lyotard and these were taken as a given and this
idea that there's no, there is no truth beyond language, you know, language is all language,
the way in which we construct our perception of reality and our perception of truth. And
and that actually there is no truth at the heart of it. I just found it so depressing,
depressingly pessimistic because it also means that you construct, can construct any kind of
reality you like and it, and it also. Well, maybe that's part of the motivation for it is
the, the hypothetical lack of constraint by anything that that seems to imply, right? I mean,
if there's no canonical reality, while there's no responsibility, that's for sure. You could
argue that there's no meaning and it's deeply pessimistic, but maybe the payoff for that is no
responsibility, but there's also no constraint of any sort. There's certainly no ethical constraint
and I mean, I keep trying to dig to see what's at the bottom of this, this anti-logo sentiment and
it's a very, it's a very difficult thing to make to get right. Maybe it's not even as deliberate as
the way that it sounds. Maybe it is just the fact that that these theories for whatever reason became
fashionable in universities about 20 years ago and now for whatever reason they have
escaped into the mainstream and, and you know, I mean, most of the people that push this stuff
don't read Foucault and they don't know about the people whose ideas they've, they've imbibed and
actually very much misunderstood. You know, I mean, the whole point of the postmodernist was to,
to, to, to trash the notion of grand narratives and what we have now in the social justice movement
is an incredible grand narrative. You know, we are, we are on the right side of history. We are the
righteous ones and everyone else needs to be, you know, decimated and it's, it's, it seems to me
that this stuff, I don't think it's as conspiratorial as that. I think it's just sort of
circumstances of history, one thing after another and this is where we're at now,
but the end result that we have to deal with, which I think you've alluded to is this idea
that if there is no such thing as reality beyond language, then you are at liberty to, to construct
whatever a pseudo reality that you desire or is easiest for you. And we see elements of this
reverberating, I think in a lot of the discourse at the moment of things like lived experience,
you know, you can present as much data as you want, but it will be disregarded if it doesn't
tally with what lived experience really means, which is what I want to be true. Well, there's
also this insistence that seems part of it that, I mean, I objected to some legislation that was
passed in Canada and that's sort of what propelled me into public visibility, let's say.
And to begin with, I was mostly concentrating on the violation of the principle of free speech
that the legislation seemed to me to represent because it compelled certain utterances and
I was never a fan of hate speech laws to begin with. And, and this was something beyond hate
speech laws because hate speech laws stop you from saying things, whereas compelled speech laws
force you to say something which is much worse, even though the first one is also
inadvised, ill-advised as far as I'm concerned. But I've realized more recently that I was also
disturbed, although in a less explicit manner, with the theory of identity that was an implicit
part of the legislation. So with gender identity, for example, and we're engaged in a discussion
across our culture about gender identity, I mean, I know as a personality psychologist that
there are females, biological females who have masculine personalities and there are
biological males who have feminine personalities, that the link between personality as such and,
biological structure is suggestive, but not absolute. And there's a lot of variability.
But the idea that identity is something that you define yourself and that you can change
at will at any point seems to me to be entirely counterproductive and dangerous because it's
inaccurate. So your identity isn't merely your membership in whatever group you happen to identify
with at that moment. It's certainly not merely your sexuality or merely your race. In fact,
your identity is barely your race because your identity is something more like
how you conduct yourself in the world. And if you define yourself as black, let's say,
that doesn't give you much of a map to encountering and approaching the world. It's nowhere near
detailed enough. And then the idea that you define it, I've been thinking about that a lot,
you never define your identity by yourself. You can't because you're surrounded by other people
and they have to play along with you. And if they don't play along with you voluntarily,
which means they appreciate the quality of your game and they understand it, then you're either
going to be alienated or you have to impose your identity by force. But that's also not a very good
solution. I mean, I just spent some time interviewing one of the world's foremost authorities on
aggression and that'll be released in a bit. Perhaps it's been released before this will be
released. He's done longitudinal studies of aggression. And if the idea that our social
structures are predicated on power was true, then children would start out not being aggressive and
they would become more aggressive with time. And the more aggressive children would be more
successful. And none of that is true. Children start out more aggressive than they are on average
by the time their adults. Aggression levels decrease with age rather than increasing. And
there's no evidence whatsoever that it's a useful long term strategy in the social world.
Identity is something you negotiate the way you negotiate a game. It has to be that way.
There's something rather sinister, isn't there, about the way in which present day identity
politics is about imposition onto others, rather than an assertion of who I am or whatever that
might be. I mean, I always mistrusted it. And so I can see the utility of identity politics,
politically speaking, in scenarios where people are marginalized. You know, I understand why gay
people collectively came together back in the 60s to fight for their rights, because there was
obviously a serious problem or the civil rights movement in Northern Ireland in the 60s and 70s
and that kind of thing, where Catholics weren't able to have the vote or to get housing. So that
sort of makes sense to me. The current identity politics are what we might call identitarians.
A lot of it strikes me as about power. In fact, I feel like they would be an incredible subject
for Foucault if he were alive today, because I've noticed this correlation and a lot of people have
noticed this correlation. And I never get an answer about this. But why is it whenever online,
whenever I'm viciously attacked or threatened, something particularly pernicious,
the person doing it always has their pronouns in their bio or a rainbow gay flag in their bio.
Why is there a correlation that I've experienced again and again? I mean, it's almost inevitable
at this point, between the need to self identify in terms of sexuality and gender, and a kind of
cruelty or viciousness or a need to attack an aggression.
Well, one of the things that disturbs me constantly about ideological representations of
the world, broadly speaking, is that their fundamental danger is that they always contain
a too convenient theory of evil and malevolence. And for me, any theory that locates the fundamental
problem of evil somewhere other than inside you is dangerous. Now, that isn't to say that
social structures can't be corrupted and aren't corrupt. That's an existential problem in and
of itself. It's always the case that our social institutions aren't what they should be and
they're outdated and they're predicated to some degree on deceit. And people who use power can
manipulate them sometimes successfully. That problem never goes away and it never will. But
when the evil can be easily located somewhere else, then you have every moral right to allow your
unexamined motivations to manifest themselves fully because you can punish the evildoers and
always remain on the moral side of the fence. There's a huge attractiveness in that.
I think, I mean, this is something you've explored a lot with the idea of the Solzhenitsyn's
idea about the good and evil cutting through the heart of every human being. Because that, to me,
it really gets to the heart of a lot of what I would call a kind of infantile culture. I think
this is a symptom of childishness. Whenever I was learning about literature and what
constituted more sophisticated literature and what didn't, Disney films, childish films,
let's take Tolkien, for instance, good people look, sorry, bad people look bad, they look like
orcs, they're ugly, and they are villains, and then there are heroes and they are good,
there isn't complexity. And if you have a more complex novel, like a Mervyn Peake novel where
people aren't necessarily good or bad, they're both, they struggle within themselves and with
other people, that is a mark of a kind of adult novel as opposed to a childish novel, right? And
that's quite an important distinction. And I think most of the political and ideological battles
that I find myself in the middle of, and I'm sure you do as well, are because people are just
reducing everything to this binary of good versus evil and putting themselves on the side of good.
It is a very infantile, almost like a caricature of religion. And I see it again and again,
we had it in this country with the Brexit vote, effectively, what happened in the vote here.
And the reason why it became so toxic and families fell apart, and you wouldn't believe,
I know it wasn't reported very much elsewhere, but it was like a kind of ideological civil war
here, but not a very sophisticated one, because it came down to this narrative that if you voted
to leave the EU, you were evil, racist, stupid. And if you voted to remain, you were good and
progressive, and all the rest and noble and virtuous, right? And of course, there are all
sorts of good reasons to have voted either way. And this kind of caricature, and it happens again
with... Well, you described it as a caricature of religion. And I think that's what an ideology is.
And this is one of the reasons that I've been inclined, let's say, to go to have my shot at the
rational atheists, much as I'm a fan of enlightenment thinking. I mean, I was convinced,
as a consequence of reading Jung primarily, but also Dostoevsky and also Nietzsche primarily,
and Solzhenitsyn, I would say, as well, that... And then biology as well, as I studied that more
deeply. There's no escaping a religious framework. There's no way out of it. And if you eliminate it,
say, as a consequence of rational criticism, what you inevitably produce is its replacement by
forms of religion that are much less sophisticated. I mean...
Well, it's not religion. It's a fundamentalist religion. You know, if I look back to my Catholic
upbringing, actually acknowledging your own capacity for sin is at the heart of Catholicism.
That's why we have the confessional. That's why you sit there and tell this stranger all these
things you've done wrong. Because it's reckoning with it. Well, that's far from trivial. It's
unbelievably not trivial. And because it was so common, like a common part of Catholicism,
it can be passed over without notice. And so the religious structures that we inherited,
I'm going to talk about Christianity most specifically, because it's the dominant form of...
It's the form of religious belief that primarily undergirds our social structures.
It's our operating system. My producer came up with that term the other day, and I thought it was
apt. And it does localize the drama between good and evil inside and makes you responsible for that
and encourages you, let's say, to attend to the ways that you fall short of the ideal. And
when you criticize a structure like that out of existence, you don't criticize the questions that
gave rise to it out of existence. And the questions might be, well, what's the nature of the good?
What's the nature of evil? Those are religious questions. What's the purpose of our life?
How do you orient yourself if you're trying to move up, let's say, rather than down?
How should you conduct yourself, et cetera, et cetera? Those questions don't go away.
They can't not be answered. And so the way that a traditional religious structure answers them is,
in a mysterious way, it uses ritual, it uses music, it uses art, it uses literature, it uses
stories, all these things that are outside the realm of easy criticism. And then some of that's
translated into comprehensible, explicit dogma, and that's the part that's most susceptible to
rational criticism. But when that disappears, I've been thinking about this a lot this week,
because of what happened to Richard Dawkins recently. And I have my differences with Dawkins
and the rest of the rational atheists, because I think that they underestimated the danger of
dispensing with what they were attempting to dispense with. And I see the influx of religious
fervor associated with political ideas as a direct consequence of the lack of separation,
let's say, between church and state, psychologically.
But Dawkins has fallen foul of this new religion, but his case actually really is
testimony to what we're talking about, that this is not a religion in a traditional sense,
it is an infantile religion that only sees things in binaries of good and evil, because
he was effectively, he was posing a question about identity. He was saying, if it is possible for
Rachel Dollazal to identify as black, why is she universally condemned and derided,
but somebody can identify as the opposite sex, and they are celebrated. And all he was doing
was posing the question, he wasn't even actually making a claim.
Yeah, well, he was doing, he was doing what a scientist actually does. I mean, I've been shocked
frequently in my interactions with journalists, because I've worked as a scientist for three
decades, and I'm accustomed to the way that scientists think and speak. And when I'm sitting
around with my graduate students, and there's a problem or an issue, what they do, and my colleagues
as well, is generate a bunch of hypotheses about why that might be. They don't necessarily believe
them, but the first trick is to generate as many, what would you say, hypotheses, I said that already,
that might account for it, ranging from biological through social, etc.
And that is exactly what Dawkins did. He even said that's what he was doing.
That puts you on the side of the devil. I mean, there was a viral tweet this week from a teacher
saying, I will never allow my pupils to play devil's advocate. I will never allow that in the
class, because some views are oppressive and are not to be entertained. I mean,
but that's the point. That's why the Vatican will call in a devil's advocate when someone is
potentially being canonized. Well, if you can't play devil's advocate, you can't think.
You have to have a devil's advocate in your head. If you don't have a devil's advocate in your head
torturing every thought you generate, you're not engaged in critical thinking.
Right. That's the scientific process to disprove yourself. I mean, that's what surprises me about
Richard Dawkins' response, because I think what he didn't realize is that he was caught in this
good versus evil binary, and he was the heretic now. He had been branded. He posed the question,
you're not meant to pose. And therefore, he's now outed himself as one of the demons. He's
there in pandemonium with the other demons. Now, so then he, of course, backtracked and
apologized and said, well, I didn't want to offend anyone. And of course, in an adult
rational world, that would be taken in good faith. And I don't think he fully appreciates
what's going on here, is that he's already marked himself as the sinner.
Well, here's his apology, let's say. Now, what he should have said, as far as I'm concerned,
here's what he said. I do not intend to disparage trans people. I see that my academic
disgust question has been misconstrued as such, and I deplore this. It was also not my attempt to
ally in any way with Republican bigots in the US now exploiting this issue. And so it's so interesting
that that's what he did, because- Well, it's buying into the tribalism thing. You know-
Well, it's also, it's not the best response to defend him. What he should have said was something
like, look, people, here's something to think about that I was posing. That's what scientists do.
And you didn't understand that, but that's not my problem. It's your lack of sophistication. But
instead of saying that, he immediately removed himself from the bad people, and that was the
Republican bigots, which just seems to me to pour fuel on the fire. And then he also said
that he didn't intend to disparage trans people, which isn't the issue at all.
Well, also, there was no implication in what he asked that he had ever intended to disparage
trans people. But to be fair to him, to be fair to him, I understand when you're caught in the
middle of a Twitter storm, you just want it to stop. And I've heard you talk about this as well,
is actually your response probably isn't going to be the best one. You just wanted to go away.
No, well, look, I mean, one of the things that's really worth pointing out here, and it's not
like I don't have sympathy for Dawkins. I have sympathy for Dawkins. I sent out a tweet defending
him yesterday. I mean, Dawkins is an admirable scientist. In my estimation, I learned lots from
reading his books. That doesn't mean I don't have my criticisms of Dawkins. But just because you have
criticisms of someone doesn't mean that they've never done anything worthwhile or that you haven't
learned something from them. And that's especially true in the scientific realm.
I just don't understand why. Okay, so back to the Twitter issue. So what I've seen repeatedly,
and this is worth some discussion, is when I'm watching Twitter, when I'm watching these attacks
on people, what I've seen the most general pattern of response to be is that it doesn't take very
many people attacking you on Twitter before it's seriously psychologically disturbing.
And that is interestingly related to this whole issue of hate speech that we've been discussing,
because it is the case that vicious attacks have quite a pronounced psychological effect,
especially if they're personal. And people generally fold and apologize instantly if my
sense is being if the Twitter mob is 20 people. It's sort of like they're reacting to 20 of their
neighbors showing up on their doorsteps with pitchforks and torches. And I think it's actually
an admirable response in some sense, because a well-socialized person actually does care what
their neighbors think. And if you offend 20 of your neighbors, it's possible 20 of your tribe,
it's possible that you've done something wrong. You might ask yourself that. Now, on Twitter,
you're connected to hundreds of thousands of people. And if you would offend 20,
it's not clear what that means. It might just mean that you said something.
It feels a lot worse than it actually is as well. It feels amplified, because there's all these people
who are strangers who know absolutely nothing about you. And it's particularly frustrating,
because more often than not, when it's happened to me, it's always been an imagined grievance.
It's not actually something I've said, it's something that they've assumed that I've said,
or a way that they have interpreted this. And the more you try and fight back against it,
or try and explain your actual position, the more they double down on their, and you've had this
as well, people are going after a figment of their own imagination, that's impossible to fend off.
And it does do psychological harm. And I've never denied that. And this is something I
addressed in the book, because I quoted, I can't remember her name now, but a writer talking about
how hate speech could be said to be violence, insofar as the psychological impact can have,
it can have a physiological impact, it can make you sick, it can make you unwell, the impact of
words. But of course, the example I use is taxation, I could fall physically sick, because I'm
under stress from being overly taxed by the government. Does that mean that the government
has committed an act of violence against me? It could be applied to absolutely anything, I think.
Well, an anarchist would argue yes.
Right, sure, exactly. But that wouldn't be me. But you could apply that to absolutely any
conceivable scenario, where anything that has happened to you has led to stress and physical
degeneration. And so I don't think it's right to single speech out and say,
speech is, but we can say that that's fine. Well, also, it's a one-sided argument, because
dangerous as speech, free speech is, we don't ever have to deny that there's such a thing as
hateful speech or damaging speech or corrosive speech or untruth speech or pathological speech
in every possible direction. That isn't the issue. The issue is, what's more dangerous to
regulate it or to leave it be, despite its dangers? That's the only rational argument,
or the only complete argument, let's say. Even if you have the most repugnant character who is
advocating the most vile ideas about society and attempting to proselytise even someone who's
attempting to recruit people to his or her cause, even something as vicious as neo-Naziism or something
like that, the question isn't, do I support what that person is saying? Because obviously,
we don't. The question is, do you take a few instances of people behaving in this way and use
that as a reason, a justification to empower the state to make a decision about what people
can say and think? That's the bigger principle that's at stake here. I worry that with social
media and Twitter as well, is that we end up buying into the illusion that there are more
hateful people in the world than there actually are, because even the people who send these hateful
things probably wouldn't behave like that in real life. There's something about the online world,
and what it does is absolutely, I mean, this is the heart of cancel culture. This is why it works.
Like you said, it's just a few tweets. That's all it takes. I've seen situations where companies
and corporations will backtrack on a policy just because of one or two tweets, because they fear
this deluge of people. It has such disproportionate power, and often with this kind of
cancel culture, it is often about something that someone hasn't even said. The example of Dawkins
is perfect, because a lot of the people and some prominent people I saw were saying, look,
Dawkins is now outed himself as a transphobe. If you said to them, where is the transphobic thing?
You him today, you tomorrow, buckle. Well, quite, because if someone is transphobic,
simply because you've decided that. It was the same with JK Rowling. It became suddenly
quite normal for commentators on the mainstream media to say that she has said transphobic things.
Well, where? Because I've read her comments and her essay on the trans issue that she posted on
her blog, and it was a long essay, which was very compassionate and nuanced, and at no point,
it's the opposite. She says that she supports trans rights, and she would stand there against
any discrimination. And I've been in these fights all the time. If ever you ask someone to say,
can you just quote the transphobic thing that she said, they never can? And an adult would say,
okay, I can't find the evidence of my preconception, so therefore I should revise
my view. But they don't. They double down on it, and they find these sort of, they use
casuistry and whatever linguistic semantic tricks they can to come background to the
conclusion they'd already decided. Same with Dawkins. I mean, not just the American Humanist
Association. I saw a major blogger saying that anyone who was defending him is transphobic.
And like, well, if that's all it takes to be smeared in this way, if it doesn't matter what you
say, if all that matters is what people decide that you believe, then I suppose this goes back
to this pseudo reality we were discussing. Well, I guess what Dawkins got in trouble for,
let's take it apart a bit, okay? Because it's worth doing. He said, this is his original tweet,
in 2015, Rachel Dolezal, a white chapter president of NAACP, was vilified for identifying as black.
Some men choose to identify as women, and some women choose to identify as men. You will be
vilified if you deny that they literally are what they identify as. Discuss. Okay, so we put
forth a set of propositions, but the proposition has a point. And the point is, what is it that you
can and can't identify with? And what power do people have to enforce their decision on others?
And that's really the question he's asking if you strip it down. And that is actually a question
that's very threatening to, well, let's see, who would it be threatening to? Well, it would be
threatening to anyone who insists that you can choose an identity, say, in the realm of gender,
and that you should have the right to enforce your choice, despite other people's opinions,
let's say. So he's asking, why is there an inherent contradiction in the intersectional
discourse? Why is it that racial identity is not malleable, and in fact has to be strictly
policed? Hence why we have all these debates about cultural appropriation. Why is that so rigid?
And yet, even if the lived experience, let's go back to that, the lived experience of the person
tells them otherwise. I mean, Rachel Dollazelle wrote a whole book in which she outlines how she
feels that she has always been black. It isn't just, I choose to be black one day, it is something
her lived experience is that, in essence, she is. So why is that to be vilified universally
without question and there's no discussion to be had here? And yet, someone who chooses,
you know, that gender identity is something that is malleable and open to options and actually
infinite options. Why? And I think there is a contradiction. Well, maybe he's vilified because
he asked a question that's at the heart of the problem with identity politics, period. I mean,
particularly because when it comes to race, I mean, virtually all intersectionists would accept
that race is socially constructed. This is something they're always talking about. And so
therefore, in a sense, there is more of a case for transracialism. If you want to say that it is
an identity that can be mixed. Well, in some sense, we already accept transracialism as a given. And
so here's something I might as well get in trouble for this. Well, if your ancestry is 95% Caucasian
and 5% non Caucasian Asian black, let's say, you're not Caucasian. Generally speaking, you can
identify with the minority group. And so at some point, the question becomes, well,
it's a ridiculous question, which is why the whole notion of group identity construed in this way
is so pathological. But we obviously accept some degree of transracial identification if
your racial group is disproportionately in one category, but you identify with the other,
and that's instantly not only accepted, it's standard practice.
Right. And I'm with the intersectionists on this. And so far as race, we're all the same. You know,
at ever since we've broken down the human genome, we know there are no differences between us. So
this idea that it must be so rigidly policed, this social construct, these arbitrary ideas,
and yet gender, I mean, I think it's something. Okay, so now we know why now we know exactly why
Dawkins got himself in so much trouble. Well, okay, you know, put his finger. Well, it will,
for sure, for sure. But magical super Nazis are always in trouble. So you know, exactly. But
then with the question of the gender identity debate, but this is the debate we need to be
having is actually the other thing he put his finger on there is that actually people are arguing
with different definitions in their heads, you know, for the identitarians, the idea of a woman,
a woman is an identity, it isn't a biological reality. But for most people, the classification
of woman is biological reality, not identity. So in other words, and why is it that we cannot
have that discussion? So okay, so you believe this thing, we believe the other. And that's why
we're at loggerheads. But let's let's have the discussion. Why can that not happen? Why does it
have to be if you've decided? Well, that's what we're that's actually what we're trying to unpack
is what's the motivation at the root of this. And it seems to me, I do believe it's something like
a pronounced infantilism. I mean, one of the things I've been toying with is the idea that
the the gender that the demand for gender fluidity in late adolescence, let's say,
is something like the consequence of insufficient fantasy play in childhood.
That that I remember, for example, when my son was little, his sister and her friends
used to dress him up as a fairy princess. They did this with some regularity. And I kind of cast
a dim eye on that. But I thought it through. And, you know, it sort of disturbed me. And then I
thought it through. And I thought, wait a second here, leave the kid alone, leave the girls alone.
He is playing out what it means to be female in dramatic play. And he needs to do that because
otherwise he can't understand what it means to be female. That's how children understand,
that's how adults understand things. For God's sake, we go to a movie and we watch someone play
out of female and we identify with that because otherwise we wouldn't be enjoying the movie and
we get we get a bit of a clue about what it's like to inhabit someone else's skin. So there's
this necessity for play in gender roles and that has to manifest itself. And if the play has been
interrupted, let's say by electronic equipment, for example, or any of the other things that
might be interrupting it, well, maybe that desire comes back with a vengeance later. And I have to
be whoever I say I am. I have to be able to play with this. And well, if it's a developmental
requirement, there's going to be a lot of insistence behind it. And it looks immature and it is because
it should have happened earlier. Most people stabilize their gender identity by the time
they're three or four. But it doesn't always happen. So there is an infantilism in this demand
for fluidity of identity, this insistence that other people play the game that I insist they're
going to play. And then what about the idea that the gender critical feminists would come in and say,
well, the idea of a boy dressing up in a dress, there's nothing inherently female about that or
feminine about that in any case that all of this is a construct anyway. And why can't we let the
kids just some kids are not gender conforming and they can just do what they want. I mean,
the concern I have with the current identity obsessed ideology is that they see a boy in a dress
and they will say, well, he could potentially be a woman. And by doing so are reinforcing the most
conservative views of gender to begin with. And that to me, I'm intuitively against that because
I wasn't a gender conforming. I didn't play football with the other boys. I didn't dress up in
dresses, but I may have done if they were lying around. I find it very odd that this supposedly
progressive radical movement is so dependent on the idea of very, very traditional unyielding
notions of what it is to be male and what it is to be female.
Yeah, but only in the case where the identity is across the sex. So you can be, if you're a man
who believes he's a woman, that's inviolable and has a biological reference point. But if you're
a woman who thinks she's a woman, it doesn't. It's completely malleable. And so that's an
inherent contradiction again. And it's worthy of discussion, surely. And the contradiction
doesn't just go away because you won't allow the conversation to happen, which is a contradiction
gets played out in in actuality if you don't allow it to be dealt with in abstraction.
So then the question is, how do we break through? And I mean, this is something I've been
really, really thinking about is that it isn't no, it's no longer just a matter of trying to
persuade people. It's almost trying to de-radicalize people at this point. How do I explain to
someone the world isn't this fantasy world that you've created in your head, where it's just
it's full of transphones and neo-Nazis and all these and good versus evil. The world is actually
much more complex and nuanced and requires discussion and thought. How do you break through
someone's fantasy so that we can have that discussion? Well, it used to be that you sent
them to the university so they could study humanities. That's the last thing you should do
now. Well, that was the answer. I mean, that was the whole point, right, to to make people more
sophisticated in their conceptions. And in which cases, is it the case that it's over now? If people
were to be educated out of those problems and now that actually the higher education itself has
become so ideologically driven that to go to university means you end up more indoctrinated
than when you went there. What hope is there? I feel like I'm, I sound a bit frustrated here,
but I feel like I'm bashing my head against a brick wall because half, most of the time when
I'm caught in an argument with these ideologues, they are arguing, like I say, with a monster
they've created in their own heads. I'm not the person they think I am. I don't have the values
they think I have. And therefore, the discussion is stymied from the outset. And it does make me
very frustrated. And that's probably the real reason I wrote the book, actually, because I want
I want the idea of free speech to be elevated again as a sacrosanct principle,
so that we can have these conversations and so that people don't get demonized and
attacked for things they don't believe. And so that we can reach some kind of consensus
on these issues that we've been describing, these contentious issues, because when you have an issue
that's particularly tendentious, you, it requires more conversation, it requires more discussion
and more understanding. And I don't think we're getting that at the moment.
Yeah, well, I guess I'm somewhat optimistic about that, because I can see all the possibility that
long form conversations of this sort bring.
Well, there's an appetite for them, isn't there? But is there an appetite for them
from the activists and the ideologues who have seen so much control in our major educational
cultural institutions?
Yeah, I think so. I think so. I think so. I mean, I've been struck by how deep the hunger
how deep the hunger is for for genuine conversation and very much heartened by it.
And so that's a counter movement.
I hope you're right. I just don't see any evidence of that from the people I'm talking about. I
don't see it from the people who will say to educate yourself.
It's another problem too, though, isn't it with Twitter, for example, is that it's never the same
people. And that plays with us psychologically, because of course, we are built to more or less
assume that we're interacting with a continuous community. And we aren't. We're interacting
with a discontinuous community on Twitter. And so we're led astray in our presuppositions constantly.
But it's worse than that. Because it isn't... I know it's different people all the time,
but they all have the same views on absolutely everything. It feels like you're arguing with
the Borg. It feels like just one mind speaking through many, many voices.
Yes, well, it is. Then that's the hallmark of an ideology. It is precisely that.
Then I guess it's a matter of it's certainly and it's a matter of trying to understand the
ideology ever more deeply to see what it's actually focused on.
But I do read their books and I do read their articles and I do try to understand.
I don't believe the people I'm talking about return the favor. They always use the phrase
educate yourself. And what they mean by that is read these select books and digest them uncritically.
That's what they mean by educate yourself. They don't mean read widely and tackle the
various views and come to a conclusion yourself. The last thing they want is critical thought.
Critical thought is the enemy. Ironically, it's the enemy of critical theory.
No, it's a hallmark of white supremacy culture as far as I can see, right?
That's what they say. But that's what they claim.
It's amazing too to see that set of ideas propagate itself across the culture so quickly.
The Canadian federal government in its diversity, inclusivity and equity training program
now uses those concepts like associating white supremacy with punctuality, for example.
They use those in the training of their civil servants. It's been accepted wholeheartedly to
that degree. I've seen them. I've seen the screenshots that often get leaked of these
training sessions and it bullet pointed hallmarks of white supremacy, punctuality,
politeness, hard work. Perfectionism.
Yeah. All these noble things. I'm thinking, well, if I was a person of color, I would be
outraged by this, this idea that this is a culture that's alien to me. It's so offensive.
But so absurd. You can hardly mount an argument against it. I mean,
conscientiousness is a personality trait and there's no racial differences in conscientiousness.
Right. And it wouldn't matter to me. If it was just a few idiots on Twitter or these extreme,
it wouldn't matter to me, but these people have disproportionate power, institutional power,
political power. I mean, the Biden administration is on side with an awful lot of this kind of stuff
and the end point. So is the Trudeau government. I mean, to have this in the training documentation
that's produced by the federal government is just absolutely stunning. It's also the document
that I was referring to. I tweeted about it yesterday. It's so badly written that it's
stunning. It's maddening with him. And how is it he's got away with his history of blackface,
for instance? How is it that there is no consistency there? Like, you know, it's
lack of effective opposition is a big part of it. It's insane. I mean, if you look at those old
videos, it looks like he spent more time in blackface than out of it. And yet he isn't the one
who's being attacked and vilified for that. It's okay. He's got a free pass. It's weird to me.
Yeah, well, the opposition in Canada, and this is a problem in general, is a real problem for
our entire culture, is that the woke narrative is very romantically attractive. It's got this
rebelliousness about it and this impetus to go out and march in the streets and, you know, to
work on a global cause. And like traditional conservatives and even traditional liberals
can't mount a counter narrative. They don't have the imagination. And it's a huge problem.
The trouble is, though, the cause that they're fighting for is largely illusory,
and that to me is very frightening. We've had people in this country claim that our major
universities, such as Oxford and Cambridge, are structurally institutionally racist. All of the
data tells us this is just simply not the case. Oh, yes. Well, that's just happening constantly
in Canadian universities. The McGill physics department has now put out a diversity inclusivity
and equity statement that's predicated on exactly those views.
Well, I think we need to push back against this particular hyper-racialization of society,
because it is reinscribing old racial tropes, even to the extent of fear of miscegenation,
this old racist idea of this fear of mixed couples. You know, there was an article in
The Guardian here recently talking about how finding mixed race people attractive is problematic.
It's almost just taking old racist ideas and just giving them a kind of hint of respectability.
Of course, the end point of that is segregation. You saw presumably the story in California,
the Brentwood School, the elite school that segregated its parents, but on their, what was
it, a dialogue session with the teachers, and you would have white parents in one room and
black parents in the other room. You're seeing that in convocation ceremonies at universities, too.
How can this be anything other than racist? It's interesting that the group, Fair, the
group Foundation Against Intolerance and Racism, a lot of those people who are doing great work,
I think, are starting to call this neo-racism. There needs to be a label for it. I think maybe
that's the right way to go about it, because the word racism has almost become meaningless,
because the people who use it the most, they throw it around so liberally. I never believe it when I
hear someone branded that way. I assume it's someone not being honest and not being truthful.
So what do we call this? What do you call it when people are advancing the cause of racial
segregation in the name of anti-racism? What do you call that? I think that's going to be the
real struggle. It's not just breaking through the fantasy world. I don't like this idea of
having to negotiate someone else's dreamland. There's that thing, firstly, but also there's
the linguistic mind fields. How do you convince people? The other reason, I mean, you mentioned
the rebellious aspect of it, I think the other reason why it's so appealing is because the language
sounds like you're doing good. Social justice, anti-racism. Who wouldn't be anti-racist? Black
lives matter. Of course they do. Who would disagree with that? But these phrasing can be used to push
through some very pernicious ideas. I mean, when it comes to anti-racism, for instance, I mean,
Ibrahim X. Kendi makes it absolutely clear in his book that he feels to be not racist is simply
another form of racism, that this dichotomy doesn't exist. Well, and that's why I find it very hard
when I'm having these arguments, because if I say I have a real problem with anti-racism,
people will say, oh, I see. So you're for racism. And then you have to explain what anti-racism means
when used by these academics in these very niche fields such as whiteness studies. You have to
explain first what that means, why that's dangerous for society, and how in order to genuinely oppose
racism, you have to oppose the discourse of anti-racism. I mean, when you say it like that,
it's maddening, isn't it? It's like, it's the stuff of nightmares, because there is no coherent
sense. And because so much of it is rooted in language and misdirection through language and
shielding what is actually meant, it becomes impossible to win the argument. And maybe that's
the point. Maybe this, they gave the word to us, gaslighting. When they gaslight all the time and
say the culture war is a right-wing myth, or cancel the people who are the chief practitioners of
cancer culture saying that cancer culture doesn't exist, when they say the opposite of what is the
observable reality. I don't know how to break through that, how to break through those arguments,
because not only have they constructed a pseudo-reality in their own minds,
they've constructed the language with which to sustain that pseudo-reality,
so no one else can be drawn out of it. And that to me is going to be the challenge.
Let me ask you, let's go sideways for a minute now. And I suppose this is an exploration of
potential solutions as well. This has been a very serious conversation, but you're a satirist and
a comedian as well. And so you have to... Isn't it terrible how unfunny I am in real life? Isn't
that awful? When I'm doing stand-up, if I've got a script, I can be funny, but I can't be funny
spontaneously. People are very disappointed about that. I'm sorry. Well, I'm curious about your
motivations. Let's talk about Titania McGrath. Why don't you define, describe her first for everyone?
So Titania McGrath originated as a Twitter character in around April 2018. And the idea of
the character is that she is a very privileged, po-faced, young, white, intersectional activist
who is determined to be offended by absolutely anything. She can problematize absolutely anything.
You know, you could give her a pair of shoes or a hat or a holiday in Margate, and she would find a
way to say that it is irredeemably transphobic and white supremacist or something like that.
She can do those things that the activists always do. So nothing is ever good enough for her. She's
also immensely privileged. She comes from well, independently wealthy background. She lives in,
you know, one of those sort of gated communities, which is 99% white. But she has a deep mistrust
of the working class. But she thinks that she is virtuous and noble and good, and she goes on
Twitter and it goes on the attack all the time, trying to isolate things, trying to save the
world in her through intersectional theory. And it's a very recognizable type of act,
even if you know nothing about intersectionality or anything of the stuff that came out of
the School of Thought of Kimberly Crenshaw or any of those academics, even if you know nothing
about that, you will recognize this type of figure because this figure is ubiquitous on Twitter,
on social media. They always have their pronouns in their bio. They always use the same terminology
such as hegemony or discourse or problematic or phallogocentric, if you want to go back to
Derrida, you know, and she knows the right jargon to use lived experience, cultural appropriation,
mansplaining, toxic masculinity, all of those kind of things. And we know, and all of these things
tend to be slogans in substitute of thought, you know, that they're just things that get thrown
out there. And so what I wanted to do with the character is in slogan means what do you mean
is etymologically? No, I don't sluag garrum. It means battle cry of the dead. I love that.
That doesn't send a chill up your back. You didn't understand it. Well, that's this is it.
I'm going to use that. That's great because that it is a kind of it's almost like a battleground
of zombies who don't have any capacity for independent thought anymore. I mean, you try
to get into a conversation with someone like this. And I have many times. Well, sure. Very
publicly. And the slogans that come back at you all the time. And the lack of interrogation of
those slogans, you know, but what I find so frustrating and so horrifying in some sense,
I mean, I think a great canonical example of that is the interview that Helen Lewis did with me
for the for GQ, which is it's now more popular online than the Channel 4 interview, which I
think the GQ interview has like 32 million views or something preposterous. But I never
did talk to Helen Lewis. I just talked to the ideology and it's not I don't like that. I like
to talk to the person and find out what they think. But I heard you saying as well that
before the interview, she was very frosty and almost as though she had decided what you were
in advance, funnily enough. Oh, there was no almost. I definitely decided what I was before
the before the discussion. Yeah, exactly. And she's been beating the same drum more recently
as well, which has driven many people to the interview because she published an article in
the Atlantic Monthly and in another locale as well. So when you're faced with those, I mean,
I just see it all the time so often. And to give another recent example that we had the obviously
since the Harry and Meghan interview with Oprah Winfrey. And there was a controversy over here
because Piers Morgan, who hosts a show called Good Morning Britain, got into an argument with
another colleague on the show, Mancoyl Alex Beresford, I think. And it was really interesting
watching once they'd had the argument, they sat down, they tried to talk through the issues.
And Piers Morgan pointed out that some of the things that Meghan had said in the interview
were factually wrong and had been proven to be factually wrong. His response was Alex Beresford's
response was, but that's her lived experience. And then he said, yes, but we have the evidence
here that it is factually incorrect. And again, he said, but it's her lived experience. So in other
words, see, that's that insistence that the fantasy world, the subjective world trumps everything.
Right. And that once you've, it's almost like these, these phrases, if you use the right, if you
use the phrase lived experience or toxic masculinity, whatever, you're in the club,
what you've signaled that you're, you're, you're right. You know, and I know that academics have
always done this, you know, the jargon, you're in the group, you're in the in-group, if you've
got the right, if you know how to deploy the right words. But there's something more sinister
about this because it is morally right in these situations. That's the sinister thing.
That's it. It's morally incontrovertible. You've made the statement and that's it. And there's
no further discussion. Yes, well, you're not evil. That's what you're saying. I'm not evil.
So I think, so with, so the reason with Titania, I wanted her to be obsessed with this language.
And so, and, and, and why I read so much of this stuff so that I knew the way that they speak
is because I thought the best way to expose the inherent contradictions of, of, of that position
and the thoughtlessness moreover, the thoughtlessness of that position is, is, is to, to embody it in
a character. Right. So you were playing, you were playing a dramatic game, essentially,
which is a form of thought. In doing so, I've actually come to understand the people I'm
satirizing a whole lot more. And look, let's face it, every now and then they'll hit on a point that
is actually right. And, and, you know, even when I read White Fragility by Robin D'Angelo, which I
think is a terrible book and is, is, is so flawed throughout every now and then she'll hit on something
and you think for a moment, oh, there's something in that. And then she'll undercut it by saying,
well, everyone's a racist and all the rest of it, you know, and it just goes back to being absurd.
But, and that book in of itself is a very good example of this, you know, setting up a reality
that cannot be penetrated because she will say that any kind of critical questioning of her
position is evidence of the very pervasiveness of white supremacy that she's identified. So you
can't win because even engaging in a discussion is proof of your malevolence, according to her
theory, it's absolutely hopeless. But I thought, I thought, I thought because the movement is so
riven with contradiction, actually, the more effective way of tackling it isn't through dialogue,
firstly, because the people I'm talking about seem impervious to reason. They mistrust dialogue,
they see debate as a form of violence. So you're never going to get through to them that way.
Yeah, and that that's actually an explicit part of the theory.
It really is. So then in creating a satirical character, it's not that they're anti free
speech, there's no such thing as free speech in that theoretical framework. No, it's a misapprehension
all the way down to the bottom, which is why I get so frustrated. I've often been in debates
where I've tried to invite these very people to participate in the debate to hear them out.
And they would say that to even appear would be to dignify the position. So it's an absolute
nightmare. And it also protects themselves from potential criticism, which is, of course,
the whole point. But I thought by creating a satirical character that embodies those
contradictions, that thoughtlessness, it might reflect back onto them. I suppose how they look
to normal people, because I don't think they appreciate, I think they're so caught up within
their own little bubbles, with their own little groups, they never hear an alternative point
of view. I mean, I used to work with academics like this, who were so within their little groups,
and they're constantly quoting each other and supporting each other and giving the illusion
that their views cannot be disputed. But what if you're suddenly confronted
with how other people perceive you? And will that give you pause for thought?
Okay, so when you started Titania, you didn't announce that she was a satirical character.
You started playing on Twitter. Tell me the story. What exactly would happen? Because
that Twitter account became extraordinarily well known and very rapidly. So I'm curious about
how you did that and how you responded once it started to amass some cultural significance.
I was very surprised that it became so popular so quickly. And I'd started it
because I'm more to entertain myself more than anything. I was so frustrated with this,
and I wanted to try and expose the absurdity of it. I mean, my background is a stand-up comic.
And as a stand-up comic, I'm not necessarily satirical. I will stand there on a stage
and ridicule the thing that I perceive to be a problem with society. With satire,
what you're doing is you're often embodying it with a kind of ironic detachment or you're addressing it.
You're always going after what you perceive to be the vices and follies of society,
and I thought that was a good way of doing it. Right, so you had to stay on a kind of edge.
You had to be believable enough as the character so that you could pass, but you had to push it
just past the point of what? Of rationality or believability? It's a funny edge.
I was continually getting into arguments with people and staying in character. I've always
stayed in character even to today. And I've actually, if you go to the Titania account now,
my pinned thread is a thread of conversations that I've had with people in character who are
angry about the things I've tweeted. And these can go on for pages and pages. And it's fascinating
to me because it's close enough to the truth. She says really ridiculous things, really absurd
things like speaking or writing in English as an act of colonial violence. She'll say that.
The only way to guard against fascism is if the state are allowed to arrest people for what they
say and think. Stuff like this, which is so obviously absurd, and yet it's close enough
to what people actually say that people believe it and get annoyed about it. And what I've always
liked to do is to stay in character and have those conversations with these people. And then
I posted the screenshots of the conversation. But part of the point of that is not to humiliate the
people who had fallen for it, because actually the point I'm making is I understand why they would
fall for it because it's so close to what people actually say. And by doing that, my hope is,
I suppose, that it exposes the folly of this stuff. Sometimes even when I'm in those arguments,
I will say something that is so out of the, out of, you know, just completely out of the realm
of possibility, so stupid. And yet they still don't, things have become so absurd that they don't
twig. I mean, even today, there was a story today in the UK, a museum, a Jane Austen museum,
is now going to interrogate Jane Austen's use of sugar in her tea, because it has connections to
plantations and white supremacy and slavery. You know, something like that, which is just so
absurd, or the recent controversy over Bluey, the Australian cartoon dog, because it doesn't have
enough dogs of color and gender diverse dogs in the cartoon. Now, that sounds like something I would
make up as a joke. But it's real, it's actually happening and people are taking it seriously.
And so therefore, in a sense, it's become harder with Titania, because anything that I come up with
is going to be topped by real life very, very quickly.
So what have you learned about the people that Titania annoys? So she's a hyper politically
correct avatar, and but she tangles up people who are opposed to that sort of thing. And so that
must have also shed substantial light for you on people on the other side of the, and so what have
you learned? Well, one of the things is that the people on the other side, who might even be quite,
might even be of my opinion about these things. A lot of people are very quick to anger,
and verbal abuse as a goat, as an instant response. So a lot of the people who get
angry with her really go after her looks. And I mean, she's not real, a friend of mine, Lisa,
created the image of the woman is just a composite of four different women. So it's not a parody.
You see, this is the thing, it's not a parody of any particular person, it's a, it's a type of,
of person. And yeah, the people who get angry with her and the people who are genuinely angry
about the social justice movement are absolutely furious about the way it is impinging on every
aspect of their lives, they are sick of it. So when they see someone as extreme as Titania,
they really let rip. And I don't think that's healthy. You know, it's not in my nature to go
and abuse someone online or to get angry online. But I've seen the extent, what it shows, I suppose,
is that that kind of instinct to immediately go for the abusive or the vicious or the attack
or the ad hominem is present across the political spectrum. It's everywhere. Or maybe that's just
a sign of Twitter, maybe that's just a symptom of social media. And I've learned a lot about
how social media works. I think that's, that's another thing about it is that I've really,
for one thing, the fact that she's, she's been banned a number of times and I've learned how
to avoid the bans and about the way that big tech censors and how they censor and why.
What if, what does she be banned for? So the tweets that she was banned for a couple of times,
she's had a number of one day suspensions, a number of seven day suspensions. Once or twice,
it's been inexplicable to me why, why she would be banned. It seems a bit like someone at Silicon
Valley has twigged that their precious ideology is being mocked and they don't like it. That,
that's the only explanation I could think of. However, on a couple of instances, it's when she's,
I suppose, what they would say incited violence. And of course, she hasn't done anything of the
kind. There was one tweet where she said she was going to go to a UKIP rally. UKIP is a right-wing
nationalist political party in the UK. And she said, I'm going to go to this UKIP rally to punch
people in the name of compassion or love or something like that, you know, which is the idea
that a lot of these activists have that actually, whereas words are violence and awful, actual
physical violence can be defended, you know, in their, in their view, it's so perverse. And of course,
I was making a comment about the perversity of that idea that you think microaggressions are,
are actual violence, but you're perfectly content to go out and set fire to cars and beat
people up if they have the wrong opinion or pepper spray people in the face if they voted for
Trump. You know, there's an obvious, there's an obvious contradiction there that I was
trying to expose. So she had a ban there. I think that might have even been the one where
she was permanently banned. I had an email from Twitter saying, this is a permanent ban,
you're not getting back on. And then there was a bit of an outcry from, from, from people who
follow her, some prominent people who follow her, and Twitter rescinded that changed their minds
and brought her back. And as a result of that, inevitably, her follower count leapt because
of course, when you try and censor something, you draw attention to it, but you're always treading
a fine line. I mean, my friend, Lisa, who I mentioned, Lisa Graves used to have a Twitter
account called Jarvis de Pong, who was one of my favorite accounts on Twitter. And he was
banned, completely permanently banned. They actually went on a bit of a purge of satire
accounts. There was one afternoon where Twitter purged 12 or 13 satirical accounts and deleted
them. Titania came back for some reason, I think it's because she was the bigger account.
But a lot of them just got ditched. And that I think shows that, you know, the powers that
be at Silicon Valley, they don't like to be mocked. They don't, well, no one in authority likes to
be mocked. It's the best way to undermine authority, isn't it? And it's, it's why every despot in
history has killed the clown. Well, that's why we have to be so careful when any of our laws
start making comedians nervous. They're the ultimate canary in the coal mine.
Even more so than artists, I think. The artists are next, probably, but.
Absolutely. I mean, you, you'll know in Canada, Mike Ward was fined, I think $42,000
by the Quebec Human Rights Commission for a joke that he told, if you, and by the way, if you,
you know, this is not. Yes, and Montreal, of course, has one of the world's great comedy
festivals. And, and some of that humor, I've been to the comedy festival a couple of times,
and at midnight, you can go and hear particularly outrageous comedy, which I actually think it
was one of those where he said what he got fined for. And I, you know, I don't even know the
context because he said it in French for one thing. So I don't fully understand. But I read
the transcript and I spoke to him about it. And what was interesting is that he's not some,
you know, open Mike Act who's, who doesn't, hasn't been on the set. He's an established,
famous, successful comedian who was, who was fined for a joke that if you actually break
it down and analyze it, there's nothing remotely offensive about it. You know, I mean, it's
perfectly, I don't think comedy can, can exist without the potential to cause offense.
No, neither can truth. Right, quite. Comedy is almost always truth, almost always.
That comedian says something funny and it's true in a way that people didn't expect and they know it.
Well, it's also that, it's also that thing of, of, of, of teasing the boundaries of tolerance,
of, of, of almost, almost having that kind of cathartic effect, the way that the, the ancient
Greeks would watch a tragedy and, and hear about this dismemberment and all sorts of
vying to philosophically to purge themselves of the, of that evil that lay within. In a sense,
when you hear a comedian say something utterly outrageous, it can have that effect on you and
you laugh in spite of yourself. And then you laugh again, because you are saying to yourself,
why did I laugh at that? That makes me, I shouldn't have done that. So you're almost
laughing at your own response as well. It has a double effect. And we are really losing that.
I mean, I don't know how it is in Canada, but, but, but in the UK, a lot of this kind of
mistrust of comedy and mistrust of jokes and the idea that certain jokes
normalize hatred is coming from the comedians themselves. And a lot of comedians
take it on themselves to police other comedians' material and they get very angry
when people broach certain subjects. I consider it very, very unhealthy. And not all comedians,
by the way, I'm not saying that all comedians, I'm just saying, certainly the more establishment
comedians absolutely would fall into this category. And it's, it's really shocked me. This has been,
since I started to Tanya in particular, a lot of comedians have been very angry that I mocked
the social justice movement or, you know, that I, you know, which to me is a bit absurd, because,
you know, I spent years, three years writing, co-writing the Jonathan Pye character. And because
that predominantly mocked Trump and the right and conservatives. And, and, you know, it went,
those were the targets, that was okay. So I never got this kind of venom about, about that. But as
soon as I was mocking social justice ideology, which I perceived to be an extremely powerful
ideology, you know, this isn't, I don't think I'm punching down. I think I'm punching up at these,
at these, at these people who have captured these institutions and, and are ruthless, by the way,
absolutely ruthless and bullying. I think the social justice movement utterly legitimizes bullying.
And I don't like bullies. And I like to stand up to bullies. And that to Tanya is my attempt to
stand up against the bullies. But what they will do is misrepresent my intentions and will say,
oh, no, you just want to have a go at gay people or whatever, or have a go at minority groups. And,
and I've been very shocked by that, because that, that kind of response has even come from comedians.
And my view is that if you've got half a brain, you know, that's not what I'm doing. You, I mean,
you absolutely have to know that that's what not what I'm doing. And yet, maybe they do know, maybe
they, maybe this is a willfulness interpretation as a means to attack me, because I've, because I've
mocked the ideology I'm not meant to mock. But I tell you what, whenever there's, whenever there
are consequences for mocking someone, then I think that's the person you ought to be mocking, right?
I think that's a sign. Do you, would you, what effect has producing to Tanya had on your life?
And, and if you could go back and decide whether you were going to do it again, would you?
I mean, it must be shocking. I would think it's shocking to have, have seen what happened
to be at the center of what happened when you created that character. But I'd like to know.
I, well, for one thing, I didn't, yeah, I didn't expect the reaction that I got. Also,
you've got to remember that for a long time, the character I was anonymous. Because I, I,
part of the effects of the character was that people thought she was real. That was so
sort of integral to it. And then I was outed by a newspaper over here the week that her first
book came out. And that although that was very good for the books, it generated a lot of publicity,
because then the story became that I was the person behind the character. In effect, it had
an innovating impact on the, on the, on the character, because now what happens, people know
it's me behind the character, people. However, what I will say is even to this day, there's
always some people who fall for it whenever I tweet something, there's always some people
who fall for it. So it has that. So, so there's that. But then there's the impact on my personal
life. Well, I would do it again, because I feel very passionately that the, the, the movement
that I'm mocking, the ideology that I'm mocking is a dangerous one. And I feel very passionately
that it is divisive and damaging to society as damaging as any ideology can be. I think it has
the potential to go to those lengths. And, and so that I think I would almost be in dereliction if
I, if I didn't mock it, it would be, it would be, I tell you what it would be, it would be an act of
self censorship, if I didn't go after these targets. And that's by the way, how most comedians, I mean,
a lot of comedians think this stuff is ridiculous. They won't go near it because they know that if
they do, they won't get on the BBC and they won't get booked by certain clubs. So they just leave
it well alone. But I think I couldn't do, I could, I just, that's not in my nature. So I,
so I don't regret that. The fact that so many friends of mine, former friends on the company
circuit no longer talk to me, that's something which I suppose I could say is unfortunate.
On the other hand, how many times has that happened to you? How many friends do you think
you've lost? It's in double figures. It's certainly in double figures. And I think,
and it's not just Tanya, it's also partly, I suppose, my politics. It's also,
it's effectively being honest about what I think and saying opinions that might not be the establishment
of fashionable opinions. And it gets people very angry. I mean, one particular incident I could
think of was when I met for a drink with two friends, very old friends of mine, a married
couple. And he started screaming at me in the pub, I won't swear on your podcast, but calling me
an effing Nazi. And then another word, which I probably shouldn't say at this point.
But, and I thought he was joking at first. And we had this conversation. And it was true. He'd,
he'd completely bought into this fantasy of who I was. And, and there was no going back from that.
And I know it was fueled by alcohol, but no apology was forthcoming or no,
you know, it's, and then every now and then there'll be, I mean, it happened to be a couple of
months ago, we're a comedian I've known for many, many years from the circuit, suddenly sent me
this abusive message online on Twitter and started attacking me and saying I was, he said I was
funded by dark foreign powers or something utterly absurd, you know, and, and I thought, well, okay,
so this is now- Of course, that is what you'd say if you were funded by dark foreign powers.
Well, this is, this is the problem. Like I said, you know, I've said it before, like, if, you know,
if I am getting all this dark money, it must be very dark because I haven't seen any of it. It's
not, you know, that'd be great. Fine. But I'm not. And this idea that I'm this sort of, it's that
going right back to what you said at the start, like that I'm defending free speech, because I,
I, because I'm an evil person who wants to say evil things. And so there's all of that.
All that I'm mocking, I'm mocking minority groups through to Tanya, which is absolutely not what
I'm doing. It's the opposite. I'm mocking those very affluent and powerful people who very patronizingly
assume that they, they, they know what's best for minorities, you know, it's the opposite of what
people say it is. But these kind of experiences, on the one hand, I think it's a bit sad, isn't
it? Because there are people now, I've had to go through my phone and delete lots of numbers,
because I know we'll never talk again. But on the other hand, were they my friends to begin with?
I'm not so sure, you know, if they can, if they can suddenly become so bigoted. And that is the
word. Well, it's an indication of how profound the divide has started to become in our culture,
right? That I mean, 20 years ago, I never lost any friends because of my hypothetical political
opinions. But things have changed. You must have lost your, your case must be much more severe than
mine. You know, because you're so much more famous and so much more known has have lots of friends
turned on you. No, actually, not a lot. Some, there's some outstanding exceptions, although even
in those situations, I would say there was extenuating circumstances. No, I've been,
I've been really fortunate in that regard that my, my close circle of, of intimates my family and
my, my close friends have been staggeringly loyal to me under. Which is wonderful.
Severe distress. Yes. That's wonderful. So is it maybe the case? Does that tell us
that actually what it's really about is the fact that I was working in an industry,
which is, you know, the, the comedy industry is so on board with the woke ideology to such an
extent that in fact, so many of it's, it's so many comedians are now really just
advertised for that, for that ideology, maybe. Maybe. I mean, my professional colleagues certainly
haven't leapt to my defense. Well, that's, that's what I was going to ask, actually. Yes.
Surely. No, that's been, no, that's pretty much done with. I mean, I would say my name,
I've decided this recently because of the slurs that have been associated with me.
I can't in good conscience accept graduate students anymore. Because if they go out, you know,
you talked at the beginning about this register where that's been set up in Britain, where if you
are charged, accused of a non-crime hate act, it's recorded without a trial. I mean, I've been on
hiring committees many, many times. And especially in academia, there's an oversupply of highly
qualified people, of radical oversupply. And so if there's anything in your record at all that's
the least bit contentious, it's like you're, you're done. And so being my student, that's not
a little bit contentious. That's really, really contentious. And so it's now become impossible
for me to, to, to serve my proper function as a, as a scientist and as a university professor. So
that's, it's taking a lot of adjustment on my part to get accustomed to that. And I don't practice
clinically anymore as well. And there are a variety of reasons for that. But certainly the,
I've become very, very susceptible to attacks through the College of Psychologists,
the governing board. They can make the life of a practitioner brutally miserable with a single
letter. And that's very, very punishing. And it's also perhaps not necessarily good for my
potential clients to be associated with someone who's controversial. They already have enough
trouble. So although I've been fortunate on the family and friends front, the, on the professional
front, things have, have been, you know, more dismal. Isn't that just suggestive of the, of the,
the power of this movement and, and the effectiveness of cancel culture? In fact,
the way, the ease with which people can become stigmatized, you know, all it takes is a few
accusations of your far right or alt-right or whatever. And it's there, you know, any prospective
employer can Google that and it comes up and who's going to take the risk? You know, the accusation
is sufficient to damn you. And, and that's, that's what. Well, that you put the finger on the, on
the absolute catastrophe of the non-crime hate index. It's like, well, it's, it's a permanent
stain, especially in a, in a technological universe where nothing is ever forgotten,
no matter how long the lag. And it's worse because the government here feels no compunction
to address this or to no politician seem to has, well, I suppose they are, well, because the strategy
is that if you oppose hate speech laws, you're obviously a hateful person. Why else would you
oppose hate speech law? You know, it's the old thing and, and a politician doesn't want to stand
up in parliament to be the one who is seen to be siding with the evil guys, the bad guys.
So you have to make a very, very subtle argument to stand up against hate speech laws because
you're faced with the problem that there is such a thing as hate speech. Yeah. Obviously. So when
it's pernicious and terrible, it's like, okay. So you're arguing uphill. This is again why it's
such a bloody miracle that we ever had free speech to begin with. It's almost inconceivable to me that
we managed to generate the baseline presumption of innocence. That's a miracle. The fact that you
can go bankrupt and start again, that's a miracle. The idea that you ever had free speech and that
that was genuinely the case, that's a miracle. And none of this is given the appropriate respect
and awe that it deserves because it's so unlikely. It's hugely unlikely. I mean, I know in the book,
I talk about, I give a kind of very, very short history of free speech from the ancient Greeks
to today. And the point of that is to accentuate this point that actually the fact that we have it
is astonishing and unlikely, so unlikely. And all the more reason why we need to defend it,
we need to be really, really vigilant about any cracks that appear in this, because it will go
away very, very easily, you know, if we don't defend it. And it's hard, particularly when it comes to
the idea of, that's why I wrote a chapter on hate speech, because, and took the other side's view
seriously, because just trashing the opposing argument isn't going to help. We have to talk
about it and explain why it's important nevertheless. Well, for one thing, like you say,
hateful speech exists. Let's start from that point. Let's acknowledge that that hateful speech exists,
and it can be hurtful, and it can do damage. But then the alternative is a state that might,
in the future, be completely unscrupulous, that is going to decide for you what you can say. And
those are the things that we have to tackle. And the other key thing is that no one knows how to
define hate speech. You know, UNESCO, the European Court of Human Rights, they've all agreed,
there's no way to define hate speech. Every European country that has hate speech laws
has different hate speech laws, different definitions, subjective, abstract concepts,
such as hate, such as offence, such as a perception, you know, and these are on the
statute books, and you don't want this stuff on the statute books, because it's all very well.
I mean, I know the, we talked about the SMP and their hate crime bill, the defense I'm always
running into, is people are saying, yes, okay, technically, someone could be arrested and imprisoned
for saying some, an offensive joke, technically, yes. But no one in their right mind, no jury,
no judge is going to, we've got common sense, it's okay. Well, that's so myopic. I mean,
what, because you don't know who's going to be in charge in 10 years time. You don't know who
that judge is going to be. How can you possibly just... You can be certain that someone will be
in charge that doesn't approve of you and that you don't approve of, that will, that will certainly
happen. You don't want vague, vague wording on the statute books. It's going to be exploited
at some point, even though, even if it's not today, there's absolutely no way that you can
guarantee it against future, against the future abuses of that. And I don't, it is, as you say,
it's a certainty. So I think it's actually one of the most important arguments that we should make
and that free speech needs to be defended in every successive generation. It's not something that
you know this, you get it and then it's there forever. No, that's not true. There's something
about human nature. There's something about people in power. There's something about the way that we
are that it will collapse. It's an edifice that is not secure at any given time. But it's hard.
It's that thing of being smeared. The risk is you're going to be smeared. You're going to be
associated with the worst possible kinds of people because, of course, it's only really
controversial speech that ever requires protection. And people are going to say,
well, then you must support what these awful people are saying. And it's hard to make the case.
But it's a case that nonetheless has to be made. And particularly by politicians,
I've been incredibly disappointed by the way in which politicians in this country have not
made any kind of effort to, if anything, as from what I can see, there are moves even in the
English parliament to push through further hate speech laws. We should be repealing them,
not pushing for them. But no one wants to have the argument. No one wants to be tainted.
Yeah, well, they get identified one by one and taken out. That's what happens.
Where you get put on a list. This is it. The identitarian left, if that's what we're going
to call them. I don't know what to call them. That's the problem. They're very clever about
evading even a label. But they like making their lists. They like observing and saying,
you know, you are problematic. You have sinned. And now they have an electronic trail.
These are the people that absolutely love going through all of your old tweets and messages
and anything they can find. And of course, the point about that is you can do that to anyone.
There is no one alive who, if you had complete unfettered access to everything they've ever
written online or in their emails or text messages, that you couldn't construct a
case to dam someone. That's actually one of the things that's more or less saved me.
Is that right? Well, by the time I made my political statement, which was a philosophical
statement or even a spiritual statement, not a political statement, I already had 200 hours of
lectures online. And so essentially everything I'd ever said to students was recorded. And
it wasn't possible to pull out a smoking pistol. This was very smart. And also, I mean,
but this is why it's also astonishing. I find it unendingly astonishing the way you are mischaracterized
because it's all there. Everything you think is out in the open. You've been very, very,
very clear and explicit about your point of view. And so when they try and demonize you and turn
you into this thing, people can check and they'll realize that you're there. I think what they're
doing is they're relying on the reputational damage being a kind of barrier to people even
investigating who you really are. Yeah, well, to some degree, that that works. But it doesn't
really work because what genuine generally happens is that, you know, for every person who
wouldn't open a lecture because of my reputation, there's three or four who do because they're
curious. And then it has an even more perverse effect on, in some cases, on the true believers
because they're primed to find anything I said offensive, but that doesn't happen,
or maybe they even find it useful. And then that's not good at all. It's like, well,
it's not interesting when you meet the people, when you get into conversation with people and
you can see that you're not what they thought you were. And they don't know quite what to do with
that. And that to me is why another reason why we need more speech, not less, we need to have
the conversation so that people can be disabused of the fantasies that they've been wallowing in.
But I do very much enjoy that when people expect one thing and then they actually
speak to me and they don't see that, that there's no evidence of it because it doesn't exist.
Yeah, well, it's interesting to watch that unfold in the public domain too. I mentioned those two
interviews, the Channel 4 interview that is being viral and the interview by Helen Lewis at GQ.
Those interviews basically consist of nothing but
the attempt by the interlocutor to have a conversation with the person that exists in
their imagination. Right, but what's the point of that?
There's almost no relationship to me at all. That was particularly the case with
Cathy Newman and was less so with Helen Lewis, but that was still essentially the issue.
It's quite reassuring, though, isn't it, that once it's out there, people can see through it?
It's very reassuring. What saved me, and this has given me an endless supply of hope, I would say,
is that all I've ever had to do is just show everything. It's like, here's the situation,
no edits. This is what happened, and every time so far, I haven't been fatally damaged.
Yeah, I mean, one of the things I've learned most, I think, since Tatania kicked off and
it became a known thing, is I've learned simply never to trust the perception of someone as
as constructed in the media or online. It's never the same person. I've ended up
coming from the background I did. Most of my friends were always on the left. I didn't really
know conservative people, and now I have a lot of friends who are conservatives,
and they're just not this villain that they were made out to be, and even some famous
conservatives who people have said they're absolute monsters, they're evil, they want to eat babies,
basically, or the equivalent, and you get to know them, and you realize, oh my goodness,
the perception is so far removed from the reality that even I once had bought into it myself,
because everyone's telling you this. Yeah, the same thing. I certainly had that experience
repeatedly, repeatedly. I never trust it now. Whenever I hear the way people talk about people
online, I never trust it. Unless I know someone personally, I'm never going to trust that again.
I think that's an important lesson for me. What's next for you? Also, how do you make a living?
You can't make a living as Detainee McGrath. I mean, you're locked down still, so it's
got to be hard being a comedian. Right. Well, comedy came to an end. I did a
tour, I did a stand-up comedy tour in early 2019, and that was really the last big thing I did,
because as soon as I was about to do some more live performances, the lockdown came, and it's
the same. I'm not complaining, because absolutely every live performer has the identical experience,
and we've all, you know, I'm not in a position to complain. Yeah, it's a very good question.
I like it, because it's also very direct. How do I make my money? Well, I write articles for
various publications. There's the Titania books have kept me going. I obviously used to work on
the Jonathan Pye character. We had a couple of television shows and live tours. Those were
particularly lucrative. And for a long time, I did just make my money as a stand-up comic,
so literally just the money I would make from the circuit. Now, I've just got a job with,
well, it's, you know, I gave up being a full-time teacher for this, and I was on a regular wage.
It was a good salary, and I left it at great risk, you know, because I don't come from a wealthy
family. I don't have the means to support myself without this kind of stuff. So I went, well,
I actually went part-time first and was on the stand-up circuit. And then I started earning
enough from the stand-up to get by. And so I went full-time stand-up, but I was really,
I was genuinely struggling financially for a long time. And then Jonathan Pye happened,
which was very successful, particularly because we had a big viral hit around the time of the
Donald Trump election, which actually went viral in America as well. And that really helped
broaden the character. And then we did live tours and all the rest of it. We played the
London Palladium and the Hammersmith Apollo. And so it was a big thing for me. And then Tatania
happened, and the book did very well, and the second book did well. And how many copies do you,
you don't have to tell me, obviously, but how many copies? I don't know. Actually, the truth is,
I don't know. That's something I should ask at some point. It's the sort of thing I don't look
into. You know, I got a royalty check the other day, and I thought, I thought it was done. And
actually, this was quite a lot of money. I thought, okay, that's good. This is something that can
keep me going. But I've also just got a new job as a broadcaster on a new channel called GB News
in the UK. And that will be a pretty full-time, full-on presenter job. But what's good about
that job is, you know, I think we have a real problem with the news media in this country is
that we don't have enough diversity of thought and the conversations that we ought to be having.
This gives me an opportunity to do that. So it's very much related to the work I've been doing.
But in addition, I'm going to continue with my comedy work and Tatania. We're doing some live
shows with Tatania, played by an actress. We did that just before the lockdown. We had to postpone
the tour. Now we're going to do another one. So I will, yeah, a lot of people get very scared by
making a living as a creative person because you're always on the line.
As they should be. Jesus, it's a tough way to make a living, man.
It really, I mean, you're taking a massive risk. And most creatives I know are very,
very poor. You know, it's simply not, and most have other jobs, you know.
Yeah, there's a tiny fraction that are hyper-rich and everyone else starves.
Virtually no one. And I consider myself extremely fortunate to be able to do this full,
the stuff I love, full-time. Because for most of my adult career, I couldn't.
And I was, you know, I had to have a full-time job and as well as go out in the evenings
and do all of this stuff. And so it's a real, you have to really commit. And you also have to be
aware in the back of your mind of the likelihood of failure. That's, you know,
that's the other thing that you have to be fully aware of. And I'm by no means taken for granted.
You know, I think I'm, you know, it's the stuff I've done comedy into Tanya and the book I've
just written is that none of this stuff would make me rich. It would keep me going. The new job
I've got is going to be a more regular income, which is something I miss. I haven't had this
since I was a teacher. I missed that. You know, I missed routine and all the rest of it.
Yeah, well, another complicating factor is not only if you're trying to exist creatively,
not only is it a very high-risk proposition financially, but you lack that psychological
comfort that comes from routine, which, you know, people, artistic people often
are hypercritical of routine, but God, man, routine keeps you sane and trying to invent
yourself every day. That's not for the faint hearted. I've seen very few people manage that
successfully across decades. No, absolutely. And I think particularly in comedy, you know,
because you have to work for about three or four years on the circuit without getting paid anything.
In fact, you're losing money because you're paying for your travel expenses and then you get
somewhere and you don't get paid for it. And this is why a lot, you'll find a lot of comedians,
particularly in the UK, are from quite wealthy backgrounds or privately educated because they
have rich parents who can help them out, put them up in a flat and they don't have to work
during the day. And they escalate much quicker through the ranks. But if you come from my sort
of background, you can't do that. You have to have the job. And then you have to, it's like
having two jobs. And so you have to really care about it. I mean, my advice is always that I do
believe, although it comes with that insecurity, if it is a vocation for you, you have to do it.
I mean, for me, I couldn't have done anything. It is a genuine vocation for me, even if I
were making no money whatsoever, out of comedy or writing or the rest, I would still be doing it
because I would feel unfulfilled if I were not doing it. I think there's something also quite,
I mean, I take your point about the practicalities of living and the business of living. But my
God, I think depriving yourself of your vocation can be so soul destroying.
No, it is. Well, I've spent a lot of time studying creativity scientifically. And
the first thing that's useful to note is that creativity is not common. I mean, everyone
isn't creative. That's wrong. Some people are very creative. A minority of people are very creative.
And I mean, it's a continuum, but you don't get, you know, you don't get creativity till you get
out to the point where what you're doing is original. And that's very difficult. So it's a minority
proposition. And then of those original people, there's only a tiny fraction that can make a
successful financial go of it because it's just you have to be creative. Plus, you have to have
some sense for marketing and sales and business. And you have to be reasonably emotionally stable
and etc. etc. It's very, very difficult. But if you are creative by temperament, well, that's you.
To not do that is to not be you. It's like asking an extroverted person not to be around people
or an agreeable person not to engage in intimate relationships or a conscientious person not to
be driven by duty. It's like, that's what you're like. And so yeah, you're stuck with it. It's a
double edged sword creativity. It's vital. It's entrancing. It's necessary. It's transformative.
It's disruptive. But it's a high risk, high risk, high return game. And the probability of failure is
overwhelmingly high. Even if you're an entrepreneur and you know, more practically oriented in your
creativity, the probability that you'll make money from your innovation or your invention
rather than other people is very, very low. But you need to find a way. I mean, it's also very
difficult if you're a creative person to a lot of creative people don't think in practical terms.
They don't think in terms of money. Actually, they're hopeless. A lot of them might I know are
hopeless. They also tend to be casually contemptuous of that to regard as practical
concerns is selling out. It's like, you should be bloody happy if you have the opportunity to sell
out. So I think that the ideal is to find a way to pursue your vocation, but have one eye on the
reality that you will have to earn money somewhere or another. I mean, yes, I think it's, that's why
I think I'm lucky. And so far as with Titania, I hit on something that had commercial viability,
but it was very true to what I desperately wanted to do. And I think that's so rare. I think some
of the stuff I've written, some of the plays I've written, for instance, I don't think would have
any commercial success whatsoever. But I wrote them because I needed to write them. And some of
them didn't even get on. And maybe one day they will. And that would be great. But what you have
to accomplish though, right? You have to have your creative endeavor aligned with market demand at
exactly that time. It's impossible. It's very, very unlikely. Actually, that's why I always say,
don't attempt to anticipate the zeitgeist because you won't. Like the best thing an artist can do
is do what they believe and hope because a lot of it is luck. You know what I mean?
I mean, there's actually, there's a technical literature on that too. I mean, what essentially
what you do is continue to produce ideas. And it's a Darwinian competition. Essentially,
they're like life forms, these ideas. And now and then one will find a niche that it can thrive in.
But the best way to maximize your chance is that that niche will manifest itself is to be,
is to overproduce. Because look, for I'll give you an example, I answered a bunch of questions on
Quora. So that's a website where anybody can ask any questions and anybody can answer. I answered
about 50 when I was playing with Quora. And one of them was a list of everything people should know,
of things people should know in their life. And I derived my books out of that list.
It was disproportionately successful. Most of the answers I generated got virtually no views,
but it got, it must be hundreds of thousands now. But even before I wrote the books, it was tens of
thousands. But had I not written 50, I wouldn't have got that one. The other 49 failures, so to
speak, were the answers weren't necessarily worse. They just didn't hit the zeitgeist,
like that answer did. And I think that's a great piece of advice. Overproduction, because
it's the same with the Beatles. They look like an overnight success. It's because they've been
playing endlessly in those dingy clubs in Europe. Before it happened, you produce as much as you
can. They say it takes 10 years to become an overnight success. That's it. Most of the things
I've written have done nothing and gone nowhere and had no success whatsoever. But the one thing,
occasionally when it hits, that's what sustains all the rest of it. And it's also why creativity
continues to be selected, let's say, from a biological perspective. It's like, that's why
I said it was a high risk, high return game. Almost everything you do creatively will fail.
But now and then, you're disproportionately successful. And so that keeps the whole game going.
You didn't have any sense, did you, that when you put the lectures on YouTube that it would
explode in this way? I mean, not in this way. That was completely, I'm still shocked constantly
by my life. I'm shocked out of sanity by my life. I just can't. This is why I asked you
about Titania. You get at the center of a whirlwind like that. And there's something very
surreal about it. And I keep getting hit by surreal things. And it's very hard to wrap
my head around it. Like this Red Skull episode was just one of many equally surreal occurrences.
But no, I had no idea. I knew I was working on something important back when I was in my 20s,
when I wrote my first book. And it was out of that, that all my lectures came. I spent 15 years
working on that book. And I worked on it about three hours a day. And so I thought about it
all the time. And so I knew there was something to it, not necessarily because they were my ideas,
but because of the people who I had read and delved into while I was writing the book. I knew
the ideas were significant. And I could see the effect of the ideas when I was lecturing on my
students. So I had some sense that there was something vital, that I was involved in something
vital. But sure. But had you uploaded those videos a couple of years before or a couple of years
later, you probably would have missed the zeitgeist and nothing would have happened. I mean, it
doesn't matter. I always think with any kind of creative endeavor or intellectual endeavor, it
doesn't matter how good you are in a sense, it has to be good. And the timing has to be right.
And like you say, if you just keep, I think persistence is it, if you just keep doing it,
not only does your craft get better and you are, if it does hit, you're in a position to be able to
no doubt. Look, if you, if you, okay, so in scientific literature, the hallmark of impact
is citations. And so if your work is cited, it means that someone who's written another scientific
article makes reference to something you wrote. And that's all tracked and it's used for promotions
and it's used to judge scientific merit. It's, it's, it's its own science citation tracking.
A very small number of your published papers accrue most of the citations. So that's the first
thing. So what that means is the more papers you publish, the more likely it is that one of them
will become highly cited. And my highly cited papers aren't necessarily the ones that I thought
would be most impactful. So you, but the other piece of information from literature on creativity
is that the best predictor of quality, and so you could index quality by impact, let's say,
or by citations is quantity. Yeah, it's not a great predictor, but it's the best one. And so
this is a good advice for everyone out there who's a musician or an artist. It's like,
produce, produce, produce, produce as much as you can, because you do get better at it, right?
You absolutely do. And, and so there's that, but there's also, I think the other important thing
is to, to actually be true to yourself in your artistic endeavors, insofar as don't be trying
to anticipate the desire, guys, don't be trying to anticipate what other people are doing. My big
concern in the current climate that we live in is that a lot of artists are choosing to self-censor,
because the penalty for risk taking has got too high. You know, you can be completely, I mean,
if I think of an example like- Well, think about what kind of catastrophe that is, because we've
already discussed the fact that the impediments to creativity are almost insurmountable. And so
then you add an additional one, which is self-censorship because of social pressure. It's like,
you just decimate the creative enterprise by doing that. We wouldn't have anything. We, we,
the western canon would be decimated. It's ridiculous. I mean, an example I often think of
is, is one of my favorite playwrights is Edward Albee. And when he came to write his play, The
Goat, which was a very controversial play, because it was about a man having an affair,
a sexual affair with a goat behind his wife's back. And obviously that doesn't sound palatable.
Well, at least he went behind his wife's back. Exactly. At least it wasn't sort of an open,
sort of paganistic thing, absolutely. But I mean, it's, it's a shocking play and it's meant to be.
It's about where our lines of tolerance are, where they lie and why. And all of his friends told him,
don't do this. You've got a valuable career, an incredible reputation. You're turning 80. You're
80. He was roughly 80 years old when this play came out. And they said, you're just going to
scupper everything. And he said that when he got that response, that's the reason he did it.
He went out there and he put the play on. And it turned out to be a huge success. It won,
I think, the Tony Award for best play. It was critically and commercially successful. It was
absolutely massive. So it just goes to show, I think, to an extent, I mean, I'm not saying disregard
feedback from other creative people or people who have suggestion. What I am saying is if you're
true to your muse, whatever that that is, the rewards will come, actually, or they are more
likely to come. Okay, so that brings us back to free speech too, because, you know, the problem
with laws that abridge free speech is they abridge creative endeavor. And that's a terrible thing,
because it's the source of endless renewal. And it's the thing that fixes corrupt structures. And
so to, to take aim at that is to take aim at the very process that would rescue you from the conundrum
you are pretending to be obsessed by. I mean, has there been any innovation, not just in artistic
terms, but in scientific terms, without the risk of offense without, you know, I mentioned the
example of Galileo in the book, because, you know, he wasn't, he caused a great deal of offense.
Oh hell, Darwin offended himself so badly that he was sick. He was sick for like a decade because
of the implications of what he'd thought up, which were thoroughly offensive to himself.
As they would be, you know, in with his belief system at the time. And, but, but that's, that's
the, we can see in hindsight, what we would have lost if people weren't willing to risk offending
others. In fact, even what you said to Kathy Newman in that interview about your risking
being offensive by disagreeing with me now in this way, like, it's how it's important to risk
offending people. It's because otherwise you just end up in this kind of, you know, this hive mind
and, and, and for the arts, it becomes utterly stultified. It becomes so boring when, when
everything is predictable and everything is in line with a viewpoint and no one wants to, you
know, the art is the best way that we interrogate the complexities of humanity. It's, it's, it's,
I love what sometimes what the filmmaker Lars von Trier, he said in an interview once that
sometimes when he's making a film, he will take an indefensible moral position
and attempt to defend it through the film, which I think is such a fascinating idea.
Dostoevsky did that all the time in his great novels and so brilliant. I mean,
that's what, what made Dostoevsky so staggeringly brilliant was he would take positions that he,
that he despised with all his soul and make the people putting those beliefs forward that
strongest characters in the book. I mean, he's so brave.
It's the best thing to do. It's, it's, I wrote a play once where I completely,
it was a one man play where I completely tried to embody the kind of person I despise. It was
someone who enjoyed relished watching via acts of violence and he would take a scour the internet
for clips of real life violence. And it's something I can, you know, whenever I've had that, whenever
someone's tried to show me a beheading or something, I know I never want to see that kind of thing.
I know I never want that in my head. And so I wanted to write a character
who relished it. But from a position, from a non-judgmental position, I've never put that
play on. I've written it's done. But the act of doing it was so incredibly liberating and
interesting. And the idea that you can, you know, you keep hearing this all the time,
you know, whenever a new film or a play comes out of a book, is this sending the right message?
David Lynch's last series, the latest Twin Peaks series was criticized, I read a review saying,
well, there's violence against women in this, and he needs to be called out for this. Well,
representing violence against women isn't an endorsement of violence against women.
You know, maybe that's what the character does, and maybe we're supposed to hate him for it or
whatever, you know, and or if you read an autobiography of a complete reprobate,
there can be something really interesting about that. And imagine all of this gone,
all of this potential. But that is the end point of that's why I believe that this this current
social justice ideology is anti art. I think it's it's opposed to the the artistic spirit,
quite quite fundamentally opposed to it, which is why I feel we must push back against it.
So that's a great place to end. No, no, that's great. That's great. Well, thanks a lot.
Yeah, much appreciated. It was a pleasure. And the time flew by, which is a good marker of a
engaging exchange of free speech, let's say. Absolutely. Thanks so much for having me, Jordan.
My pleasure. Good luck. Thank you.
