Hi, everybody. I'm pleased today to be talking with
Jaco Willink, who I've talked with on his podcast on three separate occasions. I don't think I've had
Jaco on mind. And my memory isn't what it should be. So but I'm quite sure that we've so far when
we've talked, it's been on your podcast. So I thought I'd take the time today to get to know you
in some more detail. Jaco is an American author, podcaster, and retired naval officer who served
in the Navy SEALs. He coauthored the book's Extreme Ownership and the Dichotomy of Leadership
with fellow retired SEAL Leif Babin. Did I pronounce that right? It's actually Leif Babin.
Oh, so I didn't pronounce it right at all. Leif Babin. He hosts a weekly podcast with Brazilian
jiu-jitsu practitioner, Echo Charles, called the Jaco podcast. He has a million subscribers on
YouTube, and his podcast attracts many more listeners. He co-founded the management consulting
firm Echelon Front, LLC, and has extended his business development on a number of additional
fronts. His military service included combat actions in the war in Iraq, where he eventually
commanded the SEAL teams three task unit bruiser that fought in the battle against the Iraqi
insurgents in Ramadi, and was honored with the Silver Star and Bronze Star for his service.
He achieved the rank of Lieutenant Commander. Good to see you again, Jaco.
It's good to be here. Yeah, I feel the same way that it's good to be here. I'm really looking
forward to our conversation. I'm glad that you were able to gut through that ridiculously long bio,
and I felt that as you got to the end of it, you are breaking free of the chains of that reading.
So I'm glad it's over with. Yeah, well, it's so much better just to talk than to read in this sort
of format, but at least everybody who doesn't know already has some sense of who you are, some
minimal sense of who you are. So tell me what's been happening online with you over the last
couple of years, because we haven't spoken, I would say it's got to be two years, I think,
something like that. And so I've cast an eye on what's been happening with you on YouTube, and
some of my staff have filled me in, but I'm really curious. Tell me about what's happening with your
YouTube channel and your online activities, your podcast and all of that. Yeah, a few years ago,
I started a podcast. That was actually, it was quite a few years ago now, it was in 2015.
It might have been kind of as the explosion of prior to the explosion of podcasts. In fact,
I think I read something that said, at that time, it was like 17% of Americans were listening to
podcasts and that number is much, much higher now. And I kind of got lucky because at the time,
Tim Ferriss had one of the most popular, still very popular, but at the time,
just because the numbers of podcasts that existed, his podcast was even more popular.
And I went on his podcast and when we got done recording and he pressed stop on the record
button, he looked at me and said, you should have your own podcast. And I kind of took that
and noted it. And then a little while later, I was on Joe Rogan's podcast and he had,
you know, obviously another one of the most popular podcasts in the world.
And he told me in the middle of that podcast that I should have my own podcast.
And so when guys like Tim Ferriss and Joe Rogan are telling you to have your own podcast,
you have your own podcast. Now, I came to realize later that Joe Rogan actually would tell everybody
to have a podcast. So maybe he would tell everyone, oh, you should start a podcast. Well,
I actually listened to him. And so I started that podcast. And I would say I probably, if
somebody would have asked, you know, what should a person do to make a good podcast or
maybe not a good podcast, but a popular podcast, somebody would probably say,
make it probably a half an hour to an hour, bring a bunch of different guests on so that you can
hear a bunch of deep bunch of different people talking and, you know, talk about positive things
in the world. And so instead of doing any of that, what I did was I have a podcast that's between
two and five hours long. Oftentimes it's just me talking, reading from a book and reviewing a book.
And usually the books are about war or suffering or some kind of human atrocity.
And so that's what my podcast is. And really what it boils down to is it's
learning about human nature. And for me, human nature is best revealed or most clearly revealed
in times of suffering. And one of the, I guess, pretty good monopoly on the market for suffering
is war and right in there as well as, you know, human atrocities. So I started that podcast.
And like I said, when I started it, there weren't that many, there weren't as many as podcasts as
there are now. So it got some traction out of the gate and it kind of just stayed there.
So I was very lucky in that respect. And I've been doing ever since I've,
I've put out one podcast a week for five years. I've only missed one, one week in there. And
that was when my best friend was killed in a parachute accident. And so I didn't put out a
podcast that week. But other than that, I've been very consistent. And then the YouTube channel is,
well, it's, it's kind of the podcast. And then we do some excerpts there and little clips and
stuff like that. And Echo Charles, I forget what you called him in the bio, a Brazilian jiu-jitsu
practitioner. He's also a video guy. And so he makes his little, he makes little clips and puts
special effects in them and stuff because he's creative and bored, which means
it's a great combination for someone that you're, that you're working with.
It is indeed. So I think that's what's been happening online for me and for the past few years.
Who, who do you, who's your audience? Do you think, or do you know?
Yeah, I know actually quite well that my, my demographic is people. It's people, it's human
beings. Really, it's, it's all over the place. And when I go and do live events, I'll have
just the entire spectrum of humans there. Hey, look, is there a, is there a,
you know, kind of a typical person? Yeah, there's a typical person, but we get everybody on the
spectrum from the grandma to the, the little kids, you know, I've written a bunch of kids' books
and the little kids show up as well. Right. Pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty kids' books.
Yeah, pretty broad demographic. That's, I meet all kinds of people. Everybody from a,
I'll meet a firefighter and then a hedge fund guy and then a stay at home mom and then a retired
Marine. It just meet everybody. It's, and that's the audience.
Do you, do you have any sense of what it is that's attracting people to your podcast? I mean,
you, you, you sort of approached that tongue and cheek in some sense for, for a dark topic,
you know, you concentrate on things that are, that are pretty negative or they're pretty dark.
And so as you said, that might fly in the face of any advice you'd get about what to talk about.
But obviously, I mean, one of the things I've encountered is that there's a very,
there's a vast hunger for serious dialogue. And I mean, one of the things that struck me
always about your podcast was you often read something that's very, very
emotionally demanding, stark, harsh, rough. And
well, and it's interesting to think about why people might
be attracted to that. What's your sense? And also, why are you doing it?
I think that it's emotional. I think that these are emotional topics.
I think these are things that people can be a little bit afraid of and a little bit nervous
about and being able to brush up against them a little bit gives them a little bit more
familiarity with them. And therefore, when you see, when you come close to things that are
that stark and dark and horrible, it also makes you look up around at the present situation
that you're in and maybe it doesn't look as awful. Yeah, so.
So there you touched on two things about knowing something about history that might be really
useful or about human affairs, right? One is that, I mean, it's a tenant of clinical psychotherapy
that a voluntary approach to what's frightening, threatening, even disgusting is curative. It has
to be voluntary. And it can't be too intense, right? Because if it gets too intense, it can
actually hurt you. But if it's voluntary and measured, that actually seems to strengthen
people, it develops resilience. And I would say that's one thing that virtually all well-trained
clinicians agree on is that that kind of exposure, whether it's discussing old difficult experiences
in an autobiographical manner, or whether it's actually going out into the world and
facing things that you're afraid of, if you're an elevator phobic, for example, you might be faced
with confronted with the necessity of at least looking at an elevator, which is something you
might avoid if you're phobic. And then so that's the first thing. So there is some pronounced human
tendency to be attracted to what's dark, because that is a pathway to mental and physical resilience.
And then the second thing is, which I also think is extremely important is
it's useful to cultivate gratitude in my estimation. And one of the ways that you can do that, because
you take a lot of what's good in your life for granted, it gets invisible, especially if it's
predictable, it gets invisible. And that's unfortunate, because it's still rare and precious.
And if you know how terrible things can be, have been or could become, then that can alert you
to how fortunate you are when all hell isn't breaking loose right now, everywhere in your life.
So, yeah, and you can also sort of learn some skill sets of how to handle these tough situations
when you get in them. And if you can see that someone went through something that's much worse,
and what did they do to deal with it? How did they get through it? What did they think about?
What did they do? You can say, okay, well, I've seen that before. And the situation,
amen, isn't quite as bad. But I know that that person took action. I know that person stood up
and made a move and made things happen and tried to move forward. And maybe that's what I should
do too. So you can definitely garner some skills from the past. Right. So that's a third element,
is that it can expand your notion of human competence. And that's, I think that's partly,
that's one of the reasons that people love watching high end sports performances.
Because you think, well, look, that's what a human being is capable of. Isn't that
so remarkable? And I am one of those. And so that's a limit case. But there's obviously room
for me to develop. And that's something that's very hopeful. And so if you are in dire straits and
you've seen that other people can get through that, you think, well, maybe I could get through that
if I could just learn how to do it. So I had a guy on my podcast who had written a book. His name
was William Reeder. And he had, he was a helicopter pilot in Vietnam. And he was shot down. Well,
he shot down two times. The first time he was shot down, he was able to make it back to friendly
lines. The second time he was shot down, he was captured. And he was captured in South Vietnam,
which is actually worse. You didn't want to get captured in South Vietnam, because then they
had to get you to North Vietnam to the prison. And getting to North Vietnam while you're patrolling
through the jungle for months on end is not a good thing. And at one point, he's in a two foot
tall bamboo cage in the jungle. And his legs are shackled. And it's nighttime. And he's trying to
sleep, but he's having trouble sleeping because the rats are gnawing at the wounds on his legs.
And so knowing that someone could suffer through that and survive and get through and make it out
the other side and then carry on with a completely productive life tells me that we are pretty resilient
as a species if we can dig deep and find that resiliency.
Yes. Well, that's exactly the kind of story that also makes you much appreciative of the fact that
you have a bed in an air conditioned room that in a house in a town that's not burning to the
ground with rioters. And you have that every night. And so you take it for granted, but
but it's still worth noting that it's a kind of miracle compared to all the alternatives that might
manifest themselves. Yeah, I think people appreciate that. I think people, you know, look, how many
movies have been made about war, countless movies have been made about war, countless books have
been written about war. So human beings are definitely have some sort of a, I don't know if
it's a fascination or at least an appreciation for the sacrifice and the effort that goes into
fighting a war. And I will tell you, and I can't speak for everybody, but certainly me and the
kids I, many of the kids I grew up with, and then many of the people that I served with,
that's what we wanted to do. We had some kind, I had some kind of an instinct. That's such a great
thing for you to be able to say, you know, because there's there, I remember watching this kid once
I saw him in Montreal, and he was standing, he's a big kid, about six, five, I would think, and
he was wearing these punk boots that were like military knockoffs, essentially. And
he was standing there, he's about 17 or 18, and he's standing there on the corner of this outdoor
shopping mall carrying these two pink shopping bags and looking completely out of place. And I
thought, you know, if you went there and offered that kid a chance to go off and have an adventure,
you know, to have a battle, he dropped those shopping bags and be gone in two seconds because
he wants something more than to be, he's not built for that. It was so incongruous, you know,
he wasn't built for that. And William James, the American philosopher, said that we needed a moral
equivalent to war, because war calls people to extremes, right, to the extremes in their life.
And there's something about that that was obviously compelling, as you, as you say,
it's uncomfortable as well to, to, to state that blatantly, because obviously peace is a
desirable condition. But the question is then, well, how do you put sufficient adventure into the
peace? And that's a very, very, that's a very complicated problem.
Yeah, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's very true in the fact that in war, I was lucky enough
to go and I was lucky enough to serve in, in combat and to be in a position of leadership in
combat. And in those situations, I was able to witness with my own eyes, on the one hand,
the most heinous and despicable acts that human beings can partake in. And I was also able to
witness with my own two eyes, these soldiers, Marines, the guys that were in my task unit,
making the most incredible sacrifices for their friends. So yes, there is an extreme
to war. And like you said, it's not something you wish on anybody. And I had this conversation
with Sam Harris a while ago, because he called me out and said, you know, you're talking about how
hard war is, and it's terrible. But at the same time, you say it's the best thing that you have
been through. And I, I asked him if he'd ever known anyone that had cancer and survived it.
And oftentimes those people will say, it's the best thing that happened to me. I wouldn't wish it
on anybody, but I'm glad it happened to me. And that's kind of how I feel about war too. I wouldn't
wish war on anybody, but I am, I wouldn't, I wouldn't trade it for anything.
So when you look, when you look back on your involvement in the war in Iraq and your country's
involvement, what, what do you make? How do you make sense out of it morally? I mean, we're in
that domain right now, you know, you tell, tell me already that you're pulled between these extreme
views. You don't wish war on anyone. I'm, I mean, if you have, do you have a son?
Yes. How old is he? 18.
Well, so, so then you think I presume, but I, or perhaps I wouldn't, I wouldn't deign to presume
if you could have what you wanted for him. Would that be peace?
Of course. Okay. Okay. Well, that, right. Well, okay. So, so let's have a little bit.
Of course, of course, but. Well, right. Right. Exactly. Well, the other thing,
the other thing that you do as far as please correct me if I get any of this wrong, but
I mean, part of what you're also offering to people is the, is the call of a kind of radical
discipline. Right. Now you post on Instagram, your, the times you wake up in the morning,
correct? Yes. 430, something like that. And pretty regularly. And I guess you do that to show people
that you can get the hell out of bed at 430 and get your day going. And. Yeah, maybe not. I would
love to tell you that I was that, um, had that much for forethought into when I started doing that,
but I was on Tim Ferriss's podcast and he told me I should join Twitter. And I kind of said,
what's that? And he showed it to me a little bit and he said, you really should join this. It's a
way you can communicate with people. And I said, okay, fair enough. So I signed up for Twitter and
whatever the next day I woke up in the morning and didn't know what to write or what to do.
So I just took a picture of my watch and, you know, here I go. And other people kind of noticed
that. And so that's kind of how that whole thing started. But yeah, well, it's not, it's not always
the case that when you do something new and creative, you know, why you do it. I mean,
sometimes you have, you've, and even if you think you know why you do it, you might find out five
years later that there were 10 other reasons that you did it that you weren't aware of at the time.
Like we live beyond ourselves all the time. That's especially true if you're entrepreneurial and
creative because you're changing who you are all the time. And there's no reason to assume
that your understanding of yourself would keep up with the changes. So my take on the Instagram
posts was, well, what I just, what I just mentioned, it's like, well, you know, yeah, you can sleep
until 10 o'clock in the morning if you want, but you can also get a jump on the day. And
I think part of what makes your, I think part of what makes what you're doing attractive
is that there's so little emphasis in our popular culture, especially, especially with regards to
the so-called mainstream media on discipline and responsibility, that there's a tremendous
hunger for anything that pertains to that. And you have a right to be discussing that, I would say,
because of your, because of your background, which if nothing else required a tremendous
amount of discipline. Yeah. And I ended up writing a book called Discipline Equals Freedom.
And I'm lucky that I wrote it when I did, because if I would have written it two years later,
everyone would have said, oh, everyone's talking about discipline now. So yeah, discipline,
absolutely. Discipline does bring you freedom in life. And that's something that I kind of
figured out over time. Well, so what do you mean by that? Like, how did you figure that out? And
what do you mean by that? Because they're often, and you know, the classic sort of, what would you
call it, romantic rebel is someone who has, is free from excessive order, let's say. They don't see,
they see freedom and discipline as antithetical rather than seeing one as a precondition for the
other. And so, so how did you learn that discipline was a precondition for freedom? If I've, if I've
got the equation, how did that manifest itself in your own life? So we'll start off by saying this,
and look, I was a young kid, I joined the Navy to go in the SEAL teams, I went through SEAL training,
I showed up at a SEAL team, SEAL team one. And when I got there, and as I look back,
this is a very powerful thing, even though it's very simple. When I was, so I'm 19 years old when
I show up at SEAL team one, I'm done with the basic SEAL training. And I have a goal in my head,
which is that, which is this, I want to be a good SEAL. That's what I want to do. That's like,
I don't know about anything else. This is what I want to do. I want to be a good SEAL. That's
what I want. I want to be a good SEAL. And so as a 19 year old with all kinds of energy, and we
haven't talked about my childhood yet, but I was kind of like a very rebellious kid when you talked
about seeing a kid that looked like you could have handed him a club or a battle axe, and he
would have probably been feeling a little bit better. I was like that. I was constantly looking
around for a club or a battle axe, because that's what I felt like I needed to do. And it was beautiful
because I was running around the, running around the woods as a young kid playing army. And I
just went and actually played army. You know, that's what I ended up doing. So I never really had to
do, do, you know, force myself into some mold that I didn't want to be into. So I got to SEAL team
one. And now I just want to be a good SEAL. That's what I want. And so now that starts steering some
of my decisions. And for the most part, it steered my decisions in a decent direction. Now there were
sometimes where as I look back now, what I thought was a good SEAL was a little bit off, but luckily
it wasn't 180 degrees off. It might have been 30 degrees or 40 degrees. And as I got older and more
mature and I figured out more about what that ideal should look like to me. And I could keep
chasing that ideal. That was good. But even to be even to be a 19 year old kid with a with a 70
or 80 degree corridor to move forward in is not a bad thing. No, it's a gift. It's a gift. Exactly.
So then I'm looking around at other SEALs that were older than me and more senior to me and trying
to figure out which one of those guys is a good SEAL. Yeah. And what I realized was that the guys
that were working harder, for the most part, were good SEALs. Now there were, look, there's just
some people that are just way talented. Right. It could show up, you know, three minutes before a run
or three minutes before we do a shooting competition, and they could just walk through it. No problem.
Right. And that's great for them. It wasn't me. I wasn't, I'm not that great at anything.
But I saw other guys that might not be a great at anything either, but they worked hard.
They showed up to work early. They did the drills that they were supposed to do.
They had discipline. And when you have a SEAL has amalgamated statistics. I hope I get this right,
but it's approximately correct. If you work 10% longer hours, you make 40% more money.
Right. And so and I think your comments about talent are also dead on. It's like,
in any field of enterprise, there are people who are phenomenally gifted.
And, and then if they work really hard, they're even more phenomenally gifted. Right. Those are
the people who break records. But that talent apart, hard work actually works. And with virtually
everything, it might not make you the best at whatever it is you're pursuing, but it will
certainly make you better than you are. And, and then I have in this, I have this new book.
I hope you got a copy because we, did you get a copy? Okay. So I'm bringing it up for a particular
reason. I have a chapter in this book called, well, there's two that are relevant. Imagine who
you could be and then aim single-mindedly at that. That's one. And then the course, or what would
you call it? A complimentary chapter is work as hard as you possibly can on one thing and see
what happens. And that's also predicated on this idea that discipline is a precondition to freedom.
So, so you were fortunate like you had this goal, right? So that meant you had a goal,
which is a really big deal, because you could learn about goals. You had a sense of
what a higher mode of moral being that I would rather be a good seal than the person I am now.
Well, it's a, it's a code of behavior and a way of perceiving. So there's an ethic in that. And
then you said as well, you know, your conception of what good seal meant changed as you matured.
But that's also fine. It wouldn't have changed unless you would have pursued that initial
only partially accurate goal. And so that's also a really good thing for people to understand is like,
if you don't know what you're doing, aim at something. Is it the right thing? No. But it's
better than just shooting randomly. So you aim at something and then as you aim and you move towards
it, you're going to find out why you're wrong. And then you might recalibrate your aim. And that's
going to happen over and over because as you move towards a goal, it recedes or it broadens or it
recedes and broadens. And otherwise you'd run out of things to do. So, but anyways, back to the,
back to the story, you're, you, you have this, this, this identity and you said it was, it was
there in you all right from the beginning, because you would play army in, in the, by yourself even
in the, in the, in the forest by your house, I presume. And how, how old were you? Do you think
when, how long back can you remember having that as a fascination? I do not remember wanting to do
anything else. So would you say what is as early, is that as early as four, three,
five preschool, something like that? Can you remember playing when you were that young?
I, I can't remember, you know, a specific age, but if I think back to, hey,
that looks like what I want to do. I remember, I want to be a soldier.
And do you, okay, you remember when you were a kid? I mean, I'm fascinated by this because
one of the things I really noted when I had kids was how much their personality was there
right from the beginning. Like my children are quite different. They have their similarities,
but they're quite different from one another. And those differences were there right from the
beginning and they've maintained themselves throughout their lives. And so it's fascinating to
see that, that destiny in some sense is built right into the person to begin with. And so,
while this was built into you by all appearances, and so it manifested it in itself in what attracted
you even in play as a, as a child. And that's the beginning of identity formulation, that, that
play. And so what was it about being a soldier that you think attracted you when you were a kid?
Like what, what was it that was so compelling? Because being a soldier is a multi-dimensional
identity. There's, there's, there's the, the, the physical combat element of it. There's the
strategic element of it. There's the, the discipline, the camaraderie. What, what were you playing,
do you think? I got asked this, I was talking to some folks at the special operations command
the other day and they asked me, they set me up with this kind of beautiful
possibility or opportunity for me to give some kind of an incredibly beautiful
answer to this very question, you know, and there was something along the lines of,
you know, at what point did the, did the opportunity to serve and sacrifice for your country
reveal itself to you or something along that, those lines. And all I'm thinking about is when I'm
eight years old, 12 years old, 15 years old, I want a machine gun and I want to go fight
in a war. That's what I want to do. I would love to tell you, I would love to tell you that I,
you know, read some heroic book. I read the odyssey and, and realized that I don't need to
read any of that stuff. Well, that wouldn't be wrong to do with eight anyways, right? I mean,
that's why I'm curious about what it was so early, you know, and so, okay, so for you,
it had something to do with weaponry, apparently, I got to tell you a story about my father, okay,
and tell me if this act, we like produces any echoes before you go. Yep.
Weaponry was like, for sure, that's fine, but it could be a club. It wasn't, it wasn't, I wasn't
a kid that was obsessed with guns. Okay. It was, and maybe it was just we're going to get out and,
and run around with sticks and try and hit each other or get into rock fights.
Do you ever have rock fights? Well, we, we had ice fights, because it was northern Alberta,
but also dirt lump fights. And now and then those would have rocks. And I can remember,
it was usually the Protestant kids against the Catholic kids. I mean, there wasn't that much
of a division between those two in our town, but the Catholic kids had their junior high and high
school and we had ours. And so our gangs were separate. And so we would have dirt lump fights
in the vacant lots where buildings were being constructed. And those were extremely exciting.
You know, now, and then you'd take a dirt lump rock in the mouth and that was a little bit on
the painful side. And, but, but, but there's no doubt that it was extremely exciting. And so,
and, you know, I cut you off about your dad and the gun. Well, my dad told me something,
and then this might be more relevant to, to, to guns, but my dad collects single shot rifles.
And he has a lot of them, like hundreds of them. And he's a gunsmith and, and makes stalks and
hand carves them. And anyways, he's, he's an artisan in that regard. And it's really, it's a,
it's a real focal obsession. He's a great shot. He shot at the provincial level,
which would be the state level in the US. But it was single shots and, and he hunted. And so we
grew up on moose meat and elk meat. And, and he brought elk into Northern Alberta as part of a
repopulation attempt. Anyways, I thought for, I could never understand his fascination with,
with guns, because it was really a deep fascination. So it was, it was something that
elicited my curiosity. And at one point I realized that he only hunted with single shots.
So he had one shot at whatever he was hunting. So it had to be a good shot. And so he was pushing
himself. And then I realized, well, he was really obsessed with hitting the target, taking aim
and hitting the target. And it was about that time I learned that the Greek word for, for sin,
hamartia meant to miss the target. So there's this tight alignment between taking careful aim
at the center of something precisely, and then bringing yourself into alignment so that you would
hit that target. There's a deep morality in that. It's a morality of hunting. It might be a
morality of combat. And it's really deeply embedded inside of people. And that was what had my father
in its grip. And so I would, I was wondering if the, if, if you're, if you're
the automatic interest that, that even the club elicited in you had something to do with that,
that seeking, that hunting, that, that target seeking, or if, you know, perhaps I'm barking up
the wrong tree, I would say. No, but when you, when you were talking about getting hit in the
head with a dirt clump and whether you get hit or not, when you get done with that situation,
you are in an elevated state of mind because that was dangerous. And it was a very high level
competition. Because even when you're throwing a baseball or, or, you know, kicking a soccer ball
around, there's no real danger in that situation. But when someone's hucking dirt clumps at your head,
you get a legitimate rush from that. And it feels good. And it feels it's exhilarating. One of the
most fun, yes, if there's no doubt that it's exhilarating, one of the most fun days I ever
had as a child, this was less dangerous. I lived next door to a policeman, an RCMP officer. And
we went out one day, I was probably about eight into my neighbor's backyard. And she had green
tomatoes everywhere, far more than she was ever going to eat. And we had a green tomato war
for like an hour and a half. And he was moving them at a pretty good velocity. So if they caught you,
especially in the head, you know, you kind of remembered it. But it was exhilarating. And it
was really fun to engage in that with him. And I really do remember that. And I do remember those,
I hadn't until today, but I do remember those dirt lump wars. And there is an exhilaration in
pushing yourself like that. So. And I also don't, I don't want to give the impression that I was,
you know, running around with camouflage paint going to high school, or I was, you know, I was
doing a bunch of other stuff too. I played soccer, I played basketball. I, we had, you know, a bunch
of different bands, we played music, I played bass in a band, I sang in a band, I played guitar.
We did all kinds of other stuff. But I was always kind of just in the back of my mind sort of
wanted to do that job. All right. So you went to the seals. And tell us about that a bit.
It was awesome. You know, it's your, you're making more money than you could ever figure out to do
with, you know, I'm 19 years old, and I am the richest person that's ever existed in my mind,
because I'm making whatever it is, however many thousand dollars every two weeks. And you know,
my expenses were nothing. And so you're just totally stoked. You're getting, you got a great job.
You're working out, you're shooting machine guns, you're blowing things up, you're hanging out with
a bunch of, bunch of other guys that like to blow things up and you, you, you can fight each other
at the drop of a hat. And then you get done with a fight and you shake hands and then, and then you
go eat a steak. And so you're just in this environment and it's perfect. It's, it's freaking
awesome. So what was it like? It was awesome. That's what it was like. It's funny. You read
accounts of the Navy SEALs and I've never read it as enthusiastic an account as that account right
there. And so then how long after you, what happened after you were done your Naval SEAL,
Naval SEAL training? What, what direction did your military career take?
Yes. So I got done with SEAL training. I went to SEAL team one. It was 1991. I just
missed the first golf war. I was all brokenhearted about that because this war had happened and I
didn't know when another one was going to happen. And so what do you do is you train and, and we
trained a bunch. I did a bunch of SEAL platoons, which is you form up with a group of guys, you
do a training cycle together as a platoon and then you go on deployment overseas. And when
there's no war going on, you go to other countries and you work with foreign nationals and you train
them on the skill sets that we have and learn some stuff from them. And then you come back and you do
it again. And then eventually from there, I went into a, where I became a trainer at SEAL team one
and taught the tactics to the SEAL platoons that were now training to go on deployment.
And I did that for a couple of years. And then I got picked up for a commissioning program
and became an officer in the SEAL teams, which moved me up into a leadership position.
And then I did a couple of deployments as a young SEAL leader. Then I had to go to college. The
Navy sent me to college because in order to be an officer in the, in the Navy, you have to go to
college and I hadn't been to college. So I went to the University of San Diego.
You went to the University of San Diego. What did you take there?
I, I was an English major.
All right. So you finished college and then what happened?
You're not going to ask me why I was an English major?
Why were you an English major?
I thought when he hears English major, he's going to say, wait a second,
here you are, this guy talking about machine guns and blowing things up.
What in God's name are you going to go study English for?
I have to say that that thought did pass through my mind.
Okay. Why was I an English major? I was an English major because believe it or not,
when you're in the SEAL teams and especially when you're in any officer position,
you have to write and read all the time. So when one of your troops does something and
they deserve some kind of recognition for that, you have to write them an award.
And if the award is written well, there's a much better chance that it'll actually
that be given to the person that you're writing it for.
You have to write evaluations for your troops and the evaluations that you write
is how your troops are judged so that they can be promoted.
On top of that, if you want to go do a mission, you have to write a concept of operations,
which is a document, which is five, six, seven, eight pages long,
that you send up the chain of command that then they scour through and see if they're
going to prove your mission or not. That's so insanely important.
One of the things, I did a talk at Harvard four years ago and I pointed out two things to the
students in the audience. One was that a tremendous amount of civilization and effort had gone into
producing the institution that they were now part of and that everyone who was part of that
institution was hoping that they would come there and learn everything they possibly could
that was relevant and important and that they would be the best possible people they could be
and they would go out in the world and do as much good as they possibly could.
That was the essential mission of the enterprise and that was really the case.
Also, that learning to write in particular was going to make them more powerful than they could
imagine and a number of students came up to me afterwards and said, I really wish someone would
have said that to us when we first came here. It's the writing part of that. I kind of got
obsessed with that when I was working as a professor and I'm working on a piece of software right now
to help, which we'll launch soon, to help people write because what I observed in my own career
and it's so interesting, the parallelism is so interesting but not surprising, is that
nothing can stop you if you can write and it's for the reasons you just laid out. It's like
when you write, you make a case for something, whatever it happens to be and if you make the
best case, well then you win and you get whatever it is that you're aiming at and so
you said maybe that's why I didn't ask you why you went into English. I guess that might have
been the reason is that the utility of learning to write is so self-evident to me that it could
pass by without question but it's also interesting to think about how it fits into this broader,
well let's say at least partially military slash strategic way of looking at things.
You describe the intense relationship between marshalling your arguments properly,
getting everything in order on the page and making strategic progress truly in the military sense
that those things are tied together very, very precisely and it's obviously your ability to
communicate as well that's, well look what it's done. You have your podcast, you have your YouTube
channel, you have your books which many of which you self-published so that ability to communicate
is it's, I just can't understand why it's not presented especially, not entirely but especially
to adventurous, well let's say young men, we could say young people. You're adventurous,
you want to make a mark, is you bloody well better learn how to write because if you learn how to
write well then you can think and you can communicate your thoughts so not only are you
deadly strategically, you become extremely convincing and then you can go and do anything
you want and no one will stop you and that's never told to people and I don't really understand why.
You know you hear the pen is mightier than the sword which is just a cliche unless it's fleshed
out but the reason, you laid out the reasons perfectly. You have to communicate what happened
as well as having it had it happen. Right so you already connected the dots but obviously
not only am I having to write and present my argument, I'm also having orders being issued to
me which are written. I'm sure you've heard the term rules of engagement, well rules of engagement
is a 12 page document that is in a bunch of legalese and I've got to translate that document
to my troops some of whom you know barely graduated high school and so I've got to be
able to do that so I've got to be able to read and then write and be able to then communicate
and talk to the team and brief them in a manner that they can actually understand what it is
I'm talking about and what it is our mission is and why we're doing this mission so that was why I
decided to study English when I went to college and so that was a conscious decision
absolutely and with that end in mind that it was so tell me exactly what the decision was
with regards to studying English what did you know that because it's not as you pointed out
it's not self-evidently the most practical of pursuits and not necessarily what you'd expect
someone with a military orientation to pursue right here's the here's the thought process
I want to be a good seal the good seals that I see can communicate they can write and they can read
that's what I need to learn how to do I need to learn how to do that better so that I can
persuade my chain of command that we need to do this mission or we need this piece of gear
or this guy over here needs to get an award or he needs to get promoted all those things
are done by being able to write and communicate properly okay so so let's say you take the example
of a seal who's got it all but this literacy okay so what what happens to him compared to someone
who has all those skills well if he can't if he can't write well and he's in charge of six guys
and one of those guys works hard or does something that deserves to be recognized
this is the responsibility of that leader to write that person an award okay so he can't reward his
he can't reward his his good workers his good soldiers he can give him a pat on the back but
a pat on the back isn't going to get him promoted an award is actually worth some points towards
your promotion and the people that are on that board that are giving that reward they're never
going to meet that leader and they're definitely not going to meet that guy there's no there's no
bias it's based on this piece of paper that you hand in you hand in this piece of paper they
read the piece of paper and they say award approved or award not approved or you want to do a mission
and you send that up the chain of command and it's the same thing it gets to a certain point
where they're just looking at it and reading and trying to decipher this pile of junk that you've
put together and by the way if I'm in charge and Jordan sends me a concept of operations
that doesn't make any sense why would I possibly let you go out and execute an operation that I
can't even understand what it is you're trying to do so it has a huge impact it has a huge impact
okay well I'm dwelling on this because it's it's upsetting to me I would say that
young people in particular aren't stringently instructed that the ability to that literacy
makes them powerful in every way they can possibly imagine except the absolutely immediate
and so it's just sad to me that it's not sold in that manner you want to be weak
stay illiterate you want to be strong it's like put yourself together physically fair enough man
get brave and street smart but then you could add some literacy to that and you're an unstoppable
machine so I concur 100% and you know you said being literate makes you powerful and
throughout recent history if we're trying to oppress someone what we don't want them to be
able to do is read or write or or articulate themselves right well we haven't even talked
about reading you know we just talked about writing and fair enough so but obviously you
studied English so you also read and so what's the advantage to that as far as you're concerned
practically speaking well obviously there are so many lessons that you can pull out of
books and you you can get to a point where nothing really surprises you because you've
at least seen some indication of what can unfold through reading so again for me it's
very much focused on combat and war but there's there's lessons that you learn and you say oh
I've seen that before there's a book it's it is a book called about face which I think the last
time you and I talked you were I think you were writing the forward for for the gulag and I was
about to write the forward to I don't know if that's your favorite book but I was lucky enough
to be able to write the forward for my favorite book which was re-released because I was talking
about it all the time and the book is called about the book is called about face and it's
about a guy that was in the Korean War and that he was in the Vietnam War and his name is Colonel
David Hackworth but I would read that book when I was on deployment I would read open up that book
anywhere and I would read two pages or three pages before I'd go to bed if I was in my bed that night
and there were so many lessons that correlated to what I was actually going through and a real
obvious example was when he was in Vietnam he's working with the South Vietnamese soldiers and
therefore by proxy the South Vietnamese government and guess what they're all corrupt and they're
not motivated and they don't have the right gear and here we are in Iraq and we're working with
Iraqi soldiers and therefore by proxy we're working with the Iraqi government guess what
they're all corrupted they're they're they're not well equipped and how do you how did he deal with
it how do we deal with it so there's an example of when you read you can learn and you don't have to
you don't have to go through the school of hard knocks you don't have to get punched in the face
repeatedly with things that turn out to be situations that other people have absolutely
gone through and the amount of the amount of the the the the level of capability increases
so much by seeing something one single time well if I see something one time I'm I'm infinitely
better than if I'd never seen it before so if it's like those those little puzzles they give
you a little puzzle some kind of a mind bender right the mind benders only work on you one time
the riddle only works on you one time then you I know the answer to that that's the answer you
know you never get fooled by that again so just knowing just seeing it one time you're
infinitely better so when you read enough you're capturing all these lessons and and you know what
it's I gotta say this it's not just reading it's not just reading and and I learned this
because as I started doing my podcast and many of my podcasts are just me reading books
I realized how to read more intently even more intently than I did when I was going to college
and I was going to be you know writing a paper about a book and so I'd read it in a certain way
but you even that reading was a little bit detached a little bit detached because you're
looking for a theme or you're looking for character development or what have you but
when you read to learn about human nature and life you you you detach less and you kind of
put yourself in there and you experience it a little bit closer and then when you take a step
back you go oh yeah I I know what he was thinking right there because I was right there with him
and so there's a certain attitude you kind of have to put yourself into the work and and really
read it with that kind of intensity if for lack of a better word is it is it possible for human
being to read intensely because that's what I try and do I get that's no different than than acting
intensely or playing intensely of course you want to put the book on you want to become that person
that can rattle you up man especially if the person is thinking all sorts of things that you've
never thought I mean I love reading for that reason I could pick my peers too which I really
loved it's like well you know I have these people around me but then there's these people who who've
lived before me and in different places and I can set them up on my shelf I can enter into their
world and I can benefit from everything they've thought and saturate myself with that person
it's and it's very disruptive especially if the person that you're reading has a mind that's more
powerful and more well developed than your own I mean Friedrich Nietzsche spun me around for
about three years and I was reading Jung at the same time intensely and the same thing you know it
was very disruptive but unbelievably useful unbelievably useful to try on other people
like that and you get the benefit of their entire life distilled into their into their book you
know it it's 30 years of work I read this one book called the Neuropsychology of Anxiety which
is a it's a great scientific work I think it's the greatest neuropsychological work
of the last 50 years it's very hard book I think it has 1800 references something like that and
this guy Jeffrey Gray he actually read all those references and he understood them and so it took
me six months to read the book but I got an entire education out of it I got to experience in six
months what it took him 30 years to learn like what a gift that is it's it's it's unbelievable
I was I was listening to an interview with Gary Kasparov I think you said Russian he was a chess
world champion for 20 years something like this and he they asked him anyway the the interviewer
didn't ask him directly if he could beat this young young guy named Magnus Carlson who's the
current kind of prodigy of chess he's just phenomenal and the highest chess rating ever
etc etc and he didn't get asked directly if he could beat him but it was definitely implied
if I remember the interview correctly and and it was very interesting to me Gary Kasparov
there was two things that I found interesting number one was he said he's younger than me
and he didn't mean that and like if that was an advantage for for Gary he meant it he's younger
than me so he has an advantage as an advantage because he's younger and I kind of thought to
myself well that's kind of weird because this isn't a physical this isn't a wrestling match this
isn't a jujitsu match why would that help and then sure enough you learn a little bit about
cognitive decline and Gary Kasparov is 57 years old when he did this interview and and guess what
you start well depending on who you are but you start to see cognitive cognitive decline
around that time and I'm sure it kicks in at 25 well there you go there's you can IQ is pretty
unitary but you can fracture it into crystallized and and fluid and fluid IQ is what enables you to
learn and it declines from 25 onward crystallized intelligence continues to grow roughly speaking
because it's partly dependent on such things as vocabulary which you can learn and which accumulate
but interestingly enough you know you were talking about physically the best way to stave off cognitive
decline is not cognitive activity it's exercise weightlifting and cardiovascular exercise can
is the it's by far the most potent means of staving off cognitive decline yeah so Kasparov
would have the advantage in terms of experience but the younger guy would have the edge on sheer raw
brain power that's what I thought too that's what I thought too but guess what it's wrong and it's
wrong for the exact reason that you just said so Magnus Carlson when he's 11 years old he gets to
open up a book and see every single match and move that Gary Kasparov ever made right that's what they
do they document that stuff of course and so what he got to do was what you got to do you got to
learn a person's 30 years experience in six months well this young kid so so this where it might have
taken Gary Kasparov you know eight years or four years to figure out how to get out of some particular
quandary on the chessboard well Magnus just opened to a page in a book and said oh that if I ever get
into that quandary I'm there and so what Magnus got to do is he got to start from here right and build
and so I make this point from a leadership perspective yeah we can do the same things
as as leaders we don't have to figure all this stuff out we can jump up to Gary Kasparov's level
or at least get a baseline of what he knew and and win because we learned very interesting to me
well you think and again with regards to selling this sort of thing you know I'm stunned that it's
possible to make history boring for example people should be so enthralled with history
that they can't get enough of it but with reading you imagine you have this opportunity to learn
whatever you want from the greatest people who ever lived along that dimension and and
well it's stunning to me that that is a hard sell it's mysterious that that it's
that that it isn't something that everyone is just clamoring for I mean that to me that points to a
devastating failure inadequacy of the education system a mysterious inadequacy yeah there's a
I think maybe the transaction isn't always clear for people I always talk about well if you're
going to sell somebody if you're going to sell somebody a book you know if I'm going to sell
you a book Jordan you've got to give me $20 and eight hours of your time right that that's what
you know you're going to give me you're going to give me $20 and you're going to give me
eight hours of time which you would probably you know have other things that you might need to do
and the transaction is not always clear of what you're going to get out of that especially when
look you can spend a lot of time reading books and not get as much as you might want you might not
get your $20 worth out of a book so you have to be somewhat selective now luckily it's not even that
hard to figure out which books to read because there's so many reviews and and and history about
where these books came from and the and the productivity that they resulted in so but I
think it's hard sometimes for look I can I can only speak for myself when I was younger
it was really hard for me to figure out that transaction yeah fair enough like I had a librarian
when I was 13 who told me what to read which is what a teacher should do right there's nothing a
teacher can do for you that's better than say well here's 10 books that will change you completely
and who actually knows that to be the case one of the things I'd really like to do I I've toyed with
well with the whole concept of online education one thing I'd really like to do is to
divide up the variety of domains of learning and identify the top 10 books in each domain
so to ask an expert it's like well you're a historian you're a great historian
what 10 books are crucial and I have a list on my website a list of recommended books there's
about 100 of them that have been instrumental for me and lots of people have used that list to
purchase books so that's been really good but I'd really like to extend extend and expand it yeah I
have the same thing on my website the books from the podcast and same thing all kinds of those books
get sold and it's it's beautiful to see but the people that are checking the website or listening
to the podcast they know that those books have been through a filter they're there for a reason
they're there because they're going to be worth that transaction and I think that's a tough sell for
for a lot of people they can't figure out maybe they've invested in books before and they didn't
quite get the return on investment that they wanted and buy two or three books and 50 or 60
dollars and 20 or 30 hours yeah that's that's a great observation I think because one of the
advantages to coming from a literate background is that you do in fact reduce the transaction costs
because there's an infinite number of books I mean well no there isn't but as far as we're
concerned there might as well be and so the question of what to read really is daunting if you don't
know anyone who reads like where do I start and and and how can I not be a fool in doing this so
well okay back to English so what what were you reading when you were in university was it was
it fiction novels was it nonfiction what what were you what were you focusing on
it was like your basic English literature that's what I studied and so I read everything I read
everything you know from each one of the little periods and it took the various classes and and
really as trite as this may sound it was actually the the most impact was from Shakespeare there's
the most impact on on multiple levels and I'll tell you the primary level and when I've covered
Shakespeare on my podcast I explain this to people people think well you know I didn't really
understand I read it and understand it and I so I start off when I talk about Shakespeare on my
podcast I start off by saying listen if you think you're gonna just pick up Shakespeare open it up
and read it and understand it you're not going to because it's barely written in English it's
barely written in English it's almost another language and so you're not going to be able to
just pick it up and read through it it's it's it's written in an almost other language so what you
have to do is you have to start to interpret it and so what I realized with with Shakespeare is
number one the weight of the words that these words were so pregnant with meaning that you had to
pull those words and parse those words and pull those words apart to see all the depth that each
individual word had and then the way that they're put together and what was great about this was
by the time I was back because then I went right back into the SEAL teams and somebody would hand
me a rules of engagement document and that was written by some lawyer in Washington DC and I'd
pull it out and say wait a second this word I don't know what this word means let's pull this
word out let's see what this let's see what this actual definition of this particular word is and
how that changes my viewpoint of these rules of engagement and how can I translate that for my
troops so that they actually know what to do so that part for me was from a reading perspective
starting to read Shakespeare and and saying oh okay you're not gonna understand this and if you
don't understand something that's okay you pull out the Oxford English dictionary and you look it up
and then you not just find out what the meaning of the word is but what's the root word and where
does it come from and what kind of depth and what kind of yeah that's really that's that's
unbelievably useful too to discover the connotation of words and the Oxford English dictionary is
particularly good for that because you you discover things that you'd never guess by looking at how
the word developed I mentioned the word hamartia like the fact that the word for sin was derived
from an archery concept was revelatory to me it's like that's so cool it ties this moral concept
abstract philosophy back down to something as as primordial as weaponry and hunting and just the
fact that that's the metaphor is absolutely fascinating and and then there's the overlap
in meaning that I already referred to and virtually every word is like that because word is an
ancient artifact it's like it's like an it's like an animal in some sense it has an evolutionary
history and it transforms across time and each word kind of it carries the echoes of its past
with it too because each word um attracts other words in a particular unique way so it kind of
lives in a word ecosystem as well and the ecosystem contain information about the history of that word
and you think well why is that important it's like well hey guess what you think in words you
talk in words you have all these archaic uh what are what these archaic entities these words these
living entities that you use it's like the more you know about them the more you know about you
the more you know about other people and the better you are at formulating and communicating
your ideas there's nothing there's nothing lost in that kind of investigation nothing there's
nothing but gain there so yeah and that's that was so that was the uh that was the English
road for me and and it was good thing I asked you that question hey yeah I'm really really
insightful for you to come up with that thank you thank you all right so so and you did you
did you enjoy university did you find a community there no okay so when I was going to university
I was married I I had two kids when I got to university I had three kids when I left I was
not a university student I was in fact in fact I would sit in the front row during my classes I
would have three pencils and three pens lined up and staged on my desk I would be ready to take
notes when the when if the teacher said something I didn't understand I'd be sitting in the front
row raised my hand I don't understand what you just said can you explain that and I mean you
know I'm 28 years old and there's a bunch of 18 years old in there and they just want to you know
go out and hang out with their friends and I'm there I'm in there to I'd love to really sound
come off sounding good and tell you that I was there to learn but I was there to get A's which
meant I did have to learn so I went at it as a competition and I was competing not with the other
students I was competing with the teachers because I'm a little bit crazy sometimes I would want to
make sure that they couldn't ask me a question on their test that I didn't know the answer to
so that's what I did and so did I have fun maybe not and one thing I when I got back to the seal
teams what I told the guys I'd say you know what I learned in college and they'd say what and I said
I learned never ever ever ever get out of the teams ever never get out of sorry get out of never
get out of the teams the seal teams never get out of the team okay okay well you know I taught
older students in Boston and undergraduates and the the undergraduates especially in Boston but
also at the University of Toronto were very very bright and generally very hard working the older
students were generally not as highly selected but man they were committed and most of them had had
jobs that they weren't thrilled with let's say and had a hunger for what education could bring
them that the younger people lacked and so it does seem to me often and maybe this is just because
I'm getting older that after high school it might be good for people who want to pursue university
to go do something that they're qualified for which isn't much at that point for a year or two
so that when they do go to college or university they understand just exactly what they're being
offered yeah but I couldn't agree more working in the regular world will definitely make you
appreciate the opportunities that you may have if you go and learn more in the world
all right so you you came out of university you had three kids you were married what happens next
go back to the SEAL teams and go through the rest of my career I showed up at a SEAL team
September 11th had happened so I show up at a SEAL team I become a platoon commander at a SEAL
team and then go on deployment I get done with that deployment that deployment was primarily to
Baghdad although we worked kind of all over Iraq got done with that deployment I went and became
the aid to camp for the admiral that was in charge of all the SEALs at that point in time
and so that was sort of an well not even sort of it was a very administrative job but it was also
a huge opportunity for me to get to see the SEAL community in the most broad way that I could
so I got to learn a lot there and then I went back to a SEAL team and was now what's called the
task unit commander which is two SEAL platoons combined together and I was in charge of two
SEAL platoons combined together which is called the task unit my task unit was called task unit
bruiser and we deployed to Ramadi Iraq and that was in the summer of 2006 very tough fighting
very tough battle and came home from that deployment hey so could I let me let me ask you
there so can you tell me can you describe a typical day or a typical week like what was it
like to be there I'd like all the details what you get tell me what happens when you get up in
the morning what did your day look like so we're there we showed up there and as soon as we got
there and we knew going into it in 2005 2006 if you can remember watching the news in 2005 2006
just about every day you would see in the news that there was
three soldiers killed in al-Ambar province or five marines killed in al-Ambar province or three
marines wounded in al-Ambar province and the capital of al-Ambar province is the city of Ramadi
and the vast majority of those casualties were happening inside the city of Ramadi and we knew
that going there and when you say we you say we were deployed there who are you you're obviously
referring to the country to your country but who what does we mean when you make when you say that
but when I say we in this particular case I'm talking about my seal task unit so I had and
that's how many how many people yeah so I had about 35 to 40 seals most of the time and then
another 60 around 60 support personnel and these people are armorers that you know can fix our
weapons and and mechanics that can fix our humvees and intelligence people that gather information
for us and radio operators that can receive our radio calls so there's a big support network that
goes with the the seal task unit as we deployed and why was it a seal enterprise what what was
specific about this deployment that that required this the whatever it is that the seals bring and
what is it exactly that the seals bring that's specific so on this particular deployment at this
at this point in time seals were deploying to iraq all the time we were there was always seals
in iraq my first deployment was in 2003 2004 and we were in the beginning of that deployment we were
the only seal platoon there and then by this time there would be many more seals I forget what the
number is but so we were in iraq and we were conducting special operations missions and
in particular in romadi when we got there so us standard seal operation on my first deployment
was get gather intelligence from various sources so so through various sources we would gather
intelligence about the location of a bad guy okay so you had you had a variety of people who were
targets identified and they were leaders of of what made what marked them out as bad
what were their characteristics these are these are people well we want to talk about
their psychological character no no no I mean you might be able to do a better job than that
I can tell you what they were doing for a living was trying to kill americans trying to kill coalition
forces trying to kill other iraqis trying to create chaos and mayhem for the interim government in
iraq these are and were they generally leaders of leaders of a group that you would target or
the are these people who were involved in the army on the other side or like put them in context
yeah so there's no there's no I mean the iraqi army is actually on our side right so these the
iraqi army is our friends and that's who we're working alongside and now early in the war not
so much because the the coalition forces made a decision to disband the entire iraqi military
right right well this is why I wondered if there were people with on the military to what degree
there were people with military chanting that were facing you yes so since that happened a lot
and as a matter of fact in in the city of ramadi there were there used to be a massive
military iraqi military base there and so a bunch of former iraqi military lived there
there was a whole area that was called the it was there was an area called the
officer housing there was an area in ramadi that was called the officer housing where iraqi
officers used to live so and I'm not nailing that name but it's something like that um so yes there
was there was former iraqi regime army people that were out there fighting there was also foreign
fighters and so would they have their own little groups their bands of people that were fighting
with them you were and you were targeting leaders I'm just wondering how people were selected so
the the seals were after specific individuals generally speaking yes and here's what we figured
out if you only target the leaders well it's going to be a lot harder to catch them because
they're laying low and they're moving around and and they try and they try and give misinformation
about where they are and whatnot so what we'd go and go out and grab you know one of their
lieutenants grab one of their soldiers and find out where the lieutenant is grab the lieutenant
find out where the leader is so we there would be these cell networks these little these little
networks and maybe they're a mortar cell and they're they're dropping mortars they're a roadside bomb
cell and that's what they're doing and so we would figure out who these bad guys were and then
through these various intelligence sources we would find out a location maybe it was a mid-level
guy maybe it was a high level guy maybe it was a low level guy and then once we know their location
we're going to get them so what what were the typical motivations of the people that you were
pursuing what what were they fighting for so there's a variety of motivation yeah some of the
you know if you're a front line guess what if you're a 15 year old kid with no money
guess what's a good motivator money and you and these the insurgents to be yep the insurgents
say hey we'll give you 100 bucks to go launch an rpg at the american base so that's their motivation
end of story the higher you get up the chain of command the the more you're going to start
leaning towards legitimate jihadists that now there's jihadists throughout the chain of command
don't get me wrong and and i mean hardcore jihadists and and i remember the first time i
was in my first deployment the first time i saw a legit hardcore jihadist you can tell
that these this guy hated us and it was very clear from the look on his face when we captured him
it was completely he was filled with seething hatred so there's jihadists throughout the
chain of command and that guy was like i'm so so so the the jihadist motivation was
well by definition in some sense a religious motivation but your experience of it was that
it was primarily a visceral hate and hatred for what do you think i mean obviously you're an
occupying force let's say and you know and and america is seen at at least among the jihadists
of that time as as a truly satanic force i suppose i mean what's motivating what was your experience
of what was motivating the hatred yes it's everything you just said but i mean you can
trace it all the way back to the israeli palestinian conflict i mean you can they're they're gonna
draw and see view view the west as evil as the great satan and and so that's what what did you
think at that point about the morality of the endeavor i mean because this is why i'm curious
like and please do correct me i'm sure i'm wrong about many of the things that i think but
it seems to me that the clearer your moral sense when you're engaged in a battle the more likely
you are all things considered to win because you're not part of you isn't going to be fighting
against you right and i mean in any enterprises like that if i you know i find that if i'm involved
in a prod project and i have reservations then the part of me that has reservations 20 percent of me
pushes against the other 80 percent and then i'm only 60 percent as effective as i might be
and so whenever i engage in an enterprise i try to walk through it ethically and see well am i
actually committed to this what qualms do i have what what doubts do i have what resistances do i have
because that's going to make me weak and so when you go into battle i presume it's the same thing
that you have to believe i know they say that soldiers also fight very hard for the guy who's
in the foxhole next to them so there's that brotherhood camaraderie but you go there as
a representative of your country as well your nation and and there is that there has to be
that ethical dimension to it and so what how did you guys deal with that
looking at what we're doing and and what's what's really interesting is even though when you stare
at it from a strategic perspective when you say oh as a western power as this country we're going
in here and we could argue all day long about whether that's a right call or a wrong call
whether that's morally correct or whether it's an immoral move we could have arguments about
that all day yes well they've been going on for 3000 years in the middle east right right endless
arguments about what's right and and here's what here's what one of the nice benefits of being on
the ground is you get to see what's happening what's actually happening so what you see in
iraq when you're actually on the ground is for instance in ramadi what you see and what we saw
is the iraqi populace who are a bunch of normal people that want to carry out their lives and
raise their kids and run whatever business they're going to run that's what they want to do they want
to they want they actually want life liberty and the pursuit of happiness is what they want
that's a normal iraqi family when we would when we would go to an iraqi family's house that's
pretty much what you're dealing with and amongst those normal people that just want to live their
lives in peace there are insurgents and the insurgents want power they want control and
they are willing to do anything to get it and so when you see fathers beheaded and their heads
left in the yard of a family because he had you know had really he was he was working with a shake
that had said things against al-qaeda and now this guy is beheaded uh we there was a guy that
was skinned alive there was torture there was rape so when you are on the ground and you see
this stuff happening and you see the local populace clapping and cheering when you kill insurgents
your strategic vision isn't quite in focus as much as what you're seeing right in front of you
with your own two eyes and so therefore the 20 of you that might be arguing whether this is right
or wrong when you see families slaughtered you you very quickly tell that 20 of your brain
that you don't you need to look at what's happening right here this is this this is this is immoral
and we need to do what we can to help these people and do you did you feel then and and then again
now i mean it's a quagmire it's an ethical quagmire the middle east and so it seems in some sense
that no matter what you do there it's wrong and and i'm not trying to convince you of that believe
me i'm i'm really curious about this you felt when you were there that you were on the side
that was doing the right things do you um and now when you look back i mean i don't know what to make
of what what happened with the us in the middle east over the last 15 years i'm just as happy and
perhaps you are as well there's less engagement in foreign wars now than there was 10 years ago in
the us right that seems to have receded to some degree and that perhaps that's a good thing
what do you think about the about about america's involvement in iraq what what conclusions have
you come to so you talked about this argument that you're going to have in your own head
well you are also going to have that argument on a national level right you're going to have
a national level argument of whether this is the right thing or the wrong thing to do so my
scale my measure of this is if you are going to go to war if you are going to go to war
you have to make sure before you go that you have the proper will the proper will and there's
two types of will that you need to have if you're going to go to war the first type of will that you
need to have if you're going to go to war is you have to have the will to kill
you have to have the will to kill and guess what i am sorry to inform everybody it is not just the
will to kill the enemy because when you go to war war is an imperfect is an imperfect endeavor
and no matter how hard you try to just kill the the enemy you will kill civilians you will kill
women you will kill children that is what is going to happen that is what is going to happen
if you go to war so you have to make sure you have the will to do that that sometimes you're
going to drop a bomb and it's going to land and it's going to kill women and children that's what's
going to happen and anybody that thinks anything different is naive and ignorant
and we seem to let our politicians often convince us that that's possible but it's not
so you have to have the will to kill and then on top of that obviously you have to have the will
to die you have to have you have to know and understand that if you embark in a war
your sons and daughters are going to be killed that is what is going to happen and anybody that says
it's not going to happen is naive and ignorant now i think before we go to war oftentimes we
rationalize that we can mitigate the risk of killing we can mitigate the risk of dying
and for some reason we think we can mitigate those risks down to zero which is impossible
so if you have the will if you look at a situation and say we need to do something here
for moral reasons for national security reasons we need to take action okay so let me ask you a
question there if you don't mind um you know whenever i have had to take difficult action in
the past so take to take a risk my justification for that so what allowed me to organize my will
let's say was a belief that inaction was a worse crime so
i'm trying to think through what it takes to conjure up the will that you just described
morally speaking and it's very difficult to talk about the morality of war but it's absolutely
necessary clearly do you believe that in the situation in iraq do you think that
the argument was laid forth it's it's it's such a it's it's
so there was a terrible attack on new york 9 11 and the response was
focused on iraq that's correct so far yes i'm afghanistan immediately and yes
thereafter focused on iraq yes all right it was never obvious to me why the focus shifted to iraq
do you do you have any sense of why that was i know that there was a lot of thought at the highest
levels of the american government prior to 9 11 about iraq and so there was a plan that was already
in some sense in place for iraq but it isn't obvious to me why attention was shifted towards iraq
in the aftermath apart from the fact that that plan already existed i think the shift came
from i'm trying to think of some kind of a metaphor here but you know you've got you've
got some rats in you know in the garage and the rats have nod through some of the wiring
and so you go and you you know you try and kill the rats in the garage and you realize you know
what this isn't the only place that these rats seem could could be there could also be some
rats over here in the basement and we have wires over there too we better go handle that situation
as well you said that you were overwhelmed by the reality of the situation on the ground
my first deployment to iraq we we worked with we we just worked with seals basically all the
operations we did was just with seals when we went back to iraq and ramadi we were ordered
to work with iraqi soldiers now the iraqi soldiers were poorly trained they were poorly
equipped they had low motivation some of them were not very trustworthy and we were going out
into the worst battlefield on planet earth at the time and it was it was pretty hard to make sense
of that order right mm-hmm but when i thought through the order you know why why is why is
why is my senior leadership ordering me to do this well the answer is quite clear
after i thought about it a little bit hey the reason that we have to do this is because
we need to work with the iraqi soldiers so that the iraqi soldiers become proficient enough
that they can handle the security in their own country of course yes okay so my my my
my senior leadership isn't telling me to do something because they want me to die
or want my troops to get wounded and killed they're telling me to do something because
it's a strategic move where in hopefully two or three years the iraqi military will be
at a level where they can handle security in their own country okay got it okay that's part one
well when when we got ordered to work with iraqi soldiers it wasn't just it wasn't just
my seal tasking it was everyone all coalition forces all american army and marine corps
was getting told you'll work with iraqi forces and everyone kind of had that nervous feeling
right hold on a second you want me to have this person that has a rusty ak-47 and a pair
of sandals you want that person to to support me out on the battlefield that doesn't make
any sense and so what the american forces did was when they were ordered to take iraqi soldiers
with them on an operation and they would go out with a platoon of 40 americans and they would take
two iraqis with them because they were told to take iraqis plural so that means two that's what
we're gonna do and they leave them in the hun v and they go conduct their operations well senior
leadership got wind of this and this obviously is not in the spirit of what we're being told to do
you're not going to get a nation's army trained up by taking two soldiers out so the next thing
the leadership said was okay here's the new order for every one american that you bring out
you have to have seven iraqi soldiers with you so yeah that's different so they imposed a ratio on
us now ramadi at this time was a complete war zone other parts of iraq were actually somewhat
pacified and in many of those pacified areas that order actually made sense the the the iraqis in
some area the iraqi soldiers in some areas were actually capable of conducting decent operations
with very little american oversight and the level of violence in those areas wasn't that bad so it
was okay well in ramadi it didn't make any sense whatsoever so i'm being ordered to take one seal
for every seven iraqi soldiers well first of all because of the fighting was so bad in ramadi
many of the iraqi units only had 10 or 15 or 20 people in their platoon so if i was going to send
out seals i would only be able to send out two seals 15 iraqi soldiers so now which two seals
am i going to send am i going to send the medic well i want to send a medic for sure but guess
what i also need to send a machine gunner in case we get into a firefight well what about the
radio man that actually calls for help what about the point man that actually knows where we're going
what about the leader who's going to make decisions out there what about the explosive ordinance
disposal guy that can dismantle bombs from going off so who am i supposed to leave behind
it doesn't make any sense the the danger to the troops is so much higher in that situation
so what did i do did i say that's what i'm being ordered to do no i took all this into
consideration and i and i you'll appreciate this i wrote a point paper up my chain of command
explain the situation of what was happening explain the number of casualties explain the
level of violence explain the size of the iraqi elements that we were working with and said can
i please get a waiver for this and allow me to take however many seals i've deemed necessary to
take to be safe and my chain of command read it and said yeah sure jockel do whatever you want to do
thank you so that's okay so what what you what you're what you're telling me is that you take
what you're told to do and you take what you know to be the case on the ground and you try to do
do try to take both of them into account as much as possible while you're also shunting information
back up the hierarchy hopefully to modify their decisions the decisions they're making that aren't
in accordance with the reality on the ground right right so you do i mean you do your best
under the circumstance but that that makes that that that seems to be that's that seems to be a
good answer but but it escalates obviously it can escalate higher than that right it can
the decisions the orders that we're being given can escalate to a point where maybe this entire
thing that we're doing i think is wrong right right okay so now we get into a situation where
and the reason that i i have to explain all these other things is because it happens very rarely
it happens very rarely that you know someone in the military is looking at a decision that's
being made up on a big scale and says i think this is totally and completely wrong now i will tell you
and i wrote about this in my last leadership book leadership strategy and tactics
if you're being told to do something that you
believe is completely wrong well i would love to tell you that that's a black and white decision
but guess what it's not even that's not a black and white decision because jordan if you order me
to go and assault a machine gun nest that's that's on a hill with my squad
and i know that this is a machine gun nest in a bunkered position in an elevated position
with interlocking fields of fire and if we go up that hill we're all gonna die
and i look at you and say hey hey boss i don't think that's a good call they're
elevated they're bunkered they're interlocking this doesn't make any sense and you go no jocco
shut up and do it i said no i'm telling you jordan this isn't a good idea and you say no
shut up and do it now here's my decision point if i say you know what i will not do it i will not do
it you know what you do you go cool jocco you're fired and you get your yes man come over and your
yes man comes in you say go assault that machine gun nest and he takes the squad up and he gets
everybody killed so i surrendered my influence when i when i drew that line in the sand and said no
and you doomed other people to death and i doomed other people to death now my boss orders me you
order me and i say okay boss got it you you you definitely want me to do this there's no way out
yes you definitely got to do it okay all right guys here's what's happening we're gonna start
we're gonna get into a covered position we're gonna start maneuvering towards this thing
we're gonna see what kind of fire we receive if we start receiving overwhelming fire
i'm gonna lock some of you guys in that position and i'm gonna send another squad over to the flank
and we're gonna we're gonna take out this machine gun from nest from another angle or
i'm gonna hunker down in that position and we're gonna call for air support so i go you're decomposing
you're actually decomposing the process then into micro elements and then testing the micro
elements then you can report back with that information yes right right very smart very
we have to be very careful so when you talk about oh i don't think we should go into iraq
i don't think we should go okay so what am i gonna do hey i don't think we should go now
are there times where that might be the right decision there are some times like that where
maybe i think that me as a senior leader standing up and saying no to my boss is gonna make you
know jordan suddenly looks at me goes wait a second jocco's always been a good guy and now
we're sitting here telling me no he's really serious about maybe i maybe i'm not seeing something
maybe i can get you to rethink your position that's a risky move though it's always a risky
move to kind of draw a line in the sand yeah kind of an ultimatum because if you use up your capital
you burn your leadership capital it's even worse than that you just completely surrender your
leadership guy you don't even use it you you you obliterated it's gone you have no more influence
you're done so we have to think very long and hard about those things and so when it if i was
i was never put in a position like where i didn't where where i thought that what we were doing as
a country was wrong i'll tell you actually probably the closest i've come to that was i think it was
1993 the the massacre was unfolding in rwanda there was the the um the uh who twos were killing
the tutsis by the hundreds of thousands and i was on a navy ship um off the coast of off the
coast of africa on standby to go into rwanda as this slaughter took place took place and
we didn't do anything we didn't do anything so that's the cost of not going to war there
it's the cost of not going to war and and there's a very you know it's a very interesting i'm sure
you've heard of the the the massacre that took took place in me line vietnam and and one of the most
interesting things in that reprehensible scenario is
what stopped it what's so this is this this this horror is unfolding there's there's murder
mutilation rape just going berserk a company of american soldiers is murdering raping mutilating
bodies just absolutely heinous absolutely reprehensible and while this is happening a
helicopter pilot comes in and sees what's going on and these guys have lost their mind really
the guys on the ground have lost their mind the helicopter pilot flies back to base he walks into
the tactical operation center and says hey they are killing civilians out there the commanding
officer gets on the phone and says hey stop killing people and they stopped immediately
they stopped immediately that's that's what tells you how important leadership is
leadership is the most important thing on the battlefield and if you have a leader that's going
to let things start to go in this direction all it takes is one person to step up and say hey everyone
stop what you're doing this is wrong so you get a situation like rwanda we didn't really do anything
we we didn't do anything and what would it have taken if if we rolled in there and said hey no
more stop do they look around with their machetes covered in blood and wake up of their neighbors
and say oh wait a second yep okay we're gonna stop so i'm not saying these are easy predicaments
but certainly you know the idea of are there situations where it's better to do something
than nothing i'll tell you what rolling into Baghdad and going into Saddam Hussein's torture
chambers which we did and you see the the the uh the the hook there was hooks like hooks hanging
from ceilings and and drainage where blood would drain in these torture chambers you see that a
couple times and you think i'm okay with us being in here and getting rid of this guy
i'm gonna switch topics i want to talk to you about your books and i'd like to know look you
said right at the beginning of this interview that you wanted to be the best navy seal good navy
seal that's what you said you didn't say the best you want to be a good navy the best was aiming a
little bit too high yeah i know that's why i wanted i wanted to get the words right um what are you
doing now but you i mean i i presume that that your life is still being lived in an expansion
of that the pursuit of that initial ideal you've transformed multiple times you're a civilian you
you're you're a communicator mass communicator in a variety of different in a variety of different
ways i think you mentioned we were talking offline a little bit for example that you have a clothing
line and i'm going to ask you about that because that's that's that's a curious thing to me um
and that is i'm definitely curious about that but like what's your mission and is that the right
question is that an appropriate question so there's a there's there's a there's a there's a quality
let's call it so as i as i went through that that as i created in my mind that ideal of of what a
good seal is what is a good seal and and i'm sure you could i could say okay what do you think
jordan oh he's probably strong and he's probably fast and he's probably smart and he's probably
tactically sound and he can probably shoot a weapon straight and all those things absolutely all
those things are there and as you would kind of burn away the the or if you were to set up a hierarchy
of importance of what makes a good seal yeah you might think that some people would think oh well
it's probably being the best shot or it's probably being the strongest or it's probably being really
good in the water all those things all those skills that you think it might be and you could
talk to different seals and they would all kind of you know some guy would say it's running some
guys say it's strong some guy would say it's a best shot whatever best tactician
but if you offered them one thing
99.9 percent of seals would agree on what makes you a good seal
and that is you look out for your teammates
you put your team above yourself yeah so that's a real inversion of the things that you just
described a because all of those things are dimensions along which you could be excellent
in a manner that distinguishes you from the group and elevates you above them but you derive from
that acclaim that that should all be subordinate to a reciprocity and any seal that's a good seal
would tell you that that would be at the top of the hierarchy you can be the best shot yeah
you can be the best shot you can be the best diver you can be the strongest you can be the
fastest you can be the best tactician if you don't take care of your teammates
none of that none of those other things matter you you're not even wanted in the seal teams
that's that's that's what it is so well do you think that that seems to me to be true for
functional organizations in general is that and and certainly the people I've seen this is part of
the reason why casual critiques of hierarchies annoy me so much because the people I've seen
who are radically successful don't get there from power they get there from mobility but also
reciprocity and yeah um 100 right so when you say to take care to look out for and to take
care of I think you said to look out for what flesh that out what does that mean in the situations
that you've been in and how did that guide your behavior it's a it's a it's it's a literal constant
daily hourly by the minute attitude which is okay hey my my buddy needs me to to to move over there
and cover for that area that's what i'm going to do my buddy needs to me to bring him some more
ammunition my buddy needs to me to help him clean this weapon my buddy needs to you carry the boat
I need to pick up the boat because we're moving across the beach all these things so what are you
doing you're you're looking so what like you said moment to moment so what are you doing you're
looking for ways to be useful constantly how can I support my teammates what can I give to them how
can I make them how can I make their situation better right now and and that that guy that has
that attitude has going to have a great reputation in the sea yeah well then you can think too of
course then the fact that you're outstanding on any number of dimensions let's say that becomes an
asset of the team rather than something that's a competitive liability because like if you're
going to be looking out for me and I really believe that the fact that you're stronger and
smarter than me is actually really good because now I've got someone who's stronger than me and
smarter than me who's looking out for me and so whatever competitive jealousy there might have
been there could be easily subsumed under appreciation for those positive attributes
yes and we are going to work together because guess what you might be the strongest but I'm a
little bit faster than you right right right and you might be a good shot but I'm better in the water
than you are and we're going to be in the water and shooting so we're each going to have a chance to be
number one yes so the reason I went to that and how long did it take you to figure that out like
you said something interesting about assembling the image of an ideal seal in in your imagination
and so was that something that were you consciously aware of doing that while you were
doing that or did you see that you were doing that in retrospect unconscious and saw that I
did it in retrospect and the team that the support your teammate is something that you
hear immediately and if you listen to it it's you can't miss it now guys miss it guys definitely
miss it but if your eyes are open and your ears are open you can't miss it it's day one seal basic
indoctrination you take care of your swim buddy they literally say that day one they'll say take
care of your swim buddy and what does that mean in the in the swim buddy context what how would that
what does that translate to practically that means before Jordan gets inspected by the instructor
I take a look at Jordan's gear and make sure it's all squared away and say you're good to go
as opposed to seeing that your life jackets got a twisted strap and just sitting there looking
straight ahead no I want to make sure you're okay that's actually before I check myself I'm checking you
before I check myself I'm checking you I'm making sure that you're good to go
Jesus is partly why these claims the broad claims that are being made in the social
world at large now about hierarchical power being the the fundamental attribute of society
it's so disturbing to me because this this this is not true it's literally not true only when a
hierarchy becomes radically dysfunctional does individual power come to dominate the rest of
the time it's something like what you're saying is that and that's that's that's and and that's true
let's you know capitalism has a bad rap let's say morally because of its selfishness but the
functional organizations that I've seen that are business organizations if if the people in there
aren't motivated by the ethos that you're just that you're describing no no one bloody well
wants to work with them no one wants to buy their material no one wants to partner with them across
time they don't even want to go golfing with them so it's just not it's it's so not true it's
completely not true and that's I mean that's the essence of the books that I've written about
leadership is that story over and over again I had a I had a seal platoon commander that operated
via power his his authority and his power that's how we operated we did what he told us
because he told us to do it because he was the highest ranking guy and you better be quiet and
listen to me and it's going to be my plan and you all better just shut up and get on board with it
and we had a we had a mutiny we had a mutiny in that seal platoon where we we went to his boss
and said we're not working with this guy and he actually ended up getting fired
so everything you just said well you well and that's exactly right look there's there's
no stable organization no organization can run stably across time if its predicate of operation
is raw power and the reason for that at some point is that the people who are being tyrannized
are going to band together and say no we're not going to do this we're going to take you out
and so if you don't want to be taken out you can't exercise tyrannical power it's it's the intrinsic
weakness of tyranny this and to to confuse functional incompetent organizations with tyranny
is also to make a mockery of the fact that this cooperative ethos is actually the dominating
principle if the if the if the organization is functioning properly yeah and as i pointed out i
actually lived through that and i lived through the other end of the spectrum too when that platoon
commander got fired the platoon that commander that took his place was very humble listened
had an open mind gave us ownership told us to come up with a plan and we love that guy and
that's the guy that i try and emulate to this day and we would have followed that guy anywhere
and it it's it's precisely right and so that's not power that's not power it's precisely because he
didn't use his tyrannical power to to drive us to do what he what he wanted us to do
look whenever i've been in a situation and wanted to get the best out of the people that
are working under me or with me for that matter i see as much responsibility and authority to them
as possible partly because one of my predicates of operation is that if i'm going to engage in an
enterprise with you and i have to tell you what to do and or if i told you what to do you would
do a better job i should find a different person all that is is indication that i chose the wrong
person if you're the right person i'm going to grant you as much autonomy as possible partly
because then you get to have your own domain partly then because you're self-sufficient
partly because you do better but even more so because then you're fully committed to the task
and i i don't believe that anybody occupies a position of leadership for long who doesn't
know those things and they're certainly not effective if they don't know them no they're not
and i i talk to leaders all day every day in every every possible industry that you can think of
and it's one of the things that i end up saying a lot to leaders is you know when if you're working
for me jordan and you come to me with a plan of how you want to execute a project or an operation
or a task my goal my goal is that we're going to use your idea that's my goal my goal is that
whatever you present to me if it's the if it's going to get the job done we're good we're going
with it you know then at least the person can learn from what they're doing and be better the next
time right if it's minimally viable why not let them run it sometimes an emergency and you can't
do that but yeah yeah and by the way if there's urgency and i can't do that okay by this time
you and i have built an up enough trust that you know that if i say hey we need to go over there
right now you go yep got it right right so so we do get into situations like that happens right
and that's that's something you don't want to do too often because just as we discussed earlier
you burn up your leadership credibility by doing that so you can use power if you're a leader but
but judiciously and seldom and you need a good rationale and people have to trust you and so
that's the other issue is that we could we could think about the preconditions for trust because
if the organization isn't running on trust then everybody's at each other's throat constantly
and all there is is backbiting and confusion and so to trust means i i have to i have to
i have to what would i say i have to have faith in your motives and i have to see that you're doing
your best to align your motives with mind and i have to believe that that's genuine because
otherwise the enterprise isn't going to succeed given all the other things it's going to have to face
yeah it's uh it's another you know you bring up the term alignment and when i work with companies
sometimes sometimes we'll start talking about alignment and and quite frankly
in most cases vast majority of cases if you and i are at a company if we go high enough
high enough up what i call the the ladder of alignment if we go high enough up that ladder
we'll get to a point where we're going to be aligned because look right definitely we're trying to
take care of our team we're trying to provide a good service to our clients and we're trying
to be profitable and and if look if that's what we're trying to do and 99.9 of the times the
companies that i work with i have to talk them through this but i can say we can get to a point
where we are aligned now what yeah alignment has like a like a like a like a cousin or or maybe a
step cousin called agenda where where you've got your agenda over here and i've got my agenda over
here and you're trying to get more funds for your department i'm trying to get more funds for my
department and so we can kind of sometimes it can feel like our agendas we're not aligned yeah
now oftentimes i say look if if jordan's agenda is to get more funding for his department so he
can invest more and make more money for the team his agenda is aligned and that's great that i have
no problem with your agenda it's when you know you're trying to create your own fiefdom because
you're going to leave the company and you're going to go do something else and i start to sense that
and and whenever yeah no that's going on underground and no one's really talking about it right right
when i get a company where they can't come to a they can't come to an agreement about something
they can't they cannot so we walk them up the the alignment ladder and all of a sudden you realize
oh wait a second this person's just trying to make money and this right right really wants to
take care of the team now i'll tell you i'll take them further up the alignment ladder and say listen
if you really want to make money and you want to take care of the team guess what if you have a
good team that you take care of you're going to make more money yeah yeah yeah so you can get aligned
unless people are starting to take care of themselves instead of take care of the team
which goes back to what we were just talking about which is also extremely short-sighted in my
estimation because for a bunch of reasons i i lined some of this out in in this new book
this i realized a long time ago that there isn't much difference there might be no difference
actually technically speaking in in taking care of yourself and in taking care of other people
and here's the reason so you might say well i'm one person and everyone else is a group of people
and so there's that competition between me as one person and what this one person wants
and the group but that's not true because i'm actually a group and the reason i'm a group is
well there's me today but there's me over the next week and there's me over the next month and then
there's me over the next year and over the next five years and over the next 10 years and the me
that exists right now can't betray the me that's going to exist next week by doing something
short-sighted and impulsive that will you know produce a burst of impulsive pleasure but will
compromise the future and so if i'm taking myself into account seriously which i'm an
entity that has multiple incarnations let's say across very large spans of time then i immediately
have a community that i have to serve i have to serve the 80 year old person that i'm going to become
and the difference between that and serving 80 year old people in the community is negligible
it's the same thing so if i'm taking care of someone in a in a senior's home for example
there the difference between that and how i'm going to be taken care of when i'm 80 is negligible
and so there's no there's there's there's no way out of the ethical demand of of serving the group
even if you're even if your selfishness is is is of the most enlightened kind
well that's one of the most beautiful things about this about this
whole thing conceptually is that if i put the team before myself if i put the mission and the team
before myself and by being a good team player i i i lift up jordan and i and i make you look good
and i give you the support you need the beautiful thing about this is eventually i am going to win
right i'm 100 going to win and people get short-sighted as you're talking about where i think
you know what if i can if i can pull this project away from jordan i can raise my head up and get
some credit for this the boss is going to look at me and he's probably going to give me a promotion
and that that might work once that might work once yeah or twice yeah and then my reputation is oh
you don't want jocco on your team because he's the one that's going to be maneuvering around
trying to make himself look good instead of trying to accomplish the mission yeah so ultimately if
if you take care of people if you're a good seal if you're a good team player you will win in the
end that's what's going to happen and yes and you win you'll win surrounded by people who are
thrilled to death that you won and so and that's that's that's a much better form of winning than to
be bitter and alone yeah because you've snatched something on the back of the fallen right right
absolutely and and the fact that it's own you know you can only get away with that once or twice is
dead relevant because human beings are very sensitive to negative emotion we remember and one of the
things we really remember is betrayal and so if if you don't play the game straight and you have to
play the game over and over with the same people then you're dead in the water and then you're
going to be in your own little hell you're going to think well why does it why won't anybody play
with me and the answer to that is well you don't play fair and people gave you a chance a few times
and you demonstrated that and like there's no coming back so yeah and the reason I went off on
this tangent is because you asked me your mission now what am I doing now you bet you bet and I
think that along the way in my career in the in the navy I was so ingrained with the fact of
trying to be a good teammate yeah that when I retired I kept just trying to help people out
and say hey you know what I I I can teach you something about leadership do you want to know
something about leadership I can I can maybe I can help you with this or I can at least talk you
through and maybe I can share some stories of what I've learned about human nature and and that way
you don't have to learn those lessons by beating your head up against the wall and and then maybe
I can help you out with hey putting some stuff together that you can take as supplements and
that's going to make you a little bit healthier and stronger and and and by the way we're we're
trying to rebuild our community in New England where we came from where we used to have a bunch
of factories making clothes and maybe we could rebuild that and that way so great so there's
a question and so so tell me tell me about that so because it's it's kind of a surprise right
to you have a clothing line I think well that's so that's so funny and I that that
jockel has a clothing line it's it's so cool that that's the case and not not expected so
I knew there was a backstory there so I don't imagine that it stems from an obsession with fashion
you called it do okay so so what happened and and why did you get interested in it and what's
going on okay so I was you know I started my podcast and I was interacting with people and I
talk about jujitsu a lot Brazilian jujitsu I'm a very big supporter of people training jujitsu
and mixed martial arts in general but I am absolutely a jujitsu guy so a lot of people
started doing jujitsu and they started training and and so they would ask me that the the uniform
for jujitsu is called a gi and people would ask me hey I'm starting jujitsu or I started jujitsu
and I need to get a gi what kind should I get and I knew from having gays over the years that
gays were made in China and whatever horrible slave labor scenarios are happening there and
I knew that there was also one company up in Maine and I'm from New England as well one company
up in Maine that was actually making these jujitsu gays in America and and I had seen
them online and and the story was kind of presented online that this guy named Pete
he was a New England kid and saw the factories get shut down and we all you know we all did that
we all saw when I was growing up the factories there was no there was no one in them yep and and
he saw that and he was also a jujitsu guy and so he wanted to make gays jujitsu gays in America
as he started to go down that path he realized that the material that you would get to sew
together a gi was not produced anywhere in America so he decided he was going to get a loom
to weave this material and he starts asking around and poking around and eventually finds
that in a 500,000 square foot abandoned factory in Lewiston, Maine there is one loom that hadn't
been shipped overseas and the woman that kind of owned it was planning to one day put that loom
in a museum and he said I'll buy it from you and so he bought this massive loom you know it's as big
as a couple beds put together weighs thousands and thousands of pounds and he gets some of his
buddies and they go and drag this loom out of this factory and they take it apart what a cool
finding yeah what a remarkable piece of equipment completely remarkable and he finds a guy he finds
people that knew about these things find some old timers there was a guy named Lenny who's since
died but he used to work on looms and he hired him and said why we he says what do you want to do
he said we got to make this thing work so he starts making he starts weaving this material gets this
thing up and running so one day and I'm following this story I've been following I've been following
that story for three or four years and I'd actually reached out to him and said hey man I know you're
up in Maine I'm from up there um what do you think you know can I get some of your geese I'd like to
have some of your geese and how much are they or whatever and I wouldn't even hear back from him
because he's in Maine these guys you know I make fun of him because he's up in Maine he's in
Farmington Maine population 7000 so anyways one day I'm doing like a live social media interaction
with people and someone says hey I'm just starting to get to what kind of geese should I get and I
said I'll tell you what you should get an origin geese and by the way I said if anybody on here
knows this guy named Pete Roberts that runs that company up there if you could please tell him I
want to talk to him that'd be really cool so a few days go by and I get like a message that says hey
I reached out through my business connections and I found this guy Pete Roberts here's his number
or whatever here's his email so I say all right great so we set up a Skype call this was a few
years ago and we meet each other and we talk for four hours and I come walking out of my office
and my wife says it sounds like you were talking to yourself in there because we were just you know
we were on the same page so I ended up flying up to Maine we had a steak and we had a handshake
and we merged and started working together and what was great was he had this great people up there
and was building these geese but he didn't have a platform he's in Farmington Maine
so there's not a bunch of jiu-jitsu studios in Farmington Maine well I had luckily a platform
to talk to people right well and no matter how good your product man and everyone needs to know
this the world will not beat a pathway to your doorway for your damn product you need to pay
attention to sales and marketing and you can't be contemptuous of it it's like who the hell's
gonna buy something they don't know about so we shook hands we started working together and
once so then we started making jiu-jitsu geese and believe it or not you know now we had a bunch
people that wanted these jiu-jitsu geese because they're the best in the world they're made in America
they're made by Americans with their American cotton and woven on American loom so it's just
it's a beautiful thing it's a beautiful thing and and one day I was in the airport and I'm
sitting there in the airport as we're selling a bunch of jiu-jitsu geese and I'm looking around
and I called up P and I said hey P I said how many people do you actually know that do jiu-jitsu
and he said he's like I don't know like maybe 50 or 100 and I said how many people do you know
that wear jeans and he said everybody and I said why aren't we making jeans and he said
let me let me go so the next thing we did was we started making jeans because because
because the iconic American jeans that you wear aren't made in America the iconic American jeans
that people think represent America they're not made in America and and that's wrong and and the
other crazy thing about this is you know do you make good jeans we make the best jeans in the world
do they have spandex in them they do they do they have their they have a little bit of stretch in
them we've got a heavy pair and a lighter pair and yeah they're it's great and where can people find
these? how do they look for them? originusa.com guys if you go to jaco.com you can find all this
stuff and and um so we started everybody needs good jeans then we started making boots and
and we're making everything we're making you know we we started making a bunch of supplements and
that started from I drink tea another shocking thing you might want to know it is it is shocking
I'm married to a Brit and at some point I started drinking tea and so I started making tea
and then I started making other supplements and and again it was like make high quality stuff
that works and people need it they want it and we're doing that thing of being a teammate
of helping people out so that I knew there was a good story in that clothing yeah it's a great
story it's a great story absolutely if you've ever seen a I don't know maybe you could help me
with my with my personality you know what I like about that too I've learned something in the last
while like I I noticed very much that people allow a casual and unconscious contempt to stop them from
well to elevate the status of what they're doing I would say but also to
to allow them the luxury of not having to consider the importance of all the things
they're not doing now and that stops them from taking opportunities so you know well
it's I was watching the show last night it was The Devil Wears Prada and it was about fashion
industry and this girl who starts you instantly thought of me absolutely I thought that's right
the Jock Jocko fashion special but this girl she has contempt for the fashion industry you know
and that's portrayed as a moral virtue and I wasn't on her side to begin with I thought no you
know there's probably something to this and what you should do is shut up and learn about it before
you criticize it but it's more comfortable in some sense to have contempt for things you know and
it's so interesting to talk to you about your clothing line you know you saw opportunity there
in all sorts of ways and it fitted into this context of let's say of being a broader service
and because you didn't have contempt for it at all at any level for the machinery for the
manufacturing for the fact of making clothing for having your name associated with that for all of
that it then it enables you to see an opportunity there and to do something immediately and then
to make an enterprise grow and work and so that's another thing is that that that casual contempt
for what you can't do that's that's a real ethical mistake yeah that one will definitely I see
among academics you know there's always contempt for businessman and and and and the immorality
of the capitalist enterprise and then I see among businessmen you know contempt for intellectualism
in the ivory tower and I think that's not doing either of you guys much good you know because
you both have something to bring to the table in a real sense and some appreciation for what the other
one knows that you don't is well worth everyone's attempt and then everybody gets to win too it's
like well great man you've got this business enterprise more power to you and and then you
can say too well you know great you teach all these people and you have this advanced learning and
isn't the world better because we can both bring that to the table no need for for that envy not
at all just it just contaminates things yeah unless you let your ego slide in there and
and you start to think well I've been studied so hard and yet I'm only making whatever I'm making
as a yeah well that's that's a huge part look it's a huge part of the culture war I believe is that
there's a there's a tremendous resentment in the university about the fact that
high level intellectual endeavor doesn't attract disproportionate salary when other occupations do
but it certainly has no shortage of other rewards you know absolute job security being one of them
and freedom for that matter so anyways anyways I'm actually I've been surprised that
in the all you know there's all this talk in America right now about the divisiveness in America
and I don't yeah I've been surprised that the the the ego hasn't come up more often because
you mean as a topic as a as a as a causal effect yeah yeah okay sure yeah of the fact that
well I go to have a conversation with someone and I just think that I'm right I think that
my viewpoints are right and your viewpoints are wrong and worse worse not just wrong
contemptible that's like the ultimate expression of wrong right they're beneath my consideration
right yeah and that's that's not good that's definitely not good how do I how do I listen
to anything that you say how do I how do I find any common ground with you if I think that what you
think is contemptible and so therefore we can't have a conversation if we don't have a conversation
we can't find any mutual ground and that means we can't find solutions to the problems that we're
facing and yes and it means when push comes to shove we have to fight yes it does yeah
I'm here to tell you that's not a good option
you know that's a good place to stop fair enough that was great man thank you appreciate it I loved
it well thank you appreciate it yeah so it's good to see you it's good to see you too and it's so
it's so nice to see that that all of what you're talking about is finding its audience
I like the kids books too we never talked about them oh yeah the kids books I I I feel like
there is no more there's no better gratification for me than the handwritten letters the the the
emails that I get but mostly the handwritten letters from kids that are six seven eight nine
years old just did my first pull-up got an a on my math test oh isn't that cool
it's right yes I get better how could you have anything better than that to know that you were
part of that so so tell me about that maybe we'll stop with that tell me about that
like tell tell me about the kids books how many you've self-published them how many have sold well
I so I didn't I didn't self-publish all of them okay I the first two went through normal publisher
and what happened was so so the first one is called way the warrior kid and and right
basically I have four kids myself three daughters one son as I was raising my kids I couldn't really
find books that articulated the values that I might want my children to be reading about
and so I wrote my own books so the the first one way the warrior kid it's a kid he's bullied
he doesn't know his timetable so he thinks he's stupid he doesn't know how to swim so he can't
do any of the fun stuff that the other kids are doing and he's he's getting bullied common things
that kids face and he kind of breaks down last day of school everything kind of hits him at once
and he goes home and he remembers that his uncle is coming to stay with him for the summer and his
uncle his uncle is in the SEAL teams and he presents all these problems that he's having to his uncle
and his uncle says listen we can solve these problems but you got to commit it's going to
take discipline it's going to take hard work teaches the kid how to study teaches the kid
how to make flash cards teaches the kid how to eat right teaches the kid how to work out
brings the kid did you get two classes so he learns how to defend himself
kid goes back to school and he's he's in a much better place and and so then that series carries
on with different types of situations that kids get into and so I wrote the first one way the
warrior kid the second one marks mission and then I had written a kid's book a kid's book called
Mikey and the Dragons and and I had written it I finished it in August and I talked to my publisher
and I said hey you know I wrote this kid's book I'm sorry you know it sorry I didn't let you know
earlier but I really want the book to come out for Christmas and my publisher said yeah well you
know that's not really gonna happen and I said yeah but I really wanted to come out by Christmas
and by this time I think I'd written like three New York Times bestselling books for whatever
that's worth so it wasn't like I was you know scrapping around trying to throw this together I
had a pretty good vision of what to do here and I think there's a lot yeah so I said please can I
you know get this thing published by Christmas and they and they said they said there's no
scenario where this book by Christmas and I said I said are you sure and they yeah yeah
and I said watch this and so I started publishing about a week yep I started my own publishing
company we finished the the art inside the book and the book came out before Thanksgiving
and that was the beginning of of jocco publishing and so yes I've published it and then I just wrote
the the latest Way the Warrior Kid book Way the Warrior Kid 4 field manual and and again the most
rewarding thing that that happens to me on a daily basis is I get to open up letters from kids that
are seven eight nine ten eleven years old that just you know did their first pull up or ran a mile in
a certain amount of time or they so cool they like it's so cool to see that because I mean
it's it's an unbelievably deep instinct that makes that satisfying like I have the same
experience I don't ever see anything as satisfying as getting a message from someone who says
I've followed what you've been talking about and here's what I've done that's improved my life because
of it it's this is there's a you know when you read online comments the negative ones
are salient right they've got potency but and people are wired to feel more negative emotion than
positive emotion it it affects us more more we feel a loss more strongly than we feel in
equivalent gain the one exception to that might be those kinds of letters they're so salient and
it's really curious I mean that must be the deep that must be something like the deep instinct of
fatherhood that that pleasure that's intrinsic in watching someone who's younger younger generally
speaking not always but generally speaking thrive it's so satisfying and yeah I think that goes back
to the to the concept of being a good teammate yes definitely it's the deepest part of it and you're
helping someone get on the correct path when they're eight years old and you you know when I
people say all me all the time the parents write me too the parents say hey you know thank you I got
more out of this book than my kids did right they say as well that the the the way that these books
come together it's like you're being a good teammate because you're putting someone on the right path
at a young age I always people say I wish I would have had this book when I was right right well
yes absolutely me too that's a father between pages that it is exactly that because the fundamental
role of a father as far as I can tell is encouragement and I mean that technically is that
you your job is to instill courage in or to or to or to encourage courage I suppose in in in your
children to make them resilient in that manner to make them confident in their ability to face the
world but also able to face the world and that warrior kid book it's such a different approach
to the problem of bullying it reminded me when you were talking about it about the Simpsons there's
Nelson months is the bully in the Simpsons and he's quite a complex character actually and if he
bullies you there's a pretty high probability that the reason he's doing it is because you're doing
something stupid and contemptible so he's got this kind of corrective function
and he's not a bad kid even though he's a bully some of his bully compatriots are bad kids but
he's not he's from a family that's not doing well he has his reasons for for what he's like
but he is kind of a corrective you know and there's a scene too in The Simpsons where one of the
teacher says to Ralph poor Ralph the children are right to laugh at you Ralph which is a hilarious
line but also absolutely terrible but you know in your warrior kid book the message there is
one way of dealing with your inadequacies is to rid yourself of them
and it isn't self-evident that people who point out your inadequacies are your enemy
now that doesn't mean that bullies can't exploit and it doesn't mean that bullying
isn't reprehensible but by the same token you know critics a critic who points out a weakness
has actually offered you a pathway to development a true pathway to development
so and your your attitude to the kid was look kid no one's going to laugh at you if you're the
best swimmer or maybe you don't even have to be the best but but you could swim you could be
stronger you know you could you could elevate yourself yeah it's um it's it's it's so fun to
write these books because i mean i got first of all i got to experience it and you know i always
tell people people say oh did you get bullied because i'm i'm a bigger guy now i was like oh
when you're 10 you get bullied by 11 year olds that's right exactly always going to be somebody
that's bigger than you um in the second book the bully is like a psychological bully his name is
Nathan James and Nathan he's not physically threatening you but he's he's making fun of you
and he's picking on you and he'll take it to the point where he might you know feel some
repercussions but then he'd be quiet and so you know this kid mark says to his uncle hey i'm gonna
fight this kid i'm gonna fight him and the uncle says well okay if it comes to that but before you
fight him so that's when you published yourself i presume uh no no no this was this was still this
was still um this is book two oh really okay well my mistake i it's surprising well that was a while
ago you think you could get a book like that published now i'm not a hundred percent sure
i've got another i've got a i wrote a novel that's coming out which would you probably touch on
which which went through like multiple screenings to make sure that it wasn't offensive and whatever
else uh Nathan James the bully he picks on the kids but he talks and and his uncle you know
the kid mark says hey i want to fight this kid and his uncle says okay if it comes to that but
before you fight him i want you to gather some intel he says what do you mean gather some intel
i want you to collect some intelligence i want to know why he acts this way and so he watches
mark watches this kid Nathan James for a couple days and he says goes back and reports to his uncle
this kid he he doesn't eat healthy he eats potato chips half a bag of potato chips he's dirty he
doesn't change his clothes his socks don't match he's got holes in his jeans he's a slob totally
lacks discipline i think i should fight him and then he says well why do you think he's like that
you need to do further intel and i'm sure you can see where this is going eventually follows him
and realize the kid is kind of on his own and the reason he has a bag of potato chips a half a
bag of potato chips is because his mom's not home at night and there's no dad to be found and
and we don't even know what's going on but he lives in some in some apartment building above
a auto repair shop and and maybe his jeans wears the same jeans every day because that's the only
pair he's got and so instead of fighting this kid maybe you should try and help him and that's
where that goes so yeah there's a there's another novel that i wrote which is coming out in the fall
is um it it's it's it's definitely going to be interesting what the critics say about it i'm
looking forward to it i'm looking forward to their um their assessment it's about a it's about a
two brothers one brother is kind of a handsome kind of street smart kid smart good-looking the other
brother is uh got some kind of a unidentified disorder mental disorder mental handicap and
basically is an autistic guy and he's obsessed with washing machines and he works at a laundry mat
and um well the the laundry mat is eventually going to be up for sale and the brother the younger
brother who is a little bit more street smart decides if that happens my my older brother is
never going to be happy again because he's not going to have this laundry mat and he decides
he's going to do something to get money to buy that laundry mat and the only way he can figure
out to do that is by doing something that's not legal so he goes for it and well that's the story
but and that's coming out when comes out in the fall it's called final spin
how long have you been working on that
huh well i write about i probably i wrote an original draft of it probably 15 years ago
and then just kind of set it aside and then this is then i i dusted it off because it never left
my mind uh-huh story never left my mind because ultimately it's about a you know it's about can
you be happy and what kind of sacrifices are you willing to make to be happy and what about people
that are stuck in a rut you know when i was growing up there was all these kids that were
smarter than me and funnier than me and better athletes than me and and i would look around and
they would get stuck in a rut right right and not really do anything and it would be a little bit sad
yes very and you know i was lucky enough like you said i i joined the navy and all of a sudden
had a goal and had an aim and wanted to be a good seal and that was enough to kind of put me in the
right direction yeah so what what's next what do you want where do you want to take this
what's your ambition my you're you're teaching people you're communicating with them on a very
broad level that's where do you see this going if it went where you want it to go
the the ambition the goal is to help more people is to help more people help more kids
become more confident help more leaders do a better job of leading their teams
help people be on a better path in their life healthier and and doing productive things in
the world that's i think the best thing i can do right now at this point yeah well that just seems
like generally speaking that just seems like the best i think well once it isn't clear why you would
be motivated to do anything else it's like that actually is the best thing you talked about these
letters it's like well what could you do that would be better than that i mean if you were as greedy
as you could possibly be you can't get better than that so it's so rewarding so yeah and and again
the biggest reward is is when you when you get a letter from somebody that decided they weren't
going to kill themselves yeah yeah right because they heard you talking on the podcast or they read
they read the book discipline equals freedom and they said wait a second i'm trapped why am i trapped
trapped because i'm blaming other people i'm trapped because i'm not sticking to the things
that i know i should do right and they get on the right path and you know they always say you
changed my life and i always say i didn't change your life you did which is the truth
thanks a lot thanks for having me man good seeing you good see you too
