It's the Hebrews created history as we know it.
You don't get away with anything and so you might think you can bend the fabric of reality
and that you can treat people instrumentally and that you can bow to the tyrant and violate
your conscience without cost.
You will pay the piper.
It's going to call you out of that slavery into freedom even if that pulls you into the
desert.
And we're going to see that there's something else going on here that is far more cosmic
and deeper than what you can imagine.
The highest ethical spirit to which we're beholden is presented precisely as that spirit
that allies itself with the cause of freedom against tyranny.
Yes, exactly.
I want villains to get punished.
But do you want the villains to learn before they have to pay the ultimate price?
That's such a Christian question.
You're optimizing for minimal impact and I think that is really the core of the modern
environmental movement.
It's not this just blanket collective desire for as much life as possible and we're somehow
getting in the way of that.
It's specifically against us.
They discovered the greenhouse effect.
They said this is going to on its own make the earth a much more lush place.
They speculated like the fruits are going to be bigger and everything is going to be
lush because we're going to have more farmland and more biological and it's kind of obvious.
If you have a warmer world with more CO2, it's a more tropical world with more life.
It's a more green world in the life sense of green and yet the green movement hates
it because we caused it.
They can see no good in anything we caused even when it leads to more biological productivity.
It's fundamentally an anti-human movement, not a pro-life of any kind movement.
The ineluctable conclusion that has to be drawn from that proposition is that any human
activity whatsoever is to be regarded as evil even if it increases total biological flourishing
in terms of let's say the net metric tonnage of biological life on the planet.
So that's also perverse because that is definitely a game that none of us can win.
If the a prior rule is no matter what you do, you're evil, then the only solution to that
is well how about a hell of a lot fewer of you.
Hello everyone watching and listening on YouTube or the associated podcast platforms.
I have with me today Alex Epstein.
I'm looking forward to this discussion.
He's a philosopher and energy expert who argues that human flourishing should be the guiding
principle and the appropriate metric for our energy and environmental policy and our determination
of its progress.
He's the author of the new book, Fossil Future, as well as the New York Times bestseller,
The Moral Case for Fossil Fuels, which was published in 2014.
He's also the creator of energytalkingpoints.com, a source of powerful, well-referenced talking
points on energy, environmental, and climate issues.
Epstein began his work in 2011 with the founding of the Center for Industrial Progress, a for-profit
think tank offering insights into the world of fossil fuels and fighting back against
the mainstream narrative of so-called environmentalism.
Only recognized as a master of persuasion and debate on energy issues, Alex has spoken
to dozens of Fortune 500 companies and at dozens of prominent universities, including
Harvard, Yale, Stanford, and Duke, his alma mater.
He's also a highly sought-after consultant on messaging, working with dozens of major
political offices on pro-energy, pro-freedom messaging.
We're here today to talk about the moral necessity of an energy-rich future, one that
both must and should rely on the abundant provision of the petro-based fuels so carelessly currently
demonized.
So welcome to all of you who are watching or listening, and welcome to Alex.
So maybe we could just start by having you walk through the book.
One of the things I found interesting to begin with was your discussion of the motivations,
let's say, of some of the more radical people that are pushing what is purported to be a
pro-environment stance.
People like Paul Ehrlich, who clearly have an agenda that could be more accurately conceptualized
as anti-human, certainly anti-industrial, rather than pro-environment.
And I think that's something that's worthwhile alerting everyone too, especially given the
current state of energy price increase in Europe, let's say, and the consequences that's going
to have for the poor around the world.
Let's start with that, though.
You wrote this book in 2014.
Let's talk about why you wrote it and how you think your prognostications have fared
in what's almost an intervening decade.
Well, I think one thing that's relevant, I'm not sure if you know this, but there's a new
book, 2022, called Fossil Future, which is the successor or replacement to the moral
case for fossil fuels.
So I talk a bunch in that about how the moral case for fossil fuels has fared.
And I think in terms of a predictive book, it's not primarily a predictive book, but
it has been extremely accurate.
Because if you look at what people have said in the last eight or so years, the main
narratives have been, we're not going to need fossil fuels as much as we used to.
They're going to be rapidly replaced by solar and wind primarily.
And that climate impact, the climate impact of fossil fuels, is going to be increasingly
catastrophic.
So we're going to see more and more suffering and death from climate-related disasters.
And in the book, I talk about that's not going to happen because, one, fossil fuels
will remain uniquely cost-effective, particularly in a world that needs far more energy, which
is something that was not stressed in the past and is not stressed enough today.
People are starting to realize most of the world doesn't have enough energy.
So replacing fossil fuels is almost impossible, given that you're not talking about just replacing
it for the people who use it, but for the people who need it.
So I've been very vindicated on the continuing cost effectiveness of fossil fuels.
And then on the climate disaster point, we have documented that climate-related disaster
deaths are down 98% in the last 100 years, and they've continued to decline.
And the basic reason is because whatever impact we have on climate that is negative, it is
far outweighed by our ability to master climate, to neutralize all sorts of climate dangers.
And so we're much better off overall climate-wise than we were 50 years ago and certainly 100
years ago.
So with regards to, let's start with the second one there, the climate disaster.
So the biophilic types, and so those would be people like Erlich, they seem to make the
case that metrics that involve human flourishing or even human death aren't relevant, because
the primary issue is to restore the biosphere to something approximating what it hypothetically
was before there were human beings, which is a rather strange notion, all things considered.
And so they might object to the fact that you're using the mere decrease in number of
deaths associated with climate trouble with weather events as a metric, because the metric
should be something like the purity of the planet.
And so what do you think about that argument?
What metric should we be using to determine whether or not a climate emergency actually
exists?
Well, I definitely think we should be using a human flourishing metric, but in a broad
sense, the climate disaster deaths are not the only aspect of that, but they're a very
important aspect.
We can also see that damages are flat or down.
We can see that life overall is much better.
And actually our ability to preserve the most valuable parts of nature is better.
Generally when you're not dependent on the land and dependent on wood, dependent on your
local environment for your fuel and your wealthy, you can be much better at preserving the parts
of nature that you want to preserve.
If you look at places in Africa and Asia and even now Europe, because they're now energy
poor, like cutting down their forests, it's because they don't have better sources of
fuel.
So, but I would challenge the idea that Erlich is really using this.
I think you called it biophilic standard, because if you look at his public rhetoric,
he's always appealing to a human flourishing standard.
So how did Erlich become famous?
He became famous through the 1968 book, The Population Bomb, where he's telling human
beings not, hey, the planet is going to become more impacted and that's intrinsically bad.
He's saying you're all going to starve.
And his close colleague, Sean Holdren, who was Obama's chief science advisor, now he
predicted in the 80s that we'd have up to a billion climate related disaster deaths
from famine by 2020, which has come and gone and the world is better fed than ever.
So what I find is that people who I think internally, they don't really care about human
flourishing and they're really optimizing for eliminating our impact as much as possible,
but they appeal to human flourishing to win over converts.
Because if they really said the best possible earth is the one that would exist had we never
existed and our goal is to eliminate as much human impact as possible as an end in itself,
they would not win many converts.
Well, the lack of a red wave during the midterms leads to more reckless spending by a more
emboldened administration, higher taxes, deeper inflation.
If you're unsure how the next two years will unfold, talk to Birch Gold Group about protecting
your savings with gold.
Birch Gold makes it easy to convert your IRA or 401K into an IRA in precious metals so
you can own gold and silver in a tax-sheltered account.
Gold is the world's oldest, most proven form of currency.
When inflation soars and all other assets go sideways, gold is still there.
This month, you can get a free gold back with every $5,000 purchase when you convert an
existing IRA or 401K into a precious metals IRA with Birch Gold by December 22.
Just text Jordan to 98998.
Birch Gold will help you own gold and silver in a tax-sheltered account.
Text Jordan to 98998 to claim your free info kit on gold.
Then talk to one of their precious metals specialists.
With every purchase you make before December 22, you'll get a free gold back.
This is a great stocking stuffer just in time for Christmas.
Text Jordan to 98998 and protect yourself with gold today.
Okay, so the case that you're making in some sense is that the argument on the radical
pro-environmental side actually varies sometimes, so to speak, in secret or behind the scenes,
sort of voce, I suppose.
The argument is made that the planet would be better off.
It was returned to some natural and unspoiled condition.
But then public-facing, the arguments are essentially predicated on the argument that
if we don't do something drastic about, let's say, climate change, we're going to cause
a radical increase in actual human suffering.
Okay, so that all has to be straightened out conceptually before we, as a species, let's
say, can move forward intelligently on this front.
I think the most powerful point you made, however, and I think this is where the rubber
really hits the road in more modern times, is that even if you use the metrics that are
put forward by those who, let's say, oppose the continuing use of fossil fuel, so those
would be metrics associated with climate change remediation and environmental improvement,
the policies that are designed to drive energy costs upward do nothing at all that isn't
counterproductive by their own measurements.
So you pointed out, for example, and this is something that people really need to be
alerted to, is that because Europe has taken this absolutely foolish route to reliance
on wind and solar, which is intermittent at best, one of the things that's happening because
of the pressure on liquid natural gas supplies primarily is that there's a tremendous amount
of deforestation occurring in Europe at the moment because people have to turn to sources
of energy that are actually at hand so that they don't freeze in the dark in the middle
of the winter.
And so the thing that I find so appalling about what's happening on the environmental
front at the moment is that even by the metrics of the people who are pro-environmental, these
policies that are driving energy costs upward are utterly counterproductive.
And you know, humanprogress.org has a lovely graph showing the relationship between attention
paid to true medium to long-term environmental sustainability and overall wealth.
And what you see is that if you can get, as you make people wealthier, so as you remove
them from absolute poverty, their ability and willingness to attend to longer-term environmental
issue starts to increase rather than decreasing.
And so this has struck me for, I've known this for at least 10 years, that the best
pathway forward to a truly sustainable planet, even by the definitions of the environmentalists
themselves, is to drive energy costs downward to the point where we can remediate absolute
poverty so that people aren't driven to use up damaging and polluting immediately available
bioresources instead of turning to more efficient sources of energy.
And you are certainly making that case in the 2014 book, which as you pointed out, you've
updated.
So that's the critical issue, right?
Even by the metrics of the environmentalists themselves, the policies that we're presently
pursuing on the energy front are not only counterproductive environmentally, but they're driving poor people
into abject poverty.
We're going to see a lot of that in Europe.
I think it depends.
So I think if you take the quote environmentalists as having a kind of pro-human interest in
nature and pro-human interest in lack of pollution, this is true.
But my belief is that the core of it is the belief that human impact is inherently bad,
it's intrinsically immoral, and also the belief is it's inevitably self-destructive.
So nature is viewed as this God, that if we offend it through our impact, is going to
punish us.
And it really has this character where it's wrong, and doing the wrong thing is going
to destroy us.
And if you really think about it that way, all their policies make sense because their
policies are really aimed at making human life worse and ultimately reducing the human
population.
So it is true.
You can say, well, yeah, aren't you cutting down more trees?
Aren't you doing this?
But they would say, well, let's say we had cheap, free nuclear energy, which they've
actually commented on hypothetically when they thought fusion was possible.
I talk about this in moral case and in fossil future.
The leading environmentalist said this would be the worst thing ever.
A totally clean, cheap, abundant source of energy would be the worst thing ever because
of what we would do with it.
And one of the leaders called it giving an idiot child a machine gun.
And what they recognized is that energy is really our ability to do work, which means
our ability to impact the earth.
And when we use a lot of energy, we impact the earth a lot.
Now we impact it in a way that's beneficial to us, including we preserve the most valuable
parts of nature, and we give ourselves an ability to enjoy nature.
Nevertheless, it is a very humanized earth.
And to the anti-human environmental movement, that is offensive.
So that movement is not about a clean environment for us or for us to be able to contemplate
polar bears or go on safaris or any of this.
It's about a dehumanized earth.
It's the belief that we are uniquely bad and we need to get eliminated.
Right, right.
But the problem with that argument, even if you attempt to give the devil his due, let's
say, is that it's predicated on the idea that if we pursued policies to decrease our overall
energy use, and if one of the consequences of those policies was the relatively radical
depopulation of the earth, perhaps by radically lowering birth rates, that while that transformation
was occurring, depopulation and deindustrialization, things would remain stable enough so that
in our new poverty and our hopelessness with regards to the future, we wouldn't be devouring
the planet while we were dying.
And I think that's a preposterous claim.
I don't see any peaceful way forward that's based on compulsion and poverty to reduce
the population of the world that isn't going to be absolutely destructive on the energy,
on the environment, on the environment front.
And the idea that if we had more energy, we would actually be worse for the planet, flies
in the face of what we've been discussing already, which is the fact that if people can't
turn to cheap and efficient and relatively clean sources of energy, and perhaps liquid
natural gas and nuclear would be at the top of that list, then they're going to absolutely
100% turn to much dirtier replacements, and we've already seen that happening in, well,
everywhere.
China is building coal-fired plants at a rate that's so rapid that everything the West
is doing on the climate amelioration front is absolutely irrelevant.
And what has the UK in the last week has already pledged to double its coal imports, and Germany
has had to turn to its coal-fired plants to provide backup power because wind and solar
has proved not only hyperexpensive, but so unreliable that, well, that when there's no
power, so when the sun isn't shining and the wind isn't blowing, you have to have backup,
and it's been coal that's been brought in as a stopgap.
So I just can't see any way, even if you accept the arguments that you just laid forward,
that there should be fewer people and that the right planet is one that's characterized
by minimal human action, I can't see any way forward to that on the energy poverty front
that's not going to be positively counterproductive.
I agree with you in terms of how it plays out, and I think it's important in general
this is not a scientific movement, and part of it not being a scientific movement is
it doesn't really have a long-term strategy for achieving its anti-human goals.
It has a lot of ritual in it, there's a lot of just hostility toward anything that has impact,
and you just oppose that, and then you assume things are going to get better.
And so people didn't think through what's going to happen when you make energy more expensive,
what's going to happen to the forest? They didn't think that through at all,
or when you oppose nuclear, what are you going to use in its stead? Or when you make energy
expensive, what's going to happen in terms of rights? It's not at all thought through,
and I think this might be a lesson for us to have when we contemplate these so-called plans
for net zero. This is a movement that's very much, it has this hostility toward human impact,
it opposes it wherever it sees it, and it just, it has a quality of nihilism to it.
And it's not thinking through, it's not thinking through either a dehumanized earth
or a human-friendly earth. It's sort of going after anything that has impact, but my argument is
we need to switch our hostility toward impact. This view that human impact is bad
needs to be challenged. Human impact is good if it makes the earth a better place for human flourishing.
The biggest banks and investment firms in the world are putting up to half of their total assets
into new investments. What do they know that we don't? Maybe that the economy is about to get
worse? The CEO of JP Morgan just warned that stocks could slide another 20%. Bigwigs are
moving their money into alternatives like fine art, because fine art has outpaced even the S&P
500 over the last 26 years by 131%. Even in 2022, Masterworks produced results. In early
November, Masterworks had a strategic exit for a 17.8% net return to their investors.
Their last three exits have brought in 17, 21, and 33% net returns. The next six months could
be some of the most important of your investing life. Paintings are selling out in minutes,
but you can get priority access at masterworks.com with promo code JBP. That's promo code JBP at
masterworks.com slash JBP. Or click the link in the description. See important disclosures at
masterworks.com slash CD. So yeah, well it's a strange, it's a very strange issue philosophically,
because one of the things I wonder about is why this idea that human beings are in some sense
in their activity antagonistic to the earth. It's a very peculiar metaphysical assumption,
especially for people who are hypothetically, biologically minded, because if we're living
creatures, which we clearly are, and if we've evolved in the same manner that other living
creatures have evolved, which seems relatively indisputable, then how is it that our very
existence is somehow antithetical to the flourishing of the biosphere, given that we're clearly part
of the biosphere? And you see this sort of thing with this idiot assumption, for example,
that bears some of the same hallmarks of this kind of quasi-philosophical thinking that
before the Europeans came to North America that the natives were living somehow in harmony with
nature, and that the entire biosphere was free of the scars of human interaction, and
that's utterly preposterous. I mean, the Native Americans were incredibly sophisticated agricultural
ists, and the Western Plains Indians burned the prairies with constantly to ensure that there
was a plentiful supply of the buffalo that they depended on. And so human beings have been
affecting the structure of the biosphere ever since we've been around, and that's for a very
long period of time. And the idea that there was somehow some pristine state of nature before
we emerged on the landscape, and that there's some moral imperative to return to that,
it strikes me, it's so incoherent that it's barely comprehensible. And there is something like a
hatred for humanity, as far as I can tell that's lurking underneath this, hatred for humanity,
certainly a hatred for industrialization. And those actually turn out to be the same thing.
I mean, one of the things that's really struck me as incomprehensible over the last few years is that,
especially on the left, is that you have these joint claims being put forward simultaneously
on the left, and one is that we're radically pro-environmental, and we're also the
philosophical doctrine that is standing up for the poor and oppressed. And I think, okay, well,
what happens when those two things are pitted against each other? And when are they pitted?
Well, they're pitted when it comes to discussions about cheap energy, because it's clearly the case,
and you outline this in your book quite nicely, that the most effective way of remediating absolute
poverty, so lifting people out of the privation that's associated, at least with lack of education,
but also with starvation itself, is to provide them with cheap energy, because as you pointed
out, there's no difference between energy and work, and there's no difference between work and
productivity. There's no difference between productivity and the eradication of poverty.
And so we are pursuing these expensive energy policies, and hypothetically, we're supposed
to benefit the planet, although we're not, but we are definitely dooming people who are already poor
to a much more truncated horizon of opportunity, and to absolute privation and starvation in many
cases. Yes, I think it's really... I mean, there are at least two really interesting issues raised
here, sort of this tension between the alleged concern for poverty and then the quote concern for
the environment, and then this question of how this bizarre view evolved, because this was not
the view of our environment and our impact 100 years ago. And interestingly, it's not the view
of our environment that anyone who lives near nature has. People who live in nature don't worship
nature as the superior God that can't be impacted. And I think it's my own understanding of the
history, and I really enjoy... There's a book by Einran called The New Left, The Anti-Industrial
Revolution, and it was written at the time that this was happening. And one of the analyses is
basically there's a transition between the old left and the new left, where the old left claimed
to be for industry, for productivity, for prosperity. And what happened is that was clearly
not achieved by their policies. Communism led to the devastation of industry, the malfunction of
industry, widespread poverty. And Einran said, well, the left basically had a choice. Are you
going to stay with your anti-capitalism, or are you going to embrace capitalism because you really
care about industry and productivity? And actually, what they did was they kept their
anti-capitalism, and they looked for new reasons to support anti-capitalism. And in the 60s,
they decided on this issue of environment. And it was a convenient issue in a number of ways.
One is the pro-capitalism side didn't do a very good job with it, particularly rhetorically.
They didn't make the point that, well, good environments are made possible by prosperity.
So the idea of a good environment in a humanistic way was co-opted by the anti-capitalist who had
no right to it whatsoever. I mean, look at the Soviet Union and an environment, but they owned
that value issue. But then they packaged it with this hostility toward human impact as such. And
what they really did brilliantly was they took over the schools. So in the schools, this idea
that human impact is bad, and especially the idea that it's inevitably self-destructive because the
planet is this delicate nurture that our impact ruins. And that has permeated the whole educational
system where people think that we inherently are destroyers of the planet, and it has permeated
the scientific community. What I call this delicate nurture dogma is unfortunately pervasive
in earth sciences today. It's a very primitive and bizarre view. It has nothing to do with reality
that our impact is inevitably self-destructive. Actually, our impact has made the earth much
better overall, including safer from climate. But nevertheless, I think it's really, there was
initially a real political motivation to spread this. But now we have this irrationalist philosophy
that has a mind of its own. Yeah, well, that's okay. So let's delve into that a little bit,
because the other thing that I've come to understand more clearly in the last 15 years,
let's say, as the data has also become more clear is that,
so we lifted more people out of poverty in absolute terms, and also in relative terms,
between 2000 and 2015, than we had lifted people out of poverty in the sum total of human endeavor
before that. And it's quite clear that the reason for that was that fewer countries pursued absolutely
counterproductive economic policies of the type that were put forward, let's say, by the
communists when the Cold War was raging. And so you saw all over the world, including in places like
Communist China, that there was a radical move towards something approximating free market and
free trade between individuals. And in some countries, that was implemented more effectively
than others. But wherever it was implemented, at least quasi effectively, people immediately
stopped starving. And so, and I'm trying to make a case in relationship to the anti-capitalism,
so let's say that you are a genuine classic leftist, and you are actually concerned with the poor,
especially remediation of absolute poverty, and you're looking at the data, and you see that
after the Soviet Union collapsed, and there were fewer countries turning to communist dogma to
formulate their economic policies, and more countries started to develop, started to participate
in the broad free market, that we drove poverty down to its lowest level in absolute numbers,
or in relative numbers, certainly, than we'd ever seen before in history. And so then again,
we're back to the same issue. If the spread of free market policies remediates absolute poverty,
which it clearly does, and in a staggeringly rapid manner, then what in the world is driving
the anti-capitalist ethos? You know, you said that there's this underlying metaphor of nature as
something like fragile virgin, right, continually what rendered susceptible to our raping and
pillaging. So there's a weird metaphor lurking at the bottom of all that, but given the overwhelming
data that something approximating free market frees people from absolute poverty, and then
conjoining that with the observation that richer people actually care more about the environment,
you're left again with this question of what in the world is motivating this. There's some deep
hatred. It's like a deep hatred for humanity itself, but even at the expense of the planet.
And so I still struggle with trying to comprehend that. There's a kind of existential guilt there
for the crime of existence itself. It's something like that.
I mean, I think there's one really powerful fact about the increase in prosperity that I draw
attention to a lot in fossil future, because I think it's very notable. So I point out, I was born
in 1980. Since 1980, we've gone from more than four in 10 people living on less than $2 a day,
and this is adjusted for inflation, to one in 10. So as you said, this is the greatest alleviation of
poverty in human history. Now, what's really interesting is if you survey, and this was done
in the UK, you might have seen this before, but there's a survey of college-educated adults in
the UK about what has happened to extreme poverty over the past 30 or 40 years. And this is just
an objective documented thing. There's no question. And so what happened is only 12% of people
thought it got better. 55% of people thought it got worse, and the rest thought it stayed
the same. And it just shows you the level of miseducation about this issue. And I do think
a lot of it is the modern anti-human environmental movement, because what they've done is they've
taught us that our impact ruins the planet. And so we just assume that because the world used
a lot more fossil fuels, particularly China and India did, which drove much of the increase
in prosperity, they just assume that the world is worse. And what I call, I don't use this term
in a moral case, but I use it in fossil future, our knowledge system. So the institutions we
rely on for expert knowledge and guidance, they've totally failed at educating us about how much
the world has improved from a human perspective. And this goes back to my argument that the
anti-human environmental movement, they're trying to pretend to be pro-human. So they don't want us
to know that the earth is a much better place than ever to live. They don't want us to know
that climate disaster deaths are way down. They don't want us to know about the decline in extreme
poverty, because it totally challenges their narrative that impact in general and fossil
fuels in particular are bad. And if we recognized how vital fossil fuels are, then we would be
really afraid of these proposals to get rid of fossil fuels in the next 27 years in a world
that needs far more energy. And unfortunately, we're starting to realize this involuntarily
because these policies just implemented one percent, these anti-fossil fuel policies,
just implemented to one percent success rate in the anti-fossil fuel movement's view
have already led to a global energy crisis. Do you have a coffee lover on your holiday
shopping list? Black Rifle has all the best brewing gear, thermoses, mugs, and apparel
designed for folks who love country and coffee. Black Rifle sources the most exotic roast from
around the globe. All coffee is roasted here in the U.S. by veteran-led teams of coffee experts.
Stuff your Christmas stockings with the latest roast from America's Coffee for 10% off with
the code Jordan. Better yet, sign your secret Santa up for a coffee club subscription.
Imagine the joy of a pre-scheduled coffee delivery, your favorite roast when you need the most.
It's the gift that keeps on giving. Black Rifle Coffee Company is veteran founded and operated.
They take pride in serving coffee and culture to people who love America. Every purchase you
make with Black Rifle helps support veteran and first responder causes. Go to blackriflecoffee.com
and use promo code Jordan for 10% off coffee, coffee gear, apparel, or when you sign up for
a new coffee club subscription. That's blackriflecoffee.com with promo code Jordan for 10% off.
Black Rifle Coffee, supporting veterans and America's coffee.
Right, right. Well, you knew said that the planet is getting better, let's say,
from a human perspective. And so we've looked at metrics like the radical decrease in absolute
privation. But we could turn our attention momentarily to the evidence that in many ways,
and somewhat paradoxically and perversely, the planet actually seems to be doing better
from the natural perspective too. Now, I have been concerned about, I have believed for a long
time that one of our focal concerns might be on the environmental front might appropriately be
something like remediation of misuse of oceanic resources, because I think we've done a pretty
cataclysmic job of protecting our, especially our coastal lands and the shelf environments
just off shore of the continents, where pretty much all the fish are. I think we've done a
catastrophic job of managing that. And there are genuine environmental problems that I think
sensible people should take into account. But, you know, I was looking at a graph this week,
and I've known about this phenomenon for quite a while, phenomenon for quite a while,
that again, in the last 15 years, a surface area totaling 15% of the entire planet has
greened. I mean, that is, that's an area that's larger than the continental United States,
and it's, so let's, let's walk through that for a minute, so just so everyone who's listening
is clear. In the last 15 years, the planet has not got less green, it's got more green, and not
only a little bit more green, stunningly more green, 15% in, essentially in 15 years, and that's an
area bigger than the continental United States, and that's happened pretty much everywhere in the
world. And then you might say, well, where is that happening? And perversely, and contrary to all
predictions, it's happening in the drier areas of the planet, especially in semi-arid areas,
and here's the reason. So plants have to breathe, and to breathe, they have to open pores on their
surface, and the problem for plants when they breathe with these pores is that they also allow
water to evaporate from their internal structures, and so the less carbon dioxide in the air, the
more the plants have to open their pores, and that means the more susceptible they are to drying out,
and that means that they struggle to exist in semi-arid areas. Now, what's happened as a consequence
of increased carbon dioxide production is that plants can breathe easier, and so they don't have
to open their pores to the same degree, and what's that, what that has meant is that the very desert
areas, at least the semi-arid areas, that the climate apocalypse were claiming would
expand and spread, so the desertification of the world, the exact opposite has happened,
and the Sahara Desert, for example, has shrunk to quite a stunning degree, and not only is the
planet 15% greener than it was in 2000, but there are more trees in the northern hemisphere
than there were a hundred years ago, and as well as the planet greening, and so you can think about
that as a victory on the objective front for the natural world, at the same time the planet is green,
because it's easier for plants to survive, our food crops have become much more productive
for exactly the same reasons, and so as carbon dioxide output has increased, the planet has got,
not only has the planet got greener, it's got greener in the driest areas, which is absolutely
stunning and remarkable, and one of the consequences of that increased greening is that our agriculture
production has become not less efficient, but much more efficient, and so I'm really wrestling with
how to conceptualize that particular sense of statistics. I just thought of an idea, I just
thought of an idea, I've never thought of this before, so we're just trying it right now, but I
think maybe we can think of three conceptions of the earth which capture everything we're talking
about, so my primary conception is evaluating the earth from the perspective of human flourishing,
how hospitable to human beings is it, and this includes like a lush green beautiful world for
us to enjoy for many reasons you've talked about, but then the second one could be looking at the
earth in terms of just pure biological productivity, so just not even focusing on humans, just how much
life is on the planet, and this captures what you just mentioned with rising CO2 levels,
making a greener planet, but then the third one, and I think this is really the core of the modern
environmental movement, is an unimpacted planet, so you're not optimizing for biological productivity,
you're optimizing for minimal impact, and I think that is really the core of the modern
environmental movement, it's not this just blanket collective desire for as much life as possible,
and we're somehow getting in the way of that, it's specifically against us, and I think you
brought up the perfect example, which is the climate catastrophe movements total non-interest
in kind of the obvious biological productivity benefits of more CO2, and this was not shocking
or stunning, this is exactly what was predicted by the people who discovered the greenhouse effect,
when they discovered the greenhouse effect they said this is going to on its own make the earth a
much more lush place, they speculated like the fruits are going to be bigger and everything
is going to be lush because we're going to have more farmland and more biological, and it's kind
of obvious, if you have a warmer world with more CO2, it's a more tropical world with more life,
it's a more green world in the life sense of green, and yet the green movement hates it
because we caused it, so they can see no good in anything we caused, even when it leads to more
biological productivity, so I think what you're bringing up really shows it's fundamentally an
anti-human movement, not a pro-life of any kind. Right, right, okay, but let's let's talk about
that idea of impact, it's like well what is this hypothetical perfect world that exists statically
that would be pristine and morally valuable in the absence of human beings, I mean the biosphere
is a dynamic place obviously over any timescale and there's shift in what constitutes quote the
environment, there seems to be this presumption that at some point in the past when there was
minimal human activity the earth was somehow optimized in the biological but also the moral
sense and that any change in that whatsoever in any direction, hence climate change let's say rather
than global warming, any change in that whatsoever is to be regarded axiomatically as evil, but what
that essentially means as far as I can tell the ineluctible conclusion that has to be drawn from
that proposition is that any human activity whatsoever is to be regarded as evil on the
face of it, it doesn't matter what it does, and your point is that even if it increases bio,
even if it increases total biological flourishing in terms of like let's say the
net metric tonnage of biological life on the planet and so that's also perverse because that is
definitely a game that none of us can win, if the a prior rule is no matter what you do you're evil
then the only solution to that is well how about a hell of a lot fewer of you, but then you say well
what's that supposed to serve because if what we're doing now is actually making the planet more
green and I'm saying that very carefully because I know that that's not a sufficient metric, I am
very concerned with issues let's say or conscious of issues that are relevant like the potential loss
of biodiversity and also the overfishing of the oceans let's say, so even though the planet is
becoming greener that doesn't mean that there are no mistakes we're making on the environmental
front, but those mistakes have to be differentiated out and they're all addressable and you know as
we get richer too and we can do more with less and our agriculture becomes more efficient if we can
manage that, that also means even by the standards of the environmentalists themselves that we'll
be able to set aside reasonably large tracts of land and water to maintain them in something
approximating a pristine and untouched state, I mean that's certainly something that should be done
on the on the oceanic management front, I mean the data that I know suggests that if we set aside
a certain percentage of the coastal area as marine protected areas and that might not be the most
efficient way to manage the oceans but it's not bad that we'll reap the benefits of having
untouched nature so to speak which is an aesthetic and economic and environmental good but we'll also
be able to replenish the oceans in a manner that would be economically productive and so
well like why can't why the hell can't we have our cake and eat it too that is we can help people
become rich with the provision of of plentiful energy and then we can put aside tracts of the
world so that they're relatively untouched so that biology can do its thing and like what the
hell is the problem with that precisely? Well it's it's so I think you're pointing to something
really good and something really bad something really good is why my my new book is called
fossil future why global human flourishing requires more oil coal and natural gas not less but part
of it it does talk about we can you know we can increase all of these biological things we can
have a much more lush world we can enjoy nature much more this is fundamentally good news the more
energy we have the more control we have over earth and the more we can make everything about it better
for our purposes including aesthetic things that poor people can't possibly be confused by but the
bad thing here is it's really highlighting the nihilism of this view that human impact is bad
and again I really think it's the view is not that we want a lush environment and human beings are
getting in the way of that we want biological productivity and human beings are getting away
because as you're pointing out they are opposing all human impact including obvious things that make
the world better and so it really is the view that if we did it it's bad and you ask something like
what is it serving but it's a nihilistic view so it's not really serving anything even when you
think when you think about unimpacted nature it's not this beautiful thing for us to enjoy
it's supposed to be protected from us so that's really the view including our enjoyment of this
evil of course our enjoyment is of no consequence whatsoever and in fossil future and in moral
case I have a lot of quotes from the leaders where they'll occasionally let this slip out where one
guy for example who was reviewing Bill McKibbin's book the end of nature talks about you know
like a flourishing biosphere is more important to me more important to me than one human or a
billion of them yeah yeah let me read that let me read that I've got it right here so this is
something that you cite in your 2014 book I'm gonna just read it so everybody can hear it and I would
I would ask everyone who's listening to really think about this because this gets to the this
strikes to the core of the issue as far as I can tell so for example this is from your book
in a Los Angeles Times review of the end of nature
McKibbin's influential book of 25 years ago predicting catastrophic climate change
David M. Graber research biologist for the National Park Service wrote this summary of
McKibbin's message McKibbin is a biocentrist and so am I we are not interested in the utility
of a particular species or free flowing river or ecosystem to mankind they have intrinsic value
more value to me than another human being that's a very interesting thing to say
or a billion of them which is also a very interesting thing to say human happiness and
certainly human fecundity are not as important as a wild and healthy planet
are no social scientists who remind me that people are part of nature but that isn't true
somewhere along the line at about a billion years ago maybe half that we quit the contract
and became a cancer we have become a plague upon ourselves and upon the earth
it is cosmically unlikely that the developed world will choose to end its orgy of fossil fuel
consumption and the third world its suicidal consumption of landscape until such time as
Homo sapiens should decide to rejoin nature some of us can only hope for the right virus
to come along you know I cannot understand how anybody who is
positively predisposed to children let's might we might say could read something like that
and not be absolutely shocked to their core I mean so let's walk through the claims the first claim is
a an untouched natural landscape of any size whatever untouched means is more valuable in
and of itself than any individual human being or any group of people no matter how large the number
okay so the implication there is any number of human beings could be sacrificed in order to preserve
any geographically demarcated natural zone of any size so that's a yes a standard of comparative
value and then the cancer metaphor while human beings have deviated from the natural order whatever
that natural order is whatever our deviation consists of and we've deviated the same way
a cancer deviates so now the metaphor is human beings equal cancer and that's that's a hell of a
metaphor because what we do with cancer is strive to eradicate it so these metaphors have deep
motivational significance so that's a little bit on the appalling side let's say and it's grounded in
a very narrow malethusian view of the world which is that we're something like yeast cancer let's say
and left to our own devices will multiply unchecked until we devour everything in perish
which is a pretty dismal and only vaguely biologically centered view of how human beings
conduct themselves because we're not yeast in a bloody petri dish we're not yeast and the world
isn't a petri dish let's put it that way and then you add to that though the closing statement which
is something like those of us who are properly oriented in our moral endeavor in relationship to
the non-human world can only sit and pray that the right virus comes along so that what so that
we're we're radically depopulated to what to what degree down to the half a billion people that the
world can hypothetically sustain it's like every single bit of that to me reeks of an underlying
and barely veiled brutal genocidal impulse i agree and what i want to draw attention to is that
this mentality diluted or not to various degrees is leading our thinking about what to do about
fossil fuels which is an existential issue for the world because the reason i go into this
particularly in fossil future is the point i'm making is that the people and institutions
were trusting to evaluate what to do about this source of energy that powers the world that also
emits co2 and impacts the climate those people are not making that evaluation by anything resembling
the goal of advancing human flourishing on earth they are pursuing to a significant degree this
goal of eliminating human impact on earth and the economist george reisman had this article
a long time ago called the toxicity of environmentalism and one point he made that i never forgot
is he said listening to a modern environmentalist is like listening to a doctor who's on the side
of the germs somebody who doesn't have your best interests at heart and as an example
one of the people i pick on very deservedly in fossil future is michael man who's a climate
scientist and activist who is one of the leading advisors and if you look at michael man's statements
one thing he has said is the ideal population for earth is a billion people yeah yeah how can
you possibly say that there are eight billion people like how can you possibly look at earth
and say oh yeah it's too many people that has a murderous impulse to it if you just look at the
earth and you say oh yeah seven billion people should go and what i point out with michael man
is that if you look at how he's evaluating the issue he's totally indifferent to the benefits of
fossil fuels he has a whole book people can look it up called the madhouse effect about fossil
fuels and climate and he doesn't mention any benefits of fossil fuels for example he talks
about agriculture and fossil fuels he only talks about negatives he doesn't once mention
diesel powered agricultural equipment or natural gas derived fertilizer even though those make it
possible for us to feed eight billion people so what we have is an anti-human mentality
so so some of those who are listening likely don't know that the the very survival of about four
billion people so half the world's population depends in no small part on the provision of
ammonia as fertilizer and ammonia is primarily derived from natural gas and so what that means is
the not just on the energy front let's point this out is that the the very food that is
provisioning half the world's population is a direct consequence of the cheap and easy accessibility
of natural gas and so and so what what's the idea here that we're supposed to reduce our
provision of fossil fuels and what are we going to do on the ammonia on the ammonia front we're
going to drive the price of fertilizer ever more skyward well if we do that because that
would be the consequence of reducing the plentiful supply of natural gas if we do that then what will
happen is clearly food will get more expensive and so will energy but food will definitely get more
expensive and so what that will mean is that huge swath of the world's population that's
living on the edge where they can just right now afford enough food to feed themselves so they don't
suffer the consequences of nutritional privation or even die a huge proportion of those people
are going to be tipped back into absolute poverty their children are going to be intellectually
stunted as a consequence and they might well starve and then you think well why would we
do that and if the answer is well you know some of us really believe that the planet should only
have a billion people on it if that if we have to have any people at all then well maybe this is all
part of the unconscious drive towards and and conscious drive to some degree towards reducing
the planet's population no matter what the price may be and then you see how people justify this
they say things like well you know if we don't take emergency action right now which means
let's make the poor even poorer then the poor are really going to suffer a hundred years from now
and I think look I don't have a lot of confidence in your ability to predict even a decade out much
less a hundred years with your unstable economic models that are predicated on an equally unstable
climate model so we can forget about your capacity to prognosticate a hundred years down the road
but what you're saying essentially is that the hypothetical poor that occupy my utopian
imagination are much more important than the actual poor right now who will definitely die
if we implement our higher energy price inducing hypothetical environmental policies
you know and one of the things that strikes me is so utterly absurd it's partly why I found your
book so interesting is that somehow the people who are making such arguments have gained the moral
upper hand even though you don't have to scrape beneath the surface very far to see not only the
genocidal metaphor and the genocidal intent but the actual genocidal impact of these policies
because we're definitely tipping people back into absolute privation
we'll be right back to our conversation with alex epstein in just a moment
first we wanted to give you a sneak peek at jordan's new documentary logos and literacy
I was very much struck by how the translation of the biblical writings jump started the development
of literacy across the entire world illiteracy was the norm the pastor's home was the first school
and every morning it would begin with singing the christian faith is a singing religion probably
80 percent of scripture memorization today exists only because of what is sung this is amazing here
we have a guttenberg bible printed on the press of yohan guttenberg science and religion are opposing
forces in the world but historically that has not been the case now the book is available to everyone
from Shakespeare to modern education and medicine and science to to civilization itself
it is the most influential book in all of history and hopefully people can walk away
with at least a sense of that
yeah there's a lot of there's a lot of really interesting stuff going on I mean I think one
thing why do they have the moral high ground and this is something that is really a core mission of
mine to correct is that as I mentioned before they really owned the issue of a good environment
starting in the 60s including loving nature including caring about clean air and clean water
and more recently caring about safety from climate and that the pro-capitalism side really didn't
concern them to concern themselves too much with this rhetorically at least and so the
anti-capitalist side was able to own this issue and when you own something as important as our
environment and our planet you do get the moral high ground and then they supplemented this
with this false alternative of you are either a climate change believer who hates fossil fuels
or you're a climate change denier who thinks fossil fuels are okay so they created this
total fossil alternative which made no sense because what makes sense with climate impact
is to weigh it along with the benefits of fossil fuels you cannot judge a prescription drug
by only looking at negative side effects and you can't judge fossil fuels by only looking at
negative side effects or exaggerate a negative side effects you have to look carefully at our
climate impacts negative and positive and then weigh them against the benefits that come with
fossil fuels including all the benefits that protect us from climate so there's this false
alternative so what they did is they owned the morality of caring about our environment and they
owned the claim to science because the climate change denial thing so-called didn't make much
sense because it's pretty obvious we impact climate at least some but so doing those two
things they owned this issue so people think well if I want to be a good person if I want a good
planet and I want to be pro-science then I have to hate fossil fuels and a lot of what I've tried
to do and I think Michael Schellenberger of Bjorn Lomborg and Steve Kuhn and I think what we've
tried to do is look at climate in a humanistic full context way and we're breaking this false
alternative which is a lot of the reason we get a lot of hostility so you said something there
that's very psychologically interesting so you said if I want to be a good person
because the environmentalists have captured this pro-planet narrative if I want to be a good person
then I have to buy the human beings are bad for the planet narrative but I'd like to take that
apart a little bit too because it's not exactly true what you said the truth of the matter is
something like if I want to take a shortcut to a good person without having to being a good
person without having to put into the process any real time and effort so that would mean
actually understanding the issues that are associated with environmental management and
economic sustainability which is unbelievably complicated I mean Bjorn while in U2 Schellenberger
spent their whole lives devoted to that endeavor trying to wade through the complexities it's
actually really difficult to develop a sophisticated and genuinely moral stance on the environment
and the economy it takes years and years of work and it's also extremely difficult to be a good
person and merely feeling sorry for the planet does not make you a good person in fact what it
makes you is a shallow narcissist who's using the easy identification with a genocidal ideology
to elevate yourself in the moral hierarchy and we we see people who are peddling this this dreadful
story to young people and offering them an easy shortcut to something approximating
easily trumpeted moral virtue and that's the sort of moral virtue that you can post on your
Facebook page when you claim that while you're anti-capitalist and you're in favor of the planet
and therefore all of a sudden you're actually a moral actor and someone to be regarded with
admiration and none of that's true because it's actually it's very difficult to be a good person
but it's very powerful that I agree entirely but it is very powerful and one thing I talk
about in fossil future and this is a big mission of mine is the moral monopoly of what I call the
moral case for eliminating fossil fuels has to be broken and when you have what I call a moral
monopoly you basically get a halo over your head for saying I hate fossil fuels I care about the
climate I care about the planet you don't need to do anything you just need to express this sentiment
doesn't matter you can we see you can fly on private jets you can live any lifestyle that you
want as long as you say this you get this halo and the other side gets devil horns on their head
but part of what's happened with what I call the energy humanists including me and Bjorn and Michael
and Steve is that we have now shown that actually quote saving the planet in their false view is
hurting billions of people and dooming them to poverty and actually making our environment worse
and hurting biology and so now they hate that that's why there's such vicious attacks because
their racket is coming to a close you you want it to be a controversial the first thing before
winning a debate is actually creating a debate there hasn't even been a debate over the morality
of fossil fuels intel fairly recently and once the debate is created that that easy claim to
virtue will disappear and those people will just go pick the the next easy thing to join
yeah well you said that all you have to do is express the sentiment that you care for the
planet so that's something approximating a feeling or a subjective state of mind let's say yes I'm a
good person because I feel empathy for the planet which is a pretty damn low resolution definition
implementable morality but you know it's tied in with something else too so imagine you're trying
desperately to make that case that the reason I'm good is because I feel sorry for things including
the planet well then you have to also buttress that claim with the insistence that sentiment
subjective sentiment itself is the only valid arbiter of reality and so that's something like
I feel therefore I am and I see that this in this entire modern movement that insists that identity
is nothing other than subjective feeling is actually associated in a perverse manner
with this ability to justify a claim to moral superiority by appeal to sentiment it's like
it's people see a picture of a like a bedraggled kitten on on on the internet and they go oh
and they think that because they have that reflexive response which you know has a certain moral virtue
that all of a sudden they're morally admirable people and that's a lovely thing to believe
and you can extend that to something like well I'm so concerned about the planet that I can barely
sleep at night it's like well fair enough that might be an indicator of your moral virtue although
I suspect not but the real question is do you actually know anything about the problem have
you spent any work real work in differentiating your knowledge of the problem are you taking any
concrete steps whatsoever to solve it apart from hand waving sentimentally and do you have metrics
in place that actually help you measure whether or not what you're doing has a beneficial impact
and that's also complex that if you bring to people's attention the necessity of thinking it through
all they do is get irritated at you like they get irritated with longberg's a classic example
because he's the person I think and I'd like your opinion on this you know I don't think there is
anybody who's a more effective advocate for genuine progress on the environmental front
than Bjorn Lombard he's thought it through as far as I can tell more deeply than anyone else
perhaps in the world and it's stunning to me the degree to which his ideals fail to gain traction
and I think partly it's because he makes the issue complicated right he says well we don't
have just one problem too much carbon we have like 20 problems or a hundred and and they all
need to be attended to but we need to rank order them and we have to do that in a methodologically
rigorous manner it's like well we don't want to do any of that we just want to feel good about what
we feel good about and we want to make a claim that that makes us morally virtuous and it's certainly
the case as far as I can tell that our educational systems are enticing young people to adopt exactly
that attitude and then to also engage in this demonization that you described so I think one
powerful dynamic with this this free virtue that you get by just saying I care about this issue I
care about the planet is that it's been given the stamp of science because it's considered scientific
to just say hey the planet is being destroyed by fossil fuels we need to do something about it
and it's really as long as you feel some way or you vote some way that is considered totally
sufficient there's nothing to think about but so it's really sad and shameful that science
has been has been stamped on this incredibly irresponsible way of thinking and one thing
I've tried to do and I think Bjorn does this but I think I do it probably most explicitly and I
think it's very very important to do it explicitly is I keep talking about the benefits of fossil
fuels and how how the other side is ignoring the benefits of fossil fuels so I go as far as to call
the other side fossil fuel benefit deniers I also call them climate mastery deniers because
they deny our ability to master climate danger and I think people can really get that we're
thinking about this issue in a way that makes no sense because we're only looking at the negative
side effects of fossil fuels we're not looking at the benefits and if you look at my work the
moral case for fossil fuels fossil future it's really stressing the goodness of fossil fuels
not just fossil fuels aren't as bad as you think but they're an actual positive good and I've seen
you make this case as well I think it's very very powerful it's imagine my book had been called
fossil fuels aren't quite as bad as you think it would have been no impact what's really needed
we've had this inverted morality that said that that says that food is poison and poison is food
and I think it's not enough to just to say oh they go too far it's to say no they are attacking
something good and once you are having a positive case for fossil fuels the other side goes on the
defensive you watch what happens when I debate when people will debate me they don't really have
an answer to looking at the full picture their answer is call me a climate change denier try to
smear me but they can't answer the argument of if you look at the full context benefits and
side effects of what's good for human flourishing fossil fuels are incredibly good and will remain
good for the foreseeable future and it's a pretty subtle argument that that climate change denier
phrase is a real interesting one too because that's a phrase that's so manipulatively
propagandistic that it's almost incomprehensible I mean the reason that that phrase emerged is
because there's been we've developed a universal consensus that denying the reality of the Holocaust
was a moral crime and so the propagandists took a leaf from that page and said well the people
who are denying the cataclysmic reality of climate change are as morally culpable as those who
deny the Holocaust which implies that they're as culpable as the Nazis who run the death camps
and that's a pretty decent smear and then you might say well what's the moral advantage to doing
that and so the first thing you might point out is well you get to have all the unearned moral
virtue that goes along with saying that just because you're sentimental about the planet
in some vague way that you're now a moral paragon and that solves all your moral problems
and then conveniently at the same time you get to identify a group of people who are essentially
satanic in their motivations and so that would be the climate change deniers and so that entire
problem of evil which you no longer contend with in your own life because you're on the side of the
moral is dumped at the feet of the people that you deem as enemies that's that form of scapegoating
that Ren Girard talked about and so young people are being enticed to do two things is one is to
adopt it three things to adopt an extremely simple minded view of the problems and opportunities that
confront us second to claim a completely unearned moral virtue merely on the basis of a vague sentiment
and third and more dangerously to localize the problem of evil in the minds and souls of the
people who are hypothetically opposed to their self aggrandizing sentiment and the combination of
those three moral errors is really dangerously toxic and that dangerous toxicity I would say is
manifesting itself in such things as these this idiot insistence let's say in the UK
because they're suffering from this more than any other place now maybe except Germany on the moral
benefits of an impossible net zero right the the rubber is really starting to hit the road
in the last couple of years as energy prices have spiked out of out of reach of many people
and the unreliability of these hypothetically benevolent renewables has become more and more
self-evident and so we're walking a very dangerous moral path here right easy moral virtue the the
our inability to point out that a lot of this moral virtue is driven by an unthinking ignorance
combined with this temptation to demonize those who are like lomborg shellenberger you
you're a good example as well who are standing up and saying hey wait a minute everyone um
we've lifted billions of people out of absolute privation and starvation as a consequence of the
utilization of fossil fuels and they're so fundamental that we can't shift away from them
rapidly that's actually practically impossible without tilting people into the kind of abject
poverty that's going to cause widespread starvation it's like that doesn't sound like a case being made
by satan to me no it's um i mean i do think that the energy crisis is an enormous educational
opportunity and it's obviously a tragedy and it's as somebody who's been talking about this for 15
years and advising in the opposite direction it's very sad to see me myself being right
in terms of if you artificially restrict the supply of fossil fuels in a world that needs
more energy and you don't have a viable near-term replacement then prices are going to skyrocket
including food prices and the price of everything else like this is this was obvious that this was
going to happen and it's hard to see it but at least the benefit is that people can see that the
establishment has failed that's the benefit of a crisis people see the establishment has failed
and the key is in my view two things one is the right people need to be implicated and the right
people need to be vindicated and i say the right people need to be implicated not as a vindictive
person at all uh but it's very important when you have a crisis and this happened with 9-11
happened with the financial crisis you know you need to have some idea of who is responsible
and then who was right and gave us better advice if you look at today's energy crisis
the number one thing that is scary about it is that it is a crisis that has come from the from
the net zero movement not even only achieving one percent of their goals so they have not even reduced
the supply of fossil fuels i want to stress that again they haven't even reduced the supply
they just slowed its rate of growth they already wanted to dramatically reduce the supply that was
their goal we were supposed to be using way less fossil fuel by now they just slowed the growth
and that was enough to cause a global energy crisis in a world that needs far more energy
so that should really wake us up what if we actually start on their path of getting rid of
fossil fuels and again we have 27 years now 27 years and less than a month as we record this
to achieve net zero which in effect means getting rid of fossil fuels we could talk about offsets
and stuff that doesn't work at any scale that there's any evidence of so it's really this this
homicidal movement in its in its consequences and i do think people are waking up and they're
particularly waking up to the idea that hey we ignored the benefits of fossil fuels or what i
call our designated experts did this and these people need to be jettisoned you cannot listen
to anybody about energy and climate who ignores the benefits of fossil fuels to billions of people
because if you do you get an energy crisis and if we keep listening to them it's going to get a lot
worse well the other thing that you see being the drum being beaten on the side of the radical left
for example is the anti-colonial um let's say this continual trumpeting of the anti-colonial
interference message and so then i look at that and i think well you give the devil is due and the
fact that the world's cultures have come into contact with one another in a dramatic way in the
last 300 years has produced all sorts of consequences some positive and some negative but um on the
anti-colonial front the environmental proposition and this is mostly coming from the radical left is
that there's no possible way that the third world inhabitants can be allowed much less encouraged
to develop a standard of living that in any manner approximates the profligate west is that
we're rich and you know maybe we should suffer from that a bit and maybe we should pay reparations
let's say but all those poor people who are desperately trying to clamber up the socioeconomic
hierarchy so they don't die let's let's make that perfectly clear they can't be allowed to do that
because their environmental footprint will immediately become so large that the planet
itself will be destroyed and so okay what's the consequence of that well the consequence of that
is that they should be poor and stay that way and should shut the hell up about it and should be happy
about it and perhaps there should be a hell of a lot fewer of them and if that doesn't trigger
your anti-colonialist morality then you've got some serious thinking to do because i just don't
understand at all how it is that those of us in the wealthy west and this would certainly include
those in the chattering environmental glitterati elite class i have no sense whatsoever how they're
in a moral position to be lecturing the developing world about how they should accept limits to growth
which means for example that their children won't have access to enough nutrition to even
optimize their their brain development as they mature it's like oh that's the price those people
get to pay hey those people those poor people in developing countries who don't get to be wealthy
and by wealthy means have enough to eat and have schools to send their children and we in the western
world we can sit on our high horse and say well we used fossil fuels and oops sorry about that and
all the carbon but you bastards you can just you can just accept your lot and if you stop breeding
so god damn much that would be a good thing too now how that is it's colonial to a degree that's
overwhelming is beyond me well it's it is and i think it's a very very powerful argument it's
been one of these things that has been ignored because the priorities of the modern environmental
movement are not what they say and i would say more broadly the anti-capitalist movement
they claim to be concerned about the poor but if you're concerned about the poor and you know that
fossil fueled productivity has brought an unprecedented number of people out of poverty
in recent decades you would think about how do we expand that how do we replicate what happened
in china what happened in india you know some changes to it obviously but how do we how do we
you know they use seven times more fossil fuels compared to four forty years ago like it's it's
obviously fueled their productivity and their prosperity why don't we do more of that and yet
there's been no attention paid in the culture to the energy poor there's no attention paid to the
fact we have three billion people who use less electricity than one of our refrigerators uses
we have a third of the world using wood and animal dung to eat their homes and to cook their food
and in terms of you're mentioning wealthy people three quarters of the world uses an amount of
energy that that we would consider totally unacceptable in the us or canada or anything
resembling that so once these facts are pointed out it is obvious that there is a moral imperative
to do at least nothing to get in the way of people using at least that at least that and it's clear
that the anti fossil fuel movement is absolutely getting in the way they're trying to destroy
all loans to fossil fuels there they're trying to encourage them to use things that will not
actually work for them they're trying to for example throughout africa limit oil and gas
development even though that's a huge potential source of prosperity but they're not winning this
argument once sunlight has been exposed and i had a personal experience i don't know if you heard
about this but the washington post tried to basically cancel my book fossil future back
before it came out they got a copy of the book they didn't read the book which i thought that was
their job as journalists to report on a book from a major author instead what they tried to do is
dig up what i had written in college where i had said very specifically the poor world needs more
capitalism and more individualism which i stand by but they somehow tried to portray that as
colonialism but here's the key their whole argument was alex epstein doesn't really care about the
poor so you don't have to listen to his arguments about the poor needing fossil fuels that this is
a bizarre ad hominem on its face it's completely the opposite of the truth but it was notable to me
how they had no answer to this argument that poor people need fossil fuels and that the
anti fossil fuel movement hurts the poor people most so i think that really shows the power of
this argument let's delve into that issue of caring about the poor because i don't think that
it is really all that wise for any of us to jump up and down about how much we care for the poor
because if you cared for the poor you'd be out there doing something with your life to directly
benefit the poor and that turns out to be extremely well i i have to i have to i don't mean i don't
mean you i don't mean you okay speaking more generally it's not that easy to care about the
poor and so i think that any of us who trumpet the idea that we truly care about the poor should
be very careful about that but having said that i would also say we could though say even if we
don't care about the poor any more than the typical somewhat selfish human being we could at least get
the hell out of their way when they're trying to clamber their way up the socioeconomic hierarchy
and that was the case that you made just a few minutes ago is that we could at least in the west
not implement policies that actually interfere in a serious manner with the attempts of the
developing world to lift themselves out of absolute privation we could at least get the
hell out of the road and we wouldn't have to do that by hand waving about how moral we are in
our care for the poor we could say well we're relatively disinterested at minimum but we won't
go out of our way to make your lives more miserable than they have to be while you use your own efforts
to acquire for yourself some of the things that we've managed to acquire we can't even do that
i think it's a great point and so for me yeah i don't want to act like i'm just
ministering to every poor person in the world or this kind of thing i mean look i i live in a free
country i love doing work that i find really interesting and i love that it benefits a lot
of people including some of the poorest people in the world and one that the particular way in which
i identify with the poorest people in the world is with the lack of freedom because i really think
about what what would it like be like to not be born in the u.s whatever advantages i had being born
in the u.s is by far the greatest and i really think about you know how can more people be born
into that and really the number one thing we need to do is spread good ideas and not spread bad ideas
and and this is where the antifausal field movement is so destructive particularly you've
probably seen this recent climate reparations thing yeah which is saying hey we owe the poor world
and i i wrote about this recently people can see it at energytalkingpoints.com which is where i post
my new stuff but the there's there's the idea that we should feel guilty for ruining the world and i
believe we've made the world better for everyone including the poor but the other element that
is obviously wrong is what is happening is we are paying people off usually dictators off
to not use fossil fuels so we are paying them to deprive people of the crucial freedom
to get prosperity and that is just totally shameful and that is absolutely interfering
in the lives of the world's poorest people right so with our so-called climate reparations
that are going to be devoted to the the governments of third world countries primarily we're going
to be propping up frequently brutal quasi dictatorships and bribing them to keep their
populations poor yes so that we don't save the planet that's our plan
that is that is a plan i mean again it's it's not a movement that actually has any kind of goal
in strategy long term it's really just hostility toward any impact and at the moment it's CO2
emissions so anything that has CO2 emissions you hate but observe look there's no enthusiasm for
nuclear right which you would expect them to love because it doesn't emit CO2 there's hatred
for nuclear there's hatred for hydro and there's hatred for mining which is necessary for solar
and wind which require way more mined materials than anything else there's so it's really an
anti-impact movement that's just hostile to any human impact and just nihilistically and randomly
pursues that with no strategy and no thinking about the future and this mentality is leading the
world this is what i call our knowledge system it is blindly pursuing this destructive anti-human
path with no strategy okay so let's let's delve into that a little bit that motivation for that so
i'm going to play devil's advocate here a bit and and and let you respond to it so the first
thing we might point out is that the the human proclivity for something approximating unspoiled
natural vistas actually seems to have a moral element and a biologically rooted moral element
so for example our our aesthetic preferences seem to be associated with something like preference
for natural landscapes that are verdant and green and potentially productive in relationship to
agriculture and and the flourishing of let's say edible animals with enough water we like landscapes
that look like that we think they're beautiful and the idea that we might prefer those if they were
unspoiled is also worth delving into to some degree because we do need to live in
balanced harmony with such environments so that we don't destroy the very virtue that they
they implicitly contain and so and our aesthetic preferences tilt us in that direction and so we
have a bit of a biological tilt towards not wanting to gum up and pollute the works okay so
so there's that and then we also have this moral sense that we have a moral obligation right and
so the moral obligation is to be grateful to be cognizant of our unearned privilege and so for
you that would be the fact that you were born in the united states and that you were a accidental
beneficiary of all the work that had gone into that great society before you made your appearance
on the scene and that there's a moral obligation on your part in some sense to do something about
that right and so and that can both of those can be warped the warping of the first one is
to push that moral and aesthetic sensibility to the point where we claim that any human
interaction with that pristine environment whatsoever is tantamount to immorality and on
the second front it is that the way to atone for our privilege is by being guilty and stopping all
activity so those things dovetail we might say instead that if we wanted to genuinely contend
with the problem of our unearned privilege and the fact that you know we walk on blood that is
being we walk on land that is being soaked by the blood of conflict for generations right there's a
certain guilt in that a certain sense you might say even of original sin is that we do have to atone
but the proper proposition on the sophisticated front would be something like well we should atone
by putting into place thoughtful and intelligent and genuinely pro-human environmental slash
economic policies and we should atone in our private lives for our unearned privilege by being
people whose moral striving is so admirable that we've justified the existence of our privileges
and we shouldn't be taking the easy way out and saying just because we're sentimental about Gaia
means that we've somehow fulfilled our moral obligation we're doing a very bad job of teaching
young people this as far as I can tell so like the guilt's there right the the sense of original
sin is there the sense that we're responsible for the atrocity of history in some sense is there
that needs to be contended with but we're constantly looking for easy ways out of the problem instead
of actually trying to address it head on well let's start out with the the first part in terms of
this this like sense of what we like in natural landscapes and we like life and so I certainly
have a version of this myself I mean I'm very obsessed with the ocean and I spend way more time
outdoors than most people and I just like I think people underrate being outdoors a lot and and you
know I love seeing different kinds of animals and their natural habitat so like I definitely
experienced this but when I when I think of it then what I think about is in impacting the earth
we want to make sure we impact the earth in a way that allows us to really enjoy this and in fact
have more of it there's a lot of things we can do to make the earth more beautiful and to enhance it
with respect to our aesthetic sensibilities and I think the the best thing forever in this regard
was Frank Lloyd Wright because if you look at his buildings and how he approached it he loved nature
but he also thought that we could improve nature and that's really what you're doing as a human
being is you're saying I can improve nature so you're not hostile to nature but you view it as
what I call wild potential it has the potential to be an amazing place for us it has all these
different building blocks and all these starting things and some of them we want to preserve
some of them we want to change a lot and even the things we want to preserve we want to make a
lot more accessible to everyone which requires changing a lot so I think of it as we can do an
even better job at making the earth an amazing place to live but part of that is recognizing
we've done a really good job in a lot of ways the earth is so much of a better place to live than it
was 500 years ago 200 years ago the world is is is you know it's naturally uh it's naturally dynamic
it's deficient and it's dangerous it's like those are three attributes that's why I call it wild
potential and so human beings have had to contend with that and to bring up fossil fuels our basic
way of contending with that is to try to produce a lot of value that nature doesn't produce for us
nature produces not very much value that we can use and it produces a lot of threat so we need
productive ability to create resources nature doesn't including to create resources that neutralize
the different threats like creating irrigation to neutralize drought and what we do that with
our productive ability but we're naturally very physically weak beings and so the key step is
using machines to produce far more value than our meager physical bodies can and that's what we've
done with fossil fuels we've had cost effective energy that has allowed say the average american
to have 75 machine servants producing value so that we can do far more than we ever could
and we can do types of things that we never could like no number of human beings can fly
no number of human beings can be an incubator which you know save millions incubator save
millions of lives so we've made the earth so much of a better place and I think we can make it even
more beautiful and I think a lot of the specific things we create are ugly and that's a shame but
I think of it as we've done a good job and we can do even better not that we're these sinners who
have ruined who ruin everything by touching it that is a that is a hostile view and it's an unjustified
view so I think we can be more like Frank Lloyd Wright but we should be proud of what we've done
so far and in terms of obligation I mean I feel gratitude for it I don't feel like
anyone has really sinned or I've sinned or but I feel like the obligation is to is to keep going
trying to make it better and better and I think just by being a productive person
that's really what you're doing but because I think about global issues I try to advise people
globally so let me ask you about this psychologically so obviously people there are a lot of people
particularly young people perhaps who are bearing a heavy load of existential guilt for the fact of
their very existence and so you just made something approximating a pro-human case and so I would ask
you a psychological question how do you think you've conducted yourself in your own life
effectively so that that sense of existential guilt that potential hostility towards human
endeavor itself or even human existence has been ameliorated like what have you done that you
believe is sufficiently valuable to justify the cost of your own existence but I guess
why would I I don't understand why I would feel it in the first place because the people who feel
it have a very warped at least the environmental version we can talk about other versions but
the environmental slash climate version is this very warped delicate nurture view of the earth
that the earth is stable sufficient and safe and our impact ruins it and if you believe that
and you hear all this propaganda then you think yeah we're all you we're all ruining the delicate
nurture but if you have that view it's a very damaging view but I don't have the view so I don't
understand why I would feel so bad yeah but people that's the thing is that and I think we need to
contend with this right because people do have that view and lots of people have it and it's easy
let's say for educators who are pushing this ideological agenda to capitalize on the prevalence
of that view that's why I'm pointing to something like an intrinsic sense of original sin is that
we have this sense as human beings or many people do that in some real sense
we have to atone for the crime of our existence and I think there's something to that I think that
we have to bear a moral burden that justifies the the crime of our existence so to speak
and that would mean that we have to be genuinely well in your terminology we have to be genuinely
productive people let's say we have to be genuinely productive people that are aiming up
maybe in relationship to such things as working for the amelioration of absolute poverty like
there is a moral calling there and I think that part I think of it differently okay I think of it
differently so I think of existence as an opportunity so I think of it as it's just this
amazingly special thing that you know any of us exist in the first place I mean probably you
think about the probabilistic nature of it and I feel like being on earth is just this amazing
opportunity and you can look at how different people have handled that throughout history and
how they handle it today and I think a lot of people tragically haven't made the most of it but I
think you can see certain things that people do who have made the most of it and find it fulfilling
and for me one of the observations is people who choose a certain kind of creative work it
it is makes a huge difference I'm guessing you've experienced I've certainly experienced this in
terms of just finding something that creates value in the world that really really works with
how you like to use your mind the thought process hopefully you get to work with certain kinds of
people I mean that's just part of it there are all kinds of other opportunities of being alive so I
don't think about it all as oh it's we're guilty and this is bad I think the only guilt is wasting
the opportunity that's that's where my kind of fear and guilt come in is like I worry about oh did I
waste the opportunity of being alive and part of that is of course you don't want to live at the
expense of others and ruin the world that's another way of wasting it but so I think of life as
opportunity not as not as atonement well right and we should also we could address there too the
issue that if you conduct yourself successfully so let's say that you are as a consequence prosperous
there is also this underlying presumption that's generally unexamined that you had to do that at
someone else's expense right it's something like a zero sum game and that ties into this whole
Malthusian view that were yeast in a petri dish with finite resources and the truth of the matter
I think is that if you conduct yourself in the highest manner properly then you end up being
creatively productive in a manner that doesn't just benefit you selfishly but simultaneously
benefits many other people and also facilitates their ability to do the same thing and so that's
a vision of a kind of harmony that's a high-order ethical calling is you don't have to pursue your
creative exploitation of possibility at the cost of the possibility or at the cost of other people
quite the contrary you could increase the possibility which we could do on the natural front
and you could increase the ability of others to flourish simultaneously yes and I want to really
highlight because earlier you responded you said all these people have been have been immersed
in this what I call this dogma this delicate nurture dogma and I would add a piece to this
dogma it's it's the view that the earth is delicate nurture that say stable sufficient and safe and
then it goes along with what I call the parasite polluter view of human beings what you're getting
out with the Malthusian view so the view that all we do with our impact is we take from the earth
and we destroy it we make it ugly we disrupt it in this kind of thing and in so far as you view
the world this way you are going to have a bad life and you're going to be really unhappy
because you're going to feel really guilty and you're going to feel really pessimistic
and you're going to believe in all of these apocalyptic scenarios so it's it's why it's a
fundamental thing that needs to be done to reeducate people about the basic nature of earth
and the basic nature of human beings and replace so delicate nurture with what I call wild potential
and this parasite polluter view with what I call the producer improve our view we actually produce
value and we can improve the earth and we can do even more and in fossil future I talk about this
as part of the human flourishing framework a key part of how we have to think about this issue
is change our view of human beings and earth from an anti-human view to a pro-human view and if once
you change that in people it is life changing because it's their their whole view of how the
world works changes from this terribly sad and destructive view to a very optimistic view and
that that's one of the things I'm grateful for is early on I learned pro-human environmental
philosophy and that was a huge gift that I got when I was 18 how did you learn that why were you
fortunate enough to learn that well maybe we'll leave that look we have to stop we have to stop
this part of it we'll get into that in the next part of our discussion so for everybody who's
watching and listening I do an extra half an hour with my guests on the daily wire plus platform
as part of the arrangement that I've made with them to increase the professional appearance and
quality of my podcasts for example which as you are noticing are still available on YouTube free
for wide distribution I do an extra half an hour with people I would be interested and I'm going
to continue to talk to to elix on the daily wire plus platform about his philosophical journey
because you've definitely taken an unpopular stance and a minority unpopular stance and you
did that pretty early 2014 is pretty early given all things considered and and you did it quite
successfully you haven't been particularly effectively cancelled interestingly enough
and I'd like to find out what your pathway was to your realizations and how you manage that
hello everyone I would encourage you to continue listening to my conversation with my guest
on dailywireplus.com
