I mean, you mentioned, interestingly, people like Joe Rogan and Russell Brown being considered
a gateway to the alt-right. They're still traditionally politically more akin to the left,
but because they've deviated slightly, you have this kind of puritanical sledgehammer coming
down and saying, no, you're straying from what our ideology says you should believe.
And that, to me, also feels like a fundamentalist religion.
Hello to everyone watching and listening. Today I'm speaking, once again, because we've done it
before, with playwright, journalist and political satirist Andrew Doyle, also known as Titania
McGrath. We discuss the intentional irrationality of the far-left doctrines that use religious
rhetoric and practices, despite the absence of God, or perhaps the presence of a different God,
their paramount desire to dismantle societal structures, regardless of need or merit,
the argument for transcendence inherent in the pursuit of art,
and how woke culture stifles genuine expression, forcing dogma to take the place of fundamental
truce and, say, purposefully doing so. Looking forward to it. Well, Mr. Doyle, it's good to see
you again. I think we're damn near friends, or at least I like you. I don't know what you think
about me, but... The feeling's very much mutual, Jordan. Thank you so much for having me.
Well, that's good. Well, us reprehensible types, you know, we need to stick together.
We do. Yeah. Yeah, that's for sure. So, the first, I thought I'd hassle you for a bit. First,
I got two things to hassle you about, I think. The first is, it says on your Wikipedia page,
for whatever that's worth, that you regard yourself as left-wing, and so I think you deserve
some harassment for that. But also, I don't know what the hell that means anymore. And then,
after I've done bugging you about that, I thought I'd bother you about having a PhD in
early Renaissance poetry and make the humiliation complete. Okay, let's start with the left-wing
thing. Okay, yes. Well, firstly, I'd say that Wikipedia is full of errors. I wouldn't trust
absolutely everything you see on Wikipedia. However, on that score, I think it's broadly
accurate. I know that, I mean, I've never voted for a right-wing party. I did vote for Jeremy Corbyn,
which, to be honest, I now regret. As you should. I think if you were to... I'm with you. I don't
really know what left-wing and right-wing means anymore. I think the culture war has, in fact,
obliterated those two designations. I really do believe that because, you know, if you were to
write down my views on most subjects and sort of give them to an impartial observer and say,
is this person on the left or on the right? I think broadly speaking, most of my values
would fall into what traditionally would be considered left-wing. I think I have some sort of
more conservative values when it comes to culture and education and the arts, perhaps.
But that's the same as someone like George Orwell, who was very much a cultural conservative,
as well as being a socialist. I think economically speaking, I do believe in
fair disproportionate taxation of the wealthy. I do believe in the welfare state.
All of those sort of, I believe, in redressing economic inequality, looking out for working
class people, social mobility. So all of these kind of things, I think, would traditionally be
deemed to be left-wing. But I think what the culture war has effectively done is
it's substituted identity, group identity, for the notion of class and money. And what that now
means is that people who describe themselves as left-wing are nothing of the kind. I mean,
most of the activists that you see, the sort of most vociferous cheerleaders of the critical
social justice movement tend to be, well, let's put it nicely, quite posh. They tend to have
quite plummy voices, double-barreled names. They're called things like Hugo Pondsford and
Sage Willoughby and things like this, particularly the case with environmental activists. You know,
there's people who glue themselves to Van Gogh paintings and the statue of David or whatever
it might be. When they talk, they are almost like a caricature, like the kind of thing that I would
have invented as a joke of a kind of fact. And have invented, in fact. Exactly. Well, Tatania
McGrath has that name because she's very, very well off. Part of the joke with that and part of
what I find so funny about so many of these activists is that they are bleeding about
oppression and persecution and privilege, and they're independently wealthy. They've got,
they've had everything handed to them on a plate. They're not in a position to do that.
Andrew, you know, look, I noticed this when I was teaching at Harvard, at Ivy League
school, obviously. And so all of my students were the top 1%, obviously. And if they weren't at that
moment, they were going to be by the time they were 40. So at worst, they were top 1% in what would
you call infancy. There we go. And so you might think that'd be good enough on the privilege side,
but it seems to me that there's a small coterie of very noisy people for whom being rich and
privileged is not enough. They also want all the victimization privileges of being oppressed,
because then you can have bloody well everything, can't you? And if you're a narcissistic psychopath,
then everything is what you want and you want it now. And I want to just follow up on that a bit
with regards to this left-wing issue. So, you know, there's about a dozen studies now. I want to
write an article about this or maybe even a book. There's about a dozen studies now
looking at the personality predictors of left-wing authoritarianism.
And so from the end of World War II till 2016, social psychologists in particular,
and that's a rather dismal discipline, denied the existence of left-wing authoritarianism outright.
It was only a right-wing phenomenon, apparently. You know, I mean, Stalin and Mao, notwithstanding.
But it started to switch a bit in 2016. We did a study in my lab, first of all, showing that
left-wing authoritarianism was a coherent, you could identify a coherent set of beliefs
statistically that were associated with so-called progressive causes allied with the willingness
to impose them using force, fear, force, and compulsion. So that's not a bad definition of
left-wing authoritarianism. But then a number of other studies have come out, and the most
interesting ones concentrate on what's known as the dark tetrad. And the dark tetrad is a group
of personality traits that were too evil to make it into the standard personality models.
They were excluded by fiat to begin with. Manipulativeness, that's Machiavellianism.
Psychopathy, which is predatory parasitism. Narcissism, that was the original dark tet
triad. But that wasn't bad enough, so the psychologists had to add sadism to it to fill
in the last quadrant. And the correlation between dark tetrad personality traits and left-wing
authoritarianism is so high that it isn't obvious that they're distinguishable. And so what I see
is... Is it not similarly high amongst right-wing authoritarianism?
No, it's not. So it's a different kind of authoritarianism?
Yes. I mean, this isn't clearly laid out yet, but the focus at the moment...
I think, first of all, anybody who's willing to use fear and compulsion and force
is likely to also be characterized by those dark tetrad traits. But I think the additional
pathology that emerges on the left, and this is something we can discuss, obviously, is that
you have to be a particular kind of evil snake to mask your psychopathic power-mongering in the
guise of compassion. And I don't think the right-wing authoritarians do that. They more or less come
right out and say, like, fuck you, I'm going to take everything you have, especially if you're
a group I don't like. But the left-wing types, they say, well, you know, really, I'm your best
friend. Historically speaking, is that necessarily the case? I mean, you know, if you take the example
of the Third Reich and Nazism, that was underpinned by a belief, a sincere belief,
a sort of quasi-religious belief that what they were doing was for the good of society.
However, abhorrent, we might find it.
Look, fair enough, man, I know perfectly well that in the 1930s, for example,
as the Nazis marched towards the death camps, their primary rationale for the
original implementation of youth in Asia, so to speak, of mass killing was compassionate
youth in Asia. But then I would also say, and this is something we actually don't know,
you know, that the Nazis were national socialists and their political stance was a weird mixture of
what we would think of as left and right-wing now, right? I mean, there was the fascist component
that involved the aggregation of power at the pinnacle, corporate and governmental,
and media, all of that, right? So that seems kind of right-wing and monolithic.
But it wasn't like they were, it wasn't, there were socialist elements in the platform as well.
And so we don't know enough to sort that out, I would say, maybe on the statistical side.
But doesn't all of this sort of point to the fact, or not even the fact, but my contention,
that actually thinking in terms of left and right when it comes to this
is kind of redundant. I think in a way you've sort of hit it.
Yeah, exactly.
Because the debate has always been the struggle between liberty and authority.
And so, you know, to go back to whether I'm left-wing or right-wing, I think I'm probably
just liberal. I think there are liberal-minded people on the left, there are liberal-minded
people on the right among libertarians. It's not something that is tied to a left-right worldview.
But when I hear people talking about how trying to frame the culture war in terms of left and
right, or to say that the culture war doesn't matter and there are more important things,
actually, this struggle between liberty and authority, which John Stuart Mill talks about
in his book on liberty. George Orwell has written about this. That's the thing that matters. And
the recognition that there is an authoritarian impulse in humanity, that there is an enduring
appeal to authoritarianism, whether you come from the left or from the right, this is something
that George Orwell has to go back to. He tackled this as well. It's precisely the reason why,
when he wrote Animal Farm, he couldn't get it published for so long because people were horrified
by the possibility that left-wing people could be authoritarian. And what he was saying is that
this is something that doesn't... It's irrespective of a left-wing view or a right-wing view. And I
think although you might be able to pinpoint psychological differences and tendencies among
those on the left who have an authoritarian bent and those on the right who have a similar
authoritarian bent, perhaps it's more useful just to think, particularly when it comes to the culture
war, in terms of who believes in traditional liberal values. I know that means something very
different in America, but liberal values insofar as individual autonomy, shared humanity, freedom,
freedom of expression, freedom of the press, etc. Those kind of liberal values you can do whatever
you want with your life, so long as it does not impinge upon the rights of others. That's something
that left and right can agree on. And the social justice warriors, whilst they might call themselves
left-wing, really their movement is characterized by authoritarianism. They oppose those liberal
values. Well, that's what it looks like. And quite... Well, not just what it looks like, quite
explicitly. I mean, the early critical race theory texts explicitly say... I mean, if you read Derek
Bell who wrote an essay called Who's Afraid of Critical Race Theory, he talks about how critical
race theorists have always mistrusted liberalism. They see the liberal project as having failed,
because we still live in a society where racism exists. And they take that as evidence that liberalism
doesn't work, rather than... Right, because the previous societies were so non-racist.
Right, exactly. They don't understand that point. The social liberalism is about an ongoing process.
It's about recognizing that we live in an imperfectible world and trying to do our best
with a bad lot. And the problem is that authoritarians tend to be, as well, kind of utopians,
even though in the case of the social justice activists, I don't think they've got a clear
sense of what their final ideal society would look like. At the moment, they just seem to me
to be on a sort of rampage of destruction. Yeah, well, that is what it would look like.
I've always thought that Hitler got exactly what he was aiming at. He shot himself while
Europe was burning. And it's like a big fuck you to God, fundamentally.
Well, that was because he was the personality type that would rather everyone was torn down
rather than he fails. I mean, one of the things that comes in...
Precisely, yeah. Well, that is the dark tetradite, man. That's for sure.
Right. I mean, he was deeply narcissistic. He would ball people with those lectures
late at night when no one was interested. It was all about him. One thing that comes out
very clearly, there's a great biography of Hitler by Ian Kershaw. One thing that very much comes
out about that is this guy was a narcissist. And when he knew that the game was up, he wanted
everyone to pay, all of the German people. That's narcissism right there, man.
That's absolutely right. Well, and he said that, you know? I mean,
at near the end of the Second World War, when the Russians were advancing on Berlin,
he continually expressed his dismay at the uselessness of the German people who had failed him.
Yes, exactly. And those who had failed on the Eastern front or from his perception
had failed, even though he'd put the military in an impossible situation,
couldn't take any responsibility for his own mistakes. But that kind of narcissism,
and I don't like comparing social justice activists to Hitler. I think that's their trick.
That's what they do. They call everyone Hitler. But I think you can definitely see
that combination of narcissism and also a kind of religiosity, intolerance, and yes,
exactly what you say, a desire to destroy. You know, that if we can't get our way,
we'll just destroy everything. Okay, so let's talk about that. I want to use that as a segue,
and I haven't tortured you about having a PhD in Renaissance poetry. We'll get back to that.
I want us to use that as a segue into the religious issue because you wrote a book here recently.
Just make sure I get title exactly right. The New Puritans, How the Religion of Social
Justice Captured the Western World. And so we could talk about religious issues. I've been thinking
recently along the religious lines, let's say, that what we're seeing is just the modern manifestation
of an eternal battle. And that battle is laid out first, very early in the biblical corpus,
in the story of Cain and Abel. Because what you have in that story is two modes of adaptation,
which I think roughly parallel a kind of demented narcissistic authoritarianism and a kind of
responsibility laden individualism. We can discuss that. But what happens is,
Cain and Abel make sacrifices, right? And that's what people do when they work, because work is the
sacrifice of the present to the future. And human beings uniquely work. I mean, maybe beavers work
in bees, but look, essentially human beings uniquely work. We're willing to sacrifice the
present for the future. Now, what happens in the story of Cain and Abel is that Cain appears to make
bloodless and relatively low quality sacrifices, whereas Abel's all in. And the consequence of
that is Abel gets rewarded by God and everyone loves him and things go well for him. And Cain,
nothing goes his way. And then instead of noticing that maybe he has something to do with that,
he calls God out for creating an improper cosmos and really puts him on the stand. And God says,
look, buddy, if you got your act together, things would go well for you. And the fact that they're
not might have more to do with you than me. And Cain thinks, to hell with you, God, I think I'll
go kill your favorite. And so that's the story. And that's one hell of a brutal story. And then,
Cain's descendants, including Tubal Cain, which is about four generations down the line,
they're the builders of the Tower of Babel and also the first people who make implements of war.
So there's an idea there that there's a resentful and bitter,
revengeful spirit that preoccupies mankind and that it can spread out from the individual and
take out the entire polity. And I can't help but see a reflection of that on the intellectual
landscape now in the political domain. Now, I'm curious about what you think about such things,
because you have described this new movement, let's say, as religious. So what do you mean by
that? What do you think about these more metaphysical speculations? I suppose I should be very clear
about that. And in the book, I do make it clear. I've called the book The New Puritans, and I refer
to the religion of social justice, because one of the things I'm very keen to do, and one of the
reasons why I feel that the critical social justice activists are winning is because a lot of people
do not understand their aims, they don't understand what they're about, and that they are effectively
fall for the linguistic tricks. I mean, you all know that the culture war is largely about who
gets to define the meaning of words. Activists often use words, but they mean the opposite.
They call themselves progressive, for instance, but I believe that they are regressive.
They call themselves liberal, but they are deeply illiberal. They're in favor of censorship and
authoritarianism. They scream about fascism while they themselves are using fascistic tactics,
such as violence to silence political opponents. So the language, unless you understand
where they're coming from, and unless you understand that theirs is a belief system,
which is largely tied to unfalsifiable claims, which depends upon a kind of coterie of high
priests, edicts from above, telling the masses what they should believe and punishing those who
descend. It has all the hallmarks of fundamentalist religion, at least, the idea of excommunicating
heretics, sort of sniffing out heretics, searching for them, and doing the metaphorical
equivalent of burning them at the stake, which is what we call council culture,
destroying their livelihoods, destroying their reputations, a kind of merciless, brutal,
cruel and vicious quality, which nonetheless dons the guise of compassion and righteousness.
You know, I'm sure that bullies and innately cruel sociopaths throughout history have probably
been attracted to the priesthood, because it gives them the opportunity to have a being,
a figure of authority to enact cruelty, and at the same time, to be validated as a principal
and important member of society. So I think it does mean like Pharisees and scribes,
those sorts of people. Exactly. I'm not suggesting for a second, you know,
if you take something as brutal as the Inquisition, I mean, I'm sure a lot of those people involved
felt that they were doing God's work and genuinely thought they were on the side of the angels,
but you can be damn sure that there were some psychopaths who were attracted to those positions
of power. So when I'm saying that I talk about the religion of critical social justice, I'm doing so
to try and make it accessible. I've found that if you just, because it is so baffling to everyone,
most people are completely baffled because for a start, they have their own kind of esoteric
language, this terminology like heteronormativity and toxic masculinity and cisgender, etc. Words
that most people just don't even know what they mean. But if you see them as kind of a biblical
script or a religious text, and they do have their foundational holy texts such as Foucault
and Judith Butler and things like that, if you make this analogy to religion, I think it makes
the movement comprehensible. And I think in order to defeat it, it has to be comprehended.
And I think most people can't comprehend it. So let's try to get at something that might
approximate a definition of religion. So this is how I've been thinking about it technically.
So imagine that you see the world through a hierarchy of presuppositions,
which you have to because you're fundamentally ignorant. You have to presuppose things in order
to move forward because you don't have infinite knowledge. So you have to look at the world
through a hierarchy of presuppositions. Then you can imagine that some presuppositions are deeper
than others. And what that would mean is some presuppositions very little, very few other
presuppositions depend on, and some presuppositions many other presuppositions depend on.
Right? Sort of like it's like citation depth in the scientific literature. And so freedom of
speech, for example, would be a presupposition in a liberal polity upon which almost all other
presuppositions rest. So if you move it, you're moving the depths. So a religion specifies the
deepest presuppositions and they have to be axiomatic because that's sort of where your ignorance
bottoms out. You have to say, I hold these things to be self-evident before you can proceed.
And that is something like the existence of a deity as a presupposition that has to underpin.
Right. Okay. So that's the next issue. So Carl, I read a lot of Carl Jung years ago and very deeply.
And one of the things Jung said about Protestantism, which I found remarkable, he criticized both
Catholicism and Protestantism as a friendly critic, I would say, pointing out that the
the temptation that Catholicism might fall prey to is one of centralizing authoritarianism.
And the temptation that Protestantism falls prey to is fractionating individualism. He said,
the logical conclusion of the Protestant revolution is that every single person becomes their own
church. And so it looks to me like that's happened and what's happened. And psychologists have
abetted this. And even the great clinicians, I believe, have abetted this regardless of my
admiration for them by substituting the self for God. And I think what you have, especially on the
psychopathic narcissistic fringes of what used to be the left, and you see this on the right as well,
is the momentary self elevated to the status of God.
Well, you see that an awful lot, which I think is why, I mean, you've identified the narcissism
within these kind of movements, but also the rapidity with which they resort to religious
terminology or religious ideas or religious modes of expression, for instance. You remember when
them, was it outside of Netflix when they were protesting against Dave Chappelle's show? And
there was that comedian protesting with a sign that said, we like Dave or we like jokes. I think
they had signs like that. And a one woman cornered him and it was all caught on film. And she screamed
repeatedly in his face, repent, mother, she said it again and again and again. And I mentioned that
in the book, because I love that that sort of combined that combination of rage and religiosity,
I think really encapsulates what the movement is all about. I think in terms of the presuppositions
of that movement, which it takes as axiomatic, it's not supernatural. Okay, it doesn't talk about
a deity, even though it has its profits, I think, from the French post-structuralist of the 1960s.
But I think it does have certain axiomatic presuppositions such as
there are power structures that dominate society, that underpinned all human interaction. And these
are based on the notion of group identity. And that that is how society needs to be understood.
As Foucault talked about grids of power through society, power not being a top down phenomenon,
something that sort of is latent within all of our interactions and behavior.
And they see that they believe that these activists believe that they can pick this
apart and understand it and remedy the wrongs in society, so long as they can identify where
the power structures lie and who is exercising privilege at the expense of the oppressed. That's
why critical race theorists, I mean, it was put like this in James Lindsay and Helen Pluckrose's
book, that the key question that you ask if you are a critical race theory is not a theorist, is not
did racism take place in this situation, but how did racism manifest in this situation?
Yes, right, right.
So it's almost like a ghostly spiritual thing that is always there. I think that's one of their
that's one of their major presuppositions.
Well, then, well, so here's another way of thinking about that from the religious perspective.
I mean, Milton Satan is an authoritarian narcissist and he rules over hell. And so
he's a figure that's very much analogous to Mao or to Stalin, right? He's someone who climbs
the most pathological possible power hierarchy and then regards himself as a victor even though
he's actually the biggest loser. And so, so Satan is the spirit, you might say in the Judeo-Christian
tradition, who rules the world by force. Now, the postmodern neo-Marxist types believe that there's
nothing but power. So I can't see that that's any different than a certain Christian heresy that
rose up in the Middle Ages, making the claim that Satan himself was the ruler of the earth,
right? Because the notion there is that power itself is the only or at least the ultimate
motivator and, well motivator is the right way of thinking about it. And so, and then
it follows a lot of things follow from that, right? One thing that follows from that is that
there's no such thing as free speech because there's just conflicts between different claims to power.
And that if you promote free speech, that's just an indication of how conniving you are
to use that entire philosophical language to do nothing but buttress your own colonialist
power claims. Yes, because their theories always put you in that position where you can't win.
You know, it's similar with with the critical race theory, they have their notion of interest
convergence. You know, when people say, well, there are extremely successful black individuals in
our history, Barack Obama, say, someone like that, they will say the only reason that those
people have succeeded is because it was in the interests of white people for them to succeed.
In other words, if black people don't succeed, right, so if black people don't succeed in society,
that's evidence of critical race theorists' claims. But if they do succeed, it's also
evidence of their claims because that's interest convergence. So they keep putting you in this
kind of situation. That to me has to be religion without, as in religious belief, that has not
been, it has merely been asserted rather than proven. The fact that they take on the very
notion of rationality, enlightenment ideas, the fact that they think that those things are even
part, and they also see that through group identity, that that is just the product of
some dead white men in periwigs. President Trump recently issued a warning from his Mar-a-Lago
home, quote, our currency is crashing and will soon no longer be the world standard,
which will be our greatest defeat, frankly, in 200 years. There are three reasons why the
central banks are dumping the US dollar, inflation, deficit spending, and our insurmountable national
debt. The fact is, there is one asset that has withstood famine, wars, and political and economic
upheaval dating back to biblical times, gold. And you can own it in a tax-sheltered retirement
account with the help of Birch Gold. That's right, Birch Gold will help you convert an
existing IRA or 401K, maybe from a previous employer, into an IRA in gold. When currencies fail,
gold is a safe haven. How much more time does the dollar have? Protect your savings with gold.
Birch Gold has an A-plus rating with the Better Business Bureau and thousands of happy customers.
Text Jordan to 989898 and get your free info kit on gold. Again, text Jordan to 989898.
So how do you understand this? There seems to be, okay, so we figure we've got a couple of,
what would you say, contenders for deity. One would be Satan himself, right, the spirit of
power. The other would be the untrammeled hedonic self. It's something like that. But then there's
a weird paradox there, not that the paradox bothers the postmodern types, that group identity is
paramount, but full, what would you say, full licentiousness on the personal front and the
granting of every whim on the personal front is also requisite. And I don't, I can't quite square
that coherently. Like, how is it that the radicals can push forward the notion that group identity is
the only identity, but also push forward the notion that everything possible is to be permitted every
individual at every moment. But you put your finger on it when you said that the paradoxes don't
trouble the postmodernists. You know, it's sort of built into their whole idea. When Derrida was
writing, he was trying to write incoherently. You know, it's part of it. He did manage. It's
absolutely unreadable. So let me try and understand what you're saying here. You were talking about
the idea that- Well, we see this worship of the self that emerged. So there's contenders for God,
right? We have power and we have the self. And then there's an element of that that spreads out
into identity. Now that the radical types definitely put forward group identity as paramount,
and yet they worship the self. What do you mean by licentiousness? What do you mean by
do they believe that absolutely everything is permissible, that any kind of individual
desire is able to be fulfilled? Because in their world, I think they're quite
prescriptive, aren't they, about which modes of behavior are acceptable and which aren't?
Well, that gets extraordinarily complex because it looks to me, one of the things I see on campuses
for example, is the insistence on the left progressive front, let's say, that any form
of sexual identity or behavior whatsoever is permissible. And not only permissible,
but to be celebrated. But now it's complicated because at the same time, every single interaction
between a young man and a young woman is so absolutely dangerous that it has to be subjected
to contractual validation before it can proceed. Well, yeah, well, it's a weird psychoanalytic
truism, that if you go too far in one direction, you simultaneously go too far in the other.
And that really muddies up the water. So the really narcissistic types, for example,
have an extremely uncertain core. But that doesn't make them any less, what would you say,
forthright in their claims that they should rule. So you can't stretch your, go ahead.
Well, I don't, I'm not so sure that it's about fulfilling any indulgence, no matter how depraved.
I think it's more about what they call queering society. I think it's more about,
if it is in the service of demolishing the cis, white, hetero-patriarchal structures
that are in place, then that is seen as a benefit as something positive.
Right. So you think that licentiousness serves the purposes of demolition?
I do.
What about the reverse hypothesis is that, because I would say this might be more
true of Foucault, all the demolition was put forward to license the licentiousness.
I don't know. I mean, this is real.
Yeah, I'm not sure about that. I mean, a lot of people will say that because Foucault has,
as you know, a very shady past.
Yeah, you might say that.
Yeah, absolutely. And people have pointed out that there seems to be a strong correlation
between some of the founding postmodernists and, shall we say, well, yeah, depraved sexual
activity, sometimes pedophilia, these kinds of things. The question, I suppose,
are you suggesting that they created this kind of theoretical framework in order to justify
that sort of behavior? Is that what you mean?
Well, you see, I waver and maybe the causality is interactive because you could see,
I see a lot of stunningly immature behavior on the radical front from a developmental
psychological perspective. So, for example, a lot of the behavior I see looks to me like
unsocialized two-year-old behavior, because two-year-olds are highly prone to motivational
and emotional whims in the short term, and they're incapable of developing a shared frame of
reference. That doesn't happen till kids are three. And aggressive two-year-olds who don't
develop that by four never develop it in their entire life because they become alienated and
they don't make friends and they can't further their development. And so you could say, if this is
sort of a Freudian id-like view, that part of what we're seeing is the expression of extremely
unsocialized, immature, motivational and emotional demands fragmented with a, what would you say,
temper tantrum-like insistence, constant insistence that those whims be granted
immediately. And then you could say, well, the entire power critique has been erected by,
on the intellectual front, just to justify that. Although you could also reverse it and say, no,
the licentiousness, which was the case you were making, the licentiousness is promoted because
it's revolutionary in a sense, and it can be used to demolish these so-called traditional power
structures. Well, it has to be because they just have so many impositions on other people's freedoms.
They have so many ideas of what is acceptable and what is not acceptable, particularly in the arts,
in film, in plays, in books, that, you know, they're for censorship. They believe that things that are,
that horrible word, they use problematic and they like to problematize things.
So it can't be the case that they just believe in a kind of global free-for-all.
It can't be that because I think they come across more like Pharisees to me than anything else.
But maybe what you're describing in terms of the temper tantrums and the things that we see
from these people is that that is just simply the natural consequence of when you have decades
of academics and figures of authority saying that we ought to prioritize our emotional responses
and our own subjective view of the world over objective epistemological frameworks.
Or actual practical responsibility. I mean, I saw this at the University of Toronto. It was
one of the things that constantly made me morally ill was that my idiot compatriots thought that the
best thing to do with young people was to teach them to protest rather than to help them figure
out how to make their way responsibly and productively and generously in the world.
They've created a generation that are infantile. I mean, it is an infantilized world and we see it
in absolutely every strand of our culture and politics as well. And it's because, as you say,
academics, by and large, are activists first and academics second. Helen Pluckrose traces
that to what she calls the applied turn of postmodernism, late 80s. Postmodernists for many
years were quite enjoyed theorizing and frolicking about coming up with these airy fairy ideas,
not applying them to society, not seriously saying we should reconstruct society and apply
these methods. And then the applied postmodernist said, actually, we can actually change society,
revolutionize society through the application of our untested theories and highly contested theories.
And they did it. And what's so tragic is that it eventually worked. We're now in a situation where
our government over here, the government certainly in Canada and in the US,
they are implementing these ideas, these highly contested theories in public policy,
in the educational sense. Yes, they're making the mandatory. Well, that was what propelled me
into the public domain to begin with, was the first move of that sort on the Trudeau Liberal
Government Front, right, mandated speech. But that's why surely it does merit the analogy with
religion, because you are imposing on society ideas that are based on belief, simply based on
belief. You know, there is no evidence that reorganizing society in the way that the critical
race theories would like to do, so that we have a hyper racialized society that focuses first and
foremost on your group of identity and secondarily on who you are as an individual. There's no
evidence that this is making society less racist. So we seem to have agreed that
the desire for demolition and destruction rules paramount even over the desire for untrammeled
personal self-expression. I think that is inevitable when you come from the supposition
that society is inherently broken, that it is undergirded by power structures that only
support the already privileged. Okay, so let's dive into that, because this is a good place to
further interrogate the left issues. So, you know, a lot of the people that I talk with,
Russell Brown and Joe Rogan, Brett Weinstein, those are good, Eric Weinstein, those are good
initial exemplars, are more classical leftist types, and yet they're identified by the screaming
radicals as gateways to the old right, which is extraordinarily interesting, because it means as
soon as you're no longer a useful idiot from the radical perspective, you're instantly a Nazi,
which is very convenient for them. But here's the thing. The postmodern critique that society
is to be understood as nothing but the manifestation of power is attractive, partly because when
social arrangements or even psychological arrangements pathologize, they do pathologize in
the direction of power, right? So, if you're, you can tyrannize yourself like an overlord,
you can tyrannize your partner, you can tyrannize your family and your community,
you can act like a tyrant on the local political stage, and then nationally, right?
You can do that in business as well. And so, and that happens relatively often. So,
there's a core of sense in the claim that power is a powerful motivating force. Now,
I think the radicals go too far when they say everything is about power because, well, everything
is a lot of things, and you don't want to throw the baby out with the bathwater. But the problem,
the problem the left therefore has, if the left is willing to be reasonable and say, well, some
social structures are corrupted by power, then the left has to figure out, and can't,
because I've asked like 50 senators and Republican and congressmen on the Democrat side to do this.
If your leftist stance is that power corrupts society, then how in the world can you tell
when those who make that claim take that claim too far? And I've asked, like the reason I brought
up the Democrat, the senators and congressmen is because I asked every lefty I could get my hands
on, and that's been quite a few over the last five years, when the left goes too far. And I even
asked Robert Kennedy that recently, and he said, well, I'm trying to run a campaign based on unity,
and so I don't want to go down that rabbit hole. It's like, well, the barbarians are at your gate,
buddy. They've been canceling you for 18 years. So, how do we separate out this?
Well, there are so many things that you've raised there. I mean, firstly,
you're right to identify that there is a kernel in truth of truth in the postmodernist claims,
that power is important. It is significant in human behavior and society and history. All of that,
that is absolutely accurate. And you're also right that where they go wrong is to assume that
everything is about power. Like you say, power is really important, but it's not everything.
And I wonder whether reducing everything to just power structures makes things
understandable, easier in a way. Yeah, well, we found the best predictor. In our first study,
the best predictor of left-wing authoritarianism was low verbal intelligence.
Right, because people want easy answers. Absolutely. Power is a good easy answer,
right? Any ideology is because it means that you're outsourcing your thinking to a set of rules,
and that is what is happening. But that's why all those people that you've tried to ask this
question, what happens when the left goes too far in terms of their own megalomania?
They won't answer the question because to do so would be to acknowledge that there is a flaw
in their ideology. There's a potential flaw in their system, that they're dealing ultimately
with human beings. It's the same reason why the Stalinists have never forgiven Orwell.
All these people on the left have always hated him for pointing out that the left is just as
susceptible to corruption as the right is, and they've never forgiven him for that.
And it comes down to that idea of moral purity. I mean, one of the reasons I call them the
new Puritans. Again, it's an analogy. It's trying to make them accessible. It's because in their
world, to deviate even slightly from this very simplistic formula that they've applied to society,
to give them power, ironically enough, to put them in a position where they can control other people,
but also can control their own understandings and comprehensions of the world, because they've
got this framework through which they can look at it. And to say, well, actually, your framework
is flawed in all sorts of ways, that's harder because then you have to start thinking. And they
don't want to start thinking. Thinking is the death of ideology. I think that's why you're
getting that moral purity, but it's also why. I mean, you mentioned, interestingly,
people like Joe Rogan and Russell Brown being considered a gateway to the alt-right. They're
still traditionally politically more akin to the left, I would say, than the right.
But because they've deviated slightly, you have this kind of puritanical sledgehammer
coming down and saying, no, you're straying from what our ideology says you should believe.
And that, to me, also feels like a fundamentalist religion. And I'm making the distinction clearly
between a religion and a fundamentalist religion, because I think even within Catholicism,
the Vatican has always encouraged debate, theological debate and discussion. It's not as
though they just give you the catechism and say, that's it. There's all these kinds of discussions
and debates and nuances being teased out in theological thoughts. Theologians for centuries
have done that. But with fundamentalist religion, that doesn't happen. It doesn't happen with ISIS,
for instance. You don't get the sort of leaders of ISIS sitting around cross-legged in their caves
saying, well, let's decide whether we're right about this fine theological point.
That doesn't happen. So what scares me, I think, about the critical social justice movement,
is that they are like a fundamentalist religion for some reason. I mean, this is why, and you know
this, whenever you meet one of these people, whenever you encounter them online, get into
some kind of discussion, you know what their opinions are and absolutely everything.
Yes, yes, yes. Like turning a crank on someone's head.
I've never been surprised by them. I'd like to be surprised once in a while. I've had a few
occasions recently where I've gotten to conversa... You know, I fall for it. You should just block
them, really, because they're not people who can be reasoned with. But every now and then,
I take the bait and I say, okay, what is it you think I've said? What is upset you? What is the
perspective that I have that you disagree with and why? And they can't do it. They just come back
screaming Nazi or whatever, and then you think, okay, well, I shouldn't have bothered trying.
But they never surprised me. I just wish they would, because if you're not thinking for yourself
and challenging your own ideas, if you're not coming from the basis, from humility, if you're
not coming to the world on the understanding that you're probably wrong about an awful lot of things,
I don't think you're fully human in a way. I think you're like an automaton. You know, you're just,
you're just following a code, a script. You're possessed by a principality.
Right. I find that disturbing. Okay, so let me hassle you about something else. I tweeted out
at Richard Dawkins here recently, and I talked to Richard Dawkins, and I actually admire Richard
Dawkins. I liked his books. They taught me a lot in some of his essays, too. And I think Dawkins
is a real scientist in that he believes there is truth and that the pursuit of the truth will set
you free, which by the way is a religious claim, but he still believes that. In any case, I also
think that Dawkins and Harris and the rest of the new atheists help pave the landscape for this new
woke catastrophe, because it's a humanistic movement fundamentally, and it's radically
anti-science. And I think that Dawkins, well, I know Dawkins sees that because I've been watching
his tweets, and I didn't talk to him. And it's certainly the case that the woke mob, I think,
can take out science even more easily than they can take out the vestiges of Judeo-Christian thought,
and they're definitely going to do that. So now Dawkins and his coterie looked at
the history of the West, and they said, well, we should dispense with that medieval superstition,
and we should progress down the Enlightenment trail. And I've talked to Douglas Murray about this.
Now, the problem with that, it seems to me, so Jung said something very interesting as well
that I'll bring up. He implied that Catholicism, with all its strange mysticism and dream-like
propositional structure, was as sane as people got, like that in order for people to
function psychologically and to exist together socially, the belief system that united them
had to have a dream-like quality. Okay, so and that now the new atheist types would say, well,
no, no, no, we can replace all that mumbo jumbo and darkness and occult mysticism with a clear-headed
rationality. But what I see happening instead, and this is on the religious front, is that
in the aftermath of the death of God, what we've seen reemerge is either a form of worship of power
or degeneration into a kind of polytheistic paganism, not a move forward to Enlightenment-type
Dawkins rationality. Quite the contrary. And so one of the things I'm curious, I know Murray is
uncomfortable about this. Douglas Murray is uncomfortable about this. If the woke movement
is a religion, and if it's a dangerous religion, is the alternative to that no religion, or is
the alternative to that whatever might constitute genuine religion? And what do you think about
that? Well, I think there is clearly something within humanity that we require a certain
satisfaction from some kind of belief system, which is outside of ourselves or a sense that
there is something beyond ourselves. I suppose you might call it transcendence. I think there is
a need for that. I think that I get that through the arts. I think that's why we create things.
That's why we are creative beings, which is also why I think the woke movement is threatened by the
arts and seeks to curtail it and actually to transform it into just another propagandising tool,
because it fundamentally doesn't understand what art is. So it is interesting to me though
to have noted that the new atheist movement, the one that you describe,
they seem now to have evolved into the most woke of all, the humanist society.
Yeah, there's something about them that they bought into gender identity ideology very quickly,
probably before other bodies did. And the humanist society in the UK now is fully paid up in that
really quasi-religious belief system, the idea of a sexed or gendered soul that doesn't match your
biological form. How is that anything other than religious? How is it anything other than
supernatural, really? But it has been interesting to me that those were the very people,
the people who were talking about rationality and to sort of claw back the primacy of enlightenment
values, that they are the ones who've been most susceptible of all. Of course, this is what has
got Dawkins in trouble. That's a stunningly devastating observation, because if it turns out
that those who wanted to walk down the mass enlightenment pathway, produce children who
were most susceptible to woke ideology, that's a pretty damning bit of evidence for the validity
of that approach. As far as I mean, I'm trying to look at it. Well, because it's always concerned
me that some of my most intelligent friends and acquaintances have fallen for the woke
movement. In other words, you talk about the fact that a lot of the activists are very
infantile in their behavior, and yet some of the smartest people in society seem to buy into it.
It has the capacity to infect everyone, perhaps because it isn't responsive to intellectual
rigor. It exists regardless of that. Right, but then that begs the question of why it attracts
the intelligent types that you're describing. I mean, look, it originated in the Bloody Academy.
It didn't originate. Hypothetically, it originated not only in the academy, but
in the core of the academy that was most preoccupied with the humanities.
It obviously appeals to the intellect, let's say.
Or is it just that we're all, we all have the capacity to fall for hysteria? Is it possible
that we're just all, I mean, look, my book opens with a discussion of Salem, The Witch Hunts in
Salem. And one of the key things about that, the more I read about it, and the more I was
fascinated by the fact that it was these figures in authority, it was the ministers, the judges,
it was the highly intelligent in the community who were the ones who were pushing this. I mean,
the girls were screaming and crying witch and pointing and saying that the devil was everywhere,
and they'd seen people sign the devil's book and all of that kind of thing. I see those girls as
analogous with the screaming anime activists online who just shout Nazi everywhere. They see
Nazis everywhere. The girls saw witches everywhere. I see that as very, very similar. But it would
have gone away if the ministers and the judges said, no, this isn't rational. You're wrong.
There's no evidence for your claims. We have to move on. But they didn't. They went along with it.
That's why people ended up being executed. It's when figures in authority capitulate
to the screaming of the children. You've described the children, the activist has children.
The activists themselves, I would posit, are not the problem. If they were all out there with
their billboards screaming. It's the enablers. It's the politicians and people in charge.
So one of the things you see as the biblical corpus unfolds itself symbolically is an emerging
relationship between the figure of Cain. And so that's that bitter figure who's out for revenge
and the figure of the, what would you call it, untrammeled intellect. So for example,
very rapidly after the Cain and Abel story, you have the story of the Tower of Babel.
And what you see there are emperors who are competing to replace God, right? They're building
towers that are ever and ever higher predicated on the proposition that they could build a tower
all the way to heaven. So that's like Jacob's ladder and thereby replace God. Then you have,
you know, the Milton's meditations on Lucifer. Lucifer is the, what the highest angel of God's
heavenly kingdom who's gone most wrong. And he's a stellar example of the, of the untrammeled intellect.
You know, and I kind of see this in the New Atheist movement too. It's like, we're so smart
that our theories can replace the transcendent. Now, your way out of that, I think you just
told me, your way out of that is your involvement on the aesthetic front with the arts, right?
Well, I think so. Well, there are two, there are two ways. There's also humility. I think,
I come back to that point. What you're describing is hubris and that's something which is,
which is common, particularly common among intelligent people, I think.
Right, right. Absolutely. It's the cardinal sin of the intellect is hubris.
Yes, exactly. But yes, the arts, I think are, I suppose, are way out if they are sustained
because they, they satisfying that human need to, to understand ourselves and to explore
ourselves and to interrogate our existence. It's so important, therefore, that the arts
aren't curtailed in the way that they currently are being done.
So let me ask you a question about that. I agree with that. I mean, I see that the signal power
of beauty, especially manifested in music, for me, speaks of something that's truly transcendent.
So here's a question for you. So is there a superordinate unity at which the arts aim?
And is that unity not equivalent to the monotheistic spirit? I know this is a major question,
right? I'm not, I'm throwing out a major question.
It is a major question.
Something makes the arts the arts, right? It's their movement towards beauty. What beauty and
unity, transcendence, but are the arts unified? Are they, are they the manifestation of a unitary
spirit? And I see that unitary spirit is what I think is the antithesis of power.
I couldn't profess to know. And I think a lot of people have attempted to define even what
art is. And I think people have failed. I've always liked Zola's definition of art as
life seen through a temperament. The idea that what the artist does is attempt to present to you
his view of the way that he sees the world on the understanding that we all see the world differently.
And there is something quite beautiful about that, about expressing ourselves artistically.
But it's not just variety. You know, you know, it's not just variety because there are qualitative
distinctions between presentations of worldview. So I mean, Dostoevsky, Trump's 50 Shades of Gray,
right? Because so there's a hierarchy of rank, right? And the greatest artists occupy the highest
rank. And that is what tilts the more towards that transcendent unity, I think. It's something
like that. Well, well, yeah, that's absolutely right. It's genius, isn't it? That's how the
canon is formed. I mean, the canon is, you know, I think academics like to think that they're the
ones who select what is in the canon. The canon is formed through influence, through to what extent
other great artists borrow and innovate on the back of other artists. That's that same depth of
presupposition that I was describing earlier, right? The more fundamental a text is, the more
other texts depend on it. But the reason they do, the reason that artists do that is because obviously
people like Michelangelo, Brahms, Dickens, Shakespeare, Dostoevsky, all of these are clearly
the pinnacles of human achievement. They're achieving something that most of us simply cannot do.
All we can do is look in awe at what they have achieved and other artists look in awe at that
and try to come close to it, or at least, or in some cases of extreme genius build upon it.
Well, there's a cardinal observation, because the hypothesis that you just put forward is something
like the purpose of art is to, what would you say, to provoke the emulation of greatness.
And that's based on the hypothesis that there is something transcendent that's great,
you know? And that's that unity that I think that the arts are striving toward.
Yeah, well, I don't know. I don't think it's conscious like that. I don't think that we...
I don't think so either.
And all I can say is that artists, I think, great art provokes something of the numinous
in us. And whether that's religious or spiritual or godly or whatever, I don't know.
But it's something that...
Well, I think it is sort of by definition, right? I mean, you know what I mean?
It's like, well, if that's not religious, then what is dogma?
It's certainly religious on the experiential front.
Yes, I suppose what I mean is it doesn't point to the existence of God necessarily.
It just points to the existence of something beyond ourselves that we require in order to
have a satisfactory life.
That sounds a lot like God.
Okay, well, that would be...
Well, I'm not trying to be picky, you know?
Well, that's the thing, man, because it is a matter of definition.
You know, like, I don't think God...
This transcendent unity that I've been tapping towards here is something like
the central animating spirit of mankind at its best.
It's something like that.
Now, you might say, well, is that real?
And that's not a good question because you have...
You can't ask that question without bringing an a priori set of presuppositions about what
constitutes real to bear on the question.
Like, is it the same reality as the materialist atheists claim most real?
Probably not.
No.
But that doesn't mean it's not real.
It just means we can't agree on what constitutes real.
Well, we can't agree on what constitutes a woman, so that's not surprising.
Well, then let's suggest then that...
Oh, let's agree that the critical social justice movement is essentially godless.
I think it is godless.
It doesn't have...
It has no yearning after that sense of the numinous,
and it has no capacity to produce it.
That's why no great art has ever been produced from...
Can you name a single woke activist who has produced a great work of art in any
medium or any genre?
Because I can't.
I don't think...
Okay, so that's an interesting...
That's a very interesting observation.
You know, what is it?
The gospel statement, by their fruits, you will know them.
So if they bear nothing but bitter fruit,
then you might think they're worshiping the wrong god, or in your case, they're no god.
But right, that was the criticism of the woke types.
I think they worship power as a god, but whatever, we're close enough on that,
so we don't have to discuss it.
So let's talk about the artistic front here, because I see the scientists being mowed down
like grass under a lawnmower by the woke activists, and that's going to continue,
because the real scientists don't have a political bone in their body,
and they have no idea what's coming for them.
But I'm particularly sickened by the bloody artists, because the only thing they have to
offer is this connection to the truly numinous.
That's true across art forms, right?
They point to the numinous, and they're willing, increasingly,
to subordinate that to ideology order, remain silent in the face of this onslaught,
to bolster their moral self-righteousness.
Yeah, that's really different for us.
They're cutting their own throats.
It's horrible to watch.
It's horrible to witness, because genius, artistic genius, can only come about by those
who can think outside the box, who are not conformists, ultimately.
This is a movement that demands conformity, and artists of all people are the ones
who are going along with it.
Now, to an extent, I suppose, that's always happened, though.
I mean, it must have always happened, because people, artists,
have to get on with the business of living.
Back in my renaissance period, the area that I studied from my doctorate,
you had patrons.
You had patrons of the arts in society who would effectively say,
to William Shakespeare, for instance, when King James patronized William Shakespeare's
company, the King's Men, it went from being the Lord Chamberlain's Men to the King's Men,
and he said, they were patronized, but Shakespeare could write whatever he wanted.
The great patrons are the ones who don't try to steer the artists in a certain way.
I mean, sure, you would get, for instance, at the start of Shakespeare's narrative poem,
Venus and Adonis, you have this sort of sycophantic passage about the person to whom it is dedicated,
Henry Ruthsley, the Earl, and that's because Shakespeare also needed to live at that point.
He wasn't yet a rich man at that point.
He became very, very rich ultimately, but at that point, he wasn't.
So artists do require an income, and in our day and age, in order for an artist to be employed,
they have to satisfy a set of demands by the gatekeepers of various industries.
That's theatre, the publishing industry, comedy industry, television, executives, commissioners,
all of those kind of things.
The problem is that at the moment, all of those people are entirely captured by the woke ideology.
They are all, it's foot soldiers, or at least even in some cases, I suppose you could call them,
it's clergy.
And so they make these demands to artists.
And I suppose, unless you are independently wealthy, what choice have you?
In other words, what this thing does is we can't all be a van Gogh living in complete poverty,
doing whatever the hell he wanted.
Well, that's a very sympathetic account, and I have some sympathy for that account,
because I've seen people, many, many people who've faced the threat of cancellation
and are terrified by it, not least often because they have a family to support, let's say.
But let me push back on that a little bit.
And you tell me if you think there's any flaws in this.
Okay, so look, as far as I can tell, your best bet in life is to play the most transcendent,
iterable strategy.
And because you're going to pay a price for what you do, no matter what you do.
You're going to pay, in fact, you're going to pay the ultimate price, no matter what you do.
So you're already screwed in the fundamental analysis.
Now, and that means that you're, the fact that you're going to pay means that you're always
confronted with a choice.
And the choice is to say what you believe to be true and take the consequences,
or to fail to say what you believe to be true and take the consequences.
Now, people will say, well, I don't want to speak right now because look at the consequences.
And I would say, well, that's always why people have lied throughout history,
is to avoid the consequences or to get something they don't deserve.
And so I could say, from the judgment perspective, rather than the mercy perspective,
especially to artists, it's like, I don't give a damn about your financial need.
The only thing you have to offer the world is the purity of your vision.
And if you sacrifice that while you're killing the goose that lays the golden eggs,
and you might be protected in the short term, but they're going to come for you in the future.
There may be a lot of these creative people are thinking to themselves,
I will play the game as far as I need to, so that I can establish myself,
and then I can make my own artistic choices.
That's how many times- Yeah, right.
Doesn't work. That's what the faculty did.
They said over and over as they rose up the ladder from graduate student to professor.
Well, once I have tenure, I'll be brave.
It's like, that isn't how it works.
You don't get braver because you're more pretentious.
Okay, so you didn't do that, so why didn't you do it?
Look, I completely share your sense of dismay, and particularly from artists.
You know, I think the world of academia is rather more careerist, I think.
And so, although I think it's just as unforgivable, it's more understandable.
I think to be an artist, you have to be the kind of person whose soul fealty is to your muse.
It has to be that.
Otherwise, you're not really an artist in any serious sense at all.
You have to be creating what it is you are personally impelled to create, whatever drives you.
And you know, there are some people who have done that in history.
William Blake was poor throughout his life, died in poverty,
and he could see all these mediocre people playing the game and becoming rich,
but he couldn't do it.
He was too much of an authentic artist.
He wasn't able to do that.
And I wish all artists could have that.
But the other thing about that is actually very few people are great artists.
Most people are sort of peddlers of popular culture or, you know, kind of functional hacks
that people can produce the entertainment that actually we do really need and require.
Like, I'm not trying to denigrate popular culture.
I think it's really, really important.
But it's not the same as great art, right?
So pop music, I really enjoy pop music, but I don't pretend to myself that it's Brahms.
You know, we have those hierarchies.
Hierarchies, by the way, which the woke would like to tear down and say,
that's all about the implementation of power again and the implement implementation of privilege.
They will say there's no difference between a...
There's no such thing as quality.
No, no, no, exactly, exactly.
Because it's all about subjective feeling.
And they would say that there's no difference between an Elton John song and a Beethoven symphony.
They'll say there's no difference there.
It's just about, you know, and to pretend that there is is a problem in and of itself.
And that's why I think there are two things.
The way that artists could really be supported in this
partly comes from academia, partly comes from literary theorists
and people who, by the way, I think have completely lost the plot.
But they need to retain the primacy of the canon, of the Western canon.
They need to say, actually, there are certain works of art that are greater than others.
They need to be able to be bold enough to say that.
Rather than stripping away Chaucer or Shakespeare or Marlowe or whatever from the canon
to make way for mediocre writers who happen to represent a marginalized group identity.
Well, I see in that, again, this re-emergence of the spirit of Cain.
Because Cain, imagine you're a mediocre artist, want to be.
And part of the reason for that maybe isn't so much that you're talentless,
although that might have something to do with it,
but that you're unwilling to say a true word or to paint a true brush stroke.
You're too cowardly, so you're not going anywhere.
Okay, so you're getting irritated and resentful
because your sacrifices aren't being appreciated by God.
And so what do you do?
Well, if you're Cain, you destroy your own ideal, right?
Because that's what Cain says to God,
my punishment is more than I can bear.
Now, that's a very ambiguous phrase,
because you can't tell exactly what it refers to.
But as far as I can tell, what he means is,
well, I've really spent my whole life miserable and jealous because I'm not able,
and I want to be more than anything else.
And now I've gone and killed my own ideal.
And so how can I live? I've killed my own ideal.
Well, that's what these bloody woke artists want to be types are doing.
It's not just even the woke, this predates the woke.
Harold Bloom used to, the great literary theorist used to write about
the critical theorists, the identitarian theorists of the 90s
as being the theorists of resentment.
That's what he called them.
I think that's exactly right.
It started way back in the 60s with feminist writers trying to problematize
writers such as D.H. Lawrence or Norman Mail or whoever it might be,
Ernest Hemingway, whatever, saying that these writers are sexist.
I mean, when I was studying as an undergraduate for English literature,
you basically got the highest marks if you problematized texts.
If you went through a play and teased out the homophobic elements or the racist elements,
you'd get rewarded almost like you were kind of a kind of moral detective.
And I think it all started there.
It goes way back to the past.
Well, so then I would say that's part of the
prideful hubris of the intellect.
So you have these second rate creative wannabes in English departments, let's say.
And instead of worshiping the spirit of Shakespeare,
which is what they should properly be doing and transmitting that to students,
they elevate their critical capacity over and above the creative capacity of the artist,
lay moral claim to the integrity of their arguments,
and then propagandize to the students who pay $50,000 a year for the privilege.
Which is why I go back to humility, because I think the only sensible
or intelligent approach to Shakespeare is humility.
Similarly, you know, when we saw recently the publishing house,
which publishing house was it that decided to rewrite P.G. Woodhouse's novels?
P.G. Woodhouse is the greatest comic prose stylist in the English language.
The idea that a group of 20-something activists in a publishing house think that
they can write better than Woodhouse,
think that they can improve his work by this sort of horrendous, bolderized version.
Especially morally.
Of course morally, it's all based on morals.
So it's so infuriating.
I mean, it makes me very, very angry because it's the arrogance of that
that I find absolutely stunning.
But similarly with productions of Shakespeare, so there's...
I just saw a review the other day for a production of Julius Caesar
by the Royal Shakespeare Company.
By all accounts, it's just an identitarian mess.
It's just taking the play and just reshaping it to promote
vogue-ish ideas that are in fashion at the moment
about group identity and the primacy of group identity and power structures, etc.
And therefore they're missing the entire play.
And as an audience member, this is why I think it's better to read Shakespeare at this point.
Because as an audience member, you are subject to whatever interpretation
the director wants to impose on it.
And if that director is really a preacher in disguise,
then you're just going to get a sermon, not a play.
That seems to me what's happening over and over again.
I saw today, actually, there was an article about Macbeth.
Trigger warning.
It's a trigger warning on Macbeth at the University in Belfast,
at Queen's University in Belfast, right?
Now, those people are studying a module on Shakespeare.
And it's actually even a secondary module.
They already have a decent knowledge of the subject.
This is like an advanced module where they are to really get into the weeds with this great writer.
And to put a trigger warning in that is to say
that the way that we need to perceive these great texts
is through our particularly obsessive, moralistic,
identitarian lens, and that we have to see them as morally dangerous texts,
potentially dangerous texts, toxicity.
Maybe they're exactly right on that front.
Because if you are a woke propagandist,
there is nothing more dangerous to you than the spirit of Shakespeare.
Sure. And there is something dangerous, actually,
particularly about Macbeth, I think, because in Macbeth,
I mean, I think Macbeth is one of Shakespeare's greatest plays.
And I think one of the reasons why I always found it disturbing,
even as a child, even though I didn't really know why I found it disturbing as a child,
because it's one of those that gets on school text,
because it's such a short one.
But actually, when you watch it, it isn't like you're...
Shakespeare created so many great embodiments of evil,
people like Yago in Othello, or Edmund in King Lear,
or Aaron in Titus Andronicus, these figures.
But Macbeth is different, because with Macbeth,
you go along with Macbeth knowing that it could be you.
I think it's the closest to what...
When you write about Solzhenitsyn talking about
the line of good and evil cutting through the heart of every man,
that to me is Macbeth.
Because Macbeth is like this incredible representation of,
what if we lived in a world where we didn't have free will?
Macbeth knows everything he is doing is wrong,
and cannot stop it from happening.
And it's like when you're watching it,
if you're watching a good production of Macbeth,
you are Macbeth, right?
And you're falling into this vortex.
That's why I think...
Well, that's actually like a definition of great literature.
I think literature almost always portrays something like
a romantic adventure, and then something like
the battle of good against evil,
depending on how that's laid out, right?
It's a romantic battle of good against evil.
Okay, but the great literary authors
place that battle in the soul of a single individual, right?
So that each character contains the entire landscape
of the cosmic battle.
Instead of there being some characters parsed out as good,
and other characters parsed out as villainous.
And so then when you sit in the audience,
and you experience that,
you're experiencing the divine drama in your own soul.
Yeah, and that is distilting, right?
Let me throw you something at you.
So I went to Jerusalem with Jonathan Pazio,
and Pazio is about the deepest religious thinker I ever encountered.
And he was a postmodernist for a good while,
and so is expert in that domain as well,
which makes him a particularly vicious critic now
of the postmodernist types.
Anyways, we walk the Via Dolorosa in Jerusalem.
And what that is, so if you imagine a tragic story,
then you embody that.
And the ultimate tragic story is the worst possible thing
happening to the best possible person, right?
That's the pinnacle towards which all tragedy strives,
you might say.
And walking the Via Dolorosa is an exercise in literary experience.
Because the point of that pilgrimage, so to speak,
is to place yourself not only in the role of the recipient
of all that brutality,
but also in the role of the deliverer of the brutality, right?
Imagine yourself as the mob, as yourself as the best friend
who betrays, as the intellectually hubristic Pharisee
and scribe, as the hapless ruler of Rome.
That's all you.
And that's what literature does, it walks you through that.
And I think Macbeth and Macbeth and plays of that magnitude
are threatening to the woke types, most particularly,
because they do require that pilgrimage of moral inquiry.
And that does upset the ideological apple cart.
So they hate art, they hate art,
because it pushes past propaganda always.
Exactly, and that's why the passion of the Christ
is the most powerful story and the most enduring story,
not story, but account of the brutality that we...
I mean, when you read about the experience of Jesus
on the way to Calvary, can any of us be sure
that we wouldn't be among the jeering mobs
throwing the stones?
No, we can be sure we would be.
We can be certain we would be.
The woke don't agree with that, do they?
Because the woke like to judge the past,
and they will say that if I had lived in the antebellum south,
if I had lived in the Civil War,
I would have been the ones trying to free the slaves.
I wouldn't have been a slave owner.
I wouldn't have been one of those people
who supported racial segregation.
But of course they would.
And in fact, they would have been the first ones.
So, okay, so let's...
All right, so I've been thinking
about this mythological motif of the harrowing of hell.
So what happens in this ultimate tragedy
is that, well, first of all,
the best possible person is put to death
by the worst possible people in the worst possible way.
And you might think, well, that's as bad as it gets.
Right?
Because sort of by definition, that's as bad as it gets.
But you know, that isn't as bad as it gets.
And that's pretty awful because, you know,
you just pointed to something
is that if you're looking at history
and you have any bloody sense,
you think, I wouldn't have been a victim or a hero.
I would have been a perpetrator
because most people were perpetrators.
Although, you know, there were plenty of victims.
I would have been a perpetrator.
And so then when you realize
that you likely would have been a perpetrator
and that you probably are at the moment unbeknownst to yourself,
well, then you're facing something,
I think, that is in some ways worse than death.
I think it's hell.
I actually think that is that you have to understand
that there is a part of you that would willingly dwell in hell
before you can rescue yourself from it at all.
You know, and I think that's what we're called to do
in the aftermath of the 20th century
and the horrors of Auschwitz to wake up and think,
oh my God, there's something inside us
that's so malevolent that to gaze upon it for a second
is to suffer for nightmares from nightmares
for the rest of your life.
But that that's also your moral obligation.
And that seems to me what the harrowing of hell is, right?
It's the descent through death
into the realm of malevolence itself
and to take that onto yourself.
So when the woke try to police art,
apply trigger warnings to art, censor it, remove scenes, et cetera,
are they, in your view, attempting to prevent that experience,
that necessary human experience of confronting
the worst possible version of yourself?
Is that what they're doing?
That's what it looks like to me.
I mean, I think they're protecting themselves
from chaotic complexity,
but that also denies them possibility.
So that's terrible and hope.
But more importantly,
they're trying to shuffle off the responsibility
of confronting Satan in the desert.
So there's something,
well, I mean, there's something quite understandable
about all of that, isn't there?
Because it is uncomfortable.
I mean, people have done this with the arts forever.
When, I mean, one of the most interesting things
I think about King Lear, for instance,
the Shakespeare's King Lear,
is that that was not the, after 1680, roughly 1680,
his version wasn't on the stage anymore.
It was rewritten by a guy called Neham Tate.
And that was the version of King Lear
that was on the stage for 150 years.
And in that version, you have a happy ending.
You don't have Lear come in,
cradling his daughter who's been hanged,
because they couldn't cope with that.
They couldn't cope.
And it's not just, it's not just,
because I think King Lear, of all his plays,
really represents this complete baron.
I mean, it is baron.
It's pre-Christian.
It is godless.
It's this society where exactly what you describe,
the best type of person has the worst possible experience.
In spite of what critics have said,
Lear is meant to be much loved, a great ruler,
who is subjected to this endless cruelty
that ultimately ends in an unbearable moment.
The unbearable moment is Cordelia coming in dead.
His fall has been hanged.
It is complete nihilism.
This is a play that makes you think,
what if there was nothing else?
What if there was no god?
What if being good didn't matter?
What if the very worst things happened to the best?
And they couldn't handle it.
So the Neham Tate version was what people went to see.
And in the end, Cordelia gets married to Edgar.
And it's a happy ending.
And although that seems like a travesty to us,
it actually makes sense to me as well.
It makes sense why audience goers didn't want to confront that.
Why would they?
Well, I don't think they would,
but I think the horrible truth might be that
the only way to paradise is through death and hell.
Right.
And that's like, I'm not saying that with any degree of satisfaction,
but I don't see it.
Because look, one of the things I tried to do,
I took my studies of Auschwitz in particular,
but also the Gulag really seriously.
I was trying to figure out
what I could do.
Well, I tried to put myself in the position
of an Auschwitz camp guard who kind of enjoyed his job.
Right.
And the horrible thing is you can put yourself in that position.
And the horrible thing about that is you discover
all sorts of things about yourself there by doing so
that you pretty much wish you never discovered.
But the upside, and I suppose this is the redemptive upside,
is that if you recognize within yourself
the source of all malevolence and evil,
if you can actually do that, if you'll look at that,
then you can transcend it.
But there's no other way.
There's no pretense.
And so I've been terrified of this for decades.
It's what I taught my students at Harvard
and at the University of Toronto.
I said, you have to take upon yourself
the sins of the perpetrator in order
to rectify the catastrophe of the Holocaust.
You know, weirdly and perversely,
the leftist radicals in some demented way
are insisting upon that, right?
They say, well, the problem is,
is they put the onus on the souls of other people.
They say, well, look, you powerful people,
you white people, you privileged group people,
you're the perpetrators.
It's like, no, god damn it, you're the perpetrator.
It's really hard, though, for them to put themselves
in that position and for them to confront
that aspect of their own soul, if we want to call it that.
Yeah, it's the hardest thing.
It's the hardest thing.
But also, they can't do it because they don't recognize
their own behavior for what it is.
They don't see that they are the cruelest of the cruel.
They don't see that they are themselves
capable of all sorts of monstrosities
because I've seen the way they behave.
Well, it also might be, Andrew,
that they don't see anything like,
something has to, okay, I always believe
that if you understood something,
you could find your way forward.
Like, I would say that's,
and I think my father helped me with that
in some deep way, right?
He instilled that in me in some way.
I don't really understand.
And I've always been convinced of that.
And so one of the consequences of that
is the idea that, well, if you can take it
upon yourself to gaze into the abyss,
let's say as deep as you possibly can,
that what you will see eventually
if you look hard enough is the light.
But you know, you have to believe
that the light is a possibility, right?
And maybe that's the fundamental axiom
of an appropriate faith, is the light is a possibility.
And if all you believe is that power rules,
well, how can you look upon evil without despair?
And what are the consequences for humanity
if you have a ruling ideology
that doesn't enable any of us
to have that experience anymore?
Because that seems to me to be also-
Well, we know what the consequences
we saw in the 20th century.
Right.
Right?
Many, many times.
Well, I suppose then, it's not too alarmist
to say that that's where the woke are leading us.
Certainly the spiritual.
That's what it looks like to me.
Well, no comedy, no art, no literature, right?
No science, no free speech, no redemption from guilt.
Yes.
No genuine individual identity,
no up, no down, right?
Just a desert of barren endeavor, right?
Yes.
With maybe some impulsive hedonism
thrown in now and then to-
And yet they would deny everything you've just said.
They would deny every claim that you're making there.
They would say they're not trying to do any of that at all.
That they want to preserve art.
They want free speech to flourish.
They just want to protect marginalized communities
within that.
That would be their argument.
So it's very difficult to combat.
Yeah, well, the marginalized community argument
is a very interesting one too.
I've been trying to work that through,
especially with Pajot.
You know, and he helped me walk through
the idea of the center and the fringe
in the biblical corpus.
And so there's an idea, for example,
in the ancient geography of the ancient Israelite times,
the poor were allowed to glean on the edges of the fields.
Right?
So there was a border of uncertainty around,
what would you say?
Around a demarcated territory.
And that border of uncertainty was where
the marginalized were allowed to thrive.
And so there does have to be a center,
and there has to be a margin.
But if you bring the margin to the center,
you destroy the center, and you destroy the margin.
And that's partly why I don't buy the postmodern claim
that it's compassion that's driving
the centering of the marginalized,
because that's a serpent that eats its own tail.
And I think what we're seeing happen right now
on the LGBT front is that the fringe of the fringe
is devouring the fringe.
Faster than the center even, because you know that most of the kids
who are surgically transitioned would have been gay.
It's 80%, right?
So that's pretty damn interesting.
Well, that might be the thing that breaks it apart.
I wonder if that's the thing that breaks it apart,
because there is now a schism within this LGBTQIA2S+,
whatever you want to call it, community,
which doesn't exist anyway.
And the schism is precisely what you described,
which is that gender identity ideology
is not just a fanciful theory,
a quasi-religious way of viewing the world.
It's also actively anti-gay.
And so far as it does suggest,
well, firstly, it denies homosexuality,
because homosexuality and gay rights have always been predicated
on the recognition that a minority of people
are attracted to members of their own sex.
It eliminates that by saying there's no such thing as same-sex attraction,
and that actually you should be attracted to gender or gender identity.
This is why Stonewall, which is the UK's foremost LGBT charity,
redefined the word homosexual on their website
to say it's same gender attracted.
I wrote an article recently about this, and I mentioned Nancy Kelly.
Non-women being attracted to other non-women.
Right, oh my goodness.
No, non-men.
Non-men being attracted to other non-men.
That was great, man.
That's the definition of lesbian now is non-men.
They're attracted to non-men.
It's unbelievable.
And Nancy Kelly, the CEO of Stonewall,
has said that women who want to exclude biological men
from their dating pool are sexual racists,
or akin to sexual racists.
Well, that's the logical.
That's the logical.
I said this five years ago in a discussion I had at Queen's University.
It's like, well, you don't think discrimination is right.
No, we don't.
Well, how about sexual discrimination?
Should you just lay down on the ground
and spread your legs for every comer, so to speak?
Because you're certainly being discriminatory if you don't.
Like, really, like, fundamentally,
that is the most egregious form of discrimination.
They're right about that.
Absolutely.
A sexual orientation is a form of discrimination.
Like, she says you're like a sexual racist
if you don't want to sleep with someone with a penis
and you're a woman.
No, you're just homosexual.
She's describing homosexuality there,
but she's saying that homosexuality is itself bigoted.
And that's coming from the head of the gay rights,
the foremost gay rights charity in this country.
That's insane.
The inversions are incredible.
You know, when I was at school, the kids who were effeminate,
the boys who were effeminate,
who didn't want to play football and all the rest of it,
the bullies called them girls.
They said, you're just girls.
You're not even a proper boy.
You're not a real boy.
That's what Mermaids and Stonewall says now.
They say, that's what the Tavistock was doing.
They're saying, you're basically probably trapped in the wrong body.
Let's fix you.
Like you say, between 80 and 90% of adolescents
referred to the Tavistock Clinic are same-sex attracted.
Well, that's what they do in Tehran.
That's the head of gender transformation,
sex transformation surgery in the world.
Which is really quite something.
The mothers in Tehran and the heads of Stonewall are peas in a pod.
They're totally, they feel the same way about homosexuality.
Iran and Pakistan for a while, although not anymore,
were funding same-sex change operations
because they hang gay people from cranes.
That's why you get the death penalty for being gay.
So of course they want to heterosexualize and fix gay people.
But I would never have seen this coming.
None of us did.
I've spoken to all these gay activists
who've come out of retirement basically,
and they're like, we never saw it coming.
It's more dangerous now to be a gay kid
than it was when I was growing up.
Far more dangerous when I was growing up.
Oh, yes.
Yeah.
So you guys were actually doing pretty good under the,
what would you say?
We were doing all right.
The thumb of the Judeo-Christian fascists
instead of the tender mercies of the T-activist types.
You know, we had the government implementing a thing called Section 28
where they said that teachers couldn't mention homosexuality in schools
unless they linked it to AIDS.
That's not great.
That's a terrible situation to be in.
So there was that.
So we had anti-gay ideas from members of staff.
Fine.
If you were out as a gay kid, which no one was, by the way,
you would be beaten up.
You would be bullied.
You would be abused, right?
But what you wouldn't have is the figures in authority
wanting to chop your dick off.
And that's so it's much more dangerous now.
Like you wouldn't have politicians and the media
and the commentary and gay charity saying,
maybe we need to fix you.
Maybe we need to sterilize you.
So let me ask you a question about that.
And this is one that's really,
well, I don't know what to make of it.
I just like the stereotypical guy who says he's not bigoted.
I have a lot of gay friends, and they're people I really admire.
So Bjorn Lomburg, Douglas Murray, you, Andy Know.
That's four.
Those are pretty stellar examples, by the way.
I have a sneaking suspicion, by the way,
that the genetic configuration that leads to male homosexuality
is integrally tied up with creativity itself.
And that's why it sustains itself in the gene pool.
That is fascinating.
If true, put it aside, because I've always wondered
why you have this disproportionate correlation
of homosexuality and art.
Another possibility too, which is that if you happen to get
the balance between masculine and feminine qualities
exactly right as a man, you are hyper attractive to women.
So that's another possibility.
So you could think of homosexuality as an overshoot of that target.
Now, I'm speculating, although I think the creativity hypothesis
is a better one.
Imagine that homosexuality is polygenetic,
but it's associated with a much higher probability of creativity.
Well, then obviously it's going to be conserved,
even though it has lack of reproductive ability.
It has to be associated with something stellar,
because obviously it would just disappear.
So and gay men are radically overrepresented
in creative disciplines, like radically.
If you can get to the heart of why that is,
I'd be absolutely fascinated by that.
But that was a side point, wasn't it?
That was a side point from what you wanted to say about.
Yeah. Well, here is what I wanted to ask you about.
And I don't know what to do about this.
It's like, I think that part of the problem
that we're trying to figure out is back 20 years ago,
we did what we could to bring, especially male homosexuality,
into the center by legalizing gay marriage
and by attempting to normalize it in some ways.
Now, I think that left a lot of questions unanswered.
So here's one question.
It's like, well, okay, now if it's normalized all of a sudden,
same-sex relationships, same-sex sexual relationships,
where do you draw the line and what the hell do you teach children?
And one answer would be, you don't talk about sex at all.
And another answer would be, well,
you talk about gay sex 50% of the time.
I don't know what the answer is, but it really is a problem.
And I think we're dashing ourself to pieces
in some ways trying to solve that problem.
I don't know what the hell the solution in the US
is take your kids out of the school system.
That's what the solution seems to be.
So, but I don't know what you think about all that.
It's so difficult because I think
educationists at the moment are getting it very, very wrong
in terms of what they're teaching children about sex
and gender and sexuality and all the rest of it.
And I think gay people are bearing the brunt
of a lot of the blame here, you know?
So I think what's happening is, you know,
when you have drag queens twerking in front of children
or stripping in front of children or whatever.
Yeah, that doesn't seem good.
It doesn't look good.
And because they have bracketed us all as LGBTQIA+,
this is one big thing, then, you know,
and there's evidence, isn't there, that homophobia
or at least I don't really like the word,
but anti-gay sentiment is on the rise
because I think they think this is,
they think this is gay people doing all of this stuff.
It's not, it's gender ideologues.
It's gender ideologues who have taken over
the LGBT community, whatever that might be.
And as I've said, gender ideology
is actively hostile to homosexuality.
So gay people aren't the agents of these societal changes.
They're the victims of it,
because now I'm getting it from both sides.
So I published that article in the mail about the Pride flag,
and I was getting gender ideologues piling in on me,
calling me evil and telling me I should kill myself
and, you know, the lovely things
that the compassionate people often say.
And then I was also getting right-wing people,
mostly from America, calling me a sodomite
and saying that I was evil
and that I was going to burn in hell
for my sexual orientation.
So now we've got it from both sides.
So great.
Thanks for that.
I mean, that's what the woke have done.
They, you know, it's not, and that's why...
Yeah, and that isn't over yet.
You know, that isn't over yet.
That's going to get a lot worse before it gets better.
And God only knows how it's going to shake out.
I mean, this year's Pride celebration
was a whole new set of...
Well, people are getting sick of it.
Yes, yes, yes.
Well, no bloody wonder.
A month, really?
Yeah.
Good God, guys.
Partly because it's become so corporate.
You know, corporations put their flags up.
They don't put it up in the Middle East
or in Saudi Arabia or places like that,
where it might actually make a difference, by the way,
flying that flag, where gay people are killed for being gay.
No, they don't do that.
But they put it up here.
They never did this, by the way, before gay marriage,
before the age of consent was equalized.
They didn't do any of that.
They're doing it now because corporations
are so in lockstep with the woke ideology,
which is another reason, by the way,
if you want to go back to this left-right distinction,
why I think this is so unhelpful,
because it's a movement...
Right, right, I agree.
I agree.
Well, and I don't think there's any worse woke
than woke capitalism.
No, no.
That's the bastard child of greed and ideology, man.
I mean, that's...
It's some sort of monster.
Well, that is right-wing wokeness.
It can't be anything but because capitalism is a set...
You know, these are essentially money-making bodies.
These are not...
These are not socialist organizations.
It's...
So there is a confusion there.
And also, by the way,
the woke always side against the workers.
You know, whenever these...
I know.
That's so in...
And the poor.
And the poor.
And the poor, so...
I know.
That's so interesting, too,
because I've watched the radicals,
especially in Europe over the last five years,
because I was curious.
It's like, well, when push comes to shove,
let's say, on the climate front,
are they going to sacrifice the poor on the altar of woke?
And the answer is, in a bloody heartbeat,
in a second, no holds forward.
That's what net zero does.
Net zero is precisely that.
It's the poor, the better-brun.
But that's why I don't think...
Absolutely.
And whereas I'm probably wrong to say
the wokeness is closer to the right or whatever that is,
it's definitely not a left-wing movement
in any traditional understanding
of what left-wing means.
It can't be.
No, I think we have to stop thinking
about it politically altogether.
Exactly, exactly.
I think, fundamentally,
the religious analysis is the right one.
But that's a weird one, Andrew.
That's going to take us some strange places,
because if this is actually...
First of all, we're actually making the claim
that this is a spiritual battle, right?
A religious battle.
And that's a hell of a claim to make, you know?
Especially for somebody who's more tilted
towards atheism.
And I don't even know what the hell it means
to make that claim.
But I don't think it is a political struggle, fundamentally.
That's right.
And to bring that into the LGBTQ stuff,
the way that sex education appears
to be run at the moment,
I don't know how it is necessarily where you are,
but in Wales, definitely, in Scotland, definitely,
and in England, we are having similar problems,
you have gender ideologues writing the curriculum,
effectively.
Yeah, yeah.
So children are being told.
Even worse, Canada, after all.
Oh, yeah, of course, of course.
Think of this country.
I mean, we've got narcissistic...
We've got, what would we say?
We've got the cardinal narcissist running our country.
He's everything woke you could possibly imagine.
And he's got that psychopathic charm
that lends itself to fooling gullible women.
It's a perfect bloody storm.
I don't see any difference between effectively encouraging teachers
to promote gender identity ideology to young children
as having some kind of hook-handed Islamic cleric come in
and say gay people should be burned to death.
I don't really see the difference there.
And so far as you're promoting a really reactionary belief system
on to children when it comes to the realm of sex and sexuality.
And I think that's really, really dangerous.
So unless we grapple with this point,
or unless we as a general population grapple with the fact
that sex education now is really a religious preaching,
that's all it is.
You were talking about where do you stop?
How much do you teach them about what?
Actually, kids generally learn
and figure things out for themselves, don't they?
So I've always been of the view that sex education
doesn't need to be as...
I think people need to know the basics.
But I think there's far too much of it going on.
But we've reached the point where,
I mean, you must have heard this audio recording
that was leaked this week from a school in England,
a place called Rye College.
The teacher was recorded berating two 13-year-old girls
because they would not accept
that one of their peers identified as a cat.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And look, it looks silly.
Well, it's pretty rude, you know.
It is.
To not let the poor girl wear a tail and all that.
Well, you know, this is the thing.
There was a report in the Telegraph this week as well
saying that there's a school where one child identifies
as a horse.
There's one who identifies as a dinosaur.
There's one who, quite creatively,
identifies as a moon and wears a cape.
Now, I think what's happening there
is those kids are being satirical.
They're... What they're seeing is...
God, I hope so.
No, I think they are.
Go, kids, go.
You know, the kids that are saying,
I'm a cat and I need to lie down
and I need to be stroked and I need to meow.
Look, they have seen that the figures of authority,
the teachers, are totally capitulating
to this bizarre belief system,
this esoteric cult, and unless...
I would have done that in a heartbeat
when I was 30.
I would have.
As a kid, I would have said,
I'm a velociraptor and you know,
you have to, you know, and you do what I say
or I'll eat you or whatever.
I don't care what it is, but they...
These kids are pushy.
They always test the limits anyway.
But what's brilliant about this is
the teachers can't do anything about it.
If a young child decides he's a moon
and wears a cape and a teacher says,
no, you're not,
she's denying the sacred creed
of gender identity ideology,
which is in the national curriculum now.
So she'll get fired.
So this puts the kids in an incredible position of power.
They're having fun with it.
And this is also why I'm slightly heartened by this,
because I kind of think the kids
are going to be our way out of this.
I think I hope that this mad religious fervor
will burn out because the kids see it
for what it is.
You know, the fact that that woman
in that recording was saying that these girls,
well, I think she said they were despicable.
I think that was the word she used,
despicable for not validating
or accepting their friend's identity as a cat.
I mean, that's such an extreme position
for a teacher to take.
I also don't, by the way,
I don't think it's fair to dog pile her and bombard.
And I saw someone doxing her, putting her face.
And look, she's just following,
she's probably not a very intelligent person.
She's probably not a very thinking person.
But she's just following what she's told to say.
She's been told by all of the teacher training colleges,
all of the academics in education
that this is the case and you've got to go with it.
And she's just doing her job.
So I think that's unfair as well.
I would like teachers to be more intelligent
and creative and to challenge this stuff.
But, you know, that's not happening.
So yeah, maybe it may be...
I guess we're learning why the eternal serpent
always devours its own tail, right?
Right.
It's so interesting to see these things
push too far, start to eat themselves.
You know, it's...
We're living in the strangest times, man.
That might be it.
That might be the hope, though, right?
So it's an optimistic point to make.
But ultimately, because I think this ideology
is not sustainable, because it is too full of...
We did walk ourselves back from the brink of tyranny
on the COVID lockdown front, right?
I mean, we were...
We went full totalitarian for two years,
but then everybody seemed to decide
maybe that wasn't such a good idea.
But that's quite instructive, isn't it?
The way that we now talk about it.
Everyone sort of...
No one mentions it now, do they?
You walk around, very few people wearing masks.
People have just sort of...
There came a weird turning point
where everyone just decided,
actually, it's a virus with a very low mortality rate.
Let's just not worry about it.
And that just sort of happened.
People have forgotten the mania, the extreme mania.
People screaming at each other on the streets
if they weren't wearing masks and the extreme policies.
The Canadian government's reaction
to the truckers who were worried
about their livelihood due to lockdown.
You mean stealing their bank accounts?
Stealing their bank accounts
and threatening to give them money
to other charities or something?
Didn't they even...
I mean, you'll know.
Yeah, yeah, Go said...
So $10 million was raised on GoFundMe.
That's it, yeah.
And then GoFundMe decided
they weren't going to distribute it to the truckers.
Then they decided, instead of refunding it,
they were going to distribute it
to a charity of their choice.
Then Ron DeSantis said,
I think you better not do that or else.
And then they decided they would refund it.
And now the money that hasn't been refunded
is in escrow and there's a huge fight in Canada
about who owns it.
We haven't settled the trucker mess here at all.
But the trucker convoy,
it had something to do with everybody
taking those goddamn masks off.
I'm sure.
I wonder how those politicians
who were involved in this will feel about this
in 20 years' time.
I know one of your politicians claimed
that the truckers were beeping their horns
because they were dog whistling to fascists
because the honk honk is HH
and that means Heil Hitler.
I mean, that was something that was seriously said by...
Well, that's common knowledge here in Andrew.
Everybody who honks their horn
is actually secretly admiring Hitler,
especially if they do it twice.
That is so insane.
So I wonder whether...
That's Salem which trial level is insane.
Exactly.
And Salem is a good example, right?
Because, you know,
there's a reason I've used it in the book
is that I think it gives us our clues to our way out.
Because Salem happened so quickly,
it happened within just over a year, right?
Late 17th century,
this hysteria emerged from nowhere
and fizzled out immediately
and everyone afterwards repented.
All of the people who were most involved in it said,
we got that wrong.
What happened there?
We went mad for a while there
because they weren't...
Well, this is maybe the first widespread mental illness
afflicting our new electronic nervous system.
That's it.
I think this is a hysteria on a global scale,
akin to what happened in Salem.
I think it's perpetuated itself by a similar means,
which is firstly just the mechanism of hysteria,
which I'm not qualified to talk about,
but also the fact that people in authority
go along with it because they're terrified not to.
You know, because in Salem,
anyone said, hang on, I don't think this is right,
they were the next to be executed.
So you don't have politicians saying,
hang on a minute, is it possible for human beings to change sex?
Do I know what a woman is?
They all know the answer,
just as the magistrates in Salem
knew that the girls weren't seeing the devil.
But it all fizzled out very, very quickly.
One of the points I make in the book
is about that all of the prosecutions were secured
on this thing called spectral evidence.
In other words, the girls' experience,
what we call lived experience.
The girls believed that they were seeing devils,
and therefore that was taken as evidence.
And that's why the cases collapsed,
because at the end, the deputy governor of Massachusetts
wrote to the leading clergyman in the country and said,
can spectral evidence be admissible in court?
And they all said, no, of course not.
The whole thing disappeared overnight.
Everyone denied they had any part in it.
These weren't witch hunters.
They didn't go around hunting witches.
That happened a lot in Europe.
It didn't happen in New England.
And so they were good people.
Maybe that's the least stupid pathway forward for us now.
And maybe, God willing, that's the one we'll take.
We should stop, I guess, I don't want to,
because you're very entertaining to talk to.
For everybody watching and listening,
I'm going to talk to Andrew for another half an hour.
On the Daily Wire Plus platform side,
a little bit more personally,
I want to see a bit more about what makes them tick.
And so if you're interested in that,
head over to the Daily Wire Plus platform.
You could throw those characters,
those reprehensible right-wing bastards a penny or two,
if you're inclined to, because they are heading the fight
to support free speech.
In the US, the YouTube has been after us,
because I'm allied with the Daily Wire types,
been after us pretty badly in the last month.
They took down three of my talks,
including one with Helen Joyce,
because you know how reprehensible good old Helen,
the Economist journalist is.
And they also took down a talk I had with Robert F. Kennedy,
despite the fact that he's running for president.
And so that's YouTube,
and they're definitely going after all the Daily Wire folks.
So thank you all for your time and attention,
and to Andrew for talking to me
and helping me delve into these things,
get a little bit more clarity along with everyone else.
And for everyone watching and listening,
we'll see you soon.
And to the Daily Wire folks, thanks for your support.
Andrew, off to the Daily Wire.
Thank you very much.
