One of the things I get asked all the time is what my window manager is I get that I don't know what this is about people
Obsessed about window managers and distros and stuff. It's fine. People are just making conversation
Rarely they're judging you based on your choices
to me it doesn't matter as my window manager is Tmux and
Do I use a status bar? I use my Tmux status bar
So as you can see right now everything that you see on the screen is Tmux. This is a full-screen
Nome terminal that came with pop OS is my distro and I have got a Tmux within a Tmux
So this stuff down here is all we chat
This down here is my status bar. This is a status update my pulmonary trauma on my Tmux configuration
Which we're going to be covering in other videos. So stay tuned
And then here's my title down here
You can't see it, but and then up here you can see this is this is up here. This is a Vim session
And up here you can see that I have another Tmux status bar
That's because I have a Tmux within a Tmux and stay tuned. I'll show you how to do that safely
So that you can actually have two status bars or you can split your screen and do all kinds of crazy amazing things with this
so by using
By what's that can use it to previous CPU usage and other things absolutely
I can do all of that from the command line if I wanted if I wanted to put CPU utilization or anything
I wanted to I could put it in my terminal in my in my in my
You know status bars of different types so I could put it up here or I could make a pain
I can do this so I can split a pain over here. So easily. I just split that pain in half
That's pain management. And then if I want a new window control C
Let me turn my eskies on so you can see everything
But as you can see I can go back and forth screen and tell it multiplexers I can split this guy some more
I can make T matrix here run
You know, I can put the fish in another terminal the point being that I have absolute immediate control
Over all of my windows and pains people continually say you need to learn I3 you're learning blah blah blah
I say no, I don't need any of that all I need is Tmux because Tmux gets you everything you need I
Do everything from the terminal anyway, so there's no need for me to do anything besides that
It does manage my windows it matters my real estate it manages my pains
It allows me to do I mean I can do H top over here if I want to have that thing sometimes in another window
I'll roll I'll run my other thing and and by the way all the bindings that I have here are also
Completely transferable, right? So it's like
configuration centralized and
Portable
In a single file, so you know your Tmux config if I'm doing like I don't know
I'm good planning on doing the Kubernetes certification and I know that they have Tmux so that odds are I can take my
Tmux com files stick it on the system along with my batch RC and my Vim are seeing I'm good to go
I don't care do it. Could I install I3 on there? No, could I you know change my Linux distro?
No, let's say that I want to just run a Docker container
So, you know, let's say I'm going to run it's like the fault Docker container Docker run it
You know, let's like run it a bunch of container, right dash dash RM and
Let's give it a name. Let's do Debian and what we should we call it?
What is it? How do you do names in I think it is something I don't remember so
Oh, fairly crazy because that shouldn't actually not found. Oh wait
I think it's dash and something so Debian
Is it dash T dash T is the name. I thought it was dash and is it dash T
What is it people I think it's dash dash and
Name I know there's a shortcut. Okay. So here we are on here, right?
So so now I can like I have my I have my host here and
It didn't seem to work. So we'll just go ahead and use this
So let's say I want to put my team looks config over here. I want to put my my team looks good thing. So Docker copy
This
Tmux comf and I want to put it on this. Yeah
I also structure. What am I talking about Docker copy?
Oh wait, where is my team looks file? Did I put it someplace else? Oh
there is
Tmux comf to am I doing it wrong? What am I doing wrong? I
Think I have to put slash there. Yeah, there we go. So now it's here
So over here. I don't have Tmux. So you have to update
Damn it have to update
a
app install
Tmux
Yes, I want to install Tmux. Let's see how fast this goes. I start Tmux over here and
It didn't pull up my my thing yet. So let's see if it's still there
Is it there? Yep, there it is. So where's my home directory root? Okay, here we go
move slash Tmux comf to dot and now Tmux. Oopsy
Get out of that Tmux
It should pick it up. It doesn't look like it is. I
Just not picking it up. Let me see if I can do it Tmux. Was it dash C? I
Got it. I don't remember what it is. I didn't plan this
So
We talking about oh, there's no man page
All right, so Tmux is it dash C
Dot Tmux com the point is you can use Tmux on it if I can't get it you can you get what I'm saying
This is file directory
We talking about oh, there we go
Set that show yeah, I know you didn't think you were gonna get to see me docker fail this whole time, did you?
No, since file directory what the oh wait?
Sashay, I don't know. I see it right there. Maybe I'm doing it wrong. I
Wanted to reload my Tmux and it's not loading it. Come on load my Tmux. Please load it
Uh
Okay, well it's loading something. It's loading something. I don't think that's the right thing
But it's loading something the point is you can take your configuration with you and and you can change it up and
And just copy between doctors containers and something that
I don't know here. Let's try this man Docker. Let's I don't I don't I don't have two minutes left
So let's try this man Tmux. Wait, we're gonna go into the Tmux conference after this. So
Man Tmux, let me go see if I can look up the comp
No dash C is a show command, of course silly me silly me
Where's the configuration file
By default Tmux was a configuration file from Etsy Tmux.com
It looks for a user configuration file at till the does that mean it because there's no user over here
Is that way?
Cuz cuz cuz it looks like there's one there. Okay, let's just add user
You you password you you
Yes
you you
Yes
All right as you dash you
copy
root dot Tmux dot
Comf to here
First denied
All right, well, let's try this schmocks schmod
Plus are
It doesn't have sudo built-in. I have to install sudo
Yeah, so that's why I'm doing it. I know this is what you get when you get bear bound container
I actually have configure containers, but you get the point cannot operate on a dangling sim link. How are you a sim link?
You're not a sim link
All right, fine
I'm gonna change this
Let's do this
Yep, let's just give me my copy. I'm gonna copy it to
slash
home slash you have it that and
Now we can do it exit Tmux
Damn it. Oh wait, let's do that you
Tmux
Still listen kidding it. I don't understand why make it make it go away. Wait did it?
Am I using the right Tmux file even?
You guys like it when I screw up anyway, don't you? I mean, that's your favorite thing to watch no vi I
Could use Ed's not even here is that out here. I
Think it is damn it
Damn not even Ed I
Didn't seem like it though. You saw that, right?
You did you see that? I did not seem like it. So apps
So then minimal
I don't need the rest
Is it Vim's tiny is it Vim tiny?
Yeah, that's it okay, I could remember the sim link came from the host
You
LS-J oh
You guys
Finally cracked it for me. I feel so silly of course it did
It's like trying to link to things that don't exist. I'm 14 seconds over. Can I do it?
Pomo just shut up for a second. Okay? Okay, Pomo. Thank you. All right, so
CD into dot files. All right, let's do this. So cop be good to the Tmux the Tmux
Uh
Doctor yeah, yeah, thank you. You guys cracked it. This is more fun that way when I screw up, right?
You can know the do the perils of using symbolic links. All right, so docker copy
dot Tmux dot com
To this thing whatever this is I
Didn't take my name because I got the command wrong because look I can't remember shit
That's just how I am. All right, so they went up
We do colon slash home slash you and I have a better feeling about this
I just do I just have a better feeling
LS-L
LS-LA. Oh god LS-L
Tmux
Huzzah, there's my Tmux that I know and love it's got my own things here
It's got all my bindings. It can turn my clock on. Where's the clock though? There's my refresh thingy. Anyway, as you can see
You get your Tmux and yes, I had problems because other reasons not because it was hard to get Tmux over there
So hopefully that's that's just helping that can make the case for you to consider
Using a window manager. That's just Tmux
and
You know, you can you can you can put it on anything
And put it on anything. So I'll let's just review configuration centralized and portable single file. You can put it on anything
Can be configured to behave
Like a screen which has come on every system since it's on a time
It's extremely powerful. I
Cannot even begin to tell you how powerful it is powerful and configurable even if you don't buy into the plug-in stuff, which I don't I
Avoid plug-ins because the plug-ins defeat the whole purpose of having a
Because no longer portable, right if you but you can use them right no longer portable
But I personally don't like them. I try to stick with the basics
And it's you know, it's universally available
So even
During certification exams
so, you know, if you're working through a web browser and
You can't see what you're working on and you haven't you having to fight with the web browser already because you're doing a certification test
It's a terminal-based thing and you're already using some sort of stupid ass web
Emulation, you know, if you got too much in there
It just makes it that much less painful because you can split the screen up and stuff like that rather than to do whatever
I can't even imagine what you would do which is a single terminal if you can't if you can't split the screen
You got to do two things at one time and you want to check
Maybe you want your documentation open in one window, which you can you can do or you want a man page
You're gonna be able to something like that, you know, then yeah, you need this
You're gonna open up multiple windows, you know web web terminal tabs in order to check out your different things
So there's just a million reasons to make Tmux the only window manager that you care about and
I cannot overemphasize that we're gonna still talk about how to configure Tmux thing and all that and I'll move on to different videos
About that, but this was supposed to be sort of a seamless demo of why you might want to use the team at the Tmux
Moon image or I have to do is watch me or anybody who uses one for a short amount of time to
really get a sense of why you might want to pick it up and
I mean you can use it to make your own sort of monitoring station if you're a kubernetes person
And we did I did this at work the other day where we had a bunch of things that we're watching at CD health checks
We had some pings running in other windows and it was all in this beautiful big split-screen console with no annoying borders in between
Other than like the one, you know terminal border in between the whole thing
so that's my that's my argument for using Tmux give it a shot and
We're gonna proceed with some other videos about configuration and stuff like that
We're gonna talk about oh persistent sessions, right? I forgot about that
So Tmux also allows you to have a persistent session
I'm gonna do a different video about persistent sessions though. So watch for that
