time. All right. Chapter one, Ada countless of loveless. Political science. In May 1833,
when she was 17, Ada Byron was among the young women presented at the British Royal Court.
Family members had worried about how she would acquit herself, given her high, strong and
independent nature, but she ended up behaving. Her mother reported, quote, tolerably well.
Among those Ada met that evening were the Duke of Wellington, whose straightforward manner
she admired, and the 79-year-old French ambassador, Tallie Rand, who struck her as, quote, an old monkey.
The only legitimate child of the poet Lord Byron, Ada had inherited her father's romantic spirit,
a trait that her mother tried to temper by having her tutored in mathematics.
The combination produced an Ada a love for what she took to calling, quote, political science,
poetical science, which linked her rebellious imagination to her enchantment with numbers.
For many, including her father, the rarefied sensibilities of the romantic era clashed
with the techno excitement of the industrial revolution. But Ada was comfortable at the
intersection of both areas. So it was not surprising that her debut at court, despite the glamour of
the occasion, made less impression on her than her attendance a few weeks later at another
majestic event of the London season. At which she met Charles Babbage, a 41-year-old widowed
science and math eminence who had established himself as a luminary on London's social circuit.
Quote, Ada was more pleased with the party she was at on Wednesday than with any of the
assemblages in the Grand Monde, her mother reported to a friend. She met there a few scientific people
among them Babbage, who with whom she was very delighted, end quote. Babbage is galvanizing
weekly salons, which included up to 300 guests, brought together lords in swallowtail coats,
and ladies in brocade gowns, and writers, industrialist poets, actors, statesmen, explorers,
botanists, and other scientists, the word that Babbage's friends had recently coined.
By bringing scientific scholars into the exalted realm, said one of the geologists,
Babbage, quote, successfully asserted the rank in society due to science.
They invented the word science, my friends. The evenings featured dancing, readings, games,
and lectures accompanied by the assortment of seafood, meat, foul, exotic drinks, and ice desserts.
Cheers.
The ladies staged tableaux vivants in which they dressed in costumes to recreate famous paintings.
Astronomers set up telescopes, researchers displayed their electric and magnetic contrivances,
and Babbage allowed guests to play with his mechanical dolls. The centerpiece of the evening,
and one of Babbage's many motives for hosting them, was his demonstration of a model portion
of his, quote, difference engine, a mammoth mechanical calculating contraption that he
was building in the fireproof structure adjacent to his home. Babbage would display the model with
great drama, cranking his arm as it calculated the sequence of numbers, and just as the audience
began to get bored, showed how the pattern could suddenly be changed based on the instructions
that he had coded into the machine. Those who were especially intrigued would be invited through
the yard to the former stables where the complete machine was being constructed.
Babbage's difference engine, which could solve polynomial equations,
impressed people in different ways. The Duke of Wellington commented that it could be useful
in analyzing the variables a general might face before going into battle. Ada's mother, Lord Byron,
marveled that it was a, quote, thinking machine. As for Ada, who would later famously note that
machines could never truly think, a friend who went with them to the demonstration reported,
quote, Ms Byron, young as she was, understood its workings, and she was the, quote, great beauty
of the invention. Ada's love of both poetry and math primed her to see the beauty in the
computing machine. She was an exemplar of the era of romantic science,
which was characterized by a lyrical enthusiasm for invention and discovery.
It was a period that brought, quote, imaginative intensity and excitement to the scientific work,
Richard Holmes wrote in his Age of the Wonder, quote, it was driven by the common ideal of
intense, even reckless personal commitment to discovery, unquote. In short, it was a time
not unlike our own. The advances of the Industrial Revolution, including the steam engine, mechanical
loom, and telegraph, transformed the 19th century in much the same way that the advances of the
digital revolution, the computer, microchip, and the internet have transformed us in our own.
At the heart of both eras were innovators who combined imagination and passion with
wondrous technology, a mix that produced Ada's poetic gulf science, and what the 20th century
poet Richard Rottigan would call, quote, machines of lovely grace. Lord Byron.
Ada inherited her poetic insubordinate temper from her father, but he was not the source of her love
for machinery. He was, in fact, a Luddite. In the maiden speech in the House of Lords, given in
February 1812, when he was about 24, Byron defended the followers of Ned Ludd, who were rampaging
against mechanical weaving machines. With sarcastic scorn, Byron mocked the mill owners of Nottingham,
who were pushing a bill that would have made destroying automated looms a crime punishable
by death, quote, these machines were to them an advantage in so much as they superseded the
necessity of employing a number of workmen who were left in consequence to starve, unquote,
Byron declared. The rejected workmen and the blindness of their ignorance instead of rejoicing
at the improvements in the arts so beneficial to mankind conceived themselves to be sacrificed to
the improvements of the mechanism, end, quote. Two weeks later, Byron published the first two
cantos of his epic poem, Child Harold's Pilgrimage, a romanticized account of his wanderings through
Portugal, Malta and Greece, and, as he later remarked, quote, awoke one morning and found
myself famous, end, quote. Beautiful, seductive, troubled, brooding, and sexually adventurous,
Byron was living a life of a bioronic hero while creating the archetype in his poetry.
He became the toast of literary London and was fed at three parties each day,
most memorable, a lavish morning dance hosted by Lady Caroline Lamb. Lady Caroline, though married
to a political powerful aristocrat who was later prime prime minister, fell madly in love with Byron.
He thought she was, quote, too thin, yet she had an unconventional sexual ambiguity.
She liked to dress like a page boy. He found that enticing. They had a turbulent affair and
after it ended, she stalked him obsessively. She famously declared to him, quote, be mad,
bad, and dangerous to know, which he was. So was she. At Lady Caroline's party, Lord Byron had
also noticed a reserved young woman who was, as he recalled, quote, more simply dressed.
Annabella Milbunk, 19, was from the wealthy and multi-titled family. The night before the party,
she had read Child Harold and had mixed feelings, quote. He is rather too much of a mannerist,
she wrote. He excels most in the delineation of deep feelings. Upon seeing him across the room
at the party, her feelings were conflicted, dangerously so, quote. I did not seek an introduction
to him for all the women were absurdly courting him and trying to deserve a lash of his satire,
she wrote to her mother. I'm not the Cyrus of a place in his laze. I made no offering at the shrine
of Child Harold, though I shall not refuse acquaintance if it comes my way.
That acquaintance, as it turned out, did come her way. After he was introduced to her formally,
Byron decided that she might make a suitable wife. It was for him a rare display of reason over
romanticism. Rather than arousing his passions, she seemed to be the sort of woman who might
tame those passions and protect him from his successes, as well as help him pay off his burdensome
debts. He proposed to her half-heartedly by letter. She sensibly declined. He wanted off to
far less appropriate liaisons, including one with his half-sister, Augustus Lay. But after a year,
Annabella rekindled her courtship. Byron, falling more deeply in debt while gasping for air at the
curb of his enthusiasm, saw the rationale if not the romance in the possible relationship.
Nothing but marriage and a speedy one can save me, he admitted to Annabelle's aunt.
If your niece is obtainable, I should prefer her if not the very first woman who does not
look as if she would spit in my face. There were times when Lord Byron was not a romantic.
He and Annabella were married in January 1915. Byron initiated the marriage in his
Byronic fashion. Had Lady Byron on the sofa before dinner, he wrote in his wedding day journal.
Their relationship was still active when they visited his half-two sisters months later because
around then Annabella got pregnant. However, during the visit, she began to suspect that
her husband's friendships with Augusta had been beyond fraternal, especially after he lay on a sofa
and asked them both to take him, turns kissing him. The marriage started to unravel. Annabella
had been tutored in mathematics, which amused Lord Byron. And during that, he was such a fucking
asshole. Lord Byron was such an asshole, man. And during the court should be a joked about
about his own disdain for the exactitude of numbers. Quote, I know that two and two make four
and should be glad to prove it if I could, he wrote. Though I must say, if any sort of process
like a convert two and two into five, it would give me great pleasure. Early on, he affectionately
dubbed her the quote, Princess of Parallelograms. I want somebody to call me the Princess of Parallelograms.
That's a great name. But when the marriage began to sour, he refined the mathematical image.
We are two parallel lines, prolonged by infinite side by side, but never to meet, he said. Later,
in his first canto of his epic poem, Don One, he would mock her. Her favorite science was the
mathematical. She was a walking calculation. The marriage was not saved by the birth of their
daughter or on December 10th, 1815, which may or may not be my exact birthday.
Some years later, of course, she was named Augusta Ada Byron, her first name that of Byron's
two beloved half sister. When Lady Byron became convinced of her husband's profidity,
she thereafter called her daughter by her middle name. Five weeks later, she packed her belongings
into a carriage and fled into her parents' country home with the infant Ada. Ada never knew her
father again. Lord Byron left the country that April after Lady Byron and led her so
calculating that she earned his subrequette of mathematical media, threatened to expose
his alleged incestuous and homosexual affairs as a way to secure a separation agreement that
gave her custody of their child. The opening of the canto three of Child Harold, written a few
weeks later, invokes Anna as his muse. In thy face, like thy mother's my fair child, Ada,
sole daughter of my house, of my heart. When last I saw thy young blue eyes, they smiled,
and then we parted. Byron wrote these lines in a villa like by Lake Geneva when he was staying
with the poet Percy Beasle Shelley and Shelley's future wife, Mary. It rained relentlessly,
trapped inside for days. Byron, it's like a franchise. It's like an industrial age franchise,
like a movie franchise. He meets the author of Frankenstein. Byron suggested that they write
horror stories. He produced a fragment of the tale about a vampire, one of the first literary
efforts of the subject, but Mary's story was the one that became classic, Frankenstein or
the modern Prometheus. Playing on the ancient Greek myth of the hero who crafted a living man
out of clay and snatched fire from the gods for human use, Frankenstein was the story of a scientist
who galvanized the man made assemblage into a thinking human. It was a cautionary tale about
technology and science and also raised a question that would become associated with Ada. Can man
made machines ever truly think? Third canto of chilled herald ends with Byron's prediction
that Annabella would try to keep Ada from knowing about her father, and so it happened.
There was a portrait of Lord Byron in the house, but Lady Byron kept it securely veiled
and Ada never saw it until she was 20. Lord Byron, by contrast, kept a picture of Ada on his desk
wherever he was, and his letters often requested news or portraits of her. When she was seven,
he wrote to Augusta, quote, I wish you would obtain from Lady B some accounts of Ada's disposition.
Is the girl imaginative? Is she passionate? I hope that the gods have made her anything
save political. It is enough to have one such fool in the family. Lady Byron reported that Ada had
an imagination that was, quote, chiefly exercised in connection with her mechanical ingenuity.
Around the time Byron, who had been wandering through Italy,
writing and having an assortment of affairs, grew bored and decided to enlist in the Greek
struggle for independence from the Ottoman Empire. He sailed to Missologna, wherever he took command
of the part of the rebel army and prepared to attack the Turkish forces. But before he could
engage in battle, he caught a violent cold that was made worse by the doctor's decision to treat
him by bloodletting. On April 19, 1824, he died. According to his valet among his final words were,
quote, Oh, my poor dear child, my dear Ada, my God, could I have seen her? Give her my blessing.
Ada.
I've been reading the chat, but whatever.
Lord Byron wanted to make sure that Ada did not turn out like her father.
And Byron's strategy was to have the girls rigorously study math,
as if it were an antidote to poetic imagination. When Ada at age five showed a preference for
geography, Lady Byron ordered that the subject be replaced by additional arithmetic lessons,
and her governess soon proudly reported, quote, she adds up sums of five and six rows of figures
with accuracy. Despite these efforts, Ada developed some of her father's propensities.
She had an affair with a young teenager with one of her tutors and with one of her tutors,
and when they were caught and the tutor banished, she tried to run away from the home to be with him.
In addition, she had mood swings that took her from feelings of grandiosity to despair,
and she suffered various maladies, both physical and psychological.
Ada accepted her mother's conviction that the immersion in math could help
pertain her Byronic tendencies. After her dangerous liaison with her tutor and inspired
by Babbage's Difference Engine, she decided on her own at 18 to begin a new series of lessons,
quote, I must cease to think of living for pleasure or self-critification, she wrote to her new tutor.
I find that nothing but very close and intense application of subjects of a scientific nature
now seems to keep my imagination running wild from running wild. It appears to me that the first
thing to go through the course of mathematics, the first thing is to go through a course of
mathematics. He agreed with the prescription. You are right in supposing that your chief resource
and safeguard at the present is the course of severe intellectual study. For this purpose,
there is no subject to be compared to mathematics. The tutor prescribed Euclidean geometry
followed by a dose of trigonometry and algebra. That should cure anyone, they both thought,
from having too much artistic and romantic passion. That's awesome.
Ada's interest in technology was stoked when her mother took her on a trip through the British
industrial midlands to see the new factories and machinery. Ada was particularly impressed with an
automated weaving loom and used punch cards to direct the creation of the desired fabrics the way
she wanted to. That was, by the way, well, we're going to get to it. She drew a sketch of how it
worked. Her father's famous speech in the House of Lords had defended the Luddites who would smash
such looms because of their fear of what technology might do to their humanity, but Ada waxed political
about them and saw the connection with what would someday be called computers.
This machine reminds me of Babbage and the gem of all mechanisms, she wrote.
Ada's interest in applied science was further simulated when she met with one of Bruton's
free you for you noted female mathematician scientists, Mary Somerville. Somerville had
just finished writing one of her great works on the connection of the physical sciences
in which she tied together developments of astronomy, optics, and electricity,
chemistry, physics, botany, and geology. In Blomantic of the Time, it proved in a unified
sense of the extraordinary endeavors of discovery that were underway. She proclaimed in her opening
sentence, quote, the progress of modern science, especially within the last five years, has been
remarkable for a tendency to simplify the laws of nature and to unite detached branches of general
principles. Somerville became a friend, teacher, inspiration, and mentor Ada. She met with Ada
regularly. She sent her math books, devised problems for her to solve, and patiently explained the
correct answers. Mentorship, my friends, mentorship. She was a good friend of Babbage's and during the
fall of 1834, she and Ada would often visit this his Saturday evening solans. Somerville's son,
Wuronzo Greg, aided Ada's efforts to settle down by suggesting to one of his former classmates at
Cambridge that she would make a suitable or at least interesting wife.
William King was socially prominent, financially secure, quietly intelligent,
and as taciturn as Ada was excitable. Like her, he was a student of the science,
but his focus was more practical and less poetic. His primary interests were crop rotation theories
and advances in livestock breeding techniques. He proposed marriage within a few weeks of
meeting Ada, and she accepted. Her mother, with motives that only a psychiatrist could
fast as she could fathom, decided it was imperative to tell William about Ada's attempted
elopement with her tutor. Despite the news, William was willing to proceed with the wedding,
which was held on July 1835. Gracious God, who has so mercifully given you an opportunity
for turning aside the dangerous past, has given you a friend and guardian. Lady Byron wrote her
daughter, adding that she should use this opportunity to quote, bid adieu to all of her
peculiarities, capriciousness, and self-seeking. The marriage was a match made in rational calculus.
For Ada, it offered her a chance to adopt much more steady and grounded life.
More importantly, it allowed her to escape dependence on her domineering mother,
for William had been having a fascinating, eccentric wife from a wealthy and famous family.
Lord Byron's first cousin, Viscut Melbourne, who had the misfortune of having been married
to Lady Caroline Lamb by then deceased, was the prime minister, and he arranged that Queen
Victoria's coronation list of honors, William, would become the Earl of Loveless.
His wife thus became Ada, Countess of Loveless. She is therefore properly referred to as
Ada or Lady Loveless, though she is now commonly known as Ada Loveless.
That Christmas in 1835, Ada received from her mother the most fam- family-side portrait of her
father, painted by Thomas Phillips. It showed Lord Byron in a romantic profile, gazing at the
horizon, dressed in a traditional Albanian costume, featuring a red velvet jacket,
ceremonial sword, and headrest. For years, it had hung over Ada's grandparents' metal,
but it had never been veiled and unseen by the green cloth from the day her parents had separated.
Now she was trusted not only to see it, but to possess it, along with its ink stand and pen.
Her mother did something that was even more surprising when the Loveless first child,
a son, was born. A few months later, despite her disdain for her late husband's memory,
she agreed that Ada should name the boy Byron, which she did. The following year, Ada had a
daughter whom she dutifully named Annabella after her mother. Ada then came down with yet another
mysterious malady, which kept her bedridden for months. She recovered well enough to have a third
child, a son named Ralph, but her health remained fragile. She had digestive and respiratory problems,
and these were compounded by being treated with londonum, morphine, and other forms of opium,
which led to mood swings and occasional delusions. Ada was further unsettled by the
eruption of a personal drama that was bizarre enough by the standards of the Byron family.
It involved Madora Le, the daughter of Byron's half-sister and occasional lover.
According to the widely accepted rumors, Madora was Byron's daughter.
She seemed determined to show that that darkness ran in the family. She had an affair with a
sister's husband and then ran off with him to France and had two little limited illegitimate
children. In a fit of self-righteousness, Lady Byron went to France rescue Madora,
then revealed to Ada that the story of her father's incest.
This, quote, most strange and dreadful story did not seem to surprise Ada. I'm not happy
in the least astonished, but I'm not in the least astonished, she wrote to her mother.
You merely confirm that I have known for years and felt scarcely doubt about.
Rather than being outraged, she seemed oddly energized by the news. She declared that she
could relate to her father's defiance authority. Referring to his, quote, misused genius,
she wrote to her mother, quote, if he had transmitted to me any portion of that genius,
I would use it to bring out great truths and principles. I think he has bequested me
this task, in fact. I have this feeling strongly, and there is a pleasure attending to it, end quote.
Once again, Ada took up the study of math in order to settle herself.
She tried to convince Babish to become her tutor. I have a peculiar way of learning,
and I think it is, it must be a peculiar man to teach me, she said, whether due to her opiates
or her breeding or both. She developed a somewhat outsized opinion of her own talents,
and began to describe herself as a genius. In her letter to Babish, she wrote, quote,
do not reckon me conceited, but I believe I have the power of going just as far as I like in such
pursuits. And where were there is no decided a taste, I should almost say a passion as I have
for them. I question if there is not always some portion of natural genius even.
Babish deflected Ada's request, which was probably wise. It preserved their friendship
for an even more important collaboration, and she was able to secure a first-rate math tutor instead,
Augustus de Morgan, a patient gentleman who was pioneer in the field of symbolic logic.
He had propounded a concept that Ada would one day employ with great significance,
which was an algebraic equation could apply to things other than numbers. The relations among
symbols, for example, A plus B equals B plus A, could be part of a logic that applied to things
that were not numerical. And that slammed a calculus, by the way, I've been reading about it.
Oh, great. Love it. Am I drinking? I'm drinking rum.
Ada was never the great mathematician in her canonizer's claim,
but she was an eager pupil able to grasp most of the basic concepts of calculus and with her
artistic sensibility, she liked to visualize the changing curves and trajectories of the
equations being described. De Morgan, her tutor, encouraged her to focus on the rules
for working through equations, but she was more eager to discuss the underlying concepts.
Likewise with geometry, she often asked for visual ways to picture problems,
such as how the intersections of circles in a sphere divided into various shapes.
Ada's ability to appreciate the beauty of mathematics is a gift that eludes many people,
including some who think of themselves as intellectual. She realized that math was a
love, this is a narrator, that she realized that math was a loving language. Well, that described
the harmoniousness of the universe and can be poetic at times. Despite her mother's effort,
she remained her father's daughter with a poetic sensibility that allowed her to view the equations
of the brushstroke that painted an aspect of nature's physical splendor, just as she could
visualize the, quote, wire-dark sea, or a woman who, quote, walks in beauty light at night.
But math's appeal went even deeper for her. It was spiritual. Math constitutes the language
through which alone we can adequately express the great facts of the natural world, she said.
And it allows us to portray, quote, the changes of mutual relationship that unfold in creation.
It is the instrument through which the weak mind of man can most effectually read his creator's works.
This ability to apply imagination to science characterized industrial revolution as well
as the computer revolution, for which Ada was to become a major patron saint. She was able,
as she told Babbage, to understand the connection between poetry and analysis in ways that transcended
her father's talents. I do not believe that my father was or ever could have been such a poet
as I shall be an analyst. For with me, the two go together indissolutably, she wrote.
Her re-engagement with math, she told her mother, spurred her creativity and led to,
and quote, immense development of imagination, so much so that I feel no doubt that I continue my
studies, I shall do in due time become a poet. The whole concept of imagination, especially as it
was a pleasure technology, intrigued her. What is imagination, she asked in 1841. It is the
combining faculty, it brings together things, facts, and ideas, conceptions in new, original,
endless, ever-varying combinations. It is that which penetrates into the unseen worlds around us
and the worlds of science. By then Ada believed she possessed special, even supernatural abilities,
what she called, quote, an intuitive perception of hidden things. Her exalted view of her talents
led her to pursue aspirations that were unusual for an aristocratic woman and a mother of the
early Victorian age. Quote, I believe myself to possess a most singular combination of qualities
exactly fitted to make my preeminently a discoverer of the hidden realities of nature, end quote.
She explained in a letter that her mother in 1841, quote, I can throw rays from every
core of the universe into one vast focus. It was while this fame of mine that she just,
it was in this frame of mind that she decided to engage again with Charles Babbage, whose salons
she had first attended eight years earlier. She thinks she's Sheldon. She really does.
This is the innovators from Walter Isaacson.
Charles Babbage and his engines. Probably, this probably be the last one.
From an early age, Charles Babbage had been interested in machinery that could perform human
tests. When he was a child, his mother took him to many of the exhibition halls and numerous
museums that were springing up in London in the early 1800s. At one in Hanover Square,
a proprietor aptly named Merlin, invited him up to the attic workshop where there was a
variety of mechanical dolls known as automata. One was a silver female dancer about a foot tall,
whose arms moved with grace and who held in her hand a bird that could wag its tail,
flip its wings and open its beak. The silver lady's ability to display feelings and personality
captured the boys' fancy. Her eyes were full of imagination, he recalled. Years later, he discovered
the silver lady at a bankruptcy auction and bought it. It served as an amusement at the evening of
salons which he celebrated with wonders of technology later. At Cambridge, Babbage became
friends with groups including John Herschel and George Peacock who were disappointed by the way
math was being taught there. They formed a club called the Analytical Society which campaigned
to get the university to abandon the calculus notation devised by the alumnus Newton which
relied on dots and replaced it with the one devised by Leibniz which used dx and dy to represent
infinitesimally increments in what was known as denotation. Babbage's title the manifesto
quote that principles appear deism in opposition to the dot edge of the university. He was picky
but he had a good sense of humor. One day Babbage was at the Analytical Society's room working on
a table of logarithms that was littered with discrepancies. Herschel asked if him what he was
thinking quote he said, I wish to god these calculations had been executed by steam, Babbage
answered. To this idea of mechanical method for tabulating logarithms Herschel replied,
it is quite possible. In 1821 Babbage turned his attention to building just such a machine.
Over the years many had fiddled with making calculations, contraptions. In the 1640s Blaise
Pascal a French mathematician and philosopher created the mechanism, the mechanical calculator
to reduce the drudgery of his father's work as a tax supervisor. It had spoke metal wheels with
a digits zero through nine on their circumference. To add or subtract numbers the operator used a
stylus to dial a number as if using a rotary phone. Then dialed in the next number and armature
then carried or borrowed a one when necessary. It became the first calculator to be patented
and sold commercially. 30 years later Godfrey Libnitz the German mathematician philosopher
tried to improve upon Pascal's contraption with a quote stepped reckoner that had the capacity
to multiply and divide. It had a hand crake cylinder and a set of teeth that meshed with counting
wheels. But Libnitz ran into a problem that would be a recurring theme for the digital age.
Unlike Pascal and a Duat engineer who could combine scientific theories with mechanical genius
Libnitz had engineering skills that did not surround himself with those who did.
So like many great theories who lacked practical collaborators he was unable to produce reliable
working versions of his device. Nevertheless his core concepts known as the Liebnitz wheel
would influence calculator design through the time of Babbage.
Babbage knew of the devices of Pascal and Libnitz and he was trying to do something better than
them that was more complex. He wanted to construct a mechanical method for tabulating logarithmic
signs and cosines and tangents. To do so he adapted an idea from the French mathematician Gaspar
de Pony who had come up in the 1790s. In order to create logarithmic and trigonometric tables
de Pony broke down the operations into very simple steps that involved the only addition
and mess of traction. Then he provided easy instructions so that the scores of human laborers
who knew the little math could perform these simple tasks and pass along their answers to
the next set of laborers. In other words he created an assembly line the great industrial age
innovation that was memorably analyzed by Adam Smith in his description of the division of labor
in the pin making factory. After a trip to Paris in which he heard of de Pony's method Babbage wrote
I conceived all of a sudden the idea of applying this same method
to the immense work with which I had been burdened and to manufacture logarithms as one manufactures
pins. Even complex mathematical tasks Babbage realized could be broken into steps that came
down into calculating quote finite differences.
All right.
Calculating finite differences through simple adding and subtracting. For example in order to make a table
of squares one to the second two to the second three to second four to the second and so on
you could list the initial numbers in such a sequence one four nine sixteen. This would be column
A. Beside it in column B you could figure out the differences between each and the numbers in this
case three five nine seven and nine. Column C would be a list of differences between the column
B numbers which is two two two and two. Once the process was a simplified it could be reversed
and the task parceled out to untutored laborers. One would be in charge of adding two to the last
number of the column B and then the hand that resulted to the other person would then add the
results to the number A thus generating the next number in the sequence of squares. Babbage
divides the way to mechanize the process and he named it the difference engine. It can tabulate
any polynomial function and provide a number a digital method of approximating the solution to
differential equations. How did it work? The difference engine used vertical shafts with disks
that could be turned to any numeral. They were attached to cogs that would be cranked in order
to add that numeral or to subtract from it a disk on an adjacent shaft. The contraption was even
store the interim result on another shaft. The main complexity was how to carry or borrow when
necessary and what to do with pencils when we calculate the same thing we do with pencils
when we do 36 plus 19 or 42 minus 17. Drawing on Pascal's devices Babbage came up with a few
ingenious contrivances and allowed the cogs and shafts to handle the calculation. The machine
wasn't concept of true marvel. Babbage even figured out a way to get it to create a table
of prime numbers up to 10 million. The British government was impressed and at least initially
in 1823 it gave him a seed money of 1,700 pounds and would eventually sink more than 17,000 pounds
twice the cost of a warship into the device during the decade Babbage spent trying to build it.
But the project ran into two problems. First, Babbage had his hired engineer did not quite
have the skills to get the device working. Second, he began dreaming up something even better.
Babbage's new idea which he conceived in 1834 was a general purpose computer that could carry out
the very a variety of different operations based on programmatic instructions given to it.
It could perform one task and it made a switch to the perform another. It could even tell itself
to switch tasks or alter its quote patterns of action as Babbage called it based on its own
interim calculations. Babbage names this proposed machine the quote analytical engine. He was 100
years ahead of his time. The analytical engine was the product of what Ada Lovelace in her essay of
imagination had called quote the combining faculty. Babbage had combined innovations that had cropped
up in other fields to trick many great inventors have done. He had originally used a metal drum
for what had that was studied with spikes to control the shafts and how they would turn.
Then he studied as Ada had the automated loom invented by 1801 by the Frenchman named Joseph
Marie Jacquard which transformed the silk weaving industry. Looms created a pattern by using hooks
to lift selected warp threads and then a rod pushes a wolf thread underneath. Jacquard invented
a method of using cards with hole punches in order to control this process. The holes determine
which hooks and rods would be activated for each pass of the weave thus automating the creation
of intricate patterns. Each time the shuttle that was thrown to create a new pass of the thread a
new punch card was coming to play. On June 30th 1836 Babbage made an entry into what he called
his quote scribbling books that would represent the milestone in his pre in the prehistory of
computers quote suggested Jacquard's loom as a substitute for the drums. Using punch cards rather
than still drums meant that an unlimited number of instructions could be input into the machine.
In addition the sequence of tasks could be unmodified thus making it easier to devise a
general purpose machine that was versatile and reprogrammable. Babbage brought a portrait of
Jacquard and began to display it at the salons. He showed the inventor sitting in an armchair
loom in the background holding a pair of calipers over irregularly punch cards. Babbage amused his
guest by asking him to guess what it was. Most thought it was a superb engraving. He would then
reveal that it was actually a finely woven silk tapestry with 24,000 rows of threads each controlled
by a different punch card. When Prince Albert the husband of Queen Victoria came to one of
Babbage's salons he asked Babbage why he found the tapestry so interesting. Babbage replied
it will greatly assist in explaining the nature of my calculating machine, the analytical engine.
Few people however saw the beauty of Babbage's proposed new machine as the British government
had no inclination to fund it. Try and see my Babbage head could generate little notice in the
either popular press or the scientific journals but he did find one believer, Ada Loveless,
fully appreciated the concept of the general purpose machine. More importantly she envisioned an
attribute that might make it truly amazing if it could potentially process not only numbers
but any symbolic notation including musical and artistic notes. She saw the poetry in such an
idea and she set out to encourage others to see it as well. She barraged Babbage with letters some
of which verged on cheeky even though he was 24 years her senior and once she described her solitary
game using 26 marbles where the goal is to execute jumps so that only one of the marbles remains.
She had mastered it but was trying to derive a quote mathematical formula on which the solution
depends and which she could put her symbolic language to. Then she asked quote I am too
imaginative for you I think not. Her goal was to work with Babbage as his publicist and partner
in trying to get support to build the analytical engine quote I am very anxious to talk to you
she wrote in a early 1841 quote I will give you a hint on what it strikes me that at some
future time my head may be made by you subservient to some of your proposals and plans if so if ever
I could be worthy of capable of being used by you my head will be yours. A year later a tailor
made opportunity presented itself to the young Eda.
