Okay, start. There we go. So we're now recording it. We're in dark mode today
Mostly because it's a total disaster in my room right now. But as you can see, there is a server taking form
It's coming alive
my server and I've actually got another playlist on YouTube called home lab in it
and
It will be
About how to set up your own home lab or how I set up my home lab
and
I don't know how or when I'll be recording that but we're gonna come to them
So the first question that is everybody still talking about so I'm gonna talk about it is
Did you buy all Raspberry Pi's in the world for your rig?
And you can't see it but like right up here on the top there's a 16 by cost me 250 dollars by the way
Yeah, 250 dollars to get an aluminum Raspberry Pi
Hot swappable
to you
rack
shelf and
Yeah, and I'm gonna be putting that there
For that if I know I didn't I actually have 30 or so Raspberry Pi's. I mean I keep finding them everywhere
I need to remind everybody I used to run a company. I founded a company called skill stack in 2013 where I was you know
Mentoring people in person at a school. I lived in a town home above it and the bottom floor was
Just lab in school. You can go to twitter.com slash skill stack SK
I'll
SDAK if you want to see pictures of it from from back in the day and maybe I need to show you that really quick
Because I want to
All right, so to our studio audience who can't you're an audio only I'm going to twitter.com and
I am pulling up some
nostalgic photos from skill stack my
Once popular
Place and this is where I have my curriculum and there's like pictures and all sorts of things and if you go to actually if you
Go to Instagram
You'll see some stuff. The question is about Raspberry Pi and that's what I wanted to show you
So actually Instagram is a little bit more fun
if you go to instagram
comm slash skill stack you'll see
Videos and stuff that I've done and including
So this is the there's my red rack behind me right behind my head
That used to be my really really really really cheap. I mean look at how ugly it is, but you got to understand
I ran my own company. I kept my costs really low
And so I didn't have a proper rack. I do now because I work for a
Big-ass company and I make a really cushy salary. So I've been dropping, you know, like $300 on to you Raspberry Pi
Thanks, but this this is like the thing so all these little green lights out the bottom by the way
Or I have 19 Mac minis that are installed
Which make really really great?
Cloud home lab kind of things. This is me organizing
That was when I had to move skill stack into my apartment to my house that I rented for two years
And then we moved here and so now as you know the ongoing saga. We're going to be moving within a year
To some other location. We don't even know where
To do my wife's MFA and we'll take a Raspberry Pi's with this
But no, we did not buy all the Raspberry Pi's, but this is where the Raspberry Pi's came from. Oh, this is a great
This was a game camp. This was this guy this guy made his own like
amazing thing
We don't know where we're going so this is the game camp this was a summer camp that we had and that was my workstation at the time
But I'm just showing you this we had like lightsaber camp
It kind of stuck hot damn these kids are so young all these kids are in college now
They're all in college now. Oh, I just found the box with lightsabers
Yeah, I found the box of lightsabers
This guy like distro hopped like ten times in like a week amazing student
anyway, so
We don't know. I don't think it's gonna be Wyoming. No, I don't know where
So but this is where the Raspberry Pi's came from so everybody's wondering where they came from
I know I'm not buying them up
They're leftovers. In fact, so where them people like why do you have all this apple?
I mean, there you go. This is what I wanted to show you
This is Raspberry Pi camp
Check that out. Check that crap out
He wrote that from scratch. He did it on himself the entire requirements
Look at this one, man
The requirements for this Raspberry Pi in case you can't see it the requirements for this Raspberry Pi class was just to like
make one of the things was blank and
He just he just kind of kept experimenting and putting wires everywhere and trying everything out
And he didn't make in his own full-blown like microcontroller extension
And I was like, oh my gosh, this is what happens by the way when you give
people
Freedom to be creative in their learning
Yeah, and so that's where the Raspberry Pi's came from so I have about 30
I have a sort of robot. This is the old this is the old apartment where I used to live
Before I got kicked out of that
You give them the freedom and they'll that okay. Here's another here's Sean. This is this was a this was us getting hacked
We we put a cloud server up
We put up a cloud server
This is security camp and we put a cloud server up and this is
The cloud server got hacked within a day during the camp during the week on camp. We said how long will it take somebody to hack us?
right and we were learning like all of these different commands and
his cloud server got hacked his his honeypot got hacked within a day and
And we were sitting there watching all the stuff it was doing and we were doing s trace
This is s trace. This is s trace on the the process that had hacked us
And so we could like see what the with the malware was doing and track it down and stuff. It's really really fun
Anyway, good times
No, he got we wanted to get hacked the people who got hacked first
They was like fishing like we were fishing. So if you got hacked first, you're one of the lucky ones
That means you got a bite. So he got a bot. He got a bite on the first day
And somebody hacked his closet. The whole point was to show how quickly
Unprotected did you see that royal typewriter right there by the way?
Yeah, that real typewriter is was part of I just spilled my coffee on myself
That's why I have a towel right here to protect myself from this kind of like mishap
Because I'm an idiot and it's also really dark. My coffee cup is brown
Hmm, I think I might have to add more vodka to it. I'm sure that was not a contributing factor
Are we still having fun master shells Matt you want in okay, here you come
You're gonna give me crap. I know but I'm used to it
All right, wait, wait, wait, give me a second
Hey Rob, hi, how are you doing? Audio is a little bit messed up. Let me fix the audio here my audio
Problem with my device
Anyway, so yeah, we did a lot of stuff there, but that's where the Raspberry Pi came from and I promise you
Uh, this whole open source contributed some coffee to the salt. No, thank God my map my laptop's closed
Yeah, so it wasn't it was only half full the guy or half empty whichever way you want to look at it
Hmm, and there's my old IP numbers. Anyway
Do I need to add that to the list so I have to answer that right now I
Mean I'm gonna add it to the list. Let's do that. I'll add that one right now answer that for you right now. Yes
Yes, I do
Anybody seen triumph of the nerds
If you haven't seen triumph of the nerds, then you don't understand what a compliment it is to call me a nerd
So go watch it
seriously
Seriously, if you have not watched triumph of the nerds, you need to
All right triumph of the nerds
Videos, I think it's out there for free. There it is
Excuse me 1996 documentary triumph of the nerds
it's like a three-part documentary that goes through the creation of
nerddom and
if you really want to understand the origin of personal computing and the internet there was a
Triumph of the nerds to the car. No, it was like two point two point one
I think and that was how the internet got made and
I think it's Bob cringely is the guy who did it the same guy who famously did the interview with Steve Jobs
Which they found old footage of which resurfaced near the end there
There's two point. Oh, if you want to get a real solid handle on
Technology history the most significant me can read the innovators, which is like a 300 400 page book or you can go
Watch triumph of the nerd. So if you haven't seen it cue it up. It's amazing. It's really fun
It's it's it's from a different time
Interestingly enough the guy who did this the guy who did this actually lived in Steve Jobs neighborhood
He worked for Apple computer when it was in a garage
And then and then it became so much more. So
I'll just tell you about that. So absolutely. I'm a nerd
But the real question is are you a nerd or a geek and if you haven't seen that nerd or a geek back when you could actually watch
When you could watch Rhett and link Rhett and link have completely sold out. They're just grifters now I
Used to really love Rhett and link. This was eight years ago
But if you haven't seen the epic rap battle of nerd versus geek which I cannot show here because we're doing you know a thing on YouTube
Make sure you watch it
If you don't know the difference between a need and a Gurt egg, did I say a neek a
Geek is like we I'm not gonna tell you what they are. You need to watch Rhett and link have this nice fight
It's really it's a really great rap battle. I think you'll really enjoy it
So they are definitely different
But
Like play it like ten times and slow it down and like listen to what they say
Because it it pretty much perfectly captures the difference between a geek and an earth
So that's that what this is a question
What's your favorite tech art anything related to goes logo? I
Really really really do like goes logo
those of you who know René René French
and
is is Rob Pike's wife and
The gopher is was designed by René French
Who has done many other things as well?
And
You could go you can go look at them
And and see about them
We can look at some of the different images here. So here is all of the thing
I really like I mean is is in fact René friend having been involved with artists a lot gone to a lot of art galleries
You can watch it in my rl streams on twitch some of which have been saved. I spoke coffee on myself as well. Well
My wife my René French actually reminds me of my wife a little bit. She's got that whole art look going on and
She's like really talented and you know, she's
She wearing Rob Pike's glasses there that looks like
It looks like she's wearing Rob Pike's glasses right there
That's her favorite glasses issue. It's like they're wearing the same glasses or something Rob Pike would usually wear glasses like that
So Rob Pike you made Go Lang
One of the primary contributors to go Lang is made this this is like one of the very firsts to go Lang
I absolutely love love love the artwork behind go Lang. It's probably one of my favorite
The I mean as opposed to for example, like the logo for Java, which you know was never any good
Where's the little guy? There he is
Duke the Duke logo, you know, I'm just not impressed. It was fine. It was okay. It was the 1990s
In terms of art and tech I do think they go well together. I
Actually made the logo for Tomel
I made it. I created it. I committed it. This is my logo
True story you can actually go look at the commit if you go look at the commit on the GitHub, you'll see that I made it
It was actually a joke
It was kind of a joke I made a pull request I
Made it seriously. I made her pull request
You want to see it? You want it? This is my like my one of my few claims to fame
I had to put it in a question for him in my stats of the ways
Yeah
Did you make the Tomel logo and the answer is yes, I did it's a very small claim to fame
But if you go to github.com slash Tomel
I also got Tom to kind of like pick up the pace
I was kind of on him because I was making a thing called file system as a database
which I still want to do with YAML this time and
I
Actually made Tomel Tomel spec
To oopsie to try to get people to look it up again. It's not there anymore. Damn it. I wonder if it's on github at all
It's a long time ago
This is it's interesting because I had no idea about anything on Rust and I actually burnt sushi for example one of the
The the pran the moderator and also one of the primary contributors to a lot of the Tomel parsing
He wrote Burt's issue made one of the part when they want it made the Tomel parser. That's really popular for us
He also resigned very very publicly and famously
From the Rust project over quote and I quote you can go read the PR
Hypocrisy among the Rust leadership
You can go read it if you want to read the whole drama and so actually funny because I kind of you know
Rub shoulders them a little bit while I was doing some of the Tomel parsing actually helped Tom Paletier
Do some of the that the Tomel parser with some of the test code for Tom for for
There's been super Susie's Tomel and again back then
I was thinking that Tomel was the one true way to create a file system as a database
We just have a directory and you put a Tomel file in there
Recursively and you end up with kind of a flat file database that's structured. I still want to do something with that with yaml cherry and I
Remember Ramirez. I forget her his or her name their name in the chat. We were talking about that the other day
And something I'd still like to go but some polities
Plenty is actually Tom Palletier is like one of the coolest people I have ever worked with an open source
and
because
Tom actually it's like, you know what I've always wanted to write a parser
I'm gonna write one and I'm gonna write it for Tomel and I think it's the I think it's better than Burt's issues
But whatever
And so actually evaluated it and this actually got me into writing my own parsers
So there's a lot of parsers out there. There's a lot of people who like obsess about this kind of stuff
So you can go out there and work with them. I do have some commits on here somewhere
Maybe my contributions are not that big big enough to site. I mean, I actually made a separate
Thing for the test code so it might be a separate repo that I did and I can't remember where it is
Anyway, but yeah, let me show you that actual official commit to them
to the Tomel project
Tomel laying the Tomel. Yeah, there it is
There it is there's my one commit to the Tomel project and
You can actually find it if you try to go I can't even remember where
Bob T logo, I mean, how would I put this I go through issues or code for requests
I'm just showing off at this point. What kind of show is this?
but
I'm super proud of it. So there so let's go search for logo
Alt Tomel logo change log Tomel has a logo. There we go
What changes that was this one oh
That wasn't me no, where is it Tomel has a logo. Oh, they put it in the change log
Yeah, Tom Tom approved my pull request that that was the that was the thing I wanted to show you actually prove my
My poor cause I was like super happy Tom made get him by the way like made it
He also made gravator
So he's a big deal over in Silicon Valley. He's also does his own thing these days
You can read all of his there's some recent drama with somebody who worked with him on Twitter
but whatever and
Regiment js. Yeah, he's been a lot stuff. He's he's he's great
and
You know see all results I get a
No, I where's my local commit. I'm gonna have to I want to find it. I hope they didn't delete it
That was like that's like my
My one small thing
I don't even think I'm gonna register as a contributor because I was like my only contribution to the whole project ever and it was kind of a joke
Seriously, it was a joke. I was like here. Okay. I'm gonna have to find it because it's a fun joke
Is it logos?
Yeah, is it? All right. Let me go find it. I
Don't know if that's gonna know damn it. Of course. I have to do like Maine or whatever
I
Help me help me Obi-Wan Kenobi logos. Okay. This is yeah
sink get attributes for Tom all Tom on PNG six years ago
What?
Uh history let's go look at the history added logos. Yay me
I'm in a contribution
Seriously, you know the feeling the first time you get one of your I don't care how sick I mean, you know
Chris know this committing to the Linux kernel and I'm like making logos for Tom
Same things. I mean in terms of like sick, you know, happiness, you know, so I like yeah, I did this added logo files
Seriously, it was like it was like 1 a.m. Some night and I was like, you know what?
Obviously everything is like everything is just a square bracket
So let's just do this and then the PR is something. Where's the PR history?
Where is this actually say the does it actually say it? Where's the PR?
I don't I don't know get as well as I should I kind of do but not as well as I should
I'm trying to look for the commit history because it said it said, you know, I won't care if you don't commit it
It's just kind of fun
Yeah, I don't I don't see like it's my comic got squashed or something. I
Oh, I don't I don't I don't see it anymore. Let me see. Where's it? You know the feeling?
Yeah
Yeah, well
So whatever, I mean Mike I did make a the PR wait pull request. Maybe it's in there. Oh, maybe it's in here
It's close. It's it's close
It's closed or an extra on
Damn Rob
Damn
There's no record how far back to have to go
Can have equals lost of I know I do feel lost. I mean how far back to have to go can I can I can I do a search?
Logo oh
There it is took a shot at logos. Yeah, my feelings won't be hurt if rejected figured what the hell
That was so much fun
I seriously it was like, you know, it was late at night. I'm like, what the hell? Let's just try this
So because I was trying to get it to pick up steam. I actually created tumble dash spec
Which I think didn't get picked up. I mean, but anyway, I really like it because now they use it for everything
It's like all over now. You can go on the internet and search for tumble logos and I made it
It's like my logo everywhere
So there are rust people
Every time a rust comes out and the rest people come out to me like yelling me. Okay, but but but I made the Tomo logo
Because you know rust uses Tomo. I mean rust can the rust contributors are like Bert Zushi in the gang
I mean, they were like fundamental to the creation of Tomo and making sure it became cool and all
There's many other cooler logos than mine, but it was just a shot at it. Look. Oh my god. It's even on Wikipedia
My logo is on Wikipedia. I
Can't stop. I just can't stop
This is saying anything about the logo who made a logo
To verbose that's true. That's why I don't use it. I use YAML these days
It doesn't say anything about the history of the logo. I should like make a Wikipedia edit
Where did the logo come from?
Rob was bored on one random night. I know I should like edit it and add it. I should say I made the Tomo logo
So, I mean, it's a small thing
But it's the small thing. I should I do it right right now. I have to don't have the login or something
Where should I put it? Where should I put it if I'm gonna do this?
Shit, I'm scared. You're scaring me
I need to put like
Criticism, it's like just criticism. Holy cow. Why don't we have history and then it's like the logo
I'm kind of nervous because I don't do Wikipedia ever
Example criticism see also external links at it
I'm used to I I set up a Wikipedia
Site for IBM when I was on my team there and now I feel like I don't know what I'm doing
So it's probably not the thing to do during our Q&A session, but I don't have to come back
I'll have to come back and add it. I tell it
I'll put it I'll report a request to that to the community if there's anybody in the community
Who actually knows how to do Wikipedia edits and has an account and has done so like reliably go go go add that
I made the logo
Put that on my tombstone made the Tomo logo
When I die
My greatest accomplishment
Your email or something, you know, okay, not now, but maybe maybe someday
I do need however to bookmark this. I put that in my little cast then. Yeah
Zett create
just a reminder I
Create the Tomo logo. How do we get in this? I don't remember how we got we got an art. We got an art. That was it. Yeah, I
I
Did I made all the skill stack art?
I made the van art
oops wrong thing and
Stuff
So I actually love graphic design. I
Don't spend nearly enough time doing it. I made like the can logo and some stuff
I really really love graphic design. I particularly grab, you know, like icons and stuff like that
That's something I really enjoy doing. I think it's a drafter in me
I used to do a lot of drafting and map making for Dungeons and Dragons and stuff like that
Do we have any other Dungeons and Dragons fans out there former players of Dungeons and Dragons or current?
Because that really got me into that type of art
So so yeah, I
Was going to show you that the Instagram of that. I mean, I'm still this is still a question
Oh, here's my wife's plate page. So I am married to Nicholas. I'm gonna say Nicholas to Doris Kappner
Who is in the other room and insisted I have coffee with her today?
Uh, oh boy movies get off that real quick. Um
She is doing sculpture. She's obsessed with sculpture lately
Uh, but yeah, and so being married to her is kind of nice because she's just she's not really interested in digital art
Uh, and I kind of am I kind of obsessed with I've built
Uh, you're talking about art, right? So I built ed tech retreat
Uh, I get to brag about this. I guess
Uh, I I in second life I built the entire thing
Um, this I made this logo from scratch from scratch including the shading everything
I was super proud of it. I made t-shirts with that logo on it
I made a 3d rendition of the thing that like rotated over my head and blah blah blah
I mean, this was a long time
so
I mean, this was really a long time ago. This is before my divorce
Etc. We had dance parties. God, we had fun. We had so much fun
And there's actually images of ed tech retreat
Uh, so this that here this is the um
architect rendering of the thing I eventually built in full
Um, anyway, so there's like a flicker
Feed on this. I mean you were asking about logos and art and stuff
So that's kind of what triggered this
Uh, there's no flicker feed for a tech retreat. That's so sad
I feel bad
I feel bad that all of our pictures are not there anymore
I think there's like a twitter feed for that too
Ed tech retreat
Uh, that was an amazing creative endeavor. I really really like to oh we already hear
Is it instagram? Maybe it's instagram
Is it instagram?
Instagram might have more things
Okay, remember, I don't think there was an instagram back then
We go we click we click on things and go to the different
Amy I haven't seen her forever
Uh, yeah all these amazing people that were educators
And I got into education
through
Through this through twitter actually, uh, I wanted to get into education. I wanted to do more than just, you know work
and couldn't find it but uh
Ed tech retreat mohacks. This is my avatar
Custom had all reggae goes design nice
Uh, jump ushaw jump ushaw. We actually paid this guy $3,200 to architect our island for us, and then I built it
um
but yeah
I mean and that but you were talking about art. That's so I think that's where it came up
Uh, I'm trying to I'm trying to find my
Images, but I I think they're probably gone at this point. It's been so long ago
Uh, yeah, nothing nothing here
Nothing here, man. That's kind of crazy
It's kind of crazy because there was so much stuff on there. We had like
Lots of content, but it looks like it's all gone now. Anyway question
What was the question question was
Uh, what's your favorite favorite tech art anything related to goes little so I
Yeah, I mean, that's that's my favorite. Um
You know, I worked for Nike for a while and we did we did tech art there as well
But nothing like that
Tom a logo is the one this is my silly one that I made then I did a lot of art in second life in the 3d worlds
Um, all right. So next question
Uh, what is the cheapest homelab server I can buy so I actually
Seated this question
And because I've been getting this question a lot because I built a homelab server and I'm you know putting all my old hardware on there
But we found the the hp z
Uh, 640 and 600 series
to be by far
Uh, the most affordable after a day of research
So, uh, I actually bought this server
And it's renewed. This is a different one. This is not the same one. This is only eight core
But you can get them
For all kinds you can get them
Uh, there's a 32 gigabyte memory. That's a smaller one
Um, but yeah, I mean you can like stack them, right? So I actually have one
Um, let me see if I can find it hp
Yeah, here it is
Uh, this is the actual one. Okay, and yes, the docs is my location. That's fine
Um, so this okay, so
Let me I have to tell you something about this. Okay. So this price tag
2250 $2,252
Includes
Uh, and this is something I didn't notice at first. It includes
um
2 by
This is the part I missed when I was looking at the specification
You see the 2 by it says 2 by z on 14 core processors. This system I have for $2,300
has
28 cores
That can be doubled
28 dual cores. So so it has a total
Of 56 possible cpu's when you're allocating virtual machines
And it has 120 28 gigabytes
Uh, which could be upgraded um ecc memory
And 512 gigabyte solid state drive for $2,300 and I defy you to find anything that's cheaper than this
So far it's been running really solidly. I have it over here running
Uh, and I'll keep reporting on it, but this by far is the cheapest I was able to find
Uh online. I I don't have any recommendations for any, uh, crypto of any kind. I don't do that stuff
um, but
but in terms of like
Home lab and like instantly being able to make your own Kubernetes clusters or putting if you're going to do proxmox
Just put it on here. Don't put it on anything above 14 nodes or your cluster will collapse like mine did
And we'll get to that. Um, so this is a fantastic
Uh way to go
If if you want to do that, this is by far the cheapest thing I've ever found
Uh
Another there's another question. Why do you prefer linux as a subsystem within windows?
uh
I prefer
Linux as a subsystem within windows because and I've answered this lots and lots of times
But I will just give you the short answer
because
I stream
game
And I use windows at work
Because they don't allow you to lose linux on your desktop at work and 99 of the places you're going to work
You can't use linux on your desktop
So that's the main reason
Selfishly the main reason that I use windows for streaming and everything
Is because the streaming tools and obs are over the top better than anything on linux
Uh, you can't do it on linux. I did it for a year
Uh, but it sucks
And anybody who tells you differently is lying to you. They're told I can objectively rip down any argument that says
That linux streaming is just as good as windows streaming. It absolutely is not
Absolutely is not. Let's mention if you're going to do gaming
Right and I know linux gaming has come a long way, but it is nowhere near windows gaming not even close
So I do windows gaming and I haven't had a hiccup. I actually my windows machine
Uh
Goes stays running these days up to a month
Uh, I don't have to reboot it for anything even if it has system things that says hey, you should probably reboot
I'm like fine. I'm gonna wait
And then so what I do is I run a virtual machine that's got a gigabyte surround and two or three cores
Uh on side inside of my windows machine and then I ssh into it just like I would do if it were over there
And in my new home lab
Uh, I'm going to start doing that even more. In fact, they have the same name
I have anton as the name is kind of a you know
A nod to silicon valley
And and I'm going to be sshing into anton, which is now living over here
And we'll be on a ups and can run 24 seven blah blah blah blah
And then I don't have to depend on a vm for anything, but it but it's kind of a stage, right?
So, uh, if you don't have that if you don't have a server yet, then
Um, you you might want to consider a virtual machine that's running a one-two server specifically
Way better than red hat across the board for reasons. I'll talk about in a bit and
um
And and then I I just use windows for everything else
And then my my work computer officially is a mac
And I also have a mac so this whole bigotry about what computer you use
You just need to get over it on my opinion because
I mean mac hardware is top of the line
and
I mean and I actually might these mac minis are rock solid
I have been running these mac minis in my cluster for
Over three years and they are silent. They don't put out any heat
They just are really really good hardware and they have just really great design
So they're fantastic for for running linux
Unfortunately red hat doesn't agree that linux the red hat linux should be run on a mac and so they decided to not support it
Which is one of the reasons that I abandoned red hat and open shift
um, and and I'm going to actually talk about that now
so
So in a nutshell I've been complaining about this a lot recently and I'm just going to go out and just going to say it
um
and
By the way, if you get a chance to run linux on your desktop like I did at ibm for 12 years
Go for it. It's a really great way
I ran fedora on my desktop because I supported red hat at ibm
For 10 or 15 years and I wrote
rpm packages to install software. I know red hat inside and out
I owned stock in red hat in 2002
And sold it by the way after they did the whole fedora crap. So let me tell you a story
I know you like it when I tell stories. So I'm going to tell you a story. How much time do I have?
Uh, stories are easier for me to make my point. Okay, so way back when there was a company called
Uh red hat. All right, so I think that red hat started when did they start anybody know?
So red hat
started
When I want to say it was something like 99 98
um
Uh for more headquarters
Uh, let's see opening
American Subs today founded in 1993. Wow, really. Okay. That makes sense
Yeah, because 93 94 that was when yeah, no, that's that sounds about right
It sounds about right because that was when 94 wasn't when I got into the Linux really good. Actually. No, god. It was before that
No, they must have been
They must have it. No, they just weren't popular yet
Okay, so here's the story
So, you know travel in time with me back to the 1990s when Linux became a thing a big thing
In fact, right before that unix was a big thing. Everybody was into
Indigo colored, you know, 80s colored work stations that were nice and pretty
And it was all about the work station. In fact, that led to
Steve Jobs making next step, which was a work station
It was all about work stations all about 3d as when Pixar was created and we would move past the pc
We moved past pcs
You know the max and the ibms and all that the people used to get worked on and accounting stuff and all that
And we kind of moved into this new age of like work stations work stations were the cool thing
These were these like 10 000 systems that sat on your desktop for doing 3d modeling and and drafting
And you know, whatever. I mean like really amazing stuff right and that was also the dawn of the worldwide web
So we started to see these things doubling as web servers and blah, blah, blah
so you go back to that time and
Unix was proprietary. There was a unix provider called Solaris
Which was founded in stanford for free by the way, according to the stanford university policy
Which says you can start up very interesting story
If you want to see thank you for this something if you want to see the full story of Solaris
I cannot recommend more. It's very boring, but recommend more triumph of the nerds 2.01
Which goes through the creation of the internet and it talks about macabre, you know, the uh, what's his face?
Uh, who started some microsystems and then you know, uh, he was I mean, it's it's there's a lot there to talk about
Either creation of ethernet and all of that
So anyway, Solaris and sun microsystem who by the way, if you happen to recognize the name later invented java
Uh, and then marketed it for 500 000 dollars the largest marketing budget of any language ever in history
um
Became a thing so the ellison it wasn't ellison. That was oracle
Yeah, it was a completely different thing happening. It was very very proprietary
No, Larry Ellison made oracle
No, I'm I'm thinking of macafe the guys started three come
Oh god, let me get his name
uh
Who started he was part of the
Uh, he was part of the original uh, palo alto crew at his iranx and then he's he forked off his own thing
um
And it's it's like escaping me
Robert Metcalfe, that's it. It's not macafe. That's this that's the software guy. That's the security guy. It's Metcalf
Robert Metcalfe 1979
um
so
uh, okay, so
anyway
um
In this atmosphere of like
You know, we need to the AT&T unix was 3000 dollars a seat
And so there was lots of stuff coming up. Berkeley made bsd. Berkeley, you know that at Berkeley. They made it
Uh, there was lots of people experimenting at torwald's across the the world was experimenting with making
Uh a replacement for minix, which was was college professor's colonel
And that then he came up with linux, but they didn't have any way to talk to anybody else because there was no internet yet
Yeah
I think the stream dropped
But it could be my internet
Oh, I hope I hope not and please confirm for anybody else that the stream is dropped. I I still see
I see a a red bit rate
Says he went offline
Uh, but i'm not offline. It says i'm still streaming
Going up and now you're back to zero viewers
Yeah, what's up with that?
It dropped 30 seconds. It's back
That is really weird
Um, is it back?
I mean, uh, yeah, it's back now. It is back now. Okay. Well, thankfully that'll still be on the youtube
Mostly just me talking, but thank you
Uh, you dropped for me
Yeah, I don't know what dropped. I can't begin to
Guess maybe it's my server. I don't know. We'll see probably not, but
Everybody back. Okay. So so anyway, let me finish the story. So, uh, at the time
You know, people were thinking about different versions of unix and everything
and
So there was slack where there were lots of options
And one of the biggest ones early on the alternative the unix was solaris, which is proprietary
But it was still kind of freeform and everybody loved it because they had a better attitude
And but they were still proprietary and at the same time
Linux kind of became a thing because it's like no, we really want something that's free
and it was actually, uh, the guy who taught me about unix
Who I said, man, I wish I had this at home and he turned he goes well
He can always run linux and so I started running linux at home
and
um
And at the time there weren't that many options that I had a power pc mac because I was doing web design and thing
And so I I ended up doing mock linux
Later I would get a p2 opinion and I would end up running
Slackware for a while and then I would try mandrake linux, which is susie
And eventually I would use red hat and red hat came out when red hat came out on the scene
It was a big deal
Red hat was a huge deal and it was probably the most important free, uh distribution on the planet
Now fast they promised, you know, that they were going to support everything and and everything in it
And that was really great. Everybody was really behind it
Uh, and then 2002 or something came around and they decided to make fedora and they said look we're going to make
Uh red hat proprietary in other words, we're going to sell it for the to the enterprise
Uh, and we're not going to release red hat
for use by the the community, but
We're going to make this thing called fedora so people can volunteer their time and effort
And build up fedora and we can steal all of their innovation put it into our product and sell it
Because that's what they did and at the time there was a major major
like
Backlash against red hat
I mean, it was a serious backlash anybody that's that old might remember it
Um, but they were a disaster. I mean, they were a disaster of a company making horrible decisions
Moving into I mean not horrible decisions
Maybe decisions that were in their best interests that we're going to make them a lot of money, which it did
And they became the standard distribution for enterprise
And everybody else was like man, we want to do that too
So that was pretty much the first open core company
That's a term coined by git lab, which means their product is open source
But they make money on it on the side by all their
Proprietary add-ons and if you really want to get into this go watch dalman talk about all the little proprietary crap that they
Inject into linux in order to stick their hooks into enterprise and make them pay big subscription rates and stuff
So and that you might be fine with that, you know, you might be fine with that
But that is not the linux way
It is not the fos and open source way and there was a massive backlash against it
But nobody cared because red hat was making gobs and gobs of money because it was bringing linux into the enterprise and to this day
red hat is still so
deeply deeply embedded in the enterprise that ibm bought them for 30 something billion
And now consider changing their name for a moment. Apparently that's that's the rumor to red hat because it was so significant
So now ibm, you know, who brags every year about how many software patents it has
And keeps back engineers from becoming distinguished engineers unless they don't get a patent
Who lied to me in the 1999 with the peace love and linux campaign or to get me in the door and then turns out
It's all a bunch of bullshit
That company is the company that now owns and operates red hat
And if you think for a second that red hat is ever going to do anything in the best interests of the overall linux community
You'd be mistaken as a company individual engineers at red hat will
There's many many individual engineers and they support open source and they're doing amazing things
uh
The most controversial linux commit that ever happened in my history is system d
The guy who invented it invented it at red hat for the sake of enterprise because enterprise had a specific need
And they said that they had a specific need and they made it and they pushed it in and they got it in all of enterprise
And now it's in a bun tune. It's in everything else. It's highly controversial. I'm actually still okay with it
Slightly the guy that made it by the way. I guess where he went he quit from red hat and he went he works for microsoft now
Which if I if you know anything about the history of linux
The idea that the lead engineer the person who got death threats for creating system d is now working for microsoft
I mean, it's all I have to say about that and you just know what i'm talking about now microsoft ironically has moved forward
And they are more pro linux than I think sometimes even red hat is
I mean, you know, they're doing they're still very proprietary
But the the point is is that all of these companies that said that
Balmers words exactly that linux is a viral operating system and any company is crazy to install it
Are all like changing their tune and saying oh linux is awesome. We're going to do it
Uh, do you think non non system d distros are a big deal? I don't know
Uh, I don't know. I I don't think you can get away without system d reasonably
There's no motivation behind it if you're going to do that you might as well just go bsd
And there's a lot of software that there's a lot of like, you know routers and stuff that use it still so
Uh, nobody knows the system d a system d replace it replace the init system that it's kind of
And there's many advantages of it and disadvantages the advantages are you have this monolithic startup system
That's not really unixy
Um, but it has you know state so it can keep track of things better
Uh, it can be more secure and but it you know at the cost of being this big monolith that has to be deployed
It has all control to the whole system. It's a very very controversial thing
That controversy has largely passed though and it's now the standard in all enterprise linux distros
Uh, so uh, but bsd unix which is still the primary distro used in router software
And stuff like that does not use it
Uh, and it still uses the traditional init system. So you have to go do your own research on that. Um,
I
I don't really don't have an opinion on that. I do think
That we kind of have to make some, you know con concessions. I mean cononical and shuttleworth taught us that
That the linux world has to make concessions with the enterprise community if we're going to move linux forward
So it's kind of a delicate dance. You have to you know make in order to to to walk that middle line
But red hat is clearly not and this is this is the tipping point for me. Okay
And I know the question was about open shift and I'll get to that
But the question the the question is about, you know, red hat and open shift
So this weekend and I wrote about this so might as well if you want to go read about it this weekend. I I installed
Red hat on my mac mini, okay
And I was like, okay
I installed rocky linux and uh, which is you know red hat and I went through all the problems
It's got a horrible graphic installer. I mean, it's disastrously bad compared to a bunch of server
A bunch of server install is so stinking slick. I just don't have words for how good it is
And I have been using that my whole life. I mean recently and so then I go
So then I try to do red hat and red hat just falls on its face
It can't do certain things. It doesn't have this other thing. It doesn't have this other thing and
Uh, no, I installed rocky linux not red has enterprise linux. Do they have a different installer?
If they have it if there's a different installer
With then I will have to eat my hat
And go do red hat enterprise linux installer instead of rocky linux installer. Either way
Uh, the issue that I hit after that
Uh, still applies. So
We hit an issue and I actually wrote about this in my zettelcast and you go read it
where
Um, I found a forum on red hat that said
Do all of these things if you want to get your mac mini to work
With red hat with red hat networking stuff and it was, you know, totally doable
It was just quite a bit of stuff and I have like 19 of these things that I have to set up
And I was going to have to go through all of these individual steps for all of them
And you know red hat tries to have a smart install
But it really sucks compared to cloud in it and stuff like it in in canonical and you know in in ubuntu
It's not even the same. In fact ubuntu could be cited as the the standard for
cloud-based, you know
operating system initialization cloud in it is by far the industry standard for that and
So anyway, so red has got this other answer and in the forum thread
Somebody says well, this is on a mac and the the the person officially representing red hat
Basically threw him under the bus and said
Oh, well, that's mac hardware. We don't we don't ever test on anything on mac
And and the reason that that offends a guy like me who was alive and owned red hat stock in 2000
2001
And eventually sold it when they did the whole fedora thing is because back then
Red hat promised the world that they were just as much a member of the overall linux community as everybody else
That they were going to maintain that love and support for linux on all hardware, you know
And that we were going to continue with the mission of empowering old hardware with new linux distro installations and
Recycling, you know old computers, which is all I mean that this is the core values
Of linux if you're in the linux community, those are our core values
That we we have choice we get to say what we want to do we can we can make it so that it runs on any hardware
And to be fair red hat still does run it just takes all this extra work
And so for red hat official people to say we really don't care about you if you're running on mac
Is basically just them confirming what everybody has known all along would end up happening in 2022
The only thing they care about is enterprise period. It's in the name red hat enterprise linux
There's no such thing as anything but enterprise them because people don't run mac minis in the enterprise because that would be silly
There's actually a lot of people who do
They're fantastic home lab machines, by the way, they're much more powerful than a raspberry pi
They have better hardware and they're cheaper than a lot of mainframe, you know other big systems
And if you're not going to do virtualization and you want an actual hardware instance, they're actually pretty good for that
So, you know as long as they have intel chips in them and they have one thing is a whole different question
We don't even go there
So but you know, there's no plan for them to support it
But but the the arrogance of them to just say oh, we don't care about mac people
That just really upset me and frankly
You know, if I am an enterprise cto, I'm not going to care about that either
I'm like, no, I'm really happy that you're spending all of your money and time and energy
Supporting my hardware. Why would you even dream of wasting your energy?
You know making sure to test your distribution on any mac hardware at all. That's a waste of your time
And if I'm an enterprise cto, I agree with that
But I'm not an enterprise cto. I'm a guy running a home lab
and I'm I'm
Taking all of the hardware that I have and there is a company that has values that are consistent with that
And that's canonical. You can you can throw them under the bus all you want, but the name ubuntu means what does it mean?
What does ubuntu mean?
And if I don't we're in short ubuntu has a few meanings when used as a
As a naguni bantu term ubuntu means humanity. However, it is sometimes translated as I am because we are
So the diagram of ubuntu is, you know, the logo is like all these arms and arm and arm
And you know canonical has done some weird things. They are a company as well, but the company values have never changed
I mean, they're just as relevant in the enterprise microkates and all the stuff that they're doing
Uh, and and they're doing, you know, like really really amazing things
And so they're you know, I haven't seen about red hat red has become the apple of linux
red hat really has become the apple of linux
They
They want to say that they're doing free stuff. They really don't care
They're just catering to the enterprise and they just need to come clean and own it
Um, and then everybody else can make that decision if you want to be relevant in the enterprise
But I tell you what there's a lot of enterprises that are picking that are avoiding red hat
And so the reason and I actually don't like open shift for all the same reasons red hat and open shift
Have done everything in their power to lock you in
to their product
and um
so
No, it's not like 10. No, I don't know. So the um
So the the problem the problem we have
Is that we have an enterprise operating like an enterprise
with
all of its priorities which are to lock you in and create systems that you depend on completely
And they've very openly but they've been very open about doing that and they
They're trying to do that and for I don't want that
I don't want that a bottom line. I I want open standards and red hat can tell you all they want about open standards
But as long as they control the standard
And and they have been doing that. I mean and they've done some good things. I mean bilda was great
It took red hat to kind of go at it proprietary wise with docker. Docker was also one of these companies
I want to lock you in they just proved it by forcing everybody to pay for their enterprise product
Docker desktop
So they've always been a company and they haven't really given a crap about free and open source software at all
At the end of the day, they're a company and they need to make money
And there's people there's people in the company who like to believe that they
Have the the needs of the open source community at heart
But then when they force everybody who's already got
desktop linux on their enterprise systems to pay money because it's a big
You know behemoth enterprises got the money
Then you see their true colors show and they there's nothing wrong with them making money
They're actually legally bound to make money. That's part of what being an s-corp or a c-corp is
But
They just need to own that they are no longer free and open source. They really don't care
They care about making money and so
I know i'm going kind of off the off the edge here, but
People know that i've been kind of in the middle of the road when it comes to like
corporate enterprisey conservative kind of you know, you know values and ethos and you know
Really really off the deep end fsf kind of like if you're not using gpl v3, you're the devil and should be cancelled
You know, and i'm kind of in the middle there
But this whole experience with my lab has kind of shifted me back towards the fsf side
Not quite i'm more like torval torval's is kind of dead center in the middle of it
Uh, you know, he understands the needs of corporations and thinks you gpl v3 is the devil and I agree, but but
You know, he would not go so far as to say
Everybody should put red hat on all their computers
You know, he stays out of that fight completely mostly by focusing on the kernel architectures and stuff
So that's a pretty long rant, but I I feel like I owe it to everybody
Let's see if we can change the tone up a little bit though
Uh, the open nature of linux and proliferation of distros saves us a lot. I I agree
And you know and and somebody let me let me show you another symptom of this, okay
So somebody said to me today, uh lbg, I think it was, you know, who's fond of reminding me of stuff that I forget
Which is always good
They said, well, we would be nowhere in the container space
Uh, if it weren't for red hat
And and and lbg told me about this site github.com slash containers
Do you see any indication on this site that this site is red hat the company?
There's none
You have to like dig. There's no official statement that this that this website is from red hat
Why doesn't red hat put red hat in their github container and their github name?
Because they know
That's what I think I think it's because they know they know if they were to put github.com slash red hat and nobody would open it
And so yeah, I have a look at nix's pretty cool
So so no so they they went to github.com containers. There is no way for you to know
And and let's see you and they started as soon as you start looking at the technology list
You're like realizing hmm pod man. Oh build a scopio. What the hell? This is red hat
Right
And then you start to realize and then you start to look at the names here
You get there's a guy with a red hat. Just hope he was awesome
I mean look as I said the people at red hat are awesome the company
Right so just said he's really awesome software engineer at red hat
You know and the rest of them they're not going to tell you where they work
I mean, you know who they were if you know you know names so you can look at them
So so this this is a good. This is a good example of red hat
Trying to hide the fact that they're red hat because they don't want to be associated with all the things red hat has become associated with
And and that includes filming their nose at
Anything that they don't like or any any of the the other part of the linux distribution
They the red hat is one of the worst linux citizens. They are the apple of linux
They and as far as I'm concerned. I don't want anything to do with red hat ever again
Uh in terms of a distribution and as a company I I will still use their their
Contributions because I have to
I can't avoid them
Because I don't you know, I don't have a say they don't care what I say
They you know so build a pod man and things and they'll continue to make stuff that
You know is used out there and I still think that there's stuff that you just like apple. I use apple products, right?
But I hate apple
I know I it's hard not being a hypocrite. I mean, how are you going to get work done if you don't use it?
So it's like, you know, it doesn't mean I have to like it, right?
so um
Anyway, uh speaking of things I I come to not like recently. I know this is a very ranty night
Today, but I I I feel like I I mean I wasted a lot of time this weekend on stuff that I wish I hadn't
Uh, and I wish I had thought through a little bit better
Uh, so open shift is as everybody knows is kubernetes
Is red hats variation on kubernetes?
Uh, it has some very good things in it. It it it to be completely honest though
The biggest difference between red hat and canonical is red hat over engineers everything
And they're brilliant the red hand engineers are brilliant and they over engineer shit and they don't make it usable
It's it's one of their regular problems and canonical
Is really really good at simplifying and thinking about usability
But they sometimes lack the engineering expertise that red hat has and what would be really great is that we could get the middle of that
You know, I just wish that they had done that they had done that I wish and and canonical's got great engineers
I'm gonna be wrong but but the the reason that I want to promote canonical and ebuntu is because
Their products have always been
You I mean to a fault. I mean snap comes to mind, right? Uh, have always been
Like focused on usability above everything else
Uh, if they over it I I happen to think that over engineering is a sign of a somebody you don't want to work with
but that's
There's there are people there are people there are engineers in this world
And you know if you've been around for any amount of time there are engineers in this world
Who think that the most over engineered complex solution is the best one because only smart people understand it
And I cannot overstate
How stupid that is and how that person those type of engineers should be weeded out and fired immediately
The it is so complicated that the most brilliant people are the ones you can take a highly complex system
And turn it into something that can be some simplicity
Uh, uh lock ins are depressing
My my we have a comment here. My actual and first job is pushing me towards learning open shift on top of already existing
I've been products the lock ins are depressing. They are they're depressing and so look
I had a choice in my home lab and in my personal life
Uh to say look, I I do not need or want to learn red hat
And and I don't want to stay current. I mean the argument for me to put it on there was hey
I'm going to stay current. I'll be able to get a good job. I get my r.h.c. You know
I'll be good to go if I want to be an infrastructure engineer
And if you if you want to be an infrastructure engineer today
I'm very sad to report that you cannot be one if you don't know red hat
You have to know it
But there is a certain percentage of jobs out there that people are hiring
Hiring either container-based or dev ops or cloud native and there are some
Big shops. I imagine I haven't seen any that actually use a bunch of server and I have a choice
And my choice is to prepare for those jobs
Even if that job is way way way harder for me to find and this goes for rusted go and I don't I just to compare it
I you know, I had I once advised somebody who ended up getting a job in influx db doing go programming
Get well some new rust
Uh, I I told him point blank. I said, you know
It you go for it. Go for it. Go. I you guys won't believe this about me
But I actually encourage this guy to go find a rust job. I said, look, you you know, it's gonna you're gonna have to sacrifice
You might have to move to germany. There's lots of like rust jobs in germany
um
But you know if if that's your real passion then you're gonna have to make a sacrifice and find a company that has it
And he came in one day on his own to me without me saying anything
He says I'm starting to think that I should learn go
So I can get the job and then I can just have rust and do that on the side until it gets big
And he got six how he got the job. That's exactly how he got the job
Because in all of influx db isn't go except for flux the flux language, which is in rust
They ended up getting a job working on that
The point is that
You don't have to pick
Uh, the mainstream stuff esxi. I mean
You know, you don't have to pick those things
Uh, I'm gotten older
So I my picks are largely in line and training you as largely in line with what's going to get you an immediate job
But sometimes especially like right now
You know, you have the choice to say
You know, I don't need to give in on that for example
If I want to use Linux on the desktop if you want to lose Linux on the desktop and you don't want to work anywhere
That doesn't let you do that
You can filter out 80 of the companies out there and you can say look
I don't want to work for any company that is too stupid to not let me use Linux on my desktop
And I used to I used to joke with my old manager. He's gone now. He left you retired
But I used to joke with him after he hired me
I was like, you know, if I had asked that one question
I would never have taken this job because they forced me to use a macro windows
And I after being using Linux on the desktop for 12 years
And I adapted and I'm using vmware now and everything but
But seriously if you're interviewing
You can choose I guess that's the point I'm making you can choose to say
No
And you can there's never been a time when you could be more picky, especially if you're good
You can say look, I I don't you know, no, you're gonna make me you're gonna make me use windows every day. Goodbye
There's like, you know, 10 other people down the street that will hire me
I mean, but you have to make your own decisions if you want to make your
Chances for working in a place
A lot of jesson qualifiers, you know, they use it on the server, of course
Uh, and you know, but but you can you can do the same thing you can make a choice
You can say I don't work want to work for any company that uses red hat servers
Right, you can do that
That's a very very very tiny list of companies that you'll work for and you'll be eliminating most of the fortune 500
Uh, but
You can do it. You can do that. You know, it's your choice
Uh, you could you could say, you know, whatever so
that you anyway, um
Uh, that that's kind of uh, that topic. Let me let me see if I can save some of these
I mean, we do we were a little bit late. So I'll try to to bump bump through the rest of these questions really quickly
A desktop too. Yeah
Uh, why did I bend a proxmox? So
People have been watching me do my uh, home lab and it stuff
and
uh
proxmox
I I did not know this when I got into it. I really wish I had I wrote a lot about it in my zed if you want to read it
Uh, the the short answer is uh proxmox maximum that maximum nodes in a cluster is 32
Uh, I got the 14 nodes in my cluster and proxmox started falling on its face in ways that I won't go into detail on
Uh, it just could not the coral sink could not keep everything updated
Uh, I had caching problems because the icons were not getting refreshed properly
And all the problems I was having were confirmed by tons and tons of forum posts on proxmox from the people having the same problem
and
uh, everybody
Um
That I ask who says proxmox works great for them. It has like less than five nodes usually just one node and and they use it
So, uh, I mean I was already kind of leery of the whole afero gpl v3 license that proxmox was released under
Uh, and the whole use of you know dependency on a web interface
I mean, I did like it. It was it was super pretty
Uh, but it's definitely not necessary. And so
After I hit those problems, I was like now proxmox is out of here
And and then another another problem too is that I noticed that all of my four gigabyte mac minis gave up
1.2 gigabytes of ram just to running the proxmox
uh agent
That's true story
Just to run the proxmox agent
Which which is I mean to run the base the base, you know virtual machine
And then the proxmox agent on top of that took up 1.2 gigabytes of ram
So I had about three gigabytes of ram left to do anything with really anyway
I haven't done a comparison with uh a bunch of server
I went ahead and put the full version of service to the minified version
On my nodes at this point and I went ahead and reinstalled and put that on 19 different things
So I'm going to be running a bunch of server on everything
um, and then I'm going to be running kvm and live vert and vert manager from
Uh, my main server directly and then also the vnc and stuff like that from it
I don't really need anything to do that management
I'm looking at like ansible to kind of help with that but after looking at it
How problematic ansible is with the whole python thing? I'm actually thinking about making my own
single binary agent
That's compiled with bonsai that runs on the endpoints
That does essentially what I did when I was at IBM and I wrote
I wrote an entire infrastructure framework
for audit compliance and security for 52 000 machines
I'm thinking about doing the same sort of thing and go just as a fun project. It's a home lab
That's what they're for and I absolutely hate all the solutions that are out there right now
Because they require python virtual environments and they they over step in what they do to the
Virtual machines and and if you still are running on on iron and you don't want to run under vm because you're going to take a
30% loss through your containers. That's another stat. I found
I switched to kvm vert box from virtual virtual box. Did you really cool?
And I I mean, I really think kvm is the way to go. I kvm is the basis for all major cloud providers now
Uh, and it's it's going to be the future
And so anything that I can do that plays in the kvm space
Uh, it's going to be more relevant long term and it's also fun
So I am going to be writing. I'm looking at salt right now, but that's also python and I was like, eh
So I may be stealing some of the best ideas of these configuration management systems and creating one and go if one doesn't already exist
and doing that I might actually resurrect fluff, which is um
Was what I started some time ago to do this very thing to provision
You know vm's really quickly and based on profiles and things like that
But to do it on a local machine using, you know, your local installation of vmware
Uh, I started out with virtual box
We had three providers and they would do it locally if you had enough, you know prox
But I think we could come back to the to the fluff thing and maybe come up with some sort of distributed thing as well
And now we're like controlling things remotely as well. So, uh, if we do that, that'll be a bonsai branch
It'll be fluff as a bonsai branch and then we'll be able to put that in your monolith
And your bonsai is your monolith or whatever you want to do
So that's that's all development that I plan to do over, you know
When this whether gets colder and stuff and after I get my lab set up
So if you want to watch any of that happening, it's going to be going for a while. Yes, it is a not invented here thing
I'm making a mountain what I really don't understand is why there's not a better product in this space. That's a single binary
Uh, the closest thing to it is terraform
Which is just orchestration. I mean you can bend it's arm and make it do configuration management, but it's not designed for that
Um, and there's no combination of configuration orchestration and and stuff like fabric which just runs remote
Uh, you know, just run this one thing remote and give you back the results
And I I I don't know why, um
And I I feel like there's some area for innovation on that front
Uh, what's the font? This is group. This is uh, ubuntu mono
Yeah, it just looks good because I I adopted the group box
So and and I run it at a pretty high
Uh size so that you can read it from wherever
Uh, what is your font about that? We under that. Um
So the question should you should you try to run Linux on max of apples actually trying to keep it from happening?
Uh
The answer to this is
Yes in your home lab
So
There's kind of two contexts for when you make a decision about what you want to run Linux on if you're
picking hardware for
any size organization
Obviously, you're not going to buy max for that
but
If you are working for a school or somebody that has a bunch of old lab hardware
Mac minis like mine or other old hardware and you don't have the budget to
You know use the cloud or even have a good internet connection for god's sakes
There are max errors. Yeah, but yeah, um, we were talking so
Uh, yeah, they're 10 and they were on aix. Do you remember the 90s?
In the 90s. Yeah, the power PCs. They're on aix. This is IBM tech
So anyway, um
Yeah, I can tell that people are not as interested. I have to say anymore that the viewers are dropping a little bit
Uh, that's fine. I don't care. So you should try to run Linux on max. I I do think
That if you
Have an old mac and you want to breathe life into it again
Because especially if it's been written off by apple who said we're not supporting that anymore
Goodbye
And and it has intel hardware, which is a lot of old intel and I said, yeah, hell, yeah
Uh osx server. Yeah, the cheese grader mac pro
And it has osx. Yes
Uh, it's yeah, it does. Well, yeah, I mean they're
Yes, the answer is yes. I I think you should run Linux on anything and everything
And I have made a great hobby and passion of mine to do that. There was a time when I couldn't drop
Five grand on a server and make, you know, the sweet corporate money now
But there was a time when I was we're starting out and there's a lot of you out there watching right now who don't have that kind of
money
and you are
You know at best in a in a dorm or you're trying to get it to run and you're trying to dual boot your mid laptops and stuff, right
and to someone like that just having a server
Of any kind having a separate computer to run Linux on is and use it as a server and leave it plugged into the wall
it's a big deal
and
For many people they will find old hard. I had one guy who was the son of the director of tech for david's college
And he had like thousands of dollars and left over hardware. It made me so sick
but he just got so
you know
Linux
Linux is
I mean one part of the core ethos of Linux is
Breathing new life into old hardware no matter what
And you'd be surprised what people can put Linux on it's amazing
Uh
To be mean to viewers. Yeah, I can't be pretty mean so anyway, um
So what I'm trying to say is that um
Is that
You should you should try to run on anything and don't let people put you down
If you're running it on like a p2
Or you know some really ancient hardware because you know what you'd be surprised. This is another thing about Linux
I never get tired
of
Dealing particularly when I was mentoring people directly one-on-one in person
I don't get this
I don't get this buzz as much as I used to because I don't deal with people and it's really annoying actually
One of my I didn't get paid much when I ran my own company because I lower the rate really low
So I can do the bare minimum
And so one of the things that was valuable to me was being in person with somebody when they're learning this stuff
All of the aha moments. Oh
Oh
I used to be present when they would have these moments and they were worth like a hundred dollars each to me
They still are
I miss it
This is why I want to I want y'all to stream so I can get you know paid
through watching you discover stuff
because because
Seriously, so
One of those times there there is nothing better that okay
So one guy actually brought in is another story one guy brought in I told him I said look if you look it goes
I don't have a computer. I don't know where to go. I said I promise you
Next time you're at a family gathering if you ask your family members
If anybody has an old computer in the closet or the attic someplace that they're keeping because it's got old tax records on it
Right, it's got old tax records on it and they're too afraid to give it to goodwill
And I guarantee you there are tons of them if you go find those things and they say well, we don't want to give
It's got tax records. Okay. Well or browser histories or something like that, right?
You could you can go find it you will find one
I promise you and you promise them that you will wipe that disc clean and that you will make it better
and that you will put it to good use
And I you would not believe how many free computers people can find
In fact, it was such a thing. It was such a thing that we would actually start
going through
Neighborhoods we started putting together an affidavit that we could get legally signed and presented people so we could say
Look, we are officially this is our official position on this. We're not begging
We are taking your old computers cleaning them up and and
Renewing them and giving them to people who don't have computers so that we can close the digital divide in our own country
That is my primary goal with linux and if it if and if a company like red hat says we don't care what our
Distro runs on do you see how offensive that gets to me because that's like red hat saying
We really don't want to be a part of that
We just want to cater to the enterprise. We don't care about all the linux efforts that are going on all over the world
Uh to put computers and technology in the hands of people who don't have it to take old hardware and breathe new life in it
Because the most pleasurable aha moment that you will ever hear
Is somebody booting an old computer into windows 98 and I kid you not
Looking it around at all the old netscape navigator stuff on everything
And installing linux and watching it just cook as a server watching it run
Fine as a server watching it be a hundred percent performant as a server because it's way more powerful than any the even a raspberry pi 4
Even though it's like 10 year old computer
So instead of going to the trash heap or to someplace else
This computer becomes
A new toy and it's now in the corner of the garage or it's plugged in it's like really a slow ethernet
You know
And there's that so to me that's when you when you ask whether you should run an apple
I think you should run on anything and I think the first time that you show somebody
I mean look if you take away all that ugly gooey
Right you're using a 10 year old computer right now exactly you take away all that ugly gooey stuff and you learn to use the terminal
You would be blown away and you can run like the fish at max settings
You know
And if you're using vi you're not going to get any lag at all because it's vi vi's rate is supposed to work on 300 bond
So, you know all of these things
make using
You know computers really fun again
In fact, if there's one reason to try linux is it makes computing fun again
Using linux makes computers fun to the right person
Not everybody wants to use the terminal and see what they can do with all these important
These kind of people by the way are the kind of people that will like
You know like get a pair of wire cutters and strip down old serial cables and like cause them to control other electronics and shit like that
And maybe they never did it before but they just want to experiment with that
That's the kind of person that gets really into this kind of stuff
Uh working with linux and open stack all day. Oh, you'll have to talk to us about open stack. I actually want to
Uh open stack is all python unfortunately
Uh, but I am thinking about learning open stack
Uh, because I think open stack would be better than something like proxmox for even a home lab
Uh, and by the way open stack, there's lots and lots of work in open stack
Yeah, if you learn open stack, that's something that's an open source very very open source technology that is
Um, but apparently they they're really really really bigoted about python
Yeah, tony far reported that that he tried to commit some uh, some add some projects and go to the projects
And they were denied because they weren't go
And when I heard that I was like, oh, I don't know man
I mean they're that into python, you know, they don't want to even consider other languages
So I they're we're kind of on the cusp of a lot of other stuff
Hey, how's it going south korea?
Love having you. I love south korea. I cannot wait to go one day
I want to go to south korea so bad it hurts
Uh, pythonic is in nature. Yes, that's right. Yeah
so
Who bought all the pies?
Uh, I have a few what did I change my title? Please tell me I did
Okay, good. I guess I guess I didn't
I thought I did I did that same thing I did before again
Uh, I thought I changed the title. I didn't all right. Well, let's let's wrap up the stream here
Singapore
fantastic
Oh, I love rancher desktop rancher, but it's got a problem
um
What is the data lake? I have no idea. What is a data lake?
I am a nerd we talked about that already
Yeah
You go back and watch the watch the youtube video when I post it if you wanted a data lake is a centralized repository
That allows you to store all your structure on structure data at scale
You can store your data as is having to first structure the data
Yeah
I'm not a I'm not a fan of data lakes. Uh, you got it fair. I've been a relational database person my whole life
Uh, if you look at like mongo db and a bunch of people that have tried to do object databases
And you you see them fall on their face and end up, uh, deploying a relational database later
Uh, you'll see the problem. I think you should start with relational relational database up front
Uh, if you need a database if you don't need a database, you might be fine with just files actually
Uh, I know that's heresy to say it, but um
Yeah, I but I'm not I'm not a fan of that
Uh, so yeah
Corporate yes
What do I think of web 3? I hate it. Uh, web 3 is disastrously poorly designed. Uh, it's horribly over engineered
By extremely intelligent people who have no practical sense whatsoever
And these are my worst type of technologists if I detect that type of technologist
In real life, whether I'm working with them or I see them at a conference or at a pub
I will do everything in my power to get out of the room and go somewhere far away from them
Because yeah, SQLite exactly so
um
People who don't understand why web 3 is a bad idea
Uh, are not thinking in practical terms. I I absolutely despise
Engineers who are not practical
Who do things because they can who like to pick technology because it's cool and because it's complex
I despise technology for technology's sake
um
Yeah, I'll go swing in a hammock. I will this I
Technology is serves one purpose of one purpose only and that is to enable life to
be better
and to go on and to
You know and create harmony in the universe and and all of those things and any technology that just tracks from that
Uh, especially if it's claiming to do that and it fails to hypocritically
Uh, I don't want nothing to do with it and that's web 3
As web 3 that's NFTs. That's any of the crypto stuff
Uh, am I opposed to people exploring the realm and see if it's a good way to secure exchanges between banks and stuff?
possibly, uh
I I'm just I'm just tired of
of
Impractical people applying their extremely intelligent brains to things and coming up with shit that makes no sense at all
Uh, and by the way html was a bad idea myself, too
I think html was a bad idea and to a lesser degree html was exactly this problem
Markdown was plenty fine
Why didn't they use it markdown was invented by writers
Who wanted something practical html was invented by scientists
So they immediately went to the other scientists and they said hey scientists
Uh, what are you already using for like managing like data and stuff?
We're using this sgml thing with some big ass acronym that doesn't make any sense to anybody and make some sound really important
No markdown did not exist if it had in fact the knowledge exchange grid that I want to make
Is markdown and Hugo's markdown, right?
Yeah, Hugo's Hugo's a go tech
so
Markdown is relatively, you know, uh, by the way erin schwarz
Uh, and uh, John Gruber made markdown John Gruber still has
Uh, I think John Gruber has been he's so much of a writer and a podcaster
They asked him a jgm who made pandog invited him
to be in a you know involved and he's like nah
And so jgms lost was like trying to document mark out good
If you go read the itf rfc's on markdown, it's hilarious because there's no official markdown
Specification at all and so they tried to come up with one and jgm was left
This berkeley guy was left to come up with you know as close as he could come up with with a standard because markdown as
Defined in the pearl script that jong made that erin helped him make by the way erin schwarz
God knows he's one of my favorite humans who ever live
um
You know they they it's got tons of bugs and
Inconsistency is a specification of jgm and very scientifically. He's like he's a philosophy professor berkeley
He's like okay. We got to fix this so he gets in there
And he tries to fix it all and he comes up with as much consensus as he can for common mark
And he got github to sit at the table and reddit and a couple other people
And they come out with the common mark standard which you know and get a flavor markdown as an extension of it now
And so that's all been standardized
But
You know so look there does need to be a scientific approach to it
But I I tell you that story because it's a perfect example of engineers screwing shit up
They do it all the time
engineers
fix problems
But they also create problems out of thin air
Because they're engineers
And I know because I've done it i've done it i've done it so many times
Raise your hand if you've done it raise your hand if you've over engineered a solution
And and you're like you come you go get some coffee you come back and you're like and you look at it you're like
You mean I could oh my god or or here's a here's a better one. Here's a better one your wife, right?
You're like you're like you're like going for a walk and you don't have a twitch stream to torment with all of your ideas, right?
Yeah, and you're like and you're and you're talking to your you know you're talking
You're like tormenting your wife with like technical knowledge, right?
It's just trying really hard because she loves you to understand what you're saying
And she's trying to follow you because she loves you and you try to follow her art stuff and everything
And and out of nowhere. She says well, what if you did this?
I mean, I mean she's like, you know, I'm not a techie or anything
But what if I just what if you just did that instead and you're like, oh my god
You're a genius
Oh
Yeah, you know it's like
So uh-oh you're gonna come in and comment on that
I'm I'm just wrapping up. I was just telling him how you have to have somebody who asked why are you doing it that way?
Ooh beef uncured hot dogs
Mark wallberg is making hot dogs now. He has a whole restaurant thing going on. Okay
Can you turn the last thing?
Well, actually I need to talk about tech
How many things is that break? Why does this why couldn't this just be simple?
Why did I have to make my documentation website use javascript?
IBM I post that on twitter today
Seriously, all of all of IBM's documentation site requires javascript to read it. Ask yourself
How come that's a bad idea?
So
So
Web three to me and I did answer the question. What do you think of web three?
I think web three is the epitome
It's like if you took all the people if you took
Like like the whole rick and morty idea where you can separate the toxic cells from the good self, you know
If you were to take all of the toxic
Overengineers self from every engineer and you were to put that in a big vat of actual, you know goo in rick and morty style
And you were like have it like take on some sort of like nebulous form that could communicate
It would create web three
Because that's what it is web three is the absolute worst possible
design from the most over engineered
impractical
Frankly idiotic perspective you could ever imagine and and I that's all I have to say about that
It makes me really happy that
At least I have my feet on the ground and that sometimes I'm actually happy that I'm dumb
Compared to some of these other engineers because it causes me to think things through more
I I can't you know spit out, you know
Uh complexity theory algorithms or do land to calculus, you know at lunch. I'm not that guy. I can't do that. So
I'm glad sometimes because it keeps my feet on the ground and it makes me think through things
Um and and think and ask questions like why are all these dashes in all of our command lines?
Get off get off this as a good example of over engineered crap
You know when somebody created a a user interface that was an engineer is like we'll put one dash here for this
We'll put two dashes here. We'll allow colon for this
And that's why I made bonsai because I am a practical person
I don't like when people over engineer stuff and one of the most over-engineered things ever is get-up. So
That's a little rant about that. Um
No experience with snort and nips or nids. I wish I did. I'm super sorry. I can't talk about that
Uh
This is just the whole idea of looking at logs all the time and studying those and combining them all
That's been around since the days of like, um centralized, um
Uh system log, uh daemons, but it's still a thing. I still think it should be done. Um, what is nips
I don't know what nips is
network intrusion detection system
Umbrella term for combination of hardware and software. That's cool. I like the concept from what I understand of it
Um
Is the system that attempts to detect hacking activities to now have service attacks
I think these things are cool. I really do. Uh, I don't have anything
I don't my is just old school tripwire. We would just like check some every file on the whole system make
lists of of um
Exceptions and then watch for things to change
Uh security is actually a lot simpler than most people make it out to be
Kind of in that practical sense
all you really have to do to ensure a system is secure is track everything on the system and tell you when anything changes
You don't have to have fancy signatures
It can be gotten around by compiling the same malware and go that was in c before
You don't have if you just look for things on the system that are regularly changed
And and create ways to detect those changes in the system
Uh and report on them that that is the number blue one blue team approach that I think everybody should be doing
And I don't know that's how I caught the hacker who invaded my computer at home back when I set up my own mail server
Um, and that's how everybody
It should be doing it. I don't understand why it's so so hard
Uh the defender defeater
Yeah
What is eldep and I should use it so eldep is a lightweight directory access protocol. This is uh something came from the 90s that was used to
Uh put group information for corporations and stuff and it is still used a lot. Um, it's used in
We've talked about it before we talked about it with uh, I want to say hayden
And uh with free IPA and some things like that. It's built into active directory now as of may as of may 2022
Um, and it's the way that you get group permissions
Once a person authenticates to see if they can do things if you can authorize them to do different things
Uh, I think everybody should use it. It should be a part of your system
Uh in your identity management and how you do things. Uh, we will be putting open eldep on my lab here
Um, probably in the form of free IPA. Although I'm
I'm a little bit leery of free IPA now now that I've been looking back at nis, which is really old tech
Uh, but I want to see if there's something related to that before I make a decision right now
I'm just doing localized logins on everything and which is more zero trustee because it does use search for all that
Uh eldep is not a windows thing. No eldep is getting if you do a search for eldep
You're going to get a lot of hits for azure and active directory these days because that's usually where people are run
Or they're deploying it. Uh, but it's actually way older than that
Yeah on linux, it comes. Yeah, linux eldep has kerberos built into it
Kerberos is the name of the three headed dog
Greek dog that was guarding whatever and
Is mit technology designed to do password authentication without ever sending passwords over the over the wire
By exchanging data that's been signed using public key cryptography
So kerberos is the standard. Uh, even if you're not using it outright
You're using it inside of other things. It's kerberos is is built into pam for example and linux se and
And eldep and everything else. It's just not always front in the center
Uh, yeah the tickets that nobody really understands exactly
Uh, if you're familiar with wire shark, you can be familiar. Yep. It's another one. Yeah, and you can watch eldep over the wire too. Um
These days eldep is secured and you know over encrypted connections, but not always
Um, but most of the time these days eldep is used to give information about an account
Uh regarding, you know, what things this authorized to do and what it can do
Uh roles will say role-based authentication. I mean authorization
Um, but it and it can be used for authentication the first part that says i am me
Uh, but that i am me thing, uh, is now
Taking place elsewhere in kerberos and other things that are um
And then eldep is provides the other data
They get that right
Uh, it's still useful and not over engineered. I think public key cryptography is not at over engineered at all
I think I think it's actually the only natural way to do it
Um
Uh, it's the other things you call smart are harmful. No, absolutely not
No, and there are some things that have to be complex cryptography is one of those things
Um, and I you know and I accept that right? Uh, I I don't think cryptography can be
Although I mean you can make the argument that some of the cryptographic algorithms failed because of over engineering
If you I I'm not going to get into it
But if you like short like the failure of blowfish or rsa or any of the other ones that are no longer officially good, you know
Uh, you might you know uncover the fact that somebody was getting really clever and their cleverness ended up being their downfall
um
But you know, we do need cleverness. Don't get me wrong. So I yeah
Uh, does does how to I mean my favorite xkcd about this is
Uh, you guys know the xkcd about the password thing. It's a perfect example of this over engineering concept
That seems to be the theme today. Um, does anybody have a link to it? I'll go find it xkcd
Uh password. It's it's one of the most popular pass rots
Here it here it is, right? Wait. Oh troubadour common substitutions. You're risk
No, that's not it. Where is it?
That's not it
Any enigma
Too coffee just enough to use it effectively. Yes, it was
um
Dang it
Where's the one you guys know what I'm talking about?
password
Uh pass rod actually pass for encryption
If you know what it's the next kcd about the encryption thing
I'm trying to find it. I can't it's taking me forever because I'm slow
Or is it you just have to look for a club
Yes
Or is it I love it. I love it. I can't find it
I'm gonna I'm gonna spend all day trying to find it if I can't find it. You guys can try to help me find it
It's the one where he talks about his algorithm
Uh for defeating defeat cryptography how to defeat
Uh password cryptography
Ah
It's actually it's actually a joke about it and and and mr. Robot
Oh, here it is. Yeah, this is the one
Okay, so
Here we go
A crypto a crypto nerd's imagination
His laptop's encrypted. Let's build a multi-million dollar cluster to crack it. No good. It's 40 96 bit rsa encrypted
Blast our evil plan is foiled
What would actually happen his laptop's encrypted drug him and hit him with the five dollar wrench until he tells us the password
Got it
This this is my favorite because this is exactly how
This is engineers over here, right? And this is like practical dumb people
Threat models are a thing they are a thing
you know and
You know, it's like you spend like multi-billion dollars on the door and the wall next to it is two by fours and drywall
You know
It's like
But then they don't think about it. This is this is a pretty common meme out there. By the way, they're not dumb, right?
Uh, they're not so you see engineers
Yeah, I mean
you know, it's
And I think that this problem comes about because people overthink
Uh
The technology either because it's exciting to them because they really get off on mathematics or something or
Some other reason I don't know why but they they don't accidentally lock
ZQ says accidentally locked my keys inside a calm closet today
Then I realized the door was on backwards. So I just took a piece of metal in there and
I'm probably a vulnerability
Absolutely. That's what I'm trying to tell you
Yeah, you know, it's fun. It's it's fun to talk about. It's horrible when I when you experience it
So as I seems to be kind of the theme today, I hope I hope no one gets overly
Been out of shape on my picking on engineers
I am one and I am the first one to tell you that I've made tons and tons of mistakes
Uh, because I overthought something and some of these projects I threw away
Do you guys remember that parser that I made where I made my own sco sub language to do all the parsing?
And I was like, why don't I just like go? I mean, I totally threw the whole thing away
I threw like three weeks of work
and an entire
documented
Subline sub go api for this language that I had created and I chucked it all
And I I replaced it with like a one rune
Uh character scanner instead
And and then code did code generation when necessary and I was like, oh my god. What was I thinking?
And you know, we're going to go through those times. That's just human progress
But you know and I really shouldn't beat people up for over engineering things until they get like all
You know white towery, you know, ivory tower about it. It's like you're going to use what we give you and you're going to like it
And people get like that. I have lose my patience
uh
A lot of over engineering actually comes from corporate and management not from mentors themselves. I agree
Uh, let me give you an example of that one fun one fun. Uh
Uh, the crypto web three job you experienced it first hand really
So let me give you an example of that the engineer the management screwing stuff up. Okay
This is a true story from my buddy brent who worked in the military
I taught him linux, uh, you know back in the day
He had taught me salaris and he was kind of my mentor. I was the first official system of a job I had
I had been doing web development. I was like his webmaster before that
This was my first actual job, you know managing salaris and aix and everything
and
He told me a story once that we used to play chess and and and eat and talk stories because it's just a big job
Uh
At lunch and he told me the story once about how it's and I've told the story before his senior officer
Uh, he he did all the work to spec out a salaris, uh server
And he got the best one possible for the job and it cost like 20 50 000. It was like really spending
Um, but it was small
And if you know anything about technology, you know that if you want small you pay more money
Right
And so, I mean it was barely the size of like a for you tower today, right?
But uh, we do have questions but not right now
We're about out of time
We are out of time
But if you want to you can give me a question we can put in for tomorrow
Or you can come on in and leave the questions in our discord in the questions conversations and advice channel
Economy of scale, right? So so, I mean everybody in the it world knows that
Smallest better
You know if you can keep the heat down everything
So no joke his senior officer said I have my commanding officer is coming in i'm giving him a tour
And that will not do they're going to be here in two weeks. You need to do something about this news
Like what do you want me to do?
And he's like, I don't know it just needs to be bigger
Very male american military thing to say
And he said, uh
Well, we could get a rack for it and we could get it like a we could get like a
We could get like a rack for it like a like a 42 u rack for it and put it in that
He goes is that bigger and he's like, well, yeah
I mean that would be like, you know 13 feet in the air and you just put the in there and we just close the door on it
And he's like I want that
I
Want that
His senior officer no kidding his senior officer
Commanded him to spend an extra 300 dollars like a delrack or whatever to put his like
four five u server in that cost like 20 50 thousand dollars
And you know, he's like, okay
I'm sure it was and you know, we were just riffing and he was like, oh, you know, I can put some lights on it
I
Yeah, it's the kind of outlets suspension on step 150. I know
You know when he got victorious like see this is our new computer, which we just which we just purchased, you know
And brent's been here brent's been instrumental in getting the server for us in front of brent
I just love brent brent. I I wish I could get brent on the stream
brent is the most
Stoic human being I have ever known
He's hilarious. He's so hilarious. He never cracks jokes. He's just really smart
I I can see his mustached face today. He's the kind of guy
Who just doesn't talk
But when he does say stuff, it's really funny. It's really interesting and I just I will never forget that story
I miss him so much. He was such a great
I mean, I know, you know, it's hard to you know, you you get people that you work with that are great friends
And I I just really I really miss having having him around and and letting me like transom and and
Vera, how are you? Wow? Speaking of having fun friends around
Good to see you my friend. Please don't dox anything about yourself in the moment. This is going on youtube
We are just about ready to wrap up
Uh, my my good friend Vera is here. Uh
So we will we'll be catching up in a bit
So stop by the youtube channel
Uh, stop by the twitch channel if you want to watch me making a lab
I can't wait to hear all the things i'm doing wrong from Vera my friend, uh about my server
I'm sure that everyone's going to have an opinion on that. I've gotten used to it though
So
It'll be fun
Talk to you later youtube
Stop
