and welcome everyone. My brother-in-law Alastair McWhorter once wrote a short story where he said
the boys got up earlier than anyone has ever got up before, and that seems to apply to
some of our dedicated attenders from the US. I'm going to light a candle first before I say
anything else. And I've got a match that works today. Yes, there we are. Good. So a warm welcome
to this dialogue with Rupert Sheldrake and Ian McGilkerist. I've known Ian and Rupert for over
40 years. And so our connection goes back a long way. And I'd like to start with just a remark or two
on reading. And this comes from the obituary this week in the Telegraph of John Thorne, who was headmaster
of Winchester when I was teaching there and when Ian was a pupil. And in 1981, he was chairman of
the Headmaster's Conference. And he said, I do see a cloud bigger than a man's hand in the decline
of reading, he told HMC. If it is not done at school, it may never be done. And I think this
is a prophetic remark. And at Winchester, there's something called the DIV system, which is a
general studies where the don, the teacher, has a lot of latitude in what is read.
And while Ian was at Winchester, one of the books he read at the recommendation of his housemaster
was William James's Varieties of Religious Experience, which is a seminal book of Gifford
Lectures in Edinburgh, 1901, 1902. And so Ian read this when he was probably about 16.
Rupert didn't get around to reading it until quite a bit later. And just yesterday, I'd been
corresponding with a former pupil who was also a scholar at Winchester, Professor Ben Morrison.
And Ben is now the chair of philosophy at Princeton. And my first encounter with him
was that Simon Elliott, one of my friends who was a don as well, he sent him round with a six-page
essay aged 14 entitled, Does God Exist? And he went through the usual arguments. And so I pointed
him in the direction of William James and lent him a copy of Varieties of Religious Experience,
which he proceeded to read. And then we discussed it. And then Rupert appeared first in my
horizon, as it were, at Mystics and Scientists in 1983, when I was teaching at Winchester.
And he was lecturing on his then new book or new-ish book, A New Science of Life.
And I gave him a spare copy of this book here, which is called Talks to Teacher on Psychology
and to Students on Some of Life's Ideals by William James, which I'm sure is still somewhere in
Rupert's library. And then finally, this book here is incredibly important. It's called Human
Immortality. And it's the Ingersoll Lecture on Immortality, 1898, at Harvard University. And
just to start, Ian and Rupert, off, I'm going to read a couple of short passages from the
inclusion of Varieties of Religious Experience. And this is my paperback copy. I read it when
I was 26. And I remember reading part of it in the Beautiful Gardens in Marburg. So he says,
summing up in the broadest possible way the characteristics of the religious life as we
have found them, it includes the following beliefs. One, that the visible world is part of a more
spiritual universe from which it draws its chief significance. Two, that union or harmonious
relation with that higher universe is our true end. Three, that prayer or inner communion with
the spirit thereof, be that spirit God or law, is a process wherein work is really done. And
spiritual energy flows in and produces effects, psychological or material, within the phenomenal
world. And then another very short piece on the self. We have in the fact that the conscious person
is continuous with a wider self through which saving experiences come, a positive content
religious experience, which it seems to me is literally and objectively true as far as it goes.
And the other thing I just wanted to observe about Rupert and Ian is that they are both
voracious readers, and they have read widely and deeply all their lives. And their libraries are
pretty impressive. I have a fairly impressive library as well. So between us, I think we
we span a considerable range. And so I'm going to hand over to you, Ian and Rupert. And I think Ian,
you were going to open the batting as it were. Okay, yes, yes, that's good. I should refer to
Schopenhauer's view that never read books, reading books is for people who got no ideas of their own.
But anyway, can we spotlight Ian, please? And Rupert,
just wait to Rupert appear on the screen. There we are. Yes, I'm speaking from the bedroom of the
daughter of a friend in a flat in London. And yes, it's hard to get my I feel so
so much that I belong where I live that it's quite hard to sort of reconstitute my mental
world here for the moment. But I think what I want to say is that I've become more and more
convinced that none of the things that we desperately need to do to solve the various
problems that we we face and that we talk about a great deal, none of this in the end
will matter unless we are able to get back to the spiritual ground of our being. And in other
words, we could, by some sort of a miracle, we could, we could reverse the pollution of the seas,
we could perhaps do something to at least slow climate change, we could make it harder for people
to carry on felling ancient forests, all this I believe in powerfully. But I also think that
none of it will add up to a hill of beans unless we re-engage with the spiritual basis of a human
life. I don't think it will be any longer know what it is to be a human being. I think people
haven't the foggiest idea what they're doing here, what the cosmos in which they come into being
come into being is like and what their relationship with the earth that is their home is like.
And I'm just going to say a few things for you, but then ask you to respond to them really.
In the new book I wrote The Matter With Things, I suggest first of all that
many of the ways in which we look at the the constitution of the cosmos are upside down or
back to front. So in other words, we tend to think for example that the first of all there are
things and then there are relations between them, some of which we make in our minds, and that's
the way it is. Whereas I argue throughout a very long book that in fact relations are absolutely
primary. There is nothing that truly exists that is not a relation and is not in fact in process,
as Whitehead pointed out. So in other words, relations and processes are primary, not status
and things. And I also believe that for example, it's not that there's literal truth and that's
really the important thing and metaphorical truths are just some kind of semi-imaginary
extension of literal truth. In fact, I believe that all fundamental truths are metaphorical in
nature and that literal truth is just a very special kind that we've invented to describe
a small subset of things that occur at a very everyday level. But for the purposes of what
we're talking about now, I want to suggest that it's not that somehow there is anonymity and then
there is life and then there is consciousness and then there is a sense of the great values,
goodness, beauty, truth and the sacred. I think it's the other way around that what actually exists
fundamentally is a consciousness, which is a field of consciousness, which is divine, which
which has the qualities of attending to and drawing us towards goodness, beauty and truth
and the sense of the holy and sacred. And that it's for this that we've developed
our complexity as human beings, since we are not better than animals, but we are in this sense
above them that we can hope to respond to, to receive, to resonate with and to give
a full and fulfilling response to those leading values that draw us forward.
So that's the way I would like to think of it, Rupert. What would you say to that?
Well, I think of it in a very similar way and so do most people in the world for that matter.
If you actually look at, we live in a particularly godless part of the world, Western Europe,
but it's not quite the same if you go to Africa or India or many other parts of the world, or
Iraq or Iran or I mean the Middle East. Most people are religious in the world and
this kind of secularist, secular humanist, atheist, tinted culture that we have
is a historical anomaly. Most people were religious in Europe. And as Charles Taylor
in his wonderful book, A Secular Age, points out in the year 1500 in Europe,
everyone believed in God, everyone believed in the kind of vision you've just put forward.
It was almost impossible not to, not because people were coerced into believing that,
but because there was just no credible alternative. And what's happened is through the growth of,
first through the Protestant Reformation, the disenchantment of the world that happened
in part through the Protestant Reformation, a lack of emphasis on nature, a focus entirely on human
consciousness. And then through the Scientific Revolution, the Mechanistic Materialist worldview
that's grown out of it, we now have this very secular world where people think that
evolution and life starts from the bottom up, you know, from genes and molecules and cells.
And everything builds up until you've got big enough brains where the light of consciousness
mysteriously comes on. And then we start thinking about bigger things like God, but they're all
just inventions inside our own minds, and hence inside our own brains. And you'd be able to tell
us exactly where. No, I wouldn't do that. I mean, both you and I are discussing in what, in fact,
a whole scientific medical network has been concerned with right from the start is
trying to find a way back to a worldview that is still consonant with science, because science
isn't going to go away. And we've learned a great many things about nature through the scientific
process. But to recover a sense of this connection, which is actually there in all traditions, I mean,
shamanic traditions, all admit that there's a war or all just assume that there's some realm,
they have different views of it, but there are realms beyond our own that what we see is not
all there is. And as my main teacher, Father Bede Griffiths used to point out that, you know,
the center of all religious and spiritual culture is a direct experience of our minds, our consciousness
being part of something vastly greater than ourselves. And as he pointed out, all religions
start from that experience is not a dogma, it's an experience. And then they interpret it. I mean,
his favorite metaphor was the hand and that sort of central experience of unity is like the palm of
the hand. And then it's interpreted in different cultures, in different traditions, different
languages. They like the fingers of the hand, all the different interpretations of this primary
unit of experiences, sense of ultimate unity, which are interpreted in all these different
cultural ways. But that is the central foundation of all these religious traditions. And as far as
we know, this intuition that we're part of something greater than ourselves is very ancient. I mean,
all these cave paintings from 2030, 40,000 years ago, the practice of burying the dead and so on,
all the or dealing with the dead in a ritual way, all these things suggest that this has been part of
human consciousness for a very, very long time. No doubt the forms have changed and the development
of the great religions has sort of put a more unifying aspect on these insights. But it seems
to me that it's been foundational to human life for throughout almost all human history,
with the brief anomaly of Western Europe and parts of North America in the last 150 years.
Yes, of course. And it is worth reflecting on the fact that it would be entirely irrational
to suppose that we were aware of everything in the cosmos. Why on earth would we? I mean,
we know in the very simplest level that there are sounds that we can't hear but that bears and bats
can hear. So what we know is limited by our senses and by the relative unsophistication of our brains.
I say relative because relative to what there is for us to approach, if one has any kind of
sense of imagination, one can see that things that we sense are there and that, as you say,
throughout the world people have believed were there. This is not irrational. This is a very
reasonable supposition. And there are people in, for example, Australia, the native people there who
say they can hear and see things at a distance. They can hear people, ancestors speaking to them.
And who are we, frankly, to say that they don't hear those things? I like the, I think,
I'm sure you would agree, the very important idea of Goethe's that we develop senses to perceive
things in response to the bits of experience that we are able to get. And that, therefore,
if we don't actually allow ourselves to experience certain things, then an organ that we might have
will atrophy. And I suggest that we've allowed organs that would help us to see these things and
hear these things and know these things. We've allowed them to atrophy and that people that we
consider more primitive than us and indeed our own children up to an age before they're
they're told that it's not it's not wise or intelligent to say that you see these things
of you're fantasizing. I mean, these people have the organs of perception that we need in order to
to reach the divine or to have any inklings of it. And I suppose that we all have enough
of an inkling of that that unless we shut it down, we can follow it and one hopes to grow it.
You know, Keats called this world a veil of soul making. And in other words, we are we are
nourishing or stunting the soul by the way in which we live. Yes, well, I think the
one way of looking at it is Charles Taylor suggests that in in Europe in say up to 1500 or
later, people had the idea that minds of porous porosity is a word he uses. And the anthropologist
Tanya Lerman, who's at Stanford, is I think one of the most interesting anthropologists of religion
writing at the moment. And in her latest paper, she talks about porosity in all religions, it's
assumed that our minds of porous to influences from each other influences from spirits, gods, angels,
other beings, that minds are porous. And what Charles Taylor shows is that since the 17th century,
there's been this shutting down. So the idea we've ended up ended up with is our minds are
completely insulated with inside the privacy of our skulls, nothing but the electrical
activity of our brains or other activities of the brains inside our heads. And they're all
separated off from everything else, completely privatized. And what Tanya Lerman shows is that
she wrote her most recent book is called How God Becomes Real. And the previous one was called
How God Talks Back. She's done anthropological studies of charismatic Christians, evangelical
groups, women, women praying in Tehran, Muslim women praying in Tehran, shamanic cultures and
so forth. She's done and she shows that in all these traditions, there's the idea that we're open
to spirits or beings of other kinds. But she also points out that this is actually something that
requires a cultural reinforcement and effort on our part. You know, if you believe in God,
it's not just a kind of passive belief that people who believe in God pray, they go to temples,
churches, services, they meet with others, they pray together, they have annual ceremonies,
rituals, practices, etc. There's a lot of work goes into making these beliefs more apparent and more
directly experienced. And I think something similar happens with people who have to put in
quite a lot of work to maintain the secular worldview, to maintain the secular atheist
worldview. Denying all these things involves quite a lot of hard work on denial. You first of all
have to deny all your own telepathic experiences and 85% of people have these experiences with
telepathic telephone calls. You have to deny that you can really tell when someone's staring
at you from behind and 95% of people have experienced that. You have to deny that you have
flashes of insight or mystical experience that appear to connect you with a consciousness
greater than your own. If you take psychedelics, which give a wonderful sense of connection with
something greater than yourself, you have to deny that that's real. But you just have to say, well,
that's just because chemical disturbances inside the brain. So even atheism and secularism
require quite a lot of effort in denial. And the motive for the denial, I suppose,
is fitting in with the secular world. And what the only positive side of it or is a self-congratulatory
feeling, you're smarter than everyone else, because you've seen through all these false
beliefs and childish attitudes that children have and so-called primitive people do.
When you were reading the Varieties of Religious Experience at school, I had a housemaster who
he was trying to show me the limitations of the orthodox Christianity in which the school chapel
we all had to go there every day. And I was reading bits of J.G. Fraser's The Golden Bow
and Robert Green's White Goddess. His aim was to prove to me that Christianity was no better
than these primitive, superstitious beliefs found all over the world. And since we were
quite happy to dismiss all of them as mumbo jumbo, the same applied to Christianity, it was
no better than them. And the first I was persuaded, I thought this was an appalling weakness because
it presumed to be superior to these other beliefs. I've later come to see this as tremendous strength
that it has so much in common with myth and archetypal patterns found all over the world.
But the idea that we're smarter than others, Fraser and all those late 19th century figures,
early 20th century figures, had the view that we've risen above the sort of animistic superstition
and then you get religion, which is a bit better, not much better. And then you go beyond that to
science and then you realize all that stuff, basically childish rubbish we've drove great
and out of. So I think that that's how we've got here. And I think it does take quite a lot of
effort, as I say, for people to maintain that belief. And I suppose that you would map some of
this, I'm just guessing, onto actors of different parts of the brain. Yes, maybe. I mean, before
we go there, though, you raised a number of interesting points. I argue also in my chapter
28 of the matter with things of the sense of the sacred, from evidence given by psychological
studies that actually it takes more effort to deny. It's not true that as Dawkins suggests that
we are indoctrinated into religion. In fact, it's the opposite that it takes more cognitive effort
to inhibit these ideas. That doesn't mean that they're wrong, of course. But it is interesting
that if you have people, and maybe that is to do with the brain, that some people, especially
people with autism, and who are something like a 10 times more likely to be atheistic,
the normal brain is actually allowing us to, if we will not suppress it, to experience the
sort of things that you're talking about. And going back to my idea that the things that we
think are primary are not, and the things that we think are secondary are not. So in the case of
oneness, you were talking about how we have to go back to an idea of being porous. But this is,
as you're suggesting, I think this is the natural state to see ourselves as in connection with the
world. And you get in panpsychism a very interesting phenomenon, which is that people say, okay,
so how do we, okay, maybe the logical position, since we can't see how to get
consciousness out of mere lumpen matter, maybe the answer is everything's got consciousness in it.
But then how do we recompose it? You know, how do we put this together? It's actually called
the combination problem. This is typical of the left hemisphere, which having, first of all,
ruptured a unity, then doesn't know how to, quote, recreate the unity. But the unity is there.
The unity is primary, not a secondary phenomenon that has to be put together and achieved.
So I think that that kind of panpsychism is, is somewhat irrational and left hemisphere dominated.
Now, you've brought me to the position where, of course, I've mentioned hemispheres.
And I should say to anybody listening that my position is not that the brain
creates our experience at all. I say that logically, there are three possibilities,
the brain either imits experience, or it transmits experience, or it permits experience.
And I, I believe that in fact, the brain is a permitter of experience that shapes it,
much as the vocal chords, as William James pointed out, are what shape his voice,
a restriction, a constriction and inhibition and negation, some kind of molding or
no saying to the breath that would come through. If there was no such molding or permitting,
then there would be no voice at all. But coming to the boring stuff about brain correlates,
we do know that I'm afraid it just isn't a matter of fact. And I give, I think it's appendix
seven or something in the matter of things. I do go over the science on hemisphere difference in
spirituality in relation to mindfulness, meditation in general, and shamanism, religious
experiences of certain kinds. And the overwhelming evidence is that this requires a shift of balance
away from the normal slight, uh, bias towards the left hemisphere. In these experiences, one finds
that this imbalance, if you like, is redressed and not only redressed, but that the centers
that are subtending these kinds of experience are very clearly right hemisphere related. So
in a culture which I believe promotes the values of the left hemisphere, sees the world as particulate,
made up of isolated things that are fixed, that are unchanging, inanimate, abstracted,
explicit. There is no room for this kind of, this kind of experience. Indeed, I was talking yesterday
to clergy in Canterbury, and I don't know what they thought of it. But I was trying to explain
that all the sort of things that you need in order to open your mind to the existence of a divine
being are militated against by the natural mode of the left hemisphere, which is to pin things down,
to look for certainty, to focus on the explicit rather than the implicit, to see things as naturally
inanimate rather than animate, and to be all the time cataloging and charting experience as on a map,
or having a theory about it rather than actually allowing experience to come to you. To do that,
you've got to have an opposite cast of mind, which is in fact the cast of mind that the right
hemisphere enables for us in daily life, which is the voice of a way of seeing things in which there
is no final certainty. There are things that are probable, and there are things that are more likely
than others, but there's no final certainty. Nothing is finally separated from anything else.
Nothing is ever completely fixed. It's always moving, changing and flowing. All the really
important stuff cannot be put into language. Anybody who's been in love knows how incredibly
feeble the language is to deal with this extraordinary experience. And of course,
any of you who are listening who are persuaded that there is a spiritual realm, a divine realm,
that you can have intimations of, this again is beyond conceptual reduction in language.
The right hemisphere enables us to be more willing to accept paradox, to accept things
that are not certain. And this is the realm where we find the spiritual life.
Yes, the sense of not certainty, I mean, there is a sense though in some spiritual experiences
where there is a great certainty. I mean, for example, people have had near death experiences,
or mystical experiences spontaneously, or as a result of spiritual practices,
or as a lot of psychedelics. I mean, I myself, when I've had some of these types of experiences,
one of the things that people say about them is that you know that it's real, that it's
more real than normal reality. And near death experiences which last a few minutes,
change people's lives because they feel they've contacted a realm, a reality which is
more real, more certain in a way than the ordinary world we live in. And they don't
have any doubt that there's this spiritual reality because they've directly experienced it.
Now, I don't know whether that, to what extent that depends on one or both hemispheres,
or whether it goes beyond the brain altogether. But what's so convincing for many people about
these experiences is precisely that they seem unquestionably real.
Yes, raises two points really. One is this. I would make a distinction between
the absolutely certain and an asymptotic approach to certainty. And the left hemisphere
has a category of things that are yes and no. And I don't think that experience, well,
not in my experience, there is ever this, I'm not lucky enough to have had one of these experiences,
but I imagine if I had one, I'd say I'm almost as certain of this as I can be of anything,
which is different from claiming absolute certainty or absolute truth. But the other
thing about it is something that my housemaster Martin Scott, the man who really modeled for me
the wonderful relation between a man who was profoundly sane, very funny, hyperalert to the
ridiculous, was also a deeply spiritual and in that sense, a very serious person. And he
modeled and conveyed to me that way of looking at things. And one of the things he emphasized to me
was that the true religious experience is not really about these moments of certainty or about,
you know, levitating or seeing the future or any of these things nice as they may be. They are not
the center of it. And that in fact, they're not particularly prized by the mystics who had these
experiences and not particularly prized actually by the Buddhist masters. They don't think that
these amazing transformative experiences are really what it's about. But it's typical of our
society that we would imagine that there is an experience of this kind. And it's not about a
more humble application of a kind of disposition towards the world, which is one of awe and humility
and compassion, which I believe is at the center of it. So I'm not disrespecting extraordinary
experiences. I'm just saying that I'm a skeptic amongst believers and I'm a believer
amongst skeptics. I've always been like this. And when people do this, I find myself suddenly
running to the other part of the balance here to sort of keep things properly in perspective.
Well, speaking from my own experience, I've had these moments of insight where I've just
known that there's a greater consciousness than all my experience. But on a day to day basis,
those are quite rare, those experiences are not like every day. And that's where spiritual practices
come in. And I myself meditate in the mornings and I pray in the evenings. And I see these as
different daily ways of relating. I see the meditation, I think I was more like breathing in.
And I close my eyes, I try not to be occupied with the things in my room or wherever I'm doing it.
I have mantras, I concentrate on the mantra and sit quietly, and thoughts go through my mind and
so on. And so it's a way of withdrawing not only from the outer world, but also from the inner world
of the default mode network of constant inner chatter, what it still goes on, but you detach
from it and you just let it pass and so on. So that's like I think like breathing in, whereas
prayer I experience in is almost the opposite direction, petitionary prayer. You start with
an invocation or prayers start with an invocation, our Father who art in heaven, Hail Mary full of
grace, Om Nomah Shivaya, O Allah. You start with an invocation to being graced in yourself, a form
of consciousness graced in yourself. And then in petitionary prayer, we're asking for things which
is the most common or common or garden form of prayer, I mean basic found all over the world in
all different traditions. You then direct intention towards things that in the outer world,
someone who's sick, a problem that you're worried about, some threat you want to pray for protection
or defense. So it's very practical about the affairs of everyday life and the immediate
problems in one's life. So in that sense, it's like breathing out, it's going from a spiritual
center towards the outer world, towards actual particular problems. And so I see these as both
ways. I see them as complementary to each other and breathing in and breathing out metaphor
is shows I mean, we can only breathe out because we breathe in and vice versa. So
have the flow in both directions. But these are a way of coming to a center within one's
self where one's consciousness is connected to or one can sometimes experience this connection
to a greater ground of being or consciousness. And then praying is connecting that center to
the affairs of the world. Both of these increase the sense of porosity, the idea that one's
consciousness is related to something greater. And also that the everyday affairs that one's
concerned with and the problems in the world and hopes and fears and all that are related to
something greater than oneself as well. And I think that everyone who prays and it's in if you
take the whole world, most people pray, even if you take Britain, far more people pray than
actually go to church or have regular religious practices. I think these are ways in which on
an everyday basis, we have a greater sense of this connection. Well, I like very much that image of
breathing in and breathing out naturally. And I don't, I don't in any way deny your experience, but
I'm also immediately reminded of St Francis's admonition that when you pray, you should ask for
nothing, nothing. He's very emphatic about it. I think Mother Teresa said much of the same thing.
And I remember the words of the infant Samuel, was it speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth.
When the one's praying, it's more about listening than talking. But it doesn't mean that one doesn't
remember people that one cares for and cares about. It would be odd and counter-intuitive
to do that. So I think one bears them in one's mind, in one's care, and one commends that to God.
If one asks for anything, one has to, after all, couch that with the words, you know,
if it so be your will. I do ask for things, I suppose, but I'm slightly conflicted about it.
I think that the greater part of praying is actually creating a space in which something
can come to you. Indeed, I think all creation and imagination is not about going out
and doing something, but about creating a space for something to happen.
As I often say, a gardener can't make a plant. All the gardener can do is create, create a space
for the plant to flourish or stifle the plant, but the plant has its own existence. And I think
that whatever the spirit, the divine spirit is trying to bring to us, we crowd out with our own
desires, our own wishes, our own formulations, and that being open is about creating a space
for things to happen. I'm going to just mention here this extraordinary notion of the creation
that comes from the Lurianic cabala, the prime being, the ground of being aims off.
Being relational, as God is and as love is, needs a creation to return that love, to be
the object of that love, and to realize the relationship with the loved one, which must
be free. And so what is the first act of aims off in creation? It's something called sim sum,
which means withdrawal, and that is a withdrawal to make a space in which there can be something other
than this creature, this ground of being, not a creature. And then there are 12 of them that are
in this space to catch whatever it is that comes out of aims off. The single spark of fire comes
out of aims off and lands on these vessels and shatters most of them. And the third
act of creation is called tikkun, which means repair. And this is the particular
honor, duty, purpose indeed of humanity is to repair these shattered vessels and to make
them more beautiful than they were before. And in that image, I think of this Japanese
art of ceramics called kintsugi, in which you repair a shattered vessel, but it's more beautiful
than it was before, often repaired with lines of guilt or gold that come into the ceramics.
So this idea of creating a space for things to happen, drawing back and being unknowing and
undoing is, I think, very important. Well, personally, I see that as more the role of
meditation. I mean, there are various forms of prayer. Contemplative prayer or meditation
is creating a space. I'm meditating quite often. I mean, I'm not meditating in order to have sort
of ideas, but quite often, ideas pop into my mind about things of work I'm doing, ideas,
scientific experiments and so forth. But petitionary prayer, I mean, there's an amazing
range of opinions. I used to belong to a group called the epiphany philosophers in Cambridge,
and we had retreats together. We had Easter vigils and we had masses at various times of the year,
which the priests who celebrated them for us at one stage was Ron Williams, who is a member of
this group. And once I was thinking about prayer, and we prayed together, we did matins and even
song every day together when we were on retreats. And I then said, well, could we go around the
circle? We all knew each other very well, and just say something about how we ourselves prayed.
And it was astonishing. I had just no idea these people I prayed with many times saw it say
differently. Some thought that we shouldn't ever pray for anything specific, a bit like you,
you know, could hold people before God and or hold them in the light of God, but not
tell God what to do because God already knew everything. So absolutely not right to do that.
Others prayed very, very specifically, as Jesus does in the New Testament, and Jesus is not just
holding people specifically, caring specific people. He didn't care everybody when he walked
into the room, he'd care one person at a time with a particular personal sort of act of healing.
So it was much, it was really quite specific. And so there was a wide range of opinion about
how specific we should be. And those who believed in the specificity would say it's not telling God
what to do, it's being co-creators with the divine that God works through us. An idea similar to what
you just said God works through us. And he asked for God's guidance in our prayers. You're not just
coming up with ideas, I want to have a new car or I'd like to have more money or something like that.
It's not like God in prayer is like celestial Amazon with delivery next day.
Yes. I remember a joke about that. I prayed for a new bicycle, but then I realized God doesn't
work like that. So I stole a bicycle and prayed for forgiveness. But I do, you see, I'm trying to hold
together two uncertainties, which is always my problem. I really respect what you're saying.
And of course, whether you call it prayer that caused Christ to heal people or something else,
I don't know. But the C.S. Lewis pointed out the idea that prayer will produce the outcome we desire
can be completely dispensary because the holiest of all petitioners in the Garden of Gethsemane
prayed three times for this cup to be taken from him and it simply wasn't. So we can
assume that this is not the way that prayer does work. Having said that, I believe that
disposing one's mind towards an outcome and disposing many people's minds towards an outcome
may help that outcome come about. I don't know quite how and it may be by modes that you're
more articulate about that we call parapsychological but are probably entirely natural.
Yes. I think forming the intention you see is part of this co-creation. And I think the power of
praying together. I'm a regular church girl because I like praying together. I like singing
together and I like being in a holy place with members of the community who pray together. So
I go wherever I am on Sundays and small village churches on local parish church here in Hampstead
or wherever I am. So I think that creating an intention together is very, very important.
And of course the secularized version of prayer and intention is positive thinking
which is huge in America. For a hundred years or more there have been all these books on
the power of positive thinking. Where you form an intention and then to sell more vacuum cleaners
or icopedios and then you sell more because you form the intention. And one of the most perverse
examples of positive thinking is of course the former president Donald Trump who was raised in
the church of positive thinking. The chap who was the prophet of positive thinking what's he
called Norman. I've forgotten the name for the moment but the power of positive thinking.
I don't have anything to do with these pop psychologists. Norman Vincent Peale.
Oh yes, Norman Vincent Peale. That's right. I did. You know the power of positive thinking.
He was the minister of something called the Marble Church in Manhattan where Trump's family went
and as a teenager Trump imbibed all this. So Norman Vincent Peale married him to his first wife.
So he was absolutely raised in formative on positive thinking and the idea is you just
say something and you can make it come true through power of intention. So he loses the
election so he says he's won it. You know this is pure positive thinking taken to its most
In my terms it's pure left hemisphere thinking because the left hemisphere
and believes that it has power to create the outcome at once and there's always an optimism
optimism and if something doesn't work out the way it believes it will deny that black is black.
It will say a paralyzed limb is such that they can use it freely and so it's power to deny
reality in order to fit in with its theory about reality is the defining feature of it
and I would say that you know Trumpism is just an expression of this mentality and not one that I
particularly want to take as my guide. Oh I certainly don't. The point about it is you see
that it's a kind of debased or secularized form. Yes I know what you're saying. It's about getting
what you want through positive thinking. You have success in love and business through positive
thinking. That's why these books sell so well. You know they're all about selling more of the
product and getting ahead and so forth and the basic principle that forming intentions can
actually have effects in the world but the point about proper prayer positive things about me
getting what I want through the power of my mind and that's where the left hemisphere goes magical
as it were or attempts to. Whereas the normal prayer I mean I myself being Christian always
start my prayers with the Lord's Prayer and part of that is right at the beginning is
Thy will be done so it's a prayer in a much as you were mentioning into a much larger context
of God's will and the larger purposes of which I'm a part and I play a part within that larger
pattern but if you and I suppose that would be more like a right hemisphere thing because it's
part of a global vision of what's happening in the world but then you could say the secularization
of prayer as it removes the right hemisphere aspect until it becomes left hemisphere activity
but I think positive thinking can't be understood as a movement or a practice
without its background in petitionary prayer from which it's kind of truncated derivative.
Yes no I think that's fine I don't think we need to to disagree too much about this
I mean I suppose that the touchstone for me is the is the holocaust I mean all these innocent
people and innocent children treated with utmost barbarity and you suppose that
the decent people, Jews, Christians and others did not pray that they should be spared this but
they weren't so you know that that is a I can I can there is a theodicy I think which is simply that
whatever God is God has to allow his creation freedom otherwise it's simply an extension
of himself and it's not another that he can love it is not a creation so that that creation
must have the freedom to do good or ill and unfortunately a lot of time we do evil.
Anyway let's talk about many other things as the walrus said what should we move to
panpsychism or would you like to talk about consciousness and matter or the nature of
time or where should we go? Well I think while we're on consciousness and I think one the view
that you started with you know our present bottom-up view I mean the traditional view is
the opposite that starts with consciousness that consciousness underlies all things
and then the whole of nature is produced through consciousness in the christian version
in the creed it says the cosmic christ you know through him all things were made
that there's a part of the divine the second person of the holy trinity the logast which is
the realm of names and forms it's through all creation is divinely or comes forth from an
ultimate source of form and structure that everything in that sense shares within the
divine consciousness god is in nature nature is in god and that is not panpsychism but
panentheism the idea that god is everywhere in nature and that nature is in god so god is
the mind of god transcends nature it's not just nature because of pantheism and so I think what
we've got at the moment now coming to panpsychism is the this the main driver for modern panpsychism
is to try and as you said to solve the hard problem because the hard problem is that if you
have a materialist view that the whole world is made up of unconsciousness or nothing else
there's no consciousness out there the only consciousness there is is inside brains and
moreover the maximum amounts inside human brains and maybe lesser amounts in dog brains and
elephant brains and perhaps tiny amounts in worm brains or ant brains that that consciousness
is confined to brains the entire universe is unconscious except on this planet and it's
unconscious on the entire planet except for the inside of human and animal heads that's the standard
view but it has the problem then of saying well if the whole universe is unconscious mass
unconscious how come we're conscious everything ought to be unconscious and then as you know
a lot of philosophers of mind of a materialist persuasion try to pretend we're not conscious
it's an illusion it doesn't do anything that's a happy phenomenon ridiculous yes let's try and
get rid of consciousness no so the panpsychist so you know the bright boy at the back of the class
and among materialist philosophers of mind said well what if have we say electrons and atoms are
a bit conscious then and we can explain our consciousness there's a difference of degree
not of kind but they usually end there once they get to the human brain they think they've made
their point and that's where panpsychism ends but as you know i've tried to carry this argument
further in in my paper in the journal of consciousness studies is the silent conscious
i tried to go with this panpsychist move and say okay well let's say that there really is this
kind of panpsychism then why stop at the human brain the sun is self-organizing system vastly
larger than our brains with vastly more complex electromagnetic patterns why can't the sun be
conscious why can't other stars be conscious and indeed whole galaxies with higher levels of
consciousness and then clusters of galaxies and then the entire cosmos and of course this is not a
new idea then Plato and platinus and many others talked about the world soul the the whole universe
having a kind of soul mind or organizing principle and that would be a kind of pantheistic
global consciousness but then the traditional view is that that itself has embedded within the larger
more inclusive source of consciousness which is in the end the source of nature
but so panpsychism as we currently have it is a fairly limited form of panpsychism it's a kind
of materialist panpsychism which just attributes kind of epiphenomenal consciousness to material
structures up to indicating the human brain yes yes well as you possibly know i'm a panentist
and it's a very different thing from being a pantheist but there is a way in fact of
approaching what is meant by panpsychism further towards panentism and almost making it
making them a union if you start from the idea that there is separate stuff in the realm of
matter and that you've got to find a union to it then you have this famous combination problem
but if you start from the view as i do that the promptly the ontological primitive is consciousness
there is nothing you can get beyond or behind you can't go beyond or behind consciousness
consciousness is the ultimate reality i was asked yesterday by clergy well is consciousness god and
i suppose yes but no because i don't want to sort of limit what god is rather in the panentistic
way consciousness is a divine creation but what i see is that matter is a mode of manifestation of
consciousness so at times it is it is something that is immaterial or appears to be but we only
know what we call material things because we have consciousness we don't know that we have
consciousness because of material things such as brains but we do know the one thing where
can be certain of his consciousness which is why it's so particularly annoying that people
are sitting on well-paid and prestigious chairs in american universities claiming that consciousness
is an illusion but anyway and consciousness is the basic reality and people say well matter
doesn't look like consciousness but then i suggest that we think about it as a phase of it in the way
that ice is a phase of water you know water is translucent and flowing and so forth but ice is
is static and opaque and extremely hard and so hard it can split your head open and in this room
there is a a tunnel more of of water in the atmosphere otherwise i couldn't breathe so
they don't look like one another but which is the real water they're all real water and i think the
there are all these ways in which consciousness can manifest and one of them is in what we call
matter and why should there be matter well i suggest there's matter because it provides
two important things for creation it provides importantly an element of resistance nothing
can come into existence without there being some element of resistance or something that moves
against that that trend of of creation i mean you know everything has this dual aspect you
what is friction friction stops movement certainly but it also starts movement without friction you
can't move and without there being some definition which means literally the the limits to things
that can't be the whole world that we experience with all its magical beauty and complexity so it
brings that degree of of a resistance and it brings a degree of temporary permanence in other
words the things i'm saying disappear as soon as i say them may linger in somebody's mind somewhere
for a few seconds but you know the desk at which i'm sitting will be here tomorrow absent a world
so those are the ways i would see it and that is completely constant with what you were saying
about the divine being what you're really saying is the divine is imminent and the
divine is transcendent and it's holding those two together which we can in the form of the trinity
trinity the trinity is the best explanation of panentism that there is you know it's like the
image of a book what is a book is it the thing in the mind of the creator or is it the the volume
here on the table or is it what happens when that volume is taken up and read by somebody
the book is all three of those but in different senses and this is what roomy said in one of his
meditation the spirit is the well spring it is the cup that conveys the water and it is the water
that quenches the thirst of those who are thirsty so i just thought i'd throw that in because i think
it's one way of making panpsychism a much more interesting phenomenon a much closer to panentism
i agree i i think that the best model of ultimate reality is trinitarian and we find it in many
different traditions as my favorite book on this is david bentley hart's book the experience of god
being is bliss where he shows that the an indian model sat chit ananda is is one way of looking
at this and sat is the ground of all being that which sustains all things all being and chit is
consciousness which is contains names and forms namarupa names and forms that the contents of
consciousness has is consciousness about things and these names and forms it's roughly what play
to call you know the platonic realm of ideas in the christian trinity is the logos and then
ananda joy or bliss that the divine consciousness is blissful which is why mystical experiences of
union with god are usually blissful because the divine consciousness is blissful now in the christian
model where we have god the father is the ground of being and the logos as the the second person
the trinity the names and forms which give form shape structure coherence to everything which
underlie the order and form of the world and also the order and form of our minds which is why we
can the traditional view is why we can understand nature is because they have a common source their
minds and the natural world and then the holy spirit which is the dynamical moving principle
wind energy breath flames flying birds you know it's the dynamical principle
i find that the when we understand matter as a combination of form and energy with energy
according to physics matter like an electron or a proton or an atom are organized by quantum fields
which give form the energy within them is the same energy we see in light and light can turn
into matter and matter can turn into light energy is promiscuous and can take any form
so what we have in nature is a universal energy this is a scientific view as well as a religious
view and we have a whole range of possible forms that energy can take and the source of both
energy is is the ultimate being and the source of both and the primary metaphor is of course
speaking because when i speak i'm the speaker the words i'm saying have formed structure shape
connection with each other meaning and but in order to say them i have to be breathing up there
has to be a flow of air and if i have just the words they're silent in my mind if i have just
the flow of air it's a kind of white noise of undifferentiated energy but the two together
make the words which can then relate and communicate and give structure and meaning
so i think that this metaphor i find this particular metaphor of the holy trinity particularly
helpful yes yes well i'm glad i i would endorse every word of that but i thought that we might
segue from there to the relationship between energy and matter we know that they're interchangeable
and e equals mc squared is a the most famous expression of this idea and i'm i'm very interested
in your idea which i believe will be adopted by mainstream science eventually when they catch up
which is that there are form fields of energy possibly electromagnetic energy which govern
the shapes of things and are also the cause of memory so there are memories that are stored
in form fields i believe this this is something that you would you might want to
demur but i think this is my understanding um because of course i mean i'm sure people are
aware but when we we've done this heroic task of decoding the genome you know which i don't want to
diminish in any way it was a staggeringly um clever and and and some brilliant piece of work
but at the end of the day what we discovered this is almost nothing there i mean there's
absolutely there's not just not quite enough information as but by many many orders of magnitude
far far too little most things are just simply not there and it reminds me slightly of that
episode of faulty towers i think it's number five of the first series where um the chef gets drunk
and um basal faulty has to go off to a restaurant and and get a duck for the for the gala evening
and unfortunately somebody switches the the plates around and so he takes away what he
believes is a duck but is in fact a blamance and he walks into the dining room with this sort of
i've got it here now and then he goes voila takes off of it and there's a blamance and he goes
nothing there and i i sort of see this as the state we're in now that we we thought we've got it
but actually it's not there so on a more serious note you you sent me a couple of papers that i very
much enjoyed um one of them was fairly technical but it explained itself at the end and what it was
really saying is at the lowest level of neurons and uh transmitters and so on there is no stability
or there is little stability not enough stability to say that any kind of memory is stored in this
pattern of neurons or whatever because it shifts it shifts in the brain after very short while it
may go somewhere else so but what is stable is not the manifestation in the brain substance
but some kind of electromagnetic field now expand on that Rupert please
well and i think both genes and uh brains have long been overrated um and in in the in the 1970s
and 80s these human genes would explain everything which is why literally billions of dollars were
poured into the human genome project as you say when it came when it finished you know they thought
there'd be a hundred thousand genes that you'd be able to patent them and make fortune and stuff
there are only 20,000 and you know rice plants have about 45,000 and see a few more than us so
it's not it's not it wasn't at all what was expected and then all these attempts to explain
hereditary in genome-wide association studies we compare tens of thousands of people's genomes
and they look at their height and where they get breast cancer where they you know schizophrenia
etc what do the genes actually explain well they explain about 2.5 percent of the inheritance of
schizophrenia less than 10 percent of the inheritance of breast cancer less than 20 percent of the
inheritance of height and yet these things are known to be heritable and so the genes don't
explain it so that's called the missing heritability problem in the trade and they try people have
tried to fill that gap with epigenetics the inheritance of quiet characters which was as
you know taboo in the 20th century absolutely I think it depends on morphic resonance the
connection of the kind of memory across time as you know is one of my favorite theories
and the same goes for memories in the brain that morphic resonance depends on similarity
any organism is more similar to itself in the past than to any other organism
therefore the most specific resonance is from its own past I think this maintains the form
of organisms even though the cells and the molecules turn over I mean our own molecules
are changing time and cells coming and going but the form remains more or less the same
and in the realm of memory I think that we resonate with ourselves in the past and that's how memory
works that it's not stored as the materialists believe they have to believe that it's material
in the brain because they've got nothing but material to explain things and so it has to be
material traces and people have tried over and over and over again for more than a hundred years to
find these memory traces storing memories in brains and they've proved ever more elusive
and the paper you were referring to is where people have looked in mouse brains
inserting extremely detailed electrodes so you can get tremendously fine grain picture of what's
happening in the in the brain and we know that brains have waves going through them it's not
just granular nerve cell activity it's we've known from electroencephalographs for years that there
are global wave patterns what this new study shows is that these wave patterns are highly specific
and very particular patterns of waves when a mouse learns something and when it remembers it
and when they first discovered the characteristic wave patterns they said oh we've located the
memory here they are these waves in this bit of the brain that in between when learning and remembering
they must have been stored in the cells in material traces that somehow then come to life in the form
of waves again but then they found that the wave patterns remain the same when they remember it
the same pattern but the pattern can move to different bits of the brain it it's it's not
in particular cells it's it's the ability of the nervous tissue to produce wave patterns that
underlies the memory and this is called representational drift so the standard theory of memory
just doesn't work and I think memory and the memory of form and the inheritance of form and
instinct I think instincts like habits of the species inherited by morphic resonance
um so I think that the the the standard materialist view trying to build it all up from granular
genes is simply falling apart through you know the um the inheritance problem um
the missing heritability problem and through things like representational drift and the
failure to find memories in the brain this of course has huge implications for consciousness
because the materialist view is that when we die if memories are all stored in the brain and the
brain decays then oblivion is the only possible outcome of death whereas all traditional belief
systems have had some sort of life after death whether it's a shadowy ancestral realm in Hades
or whether it's you know life after death or whether it's reincarnation all of them involve
a transfer or survival of memory beyond the survive beyond the death of the brain all of those
possibilities are ruled out by the materialist theory which is why it so fits well with kind
of atheist worldview um because it rules out a lot of religion is about thinking about consciousness
in a big picture including the possibility of life after death or whether it's our consciousness
resorbed into the ultimate consciousness or whatever um it they all assume most religions
assume that it doesn't just stop when we die whereas the materialist theory of memory says
that's the only possible option quite quite but am i right in understanding i mean i know you like
myself have had conversations with michael levin who is an evolutionary biologist at Tufts
um i think you've had conversations with him am i right yes yes i went to visit him actually i
admired him a few years ago when i was giving a talk at harvard i i went to um to visit him
and we we spent some time together in his lab and that was a purely private conversation but
did you find that there was um that he had moved towards i my sense is that he doesn't
actually want to embrace it fully or publicly but that he basically is a deeply sympathetic to
this way of thinking yes he is his his whole way of thinking is about holistic organizing
principles which are more for genetic fields that's my starting point um he's the the great
thrust of his work is that biology is organized by fields sort of top-down organization of the
development generation rather than building it up from the bottom from genes which simply doesn't
work no but there's a form of teleology or passive behavior in all living things that there's a
global organizing principles that are hierarchically organized and you've got cells within tissues
the cell has its own form of organization its own intelligence and the tissue containing millions
of cells as a higher level of organization and the organ a higher level still in the organism
and the society but this view is almost i mean it's very similar to what i i think and the one
thing he doesn't have is morphic resonance you see and um i he certainly knows about it because
when i went to visit him he pulled out a very well in thumb copy of my book a new science of life
my first about morphic resonance he asked me to sign it and and i know he's read it with great
attention and yes i mean he's very widely read i don't claim that i'm special privilege particularly
for me but or my book but um he's very widely read but he's certainly very aware of the holistic
tradition in biology very rooted in it and very very well aware of his history um you know going
back to the early 20th century people like greech and and the school i mean he's very aware of that
in a way that most biologists aren't and i think that he's hovering i think he'd love morphic
resonance to be true but he doesn't mention it he doesn't talk about it he doesn't do research on it
because he knows that this would mean he's at present has a very influential position within
biology it's he's very rare uh it's very rare for someone who has a holistic perspective to have such
wide influence in where molecular biology has dominated things for so long if he's started coming
out in favor of morphic resonance you know he'd be proclaimed a heretic like me and and this would
fall apart so if somebody else got good evidence for morphic resonance i think he'd be pleased and
i think he'd start doing work on it but i think he's in a position where he could take the lead
yes uh while you were talking about this intelligence of cells you know which is
something i'm very interested in i've written about in the matter with things um even a single cell
can inventively repair its own form although it's not programmed any rare in its genome to do so
and has no experience itself of such a repair being needed and in many ways that's a small
element in a picture which is much bigger which is in a good point that i think was made by um
fsc schiller or fcs schiller uh which is that when somebody's had a brain injury
how is it that other parts of the brain sort of know that they need to reconstitute this element
it is entirely different from anything that the machine can do because it involves a
conceptual pattern of the whole where it recognizes there's something that needs to be brought into being
rather like the idea of a representational drift there's another part of them on a much
bigger scale and more dramatically that one another area of the brain must be recruited
to do this job and that suggests that there is a form of what is going on at a higher level
which is exactly what they're finding in in the brain science of memory that you are talking about
so i think that's that's wonderful now that's why in the 1920s when the idea of morphogenetic
fields was first put forward people liked the field idea because if there's a field organizing
the development of an organism or a cell and if you damage it the field is still there which contains
wholeness and can account for regeneration and the analogy was with magnetic fields because
fields are intrinsically holistic even the fields of physics and after all fields were
only introduced into science by faraday in the 19th century in the 1850s before that it was
just purely mechanistic no pushing and pulling billiard balls and things although newton's
gravitational theory implied interconnectedness of the entire universe but the emphasis in classical
mechanics was on pushing and pulling and fields in a way are still involved in pushing and pulling
but um that they're through what i'm pulling than pushing i make a distinction i think the
things that push from behind are very mechanistic and hydraulic but that actually what we need to
be thinking about are those things both spiritually morally intellectually and biologically that draw
us from in front well yes of course magnetic fields push or pull if you put the same poles
together yes that's true but it's not symmetrical because if you shake up a whole lot of magnets
i sometimes do this for fun um they they automatically line up they repel each other
until they pull and so it's not that repulsion attraction comes out above repulsion because
you end up with interconnected magnet you don't end up with lots of repelled separate ones so
of course i love that they're repulsion and attraction are symmetrical in in an iron magnet
the rhythm is the domination of attraction and that sounds a very good point which to
um have a break
i have to sort of cut you off somewhere um because the conversation has been so wide
ranging and fascinating that you brought things out of each other um which is probably
you know new and fresh and that's what i think is so exciting about a dialogue
and where you have a creative interchange
