Okay, so I feel like I am the luckiest and happiest corpus callosum, separating and
reaching these two gentlemen, Ima Gilchrist and Rupert Sheldrake. I've had the honor
and pleasure to spend many hours in conversation with you two, and we're here at Rupert's
house because we've recorded a series of conversations with Rupert and also with Iain. The last
one covering his book The Matter With Things, and so we couldn't miss this opportunity to
be the three of us, and especially you two in conversation, so I'm really glad we're
doing this. So am I. Me too. So let's start with any curiosity back and forth, maybe
from Rupert about the hemisphere apothesis, and perhaps from me and Rupert about morphic
resonance, and then see where we go. All right. Well, I confess I haven't read the whole of
your book, but I've read several chats of it, and I've watched many of your talks and
so on, and one thing I deduced is that it's something to do with the two hemispheres of
the brain. That has come through quite loud and clear in every chapter, and there are
two things I'm curious about, about the hemispheres and your chosen central terrain. One is that
when people started doing these split brain operations, they were done, I think for epileptics
mainly, weren't they? They severed the corpus callosum that joins the two halves of the
brain together, and this enabled Sperry and other scientists to look at the lateralization
of function in the two hemispheres, and they had to do very sophisticated experiments to
show this, that all that leads to this idea of differentiated function. But the bit that
interests me is that they were doing these operations on patients who had their brain
split in two, or at least all down to, there were still a few connections in the basal
brain, but largely severed the connections between them, and the reason they were able
to do this and go on doing it was because when people went home, it seemed to have solved
the seizure problem, and they seemed perfectly normal. And for me, that's the most astonishing
thing of all in this research, that people who had had their brain completely cut in
two, not completely, but largely cut in two, worked to coordinate the movements of both
sides of their body, their mouth moved, coordinated as they spoke, their spouses and loved ones
hardly noticed any difference. And for me, that suggests either that the nervous connections
to the two halves of the brain are completely or largely unnecessary, which is very surprising,
or that the coordination between the two halves of the brain, which must be there in order
to walk and speak and swim and dance and do all the normal movements of life. I'm just
talking about motor coordination here, not just about, you know, the more sophisticated
cognitive functions, that then there must be still some coordination to the two halves
of the brain. And for me, that suggests there's a kind of resonance between the two halves
of the brain resonate, either electromagnetically or through something like morphic resonance,
that there's an overall wholeness within which these two parts are coordinated by resonance.
They're not coordinated by direct nervous connections, as one might otherwise have assumed.
So for me, it raises a completely different view of how the brain may actually work and
how the two hemispheres may be coordinated. What would you think about that? I mean, why
is it that severing the connection of corpus callosum that links the two halves has so
little manifest effect?
The first thing to say is that the corpus callosum, many people don't realize, is a
mammalian invention. So although reptiles, amphibians, and many other creatures lower
down that tree have two centers in their brain, they're not connected in this direct way.
Corpus callosum started with the first mammals. The second thing I think that's worth reflecting
on is that it's not uncommon for people to be born with what's called colossal age
genesis, in other words, they don't have a corpus callosum, and it's often a chance
finding a postmortem. So quite clearly, the finding that you can sever the connection
and people can lead a reasonably normal life, almost impossible really to, if casually encountered,
you wouldn't notice that there was a problem. These are consonant findings and they are
a bit mysterious, I agree. But what they think they show is that, first of all, this direct
connection between the hemispheres is not the only way in which the two hemispheres can
communicate. For example, they very obviously share a body and the eyes and the senses take
in both parts of the body, so they know where, if you like, they can sense outwardly as well
as inwardly what's going on. Mostly in these cases, the operation was done in somebody who
had a longish life and had got used to the coordination of the two hemispheres. They
communicate with one another through the endocrine system. There are all sorts of ways in which
they have a common internal environment. And as you say, they communicate at the level
of the brainstem and even a little bit above it. So there is definitely connection there
of a kind. I don't know quite how to understand the resonance though, because the immediate
question is, I mean, when you think of things resonating, you think the brain waves from
this hemisphere are they literally resonating with the other hemisphere? I don't know of
any evidence of that. So what sort of a resonance exactly is it that they might have?
Well, I'm not sure, but what I think of it, say that there was a field, a morphic field
covering the whole brain and brain activity, that included within it the activity of the
two hemispheres, then the way in which they're coordinated might be through this field,
co-ordinating the two parts within a larger hole. And the coordination wouldn't necessarily
mean that one echoes the other in a most literal resonance way. But the way in which, say, the
different organs of the body, or say, different atoms within a molecule are coordinated within
a larger field. Now, if you take a molecule, a very simple molecule like H2O or CO2, the
atoms, the carbon and the two oxygens in carbon dioxide, are bound together by bonds. But
the bonds that bind them together have an electron cloud that goes around the whole molecule.
Covalently bonded molecules have a cloud of electrons surrounding the whole molecule,
like a membrane around the whole molecule. And the bond between the actual individual
atoms is there are shared electrons that bond them. But there's a cloud, an electron cloud,
around the whole thing. And the vibratory patterns of carbon and oxygen within a CO2,
they have different vibratory patterns, but they're coordinated together by an overall
field which influences both through its influence on their vibratory frequencies and coordinates
them and is sensitive to changes in both in a way that communicates it to the other.
Something like that. I mean, this is a crude model and I haven't actually tried to work
it out in detail. But some overarching field of whatever kind, I mean, my favorite kind
of morphic fields, but some overarching, organizing field in which both are parts and which coordinates
the two, would seem to me to be one way of thinking about this.
Well, immediately, of course, I think of the way in which quantum field theory suggests
that the way we tend to think in terms of little balls or particles is at most of metaphorical
meaning. And that what is being referred to there is a very particular state of something
that is an overall field that has energy and exerts influence. So such fields are very
basic. And without the idea that there is some sort of coordinating field, it's difficult
to explain how a simple organism, a single cell organism, can detect changes and respond
to them in other parts of even that cell. I mean, this is something that has been puzzled
over by many biologists. And there seems to be some overall coordination. And of course
this goes much further when you come to a multicellular organism and how do the various parts of this
organism know that certain things need to be responded to elsewhere in the organism?
Look, we don't at the moment have any way of understanding how this communication takes
place. Yes. You see, I think it even applies to physical systems like crystals. I mean,
there's a longstanding problem, as you know, with snowflakes. You know, Johannes Kepler
wrote a monograph on the six-sided snowflake. I didn't actually know. He did. Yes, he was
fascinated by snowflakes. All these people have taken wonderful pictures of snowflakes.
You know, Bentley is one of the great ones, the classic pictures. What you see with the
snowflake is they all have six sides or arms. And the six arms are the same as each other.
But each snowflake is different. Exactly. So the thing is, how come they're coordinated?
Because you could say, well, the particular branches on the thing are random to do with
the immediate environment. But then you'd have to say to explain the whole snowflake
being the same. The every arm of the growing snowflake was exactly the same on that snowflake.
And they're all the same just because they were in exactly the same fluctuating environment,
fluctuating in the same way. And the next snowflake was in a completely different environment.
Or you could say, as intriguingly the late editor of Nature, Sir John Maddox, no friend
of mine in many ways, puzzling over this question of snowflakes, said there must be some kind
of internal resonance within the lattice structure of the snowflake that enables it to be co-ordinated.
It must be reading you. Possibly. But you see, there are resonances within crystal lattices,
there are resonant patterns and harmonics and stuff. And so say there's a co-ordination
between these seemingly separate arms of the snowflake, which could depend on some kind
of field that's over and above the individual arms. So that's the kind of model. And one
would expect with any holistic model of organisms that there's a field for the entire body that
helps coordinate the development of the body and all the organs within it. But this field
also helps coordinate development of different parts. So for example, when the fingerprint
patterns are similar on right and left hands, and when the right and left hand side of the
faces are similar, they're not exactly the same, of course. But I think in normal morphogenesis
there's a kind of right-left resonance going on all the time, which helps coordinate bilaterally
symmetrical structures. Now, of course, the brain's not exactly bilaterally symmetrical
as one of the points that we know from its anatomy as well as its function. But some
overarching field that enables this to happen. That to me is why one reason I myself got
interested in split brains in a sense, the opposite from your own interest, which is
about the differences. And I was just interested in how come the co-ordination is still so
remarkable and so integrated that we don't experience two, most people don't experience
two sub-personalities all the time. And the idea of a co-ordinating field that includes
both and co-ordinates both would help to explain why we don't go around with right-hand
Rupert and left-hand Rupert, one with a wonderfully integrated view of the world and the other
with a kind of obsessive literal one.
Is your question perhaps rephrased by saying, is there an organizing principle that unites
the master and his emissary? Or can the master do it on its own?
No, I think one way of thinking about what you're talking about is that just as in the
developing organism there needs to be differentiation, say that on one side of the body there'll
be a liver on the other, you know, spleen and so on. These things are also part of a single
overarching field, if you like. And the brain could be seen as similarly asymmetrical, but
part of that asymmetry is already part of a single field. I think you must have been
reading McGilchrist, actually, because of course I have wonderful images of snowflakes, actually,
and talk about exactly this issue, which also occurs in deer antlers, for example.
Deer antlers have a particular form peculiar to that deer. If you cut them off, they regenerate
exactly according to that pattern, but where this pattern is stored is not known. So overall
we have problems that are generally neglected because they're difficult to answer, but as
soon as you start thinking about it in a more inquiring way, which I would have thought
was the point of science, that's a difficult question. How is it that these things have
this overall confusion? I mean, no, for example, in the brain, I forget the exact figure, but
it's something staggering, like 500,000 neurons are generated every minute in the business
of gestation in the womb, and all those neurons have to end up precisely in the right place
in the brain, and the brain has minute architectural... Where exactly is this information stored
about the three-dimensional structure alone of the brain? I don't think it can be even
encoded in simple linear code in the sense that we think of code. Of course, we've now
dropped the idea that it's a taller linear code in the way the computer is coded, but
instead must be a three-dimensional code, and so we know about the conformation in epigenetics
of the genes involved. But nonetheless, where is this... You don't see anywhere in that
this intricate three-dimensional structure stored, and the simplest thing I can imagine
is that there is some overarching field. Can I just add a couple of other amusing or interesting
things? I mean, one is the striking fact that people who are born without limbs nonetheless
have the sense of the limbs. They've never had them, but nonetheless, they have an internal
sense of those limbs, and Ramachandra describes a woman who had no limbs, no upper limbs,
having phantom limbs, which she couldn't stop gesticulating when she talked. So this
part of evolutionary history, the hand movements are coordinated with speech, was there in
her, although she had never experienced hands or arms. The other thing, which is raised
by F. S. Schiller, the Victorian philosopher, Oxford philosopher, which is a very good
point, is we know, of course, that when people have damage to one part of the brain, other
parts of the brain can take over the function. But how is this coordinated? How does one
part of the brain that's supposedly doing whatever it does know we need speech? How
are we going to get it back? I mean, in a way, there's a need for something overarching
to draw out that function in a new place in the brain.
Well, of course, my own starting point for my ideas on morphogenetic resonance was morphogenetic
fields, form-shaping fields. And I started my scientific career working on plant development.
Yes.
And how is it that leaves and flowers and stem ends and so on develop? And the idea of morphogenetic
fields, first put forward in the 1920s, was exactly that of a coordinating field that
brings forth these patterns, and underlies regeneration. And so, for example, in the
regeneration of salamander eyes, so-called wolfian regeneration, you cut out the lens
of the eye of a new torus salamander, and it will regenerate new lens from the edge of
the iris, which is not how the lens forms in the embryo, it forms by folding in the skin
from the outside. So there's a completely filling and missing structure by modifying
some other structure would never normally be modified to create, to fill that function.
And all this similar kind of coordination applies in social insects. If you remove some
of the workers, or remove some of the soldiers, or remove some of the hive, or something. The
whole system re-adjusts, they stop doing what they're doing, some of them take on different
functions and roles. So these coordinating fields, I think, underlie all of biology,
all of nature of self-organizing systems. And phantom limbs are particularly interesting
because I think in a phantom limb, the phantom is the field of the limb which is experienced
from within, but which doesn't have a material structure associated with it. And as you may
know, one of the experiments that I proposed in my book Seven Experiments That Could Change
the World is on detecting phantom limbs. I recruit amputees through veterans' organizations,
tried recruiting them through hospitals, but they were extremely uncooperative. And then
I have the phantom amputee, but they push their phantom arm through one of six positions
in a barrier, a door, for example. And on the other side, that's done in a randomized sequence,
on the other side, I have people who do subtle energy medicine, Reiki, Helos, and so on. And
one at a time, I lead them in, I say, one of those panels has a phantom arm sticking through
it, and the others don't, which has got the phantom, and they sort of feel in different
places. And they say that one, and they write more than chance so far, substantially more
than chance. So the main objection I've had to this is, well, how do you know it's not
telepathy? If we've moved, if the skeptic of the argument says, it must be telepathy,
and we've moved it. That's beautiful. Yes, yes. But then, as a test for that, I haven't
done this yet, but the control, the telepathy control is you ask them to imagine pushing
their phantom arm through, or you ask them to extend their phantom arm with a step back
yard or two to start with and extend it so it doesn't actually go through the door.
And so that would be another control. Now, these experiments are not expensive. In fact,
they're free. So I think that actually this whole question can be taken much further. This
is not the kind of thing people do in labs at the moment, but they could. But before
we leave the subject of the divided brain and all that, I have a more, probably a simpler
easy to answer question. You could probably refer me to page 3027 in your Magnum Office,
which is, I'm a pianist, and so obviously playing the piano involves coordinating the
right and the left hand. And the left hand, which mainly does the rhythmic section as
well, is clearly controlled by the right brain. And the right hand, which does the sort of
melody and all the rest is by the left brain. And in playing the piano, these are coordinated.
And how does this map on to your interpretation? I'm sure it maps wonderfully well, but I just
love to know how. Well, one of the mysteries is that music is abnormally lateralized in
the brain of performers. So in the general population who are not professional musicians
or full-time musicians, the only bit of music that is really understood or interpreted by
the left hemisphere is rhythm. And melody and harmony are almost exclusively understood
and experienced in the right hemisphere. So that seems on the face of it very different
from what you're describing. And one of the things is that for most instruments, the two
hands need to be coordinated for all these activities. And so when you look at professional
musicians, what I've just described is not the case. So they have developed a left hemisphere
which is also capable of understanding melody and harmony. And the right hemisphere already
actually understands rhythm anyway. In fact, complex rhythms in the ordinary person are
understood by the right hemisphere, not by the left. It's only simple rhythms the left
can get. The sort of thing that I constantly hear everywhere I go, blaring out of cars
on speakers in shops and so on, which is just boom, boom, boom. That is the left hemisphere
speaking. But I think what you're describing is an effortful coordination which actually
modifies the brain. I see. Because you see, I thought on the basic, I mean my understanding
of McGillchrist 101 was that actually the right and left hand should be reversed. And there's
no reason why when the development of piano playing took place, the keyboards shouldn't
have been the other way round. With the deep notes at the top. Yes. Well, yes, with the
keyboard reversed. So you play with the left hemisphere, the right hand would do the rhythm
and the left hand would do, I mean it could have been exactly the mirror image of the
way it is now. There's nothing in the technology that says it has to be that way round. It's
quite right. I never really thought about that. I think that you'd have to have had,
not just a reversal of, you'd have to have had the higher notes on the left hands part
of the scale. Yes. That's right. The thing is that in the brain there are certain things
that are positionally, it seems like, for example, the sequence from left to right in which things
grow is innate in, for example, chicks. They tend to see that a series of numbers grows
as you move towards the right, which is the way in which we see from one to itself. And
so we start from lower to higher. And it may be that this is also the way in which it seems
fundamentally that the lower notes are basic. They are the base. And the other is what is
built more complexly on top of it. And so it may be natural that an instrument developed
in this way. But I haven't studied all instruments around the world to see whether or not there's
a project for somebody with nothing else to do. Well, look at Islamic music, you see,
because they read from right to left. Yes. And so their whole sense of the way things
develop. Yes. You start at the back of the book by our criteria and you read from right
to left. It's the exact opposite. Of course. If pianos had first been developed in the
Caliphate, in Baghdad or somewhere, perhaps the upper part of the keyboard would have been
the lower notes and the rhythm section, and it might have been a mirror image of existing pianos.
It's a hypothetical, but some research, anthropological search, would be interesting.
Yes. I don't know why it's ended up that way in brief, but that is the way it is. And
it's also true, of course, of all instruments. I don't know of any instruments that are just
played with one hand. I mean, it's one of the things we do, even with sort of playing a flute,
playing a violin. Both hands have to be coordinated, at least in Western music, that is,
almost as I think we know. So the hands have to work together in this way, and the brain
is modified in those who do it, so that it can. I wonder how much learning the piano,
you see, I started learning piano when I was five. I come from a musical family. And my son,
Merlin, learned at five, Cosmo, who started learning at four. And that means from a very early
age, they and lots and lots of other people have actually been using brains in a way that
would be somewhat counterintuitive if they read McGillchrist first. So does this affect
the actual development? Do people who learn the piano or other instruments at an early
age develop differently? I mean, professional musicians, you said, are noticeably different.
But what about amateur musicians who play every day?
Well, of course, the distinction is not between amateur and professional, but between people
who are constantly playing and those who are only occasionally playing. So I don't think
there's a problem with that. But I would imagine that starting early to learn an instrument
like this will modify, certainly we know in respect of the appreciation of sound that
it does modify the brain. And I don't see why it should not modify the brain in other
ways. You and your two sons have interesting brains that work perhaps slightly different
from the standard Western brain. Yes. Yes. Well, that's a really interesting possibility,
isn't it? I don't know if anybody has done more tests on professional pianists or, you
know, I don't know of any. No. Well, it would be a good research area from the point of view
of brain naturalization, wouldn't it? Absolutely. When I have seen reports saying the people
who learn the piano or other instruments have a different way in which they think and stuff.
Okay. But it would be an obvious thing to do because this involves a close coordination
of the two hemispheres in a way that, I mean, we need it in every physical activity, walking,
running, jumping, sports skills, presumably, you know, playing cricket, playing football,
etc., right and left feet. Presumably all these physical skills involve coordination
of hemispheres. Well, they do, but the difference is that the left hemisphere and the right
hemisphere and motor performance each control the other. And there's not the, you know,
there's the distinction that there is between melody, harmony and rhythm, if you see what
I mean. Yes. So music introduces a whole different aspect. Yes. There's no reason to suppose
that we should be discoordinated when we move. And then animals that have no corpus callosum
are perfectly well coordinated. You know, this question of yours could be scaled up to
in asking how could we nurture young brains so that they have an easier time to grasp the
world as you've proposed in your book or another way to put it would be how to nurture the
Ruperts and eons of the future, which is something I'm very concerned with. What can we do to
facilitate those intuitions that you both have been pursuing in different ways, but
scientifically and beyond? You know, if you have some thoughts on that. Well, one thought
I have that seems relevant is that I think that to the extent that what you're asking
for is people who think more flexibly. There is a problem with dogma in both in philosophy
and in science. It's a natural tendency for things to ossify, to fix prematurely and not
allow evolution. It's natural for thought to evolve. And to do this, it has to be creative.
And the best kinds of thinking that will allow this are those in which analytic acumen is
there, but coupled with rather like the left and the right hand, coupled with a more imaginative
and intuitive way of thinking. And I describe the insights of many scientists and mathematicians
and it's quite extraordinary how virtually all of them describe this so-called ah-ha
moment as being the creative thing that reveals the new Gestalt. And this ah-ha moment is
robustly associated with the superior temporal gyrus and sulcus of the right hemisphere.
So we know that this is right hemisphere, mediate it. And the trouble with our education now
is that it's very much technically orientated. More and more we're saying what's the point
in teaching people unless it's teaching them some mechanical skill that will be useful to them.
But in fact, the point of an education is to draw out of us our humanity. And humanity used to be
part of what we discussed in school, the humanities. And I think that a greater emphasis on music,
on poetry, which also involves very largely the right hemisphere, whereas ordinary
discursive language is probably more dependent on the left hemisphere than on both.
These ways of thinking should be part of the way we educate children. What do you say, Rupert?
Yes. Well, I think there are some forms of education like sports, physical skills,
crafts, which are part of education. I mean, they're always being squeezed out by the senses
on more science, more literacy, more language, more learning. I think training other skills
like intuitive abilities and emotional intelligence, all these things, they seem to be really important.
But we've got a system of education which is designed for, well, basically it follows
from Victorian design, doesn't it, of preparing people for life in an industrial society.
One thing is to make children used to getting up and showing up for school at nine o'clock
in the morning and fixed hours, I mean, which you need in an industrial society,
disciplining from an early age. And I think a lot of it's about that.
I think that's very important myself.
It's important, but it's not primarily about creativity.
Obviously so.
Actually, for most people, I don't think creativity is, I don't think we necessarily need to have creativity
built into the entire educational system because it's a major disadvantage.
It's a disadvantage for a lot of people to be creative. I mean, if you've got a regular job
and you're creative, you're going to have an awfully difficult time.
Most jobs require lack of creativity.
Yes.
And, you know, I went into the scientific career believing that the importance of scientists
be original and creative. And I soon discovered there was every obstacle to doing that.
You know, whenever I'm trying to be or am being or, you know, doing something that seems to me original and creative,
instead of people saying how wonderful, I mean, the vast majority of people say rubbish, nonsense,
where's the evidence, etc. And if you have the evidence and you do an experiment you think is creative,
you say, well, you've got these results, but where's the theory?
You know, and as Alex sometimes says, you know, one of the responses I get to my research on telepathy
and things like that is, you know, it's all very well in practice, but does it work in theory?
Yes, it does.
So actually originality is a major disadvantage for a lot of people.
Well, it may be, but it depends what we mean by an education.
If we mean simply preparing people for routine jobs, then we're limiting their potential
and we're prescribing what is valued in society.
Whereas if we were to encourage some people, definitely need their originality enhancing
or not even enhancing but liberating, I think it's there in a lot of people.
But it does need disciplining as well. This is why I see that both parts are important.
I think that modern education both lacks discipline and lacks originality.
It's about sticking information into people inefficiently and then hoping they can regurgitate it later.
But that's not an education at all.
An education is about enabling something that is innate to grow.
But that growth also, if you like, needs a formal field in which to grow.
And that should be provided by good teachers and was, I hope for you and certainly was for me,
by highly disciplined, intellectually acute, but also imaginatively inspired teachers from whom I learned.
You know, this was extraordinarily important.
Now, I was very lucky too with my teachers at school and at university.
But I mean, what I want to emphasize is it's not about letting it all hang out.
I mean, there was an enormous amount of discipline.
You know, at an early age, one had to know trigonometry and calculus.
One had to be able to understand Greek grammar and Latin grammar, all these things.
And these are difficult.
I mean, there are all things that you get by sort of going, oh, well, whatever.
I mean, they really require serious application.
And one does need that structure.
And I believe that in learning a skill, and you talked about that,
and you're talking about manual skills largely.
I think they're very important crafts and skills.
But to begin with, you have to do rather laborious copying of things.
But then you're in the position to be able to go further than that.
But you need that first element to be there before you can go further.
I mean, I didn't write this book out of not knowing anything about neuroscience or, you know,
years of hard work involved.
And your work, it also involves years of hard work, I know.
It's that commute from right to left to right that you mentioned, right?
Yes, it needs to go from right to left and back to right.
By which I mean that one's first apprehension of something is a perceptive and imaginative understanding.
And then one needs to, as we learn more, by the process of analysis
and seeing the structure of what one's doing
and making comparisons and putting things together in a certain way.
But they must never stop there.
That is an intermediary phase.
And then it needs to be reintegrated into a new whole in which that laborious analysis has been not lost
because that suggests that it was pointless, but it had its point at a certain period in time.
What your discussion reminds me of the simple organisms I used to study,
E. coli, how they navigate the world.
It's like learning to tumble and learning to run.
They need to run and tumble.
So in a way, a certain dose of dogmatism is needed to just keep on going for some while
because it would stop at every point.
To reconceive that you would get nowhere.
But if you don't stop and tumble, then you also go nowhere.
So it's this balance in a way.
It's very interesting.
And of course science needs to balance its openness to change and newness
and its willingness to stick to certain things unless there's a good reason for moving on.
Otherwise it would be changing its mind about everything all the time.
So everything in life is a matter of balancing things
and coming to a position which honours and respects and enhances by integrating
the two things that we think are separate in some way, but they're not really separate.
I agree.
Now let's not make of your particular biographies as a friend of mine says,
a universal category, but I'd like to hear a bit about your own paths
because it's clear that you've gone through the margins or the edge.
You could even say cutting edge.
You haven't followed the prescribed path.
At your risk, you've succeeded.
That's why maybe we don't have your other people who didn't make it,
but you've made it and in a way your paths are similar in that respect.
And what does that tell us as a model or what it doesn't tell us as a model for other people?
Well, I suppose we're both feral academics
and we were both fellows of colleges in Oxford, me at Cambridge
and we somehow escaped from domestication and lived in the wild.
As much in the wild as you.
I mean, you were treated to the fastnesses of the Western Isles.
I'm merely on the edge of Hampstead Heath.
But I find, I don't know if you do, that very often now,
and I didn't think this was always the case, but very often now,
the really interesting ideas are coming forth from places that are not in the middle of the mainstream.
They're coming from people who are working on their own or working in small groups
and these are producing highly interesting and imaginative propositions
whereas in the mainstream there's far too much emphasis on not stepping out of line,
not rocking the boat, and if you say something that isn't what your colleagues are saying,
then you won't get promoted, you won't get a grant and all the rest.
So it must be deadening actually living like that
and I'm just not prepared to live like that and I don't expect you to be a writer.
No, no, but it does.
I mean, it's not a career path one can recommend to other people
because it's not very easy to survive outside the framework of regular salaries.
Alex is a uniquely privileged being Spanish in a way that we can't be being British
because being a scientist in Spain is to be part of the civil service
and once you've got tenure as he has, then you've got it for life
and so he can do what he likes.
So he's in a uniquely privileged position of having an actual salary
which neither of you or I have had for a very long time
and the freedom to be inquiring into all these things
and talking to you and me and investigating all sorts of areas of science
with a remarkable freedom.
Two caveats here.
One is once you've got tenure, that's one caveat
and what has happened to those who didn't get it
and were perhaps more valuable
and also those who got it, how the whole process has shaped their minds, that's one thing
and the second paradox is I have many colleagues who got tenure
but they continue, I mean, probably some of them may want to continue doing what they're doing
but even having tenure, like some people say, I'll wait until I retire
and then I'll write that book or that idea
and perhaps that's also a good idea to do it later but maybe it's too late.
Maybe it's too late often, I think.
One you need to get to tenure and even if you get there, it's no guarantee for anything of that.
No, it doesn't guarantee people or take you seriously.
I mean, I used to think that people who got the Nobel Prize
would have enough confidence to do and say what they think and would be taken seriously
but actually even the Nobel Prize is no guarantee.
Brian Josephson, for example, at Cambridge,
well, as soon as he got interest in psychic phenomena and the nature of consciousness
although he's a professor with tenure, as a Nobel laureate, a fellow of Trinity College,
his colleagues make sure he doesn't get students and that he's marginalized, etc.
because his views are untenable in their eyes.
So even the Nobel Prize and tenure, it may guarantee a certain freedom of manoeuvre
but it doesn't guarantee that what one does will have much influence.
The influence is perhaps another matter but I haven't found that, I mean,
largely being in the mainstream race of my life has impeded me.
I mean, because I was, you know, I was a fellow of Oxford College
and I became a psychiatrist and director at the Bethelman Morsley Hospital in London
which is of all the institutions of mental health,
one of the most, you know, central in the world.
And I was salaried but of course there was freedom to use what one saw and think in another way
and I think it's open to more people than one thinks.
They don't have to go out completely on a limb
but if you look at what you experience and think about it in a deeper, broader context,
you see something different.
And I just think that an awful lot of people see what they're doing in science
as sort of self-evident and not raising further questions.
It's a rather unusual kind of mind that asks the question,
so why does it actually do that? Why does it work like that?
And I have found one of the best books on this topic is Erwin Chargaff's
autobiography, Heraklite and Fire.
You know, he was a very great, honoured biochemist at Yale
who laid the groundwork for Crick and Watson and so on, the author of Chargaff's Rules,
but he writes brilliantly and with enormous imagination about what he sees science to be
and he contrasts it with this extremely deadening, simple following out of linear paths.
I think it's partly a result of the massive expansion and professionalisation of science.
Exactly.
I mean, so he would say in World War, it becomes a career path.
It was a struggle. In the 19th century a lot of scientists in Britain
were either amateurs like Charles Darwin who never had an academic job.
Faraday was at the Royal Institution, not in the university,
in a rather eccentric small institution.
But when it became professionalised, something that T. H. Huxley was one of the drivers of in Britain,
to make science a professional, like a priesthood,
where only people who got the right degrees and qualifications could teach it
and influence people through universities.
The school system and what was taught in schools and all that was professionalised.
And then you've got to have the right qualifications.
His aim was to squeeze out country vicos who did wonderful natural history,
who believed in God.
He thought no one in science should believe in God, or if they did,
it should be kept at least very much their private life.
You've got to have two priestshoods.
That's right. You have one priesthood and then this model of scientists as priests
then spread to the Soviet Union.
Scientists were the highest rank of the intellectuals and all that kind of thing.
And so it became all over the world.
In countries like India and China, engineers and scientists are very, very high prestige.
They're not terribly high prestige in Britain because they're regarded as boffins and geeks and things.
The highest prestige goes to people who've been to Eaton and Oxford
and who belong to the Bollinger Club and become conservative prime ministers,
at least for a while.
So they don't know that the person you're referring to currently enjoys great esteem in the country.
No, no. It's only temporary.
It shows these things are always temporary.
But still, the point is that in Britain, scientists have never commanded,
Newton's being venerated and Darwin's being venerated and so on,
but it's never been like there's quite the priesthood level that it achieves in many other countries.
But nevertheless, it's the idea is of a kind of priesthood.
And then you've got all the ranks of the sort of deacons and sub-deacons and stuff.
It becomes a whole professional thing. Then it becomes a career.
And when I lived in India, I worked with Indian scientists.
I was an Indian International Scientific Institute.
Most of my Indian scientific colleagues had not gone into science
because of a deep curiosity about nature.
They'd gone into it because their parents believed in education
and science and medicine and engineering were the three top careers.
And so any bright children had been pushed into that
and pushed in their studies and pushed through the university.
And then they got jobs in high prestige institutions if they worked hard enough.
And their whole social status and the ability to marry off their daughters
to more prestigious husbands in an arranged marriage system
moved them up the social scale instead.
It wasn't at all about curiosity for most of them.
And I think for many scientists today here in Britain,
it's not primarily about deep curiosity about nature.
It's about being a functionary within a system.
Well, as Whitehead said, this divorce between science and philosophy
has been a congestion of both.
And I think that science properly understood is a form of philosophy.
It's an investigation of philosophy in certain particular empirical methods.
But it has philosophical implications
and it draws on philosophical principles that it's outset.
You may not understand that it does that.
But that's more dangerous when people don't realize what it is they're doing.
They don't do it well.
But I think that we need to get back to the understanding
that science has philosophical meaning
and that this is not enough discussed.
If one needs philosophically minded scientists
and scientifically minded philosophers,
philosophers who are willing to spend time
learning about the science that will give them insights
into the forming of their philosophy.
Well, I mean, here in Britain the word science wasn't introduced
until the 19th century.
And before that it was called natural philosophy.
And Newton's great book, Principia Mathematica,
the mathematical principles of natural philosophy.
So I think that natural philosophy
is actually a really good word and for it.
I'm a member of the main Cambridge University Scientific Society
which is called the Cambridge Philosophical Society.
Because when it was started in the early 19th century
it was called natural philosophy as Cambridge.
I subscribed to biological reviews
which was on the main review journals in biology,
the subtitles of the Cambridge Philosophical Society.
So I think natural philosophy is what you are.
I like to think it's what I and Alex are too.
And I think that probably most people who listen to us
are natural philosophers.
And so in a sense it's a matter of recovering
what was the root of what we now call science.
Before it was hijacked by this professionalization movement
and this creation of this priesthood
and making it an exclusive professional organization
that you have to obey the rules of.
One of the things I feel about the age we live in
is the predominance of the administrative or bureaucratic mind
over almost every aspect of our lives.
And I think this is deeply damaging
and I think it's an exhibition of the left hemisphere's way
of both trying to understand
but misunderstanding what it's dealing with
and above all to control it.
And I think that what has happened is that
yes, I understand the analogy with the church
but what has really happened is that something much less glamorous
has happened in science
which is simply that it's become a huge bureaucracy.
It has money to spend
which follows people who tow the party line
do more of what everyone else is doing
and it's very difficult in this sclerotic hierarchy
as it would be in the middle of an enormous Byzantine civil service
to be able to break out and see something else or do something else.
So I think the future will depend on the development
of small private colleges where people are very much
you take in only the brightest people.
I think that's very important.
We're sort of worried by the concept of elitism
but looked at another way.
Education depends on and our future depends on
people who have the capacity to think clearly
and to think imaginatively being encouraged
and that's what a good college should be doing in my view.
And so I think it's from those small institutions
which are beginning to spring up in competition
with the great universities
that the future will flourish.
And I'm sorry about that
because I have a great allegiance
for the enormously interesting and valuable history
of our great institutions.
I'm very sorry to say this
but they're beginning to turn themselves into something
that can be easily dispensed with.
How to prevent those institutions from following the same path
and also how to solve the accreditation problem there?
Because in a way that I wanted to ask you both this very question
like you have navigated outside the institutional seas
but nevertheless there's some appreciation for institutions
still in both of you.
Very much so, yes.
How much of it can we still embrace
and how much we need to just reject?
So back to the future, these future scientists and philosophers
are they going to be in institutions
and if they're not, how is the new order
or the new business going to be
in terms of accreditation and so on?
It's like designing a new Atlantis
you know, what's the new new Atlantis?
Four hundred years later.
Well I don't have a crystal ball, I don't know
but I think that what you say in the sense
that there needs to be an institution
but it may not be these institutions I think is right.
I mean everything evolves
and evolution is partly that things have their proper period
and the great universities, Oxford and Cambridge for example
have a thousand year history
they're currently committing suicide in my view
by not sticking to their guns
and so this means that other institutions will spring up
because there's a natural need to nourish those
who will benefit from being given freedom and discipline together
and the time to fulfill these things.
Let me tell you something about my own experience
which will sound horribly, you know, I don't know, unusual
but I got this fellowship at 21 of all souls
and I was to embark on a doctorate on 18th century English literature
and this fellowship was a seven year fellowship
after examination there's this strange thing
that doesn't have any equivalent to Cambridge
or anywhere else in Oxford
of a college that consists only of fellows
not of any students, graduate or otherwise
and when you become a fellow after examination
which is a three day examination
if you become one you get seven years
in which to do whatever it is that interests you intellectually
and Derek Parfit, a very well-known philosopher
said to me, don't do your doctorate
anybody can do a doctorate, that's part of the sort of machinery
but you've been given something completely extraordinary
which is seven years in which you can pursue ideas
and I thought he was absolutely right
and at the time I followed all kinds of interests
in science, in other languages, in literature, in philosophy
and at the time I thought, you know, this is wonderful
but I didn't realise until much later in my life
why it had been so important
and I'm not sure that even, I don't know enough
I mustn't speak about what I'm not certain of
but I think that the ethos of all souls is rather changed
as everything does
and there's more of that, you know, we must keep an eye on what he's reading
and has he published a paper and all that
but I was free of that
and later in life I thought, well what did I make of that?
and to me the answer came with the publication of these books
because I couldn't possibly have written them
unless I'd been allowed to range wild, as you should say
but I did it within an institution
over the fields of things from which I drew
the bigger picture I've tried to express in these books
which can only be done if you've had the ability to range
so this business of range
which is exactly the opposite of the tendency towards ever greater specialism
is very, very important
and I think that more institutions ought to
follow what happened in the 60s
which was, you know, institutions used to take people
that had proved themselves to be intelligent
and give them carte blanche
and they gave them an office, gave them an income for a few years
and then said, follow your instincts, you know, what you find interesting
and out of that came many, many inventions
Well I had a very similar period of freedom to you
and actually I feel enormously grateful for it
and I had two periods of freedom
First of all, when I was an undergraduate at Cambridge
I became increasingly disenchanted with mechanistic science
which I was studying
I started reading Goethe and I had the idea of a holistic science
and everyone assumed I'd go on and do a PhD
because I got a double first
but I wasn't sure if I wanted to
I mean I liked science but I didn't like killing animals all the time
and I didn't like treating them as machines
and the whole attitude of mechanistic science
so I found there was this fellowship at Harvard
that was open to people from Cambridge for a year
in the graduate school, I applied for it and I got it
and when I got to Harvard to do history and philosophy of science
to step back to see the bigger picture, that's what I wanted to do
I found that they treat graduate students at Harvard
in a way I hadn't been treated since I was about 15
read these pages this week, read those and we'll test you
to make sure you've read it
it was spoon feeding, there was no freedom
I tried doing what they said
and after about a month
I just couldn't do it, I mean you'd have to stay up till midnight
every night to read all this stuff and they'd test you
there was no time to read anything else
to study anything else that interested you
it was completely on their own track
so I went to see the professor of history of science
who was in charge of me and I said
look, I love being here at Harvard
and I'm really interested in these subjects
this isn't the way I learn and this isn't the way I work
I don't really need a master's degree from Harvard
because I can buy one from Cambridge for 75 pounds
and in those days
all you had to do was stay alive for three and a third years
and pay five pounds and you've got a master's degree
if you've got a bachelor's, same as Oxford
same as Oxford, yes
so presumably you bought yours too
or maybe you didn't bother
yes, it came to me automatically
I don't think I had to pay
oh yes, I had to pay five pounds
so I said to the professor
I just don't need your master's degree
and he said are you sure
and he said there's a Harvard master's degree
and I said well I'm quite sure
I'll get a Cambridge one
and I said is there any way out
and just be here for a year
and be part of the university
and not do all these exams
and tests and things
I said I think that would be much more useful
and valuable for me
he said well actually we do have a rarely used
provision called special students
and he said
and I said well can you make me one
and he said well I'd have to talk to
the committee and stuff
so anyway
I got him to register
they agreed
and I was registered as a special student
so I was there in the graduate school at Harvard
I was doing a bit of teaching
to earn a bit of money in the natural sciences program
in biology labs
in biology 101
I was teaching lab classes
but otherwise, apart from my obligation to do that
I had complete freedom
I went to lectures in history of art
and philosophy
and classics
in history
I had the entire
I got the university catalogue
and I went through the list of lectures every week
and I did a lot of philosophy
in history of science
but I had an entire university
at my disposal
and whenever I was doing exams
I just caught the train to New York
and had fun in New York
for a few days
and it was the most blissful way of being at a university
and then later
when I got my fellowship at Clare College
in Cambridge
it started as a research fellowship
and it was
I had a six year research fellowship
where
my teaching load was limited
to six hours a week of
tutorials and since
in Cambridge, like Oxford, the vacations
last six and a half months a year
this is only six hours a week
for five and a half months a year
and actually less than that
because half a month is exams
it was not exactly an onerous teaching burden
it was the nicest form of teaching
to students at a time
informally in tutorials
and the rest of the time
I was completely free
I don't think I even read annual reports
then I got a research fellowship
from the Ross site
and I did have to write a one page annual report
but I was completely free
and quite into it
when I said to the college
I just got this
thing from the Ross site
a tropical research grant
and I'm going off to the University of Malaya
for a year to study rainforest plants
and travelling through India on the way
they said
well fine
it was an incredible
period for me
laid the foundation for everything I've done since
so like you
given an extraordinary freedom
within an institutional framework
which was
vastly valuable
now very very few people have that opportunity
absolutely
and you know what I want to emphasise
is I
like you I think it's very important
like you I feel very grateful for having been given it
my worry is that it won't be
given in the future to many people
but I think it's important
we live in an era
of micro-management
and I think micro-management produces only mediocrity
if you're constantly controlling
and dictating what people
read and think you'll only get
mediocrity
and if you give people a degree of freedom
okay there's a risk that they will abuse it
and they won't come up with something
but it's a much smaller risk
than the risk of micro-managing them
which ensures that they will never come up with anything interesting
so you actually have to
in a way trust
you have time to people
to explore things
that are of interest to them
otherwise it's the death of the life of the mind
it's for this reason that so many
as we both know
in the past so much of the science of the 18th
and 19th century
and even into the 20th century
comes from the work
of priests
of vickers of monks
I mean Mendel was a monk
they weren't part of any particular mainstream
but they had the security of a place
and they were allowed to think
and observe and ask
interesting questions why do people
work in this way
well I think one simple way
this could be achieved at the strike of a pen
is simply changing
the name of unemployment benefit
to research grants
so then we could have lots
of people on research grants
and the stigma of being on unemployment
would be transformed
at least for some people
yes very nice
because we after all have a lot of people
who are economically idle
as in we're in the classification of governments
who are actually being paid
by the state
and so much of that
could be repurposed
I mean mostly people are disempowered
by being unemployed
if this could be seen as a
positive thing
and also
another idea
it's only academics really that have sabbatical years
which is supposed to be
a year in which you can enjoy
the kind of freedom we're talking about
to be refreshed and so on
and
so
another scheme would be to make
sabbatical years optional for everybody
so when you're at 40
or 50 or 60
you could take an optional sabbatical year
and you'd take a cut
in income, you'd take leave from your regular job
and you'd get the unemployment
benefit which would now be
a redesignated research grant
or a sabbatical grant
it wouldn't cost the state anymore
because they're paying lots of people
not to work anyway
and by empowering people
who are not working in regular jobs
to think of themselves as doing
something different
it could be voluntary work
it could be natural history
it could be scientific research
there could be small grants
for people on sabbaticals
to set up experiments in their garages
and stuff
it could fuel a whole wealth of invention
throughout the population
I'm sure you were right
almost no extra cost
and one thing I
know from experiences
a practical skill
that it has been enormously satisfying
probably more satisfying than almost anything else
and so
encouraging people not just to feel
demoralized and not have any goal
it might be better to allow people
to train
to develop a skill
which is a very life enhancing thing
and useful to society
there's not enough skilled labour
ones always looking for people who can do
this or that or the other
and maybe that should be part
of the scheme as well
there's already government schemes
for people in deprived areas
economically
for retraining
there's already retraining grants
I haven't looked into how they're administered
but I imagine that
if one got into the details
of existing bureaucracy
and existing grant structures
some of it could be repurposed
in a way that's
along the lines you're suggesting
some of it's intended for that
so I think within the present system
there's probably quite a lot of potential
for revisioning
what people can learn and do
so drawing things together
perhaps there's a need
to break out of the straight jacket
of these people are unemployed
and therefore just waiting to get back into
this horrible machine
there's life outside the machine
there are other things that can be developed
for all of us depending on
what is both practical
for us and enjoyable
for us to develop
and it's about
abandoning this
micromanaging
administrative approach
to education
to science
and allowing people to develop the skills
that they have innately
in other words education should be a matter
of growing things
not inserting things
and at the moment it's mainly about inserting things
but it's interesting
one of the things that's happening at the moment
is the so called skill shortage
or employment shortage
I read an article
just yesterday
the mystery of why
we have very low
unemployment at the moment
in Britain
and yet you can't get people to do jobs
but there's
large numbers of people who are economically inactive
and so
most people in Britain assume
the skills shortage or labour shortage
is because of Brexit
no
immigration from Europe
but
those are very similar when we were in Canada in the summer
they have the same situation there
in western Canada it's the same in the United States
what seems to have happened
is that a large number of people
have just voluntarily retired
from the labour force
before retirement age
simply can't be bothered to have a job
and that must mean a drop in income
but there's millions of people
prepared to take that rather than carry on
well what that tells you is
that a lot of people's jobs are very unrewarding
and I think
what's really sad is that
jobs that are in the past
are obviously rewarding
like being a teacher or a doctor
I think people are probably
not keen to, we know there's a shortage of doctors
there's a shortage of teachers
and I think that's partly to do with
the way again a management culture
has taken over
from a professional culture
and the individual is no longer
allowed to pursue interests
and it's entirely
micromanaged like the Harvard thing
today you read these things
or you read those
so we need to stop this
and there was a wonderful moment
of creativity early on
in the Covid crisis
when managers couldn't keep up with the situation
and doctors said well
the hell with it we're going to do what we think will work
and lots of things were experimented with
and some of them were successful and some of them not
but this is a good situation
there's one in which doctors use their experience
are not told what to do
by a manager who has no experience
and in closing
it's not only important
we talk about it but again let me say
both of you are examples that this can be done
so I think it's useful
again to have the discussion
but to show that there are living examples
and it's not easy
but it can be done
and hopefully more people in the future
will be able to
we've been very fortunate
yes very fortunate
both within and outside
institutions
all right
thank you very much
well thank you Alex
