What am I going to do this evening? I'm going to try to do the impossible. In the old days,
students used to have nothing very much to do at university, so they used to entertain themselves
with pranks, like how many people can you fit into a telephone box? And it's going to be a
little bit like that tonight. I'm going to see how many ideas I can cram into whatever time has
allowed me. I want to begin by talking a bit about what I call the hemisphere hypothesis,
the question of the difference between the hemispheres, but mainly as a portal to a further
exploration of reality. It seems to me that at the moment we're puzzled about reality because
there are messages that come to us, particularly from some areas of postmodernism, that there is no
such thing as truth. Everything is just whatever you make up. I don't believe that for an instant.
I believe passionately that we are truths. They are rarely simple and they may sometimes conflict
with one another. So it is hard to set up a program of them, but we can learn to look for them and be
more successful in finding them. And it's in that project that I've been writing for 30 years,
first the master and his emissary, and then the matter with things which came out a couple of
years ago. Well, less than that now, November 21. And in it I try to take strands from what we know
about the brain, what we know about our thinking patterns in consciousness, and what we know from
physics. These seem like three pretty core ways of looking into the nature of reality. I'm not
suggesting there is one single easy reality. I'm not suggesting there is one ever-knowable truth.
I'm suggesting we mustn't ever give up on the idea that it is worthwhile for a human life. In fact,
it is imperative for a human life to be searching for such a reality and such a truth. Otherwise,
we are frankly deluded. And I believe that much of the world I now live in is
suicidally deluded. But I come on to that later. Now, let me see. Oh, that's good. So this is a
quote from Pascal. The twofold nature of man is so evident that some have thought that we had two
souls. But he's not the only person to have said something like this. Kant said something like
this Schopenhauer, Bergson, Goethe, Nietzsche, the wonderful German philosopher Max Schäler,
who in my view is underrated and underread these days. They all had this instinct that there were
two sort of almost people or points of view within us that were somewhat in conflict. Each could be
helpful for some things, but neither of them was complete in themselves. And in fact, incidentally,
in writing this book, I found that there are stories like the story of the master and his
emissary, which gave me the title of my earlier book 2009 from all around the world. The story I
took there was supposed to resituate the way in which we think about the left and right hemisphere.
When I was in medical school, it was said that the left hemisphere sort of was terribly important
because it controls the right hand with which you do the grasping, and it controls certain elements
of language, mainly speech, through which we say we grasp things. But actually, it turns out that
the right hemisphere is far, far more important for getting a hold on the world than the left
hemisphere. And indeed, when people have had a stroke, it is harder for them to recover from
a stroke in the right hemisphere than a stroke in the left hemisphere, even though the left
hemisphere's stroke often affects their speech and affects their ability to use their right hand.
So, I could say at this point that in the later book that I've written, The Mashable Things,
which came out, as I say, November 21, I begin by looking at what I call the various portals
through which we can get a grasp of the world at all, get some kind of understanding of it,
receive information from it. And I take it that those are attention, perception, which is not
the same as attention, judgment, the ideas we form on the basis of what we attend to and what we
perceive, emotional and social intelligence, cognitive intelligence, in other words, IQ,
and creativity, because that enters into our ability to interpret what it is we're seeing.
And in all of these, I demonstrate at length, over 400 pages, and I draw on 5,600 pieces of
research, I can demonstrate conclusively that all of these are better carried out by the right
hemisphere. It is more veridical, it is more intelligent, more perceptive, and much better
guide to reality. And when people have right hemisphere, damages has been commented on by
neurologists over the Easter century, they lose any sense of reality, they become deluded,
start hallucinating. And indeed, in schizophrenia, which is the topic that probably rings bells for
most people when one mentions delusions and hallucinations, what is going on there is something
like a defunct or deficient right hemisphere, which has been compensated for by an overactive
left hemisphere. Anyway, that's all by way of an introduction. But first of all, let me just ask
this question, most of you here will have heard something like this, what hemisphere differences,
that's all complete rubbish, that was all blown out of the water 30 years ago, it's all nonsense,
don't even listen to it. And there's a sort of circular thing that happens here, this is what
people were taught, so they never looked, because they never looked, they never found anything
different from what they've been told. So much later in their careers, they don't want to spend 30
years like me actually finding out what are the differences between the hemispheres, because it
would mean the end of their career, they'd be despised by their colleagues, they wouldn't get
promotion. So I'm afraid this is a question of a, and what you might call an urban myth,
it is an idea that itself needs powerfully to be debunked. If you don't believe me,
read my work, it is enormously well referenced, you can look up everywhere what it is that I'm
referring to, and why it is scientifically based. I'd just like to ask you three simple questions,
why is the brain divided? This is a picture by the Salius, and we were in Basel the other day,
and passed by accident a house, it said here lived the Salius. So in 1542, this slightly grumpy looking
man had the top of his head lifted off, and here you see the left hemisphere pushed slightly to
decide to expose this band of fibres at the base of the brain called the corpus callosum.
Why is the brain divided in this way? If the power of the brain is in making connections,
why have it so massively divided? And it's not just our brains, by the way, it's all the brains
we've ever looked at, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, birds, right down to insects having separate
different ganglions. Wherever you look, and in fact, the oldest creature that we know has a neural
network, which is said to be the ancestor of the mammalian brain, a sea creature called nematosella
vectensis, the brain is the neural network is somewhat divided and asymmetrical, which is the
next thing I'm coming on to. Why is the brain asymmetrical? Here you're looking up at the base
of the brain, as if you were looking up your own spinal column, and you can see that the
right hemisphere, which is hopefully on the left, is larger than the corresponding frontal
layer of the left hemisphere. And similarly at the back, the left hemisphere is larger than the
right. When I was in medical school, that was always said to be because of language, but we
know it is nothing to do with language. It has become used by language now that the brain has
its expansion, that the expansion was not caused by language, because it's there in chimpanzees,
gorillas, orangutans, and other creatures that we've tried to teach language to and got nowhere.
And the third thing is the corpus callosum itself, this band of fibres, which only 2% of brain
fibres actually cross from one hemisphere to the other. It's rather wonderful, this suburban doorbell
suddenly coming in from the cosmic reaches. What I've got here is a normal human brain over, whoops,
there. And over here, I was very privileged, I got a slice through Donald Trump's brain,
and, oh no, sorry, it's a dog's brain. But anyway, what you see is that the dog's brain
is smaller than a human brain, quite a lot, but the corpus callosum, which is, if I can do this,
this, oh, band of fibres here, and the same thing in white over here, in the, whoops, in the,
there. The dog didn't have a drink. And so you can see that it's not as big
comparatively with the brain. So the corpus callosum is getting smaller over evolution,
and it only started in mammals, prior to mammals that wasn't a corpus callosum at all.
And get this, the main purpose of the corpus callosum is to inhibit, to tell one hemisphere
to the other one, keep out of it. Many of the fibres that cross the corpus callosum, for those
of you who are neuroscientists are excitedly, they're glutamatergic, but they abut on GABA
ergic neurons, which are functionally inhibitory. And that, why this might have a reference to
human culture is expanded in this book, The Master and His Emissive. Why would this have
anything to do with human culture? Well, I'm going to explain to you that the two hemispheres have
evolved to do completely different things. And in this book, I go into that and the philosophy of
it. But I also look at the history of human culture and suggest that there are times when we
have got these two aspects of our brains out of balance. I'll come on to that. Now, as was
mentioned by Amir, a central concept for me is attention. When I discovered that one of the
most important distinctions between the two brain hemispheres was the way in which they pay attention
to the world. It didn't immediately dawn on me why this was so significant, because I had been
trained in a mechanistic way of thinking about the brain, which was that attention is just another
cognitive function that can be measured in the lab, and it could be simulated by a machine.
A machine can be directed towards something, but it can't pay attention to it. And attention
is something very special indeed, because I believe it actually creates the world,
the only world that any of us can know is the world that comes into being for us. And that world
is a combination of something coming from us and something out there. And I believe that this is
a two way relationship. In fact, that all things in the cosmos have two way relationships are
reverberative in their nature. And I'm trying to get away from naive realism on the one hand,
and the naive idealism on the other. Naive realism, I call rot, that the reality is out
there, R-O-T. And that's just nonsense, that there's just a world out there and we record it
passively like a photographic plate or a sound recorder. No, something of us goes into what we
find there, which is why what we find there has some very general common ground, but it is not
identical in every experience, even by the same person, never mind by different persons.
But I also don't think that it is what you might call mumbo made up miraculously by ourselves,
M-U-M-B-O, which is the kind of postmodern idea that it's just a fantasy out of our brains.
It is something that happens between, in what I call a betweenness. And a betweenness is not
just a gap between. It is like an electric current. Where is the electric current? Is it in the
positive terminal? No. Is it in the negative terminal? No. It needs them. Is it in the space
between? No. It's in the whole ensemble. And betweenness is what happens when two things come
into a new unit and something comes about that is different from either of any of its component
parts, but subsumes them. So they're necessary but not sufficient. Now this is the mountain behind
my house. Its name derives from a Norse word, which means a sloping rock. And you can see why,
because from the sea, this mountain was a signal to the Vikings who came there a thousand years ago
that this was a very dangerous bay in which they would be shipwrecked. So to them, this mountain
was a landmark that meant life and death. But there were people here before the Vikings. There
were the Picts and they've left their broths, their stone houses. And we know that for them,
this mountain was the home of the gods. Then in the 18th century, people came to draw and paint in
Scotland. It's a very beautiful landscape. And they would have seen this as a many-coloured,
many-textured form of beauty. And then in the 19th century, people came and they were interested
in geology. And it just happens to be an extremely good example of columnar basalt formation.
So to all these people, it was something different. And then to a physicist, you ask a physicist what
it does. But 99.99% of it is empty space. And the other bit, 0.01%, we don't really know what it is
after all. So which of these is the real mountain, I ask you. Now my answer to that is that no one
of them is the full story. But each of them is the real mountain. Each of them is a real way of
looking at the mountain. And if you say to me, yeah, but come on, it's just a big lump of rock.
That already is a very specialist way of looking at it, which betrays your values and your particular
narrowness of way of viewing. Because it's many, many things. If you apply that across the world,
you realise that attention is a creative act. Attention is a moral act. Because what you make
of the world is something that really comes out. When I attend to you in a certain way,
I can bring something that is warm, good, beneficent, perhaps healing as a good therapist or
doctor might be able to do. If I pay attention to you in a clinically detached way, I can make
you feel very small, very alien, and so on. We create the world around us. We actually make
things through our attention. So how you attend matters, because it forms up like this. Once you
start looking in one way, you find only the bits of the world that respond to the way you look.
The world is a machine. So you look at it. This is mechanical. That's mechanical. The other is
mechanical. The whole thing is a machine. But that's because looking at it as a machine,
all you see are the bits that respond to that mechanistic view. And if you do, you then start
to look further in this same way, thinking that was a good start. And now you just harden up. So
after a few decades, it's very difficult to break out of a habit of mind that we are instilling
into people in the West, which was never held at any other time in human history, never held in
other parts of the world and the West until very recently, and is extremely odd.
This is the kind of attention paid by the left hemisphere targeted on something. The reason that
we have these two hemispheres, you measure why do we have these two hemispheres, is because the
left is good at one thing only. It's much better than the right at grabbing, at grasping. And even
the processes whereby we say we have grasped something, we have big glyphin, or indigene,
or indeed, comprendre, is to grasp hold of, or apprehend, is to grasp onto. Comprehend is probably
different. It's sort of see the whole together, which is what the right hemisphere alone can do.
But this is how the left hemisphere looks at the world. A leads to be job done. But the broad view
of the right hemisphere sees that A and B are connected, but not as directly as you thought,
and that the system is living, hence the birds and the tree, and complex, not just complicated.
You may say it's very facile to talk about one hemisphere as a whole. And of course,
I am neurologically trained. I'm psychologically trained. I know that there are different areas
in the brain. I know they have different functions. If you read my writing, you will find that the
different areas do. But it is also now known that instead of thinking in a modular way about the
brain, we should be thinking more in terms of whole networks. And indeed, when you excite one part of
the left or the right hemisphere, there will be excitations that spread much more widely
throughout that hemisphere. And this is to show you a couple of, sort of, if you like,
superhighways of transmission, the superior longitudinal fasciculus and the insonant fasciculus,
showing connections between the posterior part of the brain and the frontal lobes and between
the frontal lobes and the temporal lobe. So this pains me. I'm going to do something
it's extremely simple-minded and much more black and white than I would like it to be. But because
I just don't have time, you'll have to take it as a bit of a caricature, but broadly speaking,
it is what you can accept. And if you want to know the finesse and all the details,
then read my books. So there are various differences. And one is that the left, I put the left hemisphere
version on the left and the right hemisphere version on the right. And in these dichotomies,
there are somewhat false dichotomies because nothing can be cut and dried when it comes to
anything as complicated as the brain. But nonetheless, there are strong tendencies
for the right hemisphere to be able to apprehend new experiences of whatever kind, new music,
new person, new shape, whatever it might be. Whereas the left hemisphere latches on to what
is already known and familiar because it's looking for food. It's looking for things to pick up
with its right hand. And the evolutionary point here is that if you're only attending to food
and a twig to build a nest and all the utilization of the world, the manipulation of the world,
which the left hemisphere is good for, you'll soon be eaten by another creature while you're
getting your own lunch, because you need to be looking out for predators, for your mate,
for your constasifics. And so you have to have some part of your brain that is holding the whole
picture together while you go about grabbing and picking what you know. It prefers what is certain
to what is possible. In other words, it likes things to be cut and dried, black and white.
Whereas the right hemisphere is more open to ambiguity. The left hemisphere prefers fixity.
It likes to fix things. And literally, when people have a certain kind of damage to the right
posterior hemisphere, they begin to see normal flow of motion broken up into
like a sort of an old fashioned cine film that's got stuck or stop go animation.
Because after all, it's targeting something and wants to catch it. So it fixes it and picks it up.
So it sees a lot of static bits, whereas the right hemisphere sees that everything is flowing.
The left hemisphere sees parts where the right hemisphere sees the whole.
The right hemisphere has the body image in it, which is the whole image of the body and all
modalities. The left hemisphere has a nose, an elbow, a knee, a foot. Explicit versus implicit.
So the left hemisphere understands what is explicit, what if you have a dictionary and a grammar,
and perhaps a computer could put them together. But all that is implicit, which is nine tenths
of what matters to us, things like love and a sense of the sacred and the meaning of music
and the understanding of poetry, the understanding of humor, sarcasm, irony, all these things that
change the way the world is to be interpreted are taken at face value by the left hemisphere,
though understood by the right. The left hemisphere tends to abstract things from their context.
And if you take things out of their context, they change their meaning completely.
And the best way to understand something is to see it in the context, which makes it what it is.
Nothing is something outside of its context. The context is what actually creates it,
which is one of the reasons I say that relations are prior to things. The title of my later book
is the matter with things, which is a pun about our obsession with matter and our obsession with
things. But things, I say, arise secondarily out of a web of relationships. They are the things
that catch our attention. They are the little hubs where things cross, but actually they are
only what they are because of their relations. In abstracting, it turns whatever it has into a
general case, not a unique one. And here, because I'm in Switzerland, this first time I've ever
talked about this with two wonderfully described cases, rather sad cases. One is of a woman who
spent her whole life describing and writing about the birds of Switzerland. And you have a wonderful
bird life here in Switzerland. And she had a right posterior temporal parietal stroke.
And afterwards, she said, all the birds look the same. This is pretty tragic. And another is a
case of a farmer, Swiss farmer, who knew all his cattle by name. But after a stroke, he had difficulty
telling a cow from a horse. So you see, it deals in very broad categories, but the right hemisphere
sees the unique case, sees the ewness of you, and the vesseness of your friend.
The left hemisphere is mainly interested in how much of something the right hemisphere mourn,
but how, what is the quality of it? Naturally, this world becomes inanimate. And the right
hemisphere sees the animosity. And you can actually isolate one hemisphere at a time,
painlessly, experimentally, using something called transcranial magnetic stimulation. And if you
suppress the right hemisphere, people see what they would normally think of as living as inanimate.
If you suppress the left hemisphere, they see things that we would normally think of as inanimate,
like the sun, as a living being. The left hemisphere is remarkably optimistic,
ridiculously optimistic. Again, you can isolate one hemisphere at a time. And this is done sometimes
prior to brain surgery. And it's called the WADA test. And while one hemisphere is isolated,
the other one is not contributing. It lasts for about 15 minutes. During that time,
some psychologists administered a personality inventory to the subject and also to the subject's
relatives and friends and discovered that the left hemisphere has a very high opinion of itself
compared with what other people think. But when it was the right hemisphere's turn, the right hemisphere
was a little bit too negative about itself, but more realistic. And the most extraordinary
demonstration of this is denial. This is terribly important because I believe we now live in an age
of denial. All around us, we are denying a whole host of things, trying to not see them at all or
saying the opposite is the case. And this is very literal. After the left hemisphere stroke,
somebody may have a paralyzed right arm or right leg, and they'll be very unhappy about this. They
will weep about it, complain to the doctor. But if they've had a stroke in the right hemisphere and
the left side is paralyzed, they may completely deny there's anything wrong. So you can see them in
the morning after they come into the stroke in the night and say, how are you? And they say,
fine. They say, oh, that's very good. And any difficulty moving anything? No, no. Can you move
your left arm? Yep. Can you show me? And they go there, but nothing actually moved. And if you
bring it round in front of them and say, move that, they say, that's not my arm. That belongs to that
person over there, or it belongs to you, doctor. And the most important, but least exciting,
perhaps, of this list is the difference between something that is truly present and something
that is represented. Now, represented literally means presented again, after which is no longer
present, is therefore already past finished dead. And presenting is something that we don't allow
the world to do nowadays, because we're so quick with our representations. Oh, it's one of those.
It's a picturesque scene. It's a lake. It's a car. It's a water. We don't, only if we practice
mindfulness, are we able to get back to that state in which we are fully present and the world
is fully present to us? Okay, that's because I didn't know how to build that slide. Hello.
Yes, we've heard from you before. Now, so effectively, what you've got here, I'd like
to draw this together. So you see the kind of world that the left hemisphere brings into being
for us. It's effectively, I think we may have more problems with my poor skills at building slides,
but let's see. Ooh, that's all right. So first of all, you've got a world in what we take for reality.
Better?
Yeah, yeah. Has it stopped working?
Well, it's been very quiet all along. I'd have liked it to be louder, but I'm not a technician.
No, I'm fine. Oh, that's better. That's a bit too much.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. So first of all, what we take to be reality is in fact,
just a representation, a map, a picture, a diagram, but not the complex living home.
One that is, in fact, made up of isolated things, things moreover than known, familiar,
decontextualized, fixed, predetermined, and made up of bits, fragments, disembodied,
having no meaning or coherence until we give it to them, where all is abstract,
generic in nature, infinitely reproducible and quantifiable, and therefore inanimate
and mechanical. And the future is a fantasy which would be only better if we could get
more of it under our control. Whereas, in the right hemisphere, one sees that nothing is ever
entirely certain or predictable, that all things are ultimately interconnected,
that there is nothing that is ever fixed, but in fact that, as Heraclitus said, everything flows,
that what exists are holds, the parts are an artifact of the left hemisphere's way of looking at
it, that meaning is implicit, and that the world of uniqueness is real, not just categories that
can be quantified, but having different qualities, and an essentially animate world.
And here there's a future that is a product of realism, not denial. We've got one
hemisphere that sees just a theory of the world, it's very simple and pleasing and is only going
to get better. The right hemisphere is seeing the whole embodied, impassioned business of vitality
and seeing that it is not necessarily leading somewhere we want to go.
And there is a relationship between the brain and the structure of the cosmos.
That's something I'm going to try and explain now. There is a sort of hierarchy of the right
and left, let me say this first of all. I think I've explained that the right hemisphere is more
veridical, that it is a better transmitter of producer of reality, and the left hemisphere
has certain limited uses. What it sees is not wrong, it's not that it's got no use,
it's just that its use is very limited and its knowledge is limited. The problem only becomes
when it thinks it knows more and we pay attention to that very narrow way of thinking as though it
gives us the full picture, which it doesn't. So there's a hierarchy there and I think this is
also demonstrable in physics, I've explained that. And I would say that when we're talking about
how we would like to make a world, it's a fantasy for us to imagine that we can just make up a world
without understanding both our own brains and the cosmos. And so this is where we need to start from
in all our exercises of imagination.
In whatever exists, there is a replication of this thing about the brain, which is that the
left hemisphere tends to divide in order to understand, but then cannot put it together again.
But the right hemisphere tends to see the whole and see the whole picture of which what the left
hemisphere has been looking at is just a part. Now, we need both these kinds of attention,
but one of them is more important than the other, the capacity to see the whole.
And there are these forces for division and forces for union throughout the physical cosmos as well
as the metaphysical one. And what we need is the unity of the forces of division and union,
not the division of the forces of division and union. Do you understand? I sometimes say we
don't want either, either or or both and we need both either or and both and. I hope that's entirely
clear. So this idea of the unity of difference and unity is the first asymmetry. The cosmos is founded
on asymmetry. So this is all played out in this recent book of mine in two volumes,
1300 pages of text, 1500 all together. Now it's based on this idea that science and philosophy
should never have been divorced. The word science in English only began being used to
specialize meaning in 1830. Until then science meant knowledge. And indeed what we call science
is called natural philosophy because in fact, what scientists don't see anymore is there is no such
thing as just looking because the way you attend the preconceptions of which you attend alters
what you find. If you don't know anything about philosophy, you just think it's obvious that
everything is mechanical because that is the philosophy of our age. That is what people suck up
from all around them as they grow, that everything is mechanical, but it is not actually mechanical.
Organisms in particular are not like machines in at least eight ways which I explain in this book.
And here I'm quoting from my favorite English philosopher of the last 100 years, the antagonism
between science and metaphysics is like all family quarrels being disastrous and from calling
words science and metaphysics are inextricably united and stand all four together. Any of you
who hear a scientist, please take that away and think about it. It does matter. And one of the
things that I wanted to talk about was the centrality of attention to what comes into existence. I've
talked a bit about that already. Then the coincidence of opposites. Now to our way of thinking now,
how can opposites coincide? It sounds impossible. We're taught at school that if it's this then
the opposite is as far away from it as possible. But this is not the case actually because mental
space, metaphysical space and indeed physical space is curved. It's not linear. And the further
you go in a certain direction, the more you find yourself coming back to what you are running away
from. It's a truism that anarchy leads to tyranny, that something extreme gives rise to its opposite
because it has its opposite in it. I've always thought that politicians is extreme left and
extreme right. You can hardly get a razor blade between them. They've got the same mentality
which is to miss all the shades, the complexities, the subtleties of human existence.
And I've already mentioned that I believe that relations come before a lot of the things that
are related. And then I just want to say something about limit cases being inverted. This is my view
of reality that in the old world, in the old world of physics, we thought that this was a
Newtonian world, that things are naturally static and they don't move unless they're given a push.
But now we know that there is nothing that is actually static in the entire cosmos. Everything
is in motion and stasis would be the limit case of motion, not motion, the limit case of stasis.
Representation is the limit case of what is actually real. Total independence is the limit
case of interdependence because everything is interdependent. There is no such thing as total
independence but if it exists at all, it will be the limit case of the norm which is interdependence.
Discontinuity is not the norm which then gets connected. Continuity is the norm. You may say
why do you say that? I can quote physicists who say this. Metaphysically, I believe it to be the
case. From observation of the world, I believe it to be the case. But discontinuity is the limit
case of the continuous. The explicit is not the norm and the implicit, some very strange thing that
happens in a poem. Implicit is what all our knowledge is. Explicit knowledge is a very special case
that we learn how to say in words through the process of education. The literal is the limit
case of the metaphorical. Everything is metaphorical. Even the words, in fact, particularly the words
used by science and philosophy, a point that has been made by philosophers themselves,
are based on metaphors because they're dealing in an abstract realm and they therefore have to draw
things from a real world. In fact, the word abstract is itself, something that means being
dragged away. I mean, it's very physical. So meaning is effectively metaphorical and the
literal is only a special case of the metaphorical in which you privilege one kind of meaning.
Randomness, which actually doesn't exist anywhere in the cosmos, would merely, if it existed,
be the limit case of order, which is everywhere. Simplicity represents a special case of complexity
because the more you go down, even into the quantum vacuum, this is the simplest thing that we know.
According to David Tong, Professor of Physics at Cambridge, it's unbelievably complex.
Simplicity is what we make when we clear away all the complexity. Ah, I've got a mechanism.
How lovely. That gives me a little tweak power. The determinant is the limit of the indeterminate.
Everything is actually ultimately indeterminate, but in very special cases, if you take the window
narrow enough, you can say it looks determinate. And straight lines are the limit case of curves,
not curves, some special case of straight lines. So all that exists is a kind of form.
And in the words of Whitehead, beyond all questions of quantity, there lie questions
of pattern, which are essential to the understanding of nature. And form is a matter of tension.
Can I go back? Yes. This is from my favorite
presocratic philosopher, Heraclitus, or my favorite philosopher, frankly,
they do not understand how a thing agrees with variance at variance with itself.
It is an attunement turning back on itself like that of the bow and lair. What did he mean?
He meant that things are always in balance of their opposites, that wherever something exists,
its dark side, the other end of it is there as well. And that what you look for is not to collapse
this creative tension into just this or just that, but to hold the tension. For us, this is
uncomfortable. Therefore, we try to collapse it. Oh, it's just that or it's just that. No,
you have to hold the two opposites. And the bow and the lair is the string of the bow,
the string of the lair gives rise to the note that gives rise to the flying arrow. And if you
let that tension go slack and didn't pull into opposite directions, pulling in opposite directions
is logically a waste of time. But actually, it's essential to everything that exists,
because this tension is creative. You want to make a good apple pie, you don't get boring,
bland apples, you get nice tart apples and put lots of honey with it.
And this is one of his deepest sayings, grasping, which means the coming together of things,
hose and not holes, convergent, divergent, constant dissonant from all things one,
and from one thing all. I would love to have time to unpack that for you, but
take it away and read it and think about it. And that relates to the idea of one and all.
I have a chapter on the coincidental or positive or on the coincidence opposites,
and a chapter on the one and the many. And I say it is wise, or he says it is wise,
listening not to me, but to the logos, which is like the founding ground of being,
to agree that all things are one. And I foot in brackets and that the one is all things,
because the Greek grammar allows this ambiguity of dual interpretation.
As I say, he also, and this is the second important point about physics, is that everything flows.
That's not the same as everything changes. There is a Buddhist saying that everything changes.
It's good as far as it goes, but everything flows is better, because not only does it suggest
there's a difference between the meaning of flow and just the succession of things,
but also it contains within it the important idea that when things flow,
they both are different and the same. The river that flows by my house is always the same river,
but the water is always different. And Heraclitus said famously, you can't step into the same water
twice. But that is beautiful, because he also said by changing things remain the same.
See, this very interesting idea that comes from observing the flow,
that in the flowing it remains what it is, but it also becomes something other.
Then here is Democritus, another early Greek philosopher. The cause of coming into being of
all things is the vortex. The vortex, of course, is a whirlpool. And this is terribly important,
because, well, this is about flow really. This is David Tong again from Cambridge.
At a fundamental level, nature is nature discreet or continuous. I see no evidence,
whatever for discreteness. All the discreteness we see in the world is something which emerges
from an underlying continuum. Contra are emergent, they're not built into the heart of nature.
So there we need discontinuity and we need continuity, but continuity
trumps, if you like, discontinuity. It is able to overarch the two.
And here is the vortex. And there's various interesting things about the vortex. First
of all, if you look at a whirlpool in a stream, a whirlpool is photographed or measurable. It can
move stones. Is it in the water? No, it's not in the water like the stone is in the water. It is
water. For that moment, it is that water. And I believe that beings, including every one of you
here, if you think about your nature and your being, you are like this whirlpool in that you are not
distinct from whatever it is that constitutes as a sort of indigestible lump. You are from
something that is already there, that takes the form you take at the moment. And when you go,
it will be passed on and will still be part of the flow of the river. So there are various things
about vortex. One is that it has the nature of a spiral, as you see. And spiral staircases are
very important because they are a good image of how we progress in life. TS Eliot said that the end
of all our voyaging is to return to the point where we started from and know it for the first time.
But that's not actually true. We don't ever return. We can't ever return to the point we started from
because it's gone. We come back somewhere higher on the spiral and look down at where we had been
before. But nonetheless, the progress is in one sense circular, but it's also up.
And this is Jacob's Ladder, as depicted by the poet and painter William Blake,
romantic poet and painter. And it's the only Jacob's Ladder I know, which shows it not as a
straight line to heaven, but as a spiral that climbs in this way forever.
And this is really just to say, if you look at a spiral down its axis, you see a perfect circle,
which is static and eternal. But if you look along the side of the spiral, you see that it's
actually not a particle, but a waveform, and that it is extending somewhere in space. It has
circularity, recurrence and newness in one. This is just to show that in flow, there is always
movement, which is reciprocal. That's one of the things that flow gives rise to.
And these are rather interesting. These are photographs taken of the flow in water.
And what has been done is simply a straight line of rectangular rods that are rectangular in cross
section immersed in the stream. So absolute rigidity, straight pieces, bars in a line.
And what you get is this completely wonderful creative newness, which flows and changes.
This is something called the Karman Vortex Street, which is created by an obstruction simply stuck
into the flow of water. And it results in this amazingly beautiful form. This is suggesting that
flow and the obstruction of flow are creative. In my philosophy, resistance to flow is as
important as flow. Resistance is creative. Without resistance, nothing can happen. What is friction?
It's what stops movement, but it's also what starts movement. Without friction, I can't take a step.
So these things come together in this way. And this is from Leonardo. He's showing an old man
leaning on a stick in the water. And there he shows the patterns that follow, which he describes as
like braided hair coming from the stick. And the most beautiful ratio on which many aesthetic
figures and pictures and so on are based is the so-called golden section, which is asymmetric.
It has this interesting asymmetry built into it. And this is just to say that each of those rectangles
is in relation to the next rectangle in the ratio of 1 to 1.61, which is roughly speaking,
that of the golden ratio. And it relates to a spiral. Here you can see the generation of the
spiral out of it. This spiral is, again, part of the asymmetry of nature. And they're both going
forward from something, but completing something at the same time. These are snowflakes. They are all
the random, we say, expression of form. They are all beautifully, in one sense, themselves,
but they are also fractal. So as you go down the stem, you see further expressions, which are of the
overall nature of the whole snowflake. And this is fractality, which is another expression
of difference in unity. So there is a unity. And as you go down into it, and things differentiate,
they become more and more versions of the same thing in the way that beautiful things often have
this asymmetry built into them. I mentioned the golden ratio. But here is an example,
so many of them from Japanese art, where there is both symmetry and asymmetry. And get this,
it's not just asymmetry that matters. It's the asymmetry of symmetry with asymmetry. Look at that.
In a way, it is symmetrical, but in an important way, it's also asymmetrical.
And it's the coming together of these two opposites that creates beauty. This is very profound in
beauty. Here is Palladier's villa, the Villa Capra, now known as the Villa Rotonda,
in the region of Vicenza Padua. And you see that in this, in some ways, very formally perfect,
symmetrical facade. There are little signs of life. There are these figures that these figures
that are living and asymmetrical. And here there is a goat, which was the coat of arms of the
Capra family. And so it has a sense of the beautiful symmetry, but complemented by asymmetry.
Now look at this, which is a copy of it basically, built at the University of Virginia by Thomas
Jefferson, who is a not inconsiderable architect. It's just symmetrical. I had to put that in,
because there's asymmetry and symmetry and the asymmetry of symmetry and asymmetry.
So something about sameness and difference is very important. We don't just want
difference or sameness, but both together. And this is from Goethe, from his father,
dividing the united, uniting the divided is the very life of nature. This is the eternal
cistern and diasterly, the eternal coalescence and separation, the inhalation and exhalation
of the world in which we live and where our existence is woven. And cistern and diasterly
are the two beats of the heart, cisterly is the lup and diasterly is the dup of relaxation.
Now, just to finish on physics, I wanted to quote Pasteur, who of course was a biologist,
the universe as a whole is asymmetrical. And I've come to believe that life, as it is
manifest, is a function of the asymmetry of the universe. I would even say that living
species are primordially in their structure, in their external forms, functions of the cosmic
asymmetry from his inaugural lecture in 1854 at Lille. And here, some 40 years later,
is Pierre Cooley, of course, a great physicist, certain elements of symmetry may coexist with
certain phenomena, but they're not necessary. What is necessary is that certain elements of
symmetry do not exist. It is asymmetry which creates the phenomenon, the effects produced maybe
more symmetrical than the causes. And I just put this here, in 1956, this Chinese lady made this
discovery of the violation of parity, which means the left and right hand are not symmetrical,
in the case of the weak interaction, all the other forces that have been discovered were
symmetrical, but then she discovered this is asymmetrical. And I'm sorry to report to you that
about three or four years later, two men got the Nobel Prize for this discovery.
There we are. Now, what has this got to do with the world we live in? I'm going to do this very
quickly, you'll be glad to know. I believe that over the course of the history of the West,
we've gone through phases. In the Greek civilization, there was a sudden efflorescence of everything,
of the arts, of the sciences together. Then in the Roman world, there was something similar.
And in each of those cases, it tailed off over 300 or 400 years and that civilization disappeared.
And then again, in our age, the sudden eruption of wonderful working together of the right and
left hemisphere, which are both necessary for science. In fact, the more important one is the
right hemisphere. So don't ever quote Mia saying that left hemisphere is science and the right
hemisphere is the arts. We need both for both. And in both cases, the right hemisphere asymmetrically
is more important than the left, even in science. I believe that in our world, like those worlds,
in which I've shown in the second part of the masternism, that things have drifted further
and further to the left hemisphere point of view, it's happening to us now. Now, if I'm right, let's
do a little fantasy. Let's imagine that actually, the left hemisphere was the only one we were
listening to. What would the world look like? Well, there'll be a loss of the broader picture.
Knowledge would be replaced by information's tokens or representations of true understanding.
Wisdom wouldn't get anywhere near it because wisdom is much too unmeasurable. The product of a
properly lived human life has nothing there that the left hemisphere can get hold of.
Can't be operationalized. There'll be the loss of the concepts, therefore, of skill and judgment,
which are essential to being a fully functioning human being. They'd all be taken over by machines
that had algorithms and things like that. So we'd spend hours talking to machines and getting nowhere
instead of talking to people who would exercise skill and judgment. I'd hate to live in that world.
And there'll be simultaneous abstraction and reification. So one of the same time,
things would become more and more abstract. The stuff you read would have more and more
abstract nouns in it. It wouldn't refer to reality. At the same time, matter would become just lump
and matter. I always say that materialists are not people who overvalue matter but undervalue
matter because matter is very, very special. Even if you believe there is only matter, then you've
got to accept that matter gave rise to Bach's and John's passions. So it's pretty amazing stuff.
Bureaucracy would have a field day because, according to Peter Berger, a great sociologist,
these are the characteristics of bureaucracy. I'll let you read them. And there'd be a loss
of the sense of uniqueness, just categories. On those things, you had to fill out which box.
There's never a box for me. But wait a minute, with whom, on which day, in what circumstances,
and in what mood, quantity would become the only criteria, not quality. There'd be a sort of either
ornus. No, you can't have, well, it might be this, it might be that. You've got to go, yes,
it's this or yes, it's that. Reasonableness would be replaced by pure raciocination,
which is not the same thing. In German, there's a distinction, as you know, the German speakers
here between Vernunft and Frischland. And we don't have this distinction in English. So I make the
distinction between reason, which is an embodied thing that comes with experience and being able
to think clearly, whereas rationalization is just the application of logical rules.
There'd be a failure of what we call common sense, and there's now extremely uncommon.
There'd be systems designed simply to maximize utility, loss of social cohesion,
depersonalization, paranoia and lack of trust, because the left hemisphere wants to control.
Its only power is control. So if it thinks things are slipping out of control, it's starting,
how can I control them better? We need more cameras. We need perhaps a database. Yes,
let's have a database of the genomes of the population. There'd be a need, in other words,
for total control and anger and aggression would be the term of our conversations.
People think the bad old days used to say, oh, the left hemisphere is down to earth,
reliable, but not emotional. Whereas the right hemisphere is a bit given to moods,
you know, that's terrible. But actually, the emotion that most strongly lateralizes,
of all emotions, is anger, and it lateralizes to the left hemisphere, not to the right.
And we would, you remember how when something doesn't work, oh, it's nothing to do with me,
I can't be responsible, remember that? Well, we would be the passive victims of other people's
doings, never a problem with us. And in this world, art would become pretty conceptual. It would have
Latin, a sense of depth and bizarre perspectives. These are things that only the right hemisphere
can fully understand, and therefore came into being three times in Greece, in Rome. It wasn't
just invented in Florence in 1453. It was invented serially, and then lost the civilization decayed,
because it's how the right hemisphere sees depth in the world, not just the screen in front of it.
Music would reduce a little more than rhythm, because that's the only bit the left hemisphere
gets. The complexities of melody and harmony are interpreted by the right hemisphere, that is
the distinction in professional musicians who train their brains especially, but that's the norm.
And language would become, I hope not too much like mine, diffuse, excessive, lacking in concrete
reference. There'd be a deliberate undercutting of the sense of awe or wonder, because what does
that mean? It just means you haven't done enough research yet. Of course, we understand everything.
One more experiment, and we really have got it, that actually to be fully present in the world and
to understand it, and to be appreciative of it with gratitude, which is the secret of a fulfilling
and happy life, we need to be able to rediscover the sense of awe or wonder. And flow would just
become an infinite series of pieces like a goods train. There'd be discarding of all tacit forms
of knowing, everything having to be explicit, network of small complicated rules strangling us.
This is what the top fill saw in America in 1837. That was a very prescient man. And we would be like
Descartes proudly calling ourselves spectators rather than actors in the world sitting on the
sofa with a six-pack, watching it all go by on the telly. And all this would be accompanied by
a dangerously unwarranted optimism. Well, thank goodness we don't live in that world.
So this is my last words, values. Shaila created this pyramid of values. And I say these are the
only ones that we now respect, the values of utility and pleasure. All the other ones, what
he meant by Laban's verta was courage, magnanimity, fidelity, generosity. All of that seems to be the
sort of thing that nowadays only suckers do that. And other people profit from it. So why would you
do that? Why don't it just be a dog with each dog? Values of the intellect, geistig verta, of course
you know that geist means both mind and soul. These would be things like beauty, goodness and
truth, the platonic virtues. And at the top is das Heilige, the holy. And I believe we have inverted
this. So in our left hemisphere world, the holy is just a fiction that enables certain priests to
have power. The values of the intellect are really just to do with sexual selection. The values of
vitality, as I say, are those espoused by people who don't know any better. And thank God they do
because we can take advantage of them. And really it's all in the service of use and pleasure.
Well, we live in an upside down world, my friends. This is where we are now. We've lost value. We
have a lust for the power to manipulate, which is the left emitter's raison d'etre. We seem to have
lost any sense of purpose, because we think of purpose in the utilitarian way. The purpose of the
of the copy of the copying machine is to
purpose the copying machine and whereas we have a purpose, even when it's not a utilitarian
purpose. And lastly, there's a blaring of boundaries between truth and falsehood now.
There's a war on truth, basically, all around us, from politicians and from various sectors
of society, which is that of bureaucracy and AI, turning everything that is living into
a series of processes. And I can talk, as you can well imagine, for a very great
deal of time about those and have done on other occasions that I'm not going to do now. Thank you.
