These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Representing Justice, Stories of Law and Literature, Part 2.
Lecture 13, Trial Tales of Parasite, Mary Blandy.
Novelist Henry Fielding, perhaps best known as the author of Tom Jones,
was a member of the Middle Temple, a magistrate as well as a dramatist,
and thus master of several forms of storytelling.
In this exploration of a mid-18th century core celeb, The Trial of Mary Blandy for the murder of her father,
we will compare a legal narrative with its popular version by Henry Fielding
and also examine the narrative written by Mary herself.
While each form told a different version of the story,
these versions were not simply different ways of telling the same story,
but rather mutually supporting as well as conflicting ways of articulating a set of values.
The range of the legal and popular narratives, from the confessional to the prosecutorial
to the providential to the journalistic, illustrates the manner in which the idea of sin
and the idea of crime were still inseparable in the popular imagination,
a point exploited by the prosecutor of Mary Blandy.
Fielding's commentary upon the trial and its media coverage also illustrate
the growing power of the printed word in 18th century society.
Since the 18th century, legal trials have been perceived as representing a true picture of reality.
That definition of a trial can also describe another representation of reality,
that is, the novel.
The novels claim to be a true account of the world's troubled critics, theologians and moral philosophers,
given the fictionality of the narrative.
On the one hand, the novel was insisting on its verisimilitude, on its likeness to reality,
and yet on the other it was clearly a mimesis, an imitation of reality, rather than the real thing.
Up to the late 17th and early 18th century, the narratives of law, theology, natural philosophy and literature
were complexly interwoven, each borrowing from the other.
Such interweaving produces the mixing of kinds that is one of the particular characteristics of early 18th century discourse.
Fictions that claim to tell the truth, factually based biographies,
and autobiographies that borrow plot from character and French romances.
Scientific essays that are inseparable from theological treatises
and travel narratives that are part allegory, part scientific essay, part theological treatise.
By the later half of this 18th century, however, we can see the beginnings of a modern sensibility
that represented law as objective, factually based and enabled by logic and rules,
but considered literature to be subjective, located in the unreal and therefore potentially untrue world of the imagination,
and enabled by emotion and image.
I'd like to stress that these distinctions did not necessarily conform to the reality of law or literature,
but rather to the way in which they were described and the use to which they might therefore be put.
In this lecture, I will examine the trial of Mary Blandy for Parasite to illustrate the complex mixing of narrative forms
that occurred in the management of legal events and their popular representation.
Mary Blandy's trial for Parasite generated enormous public interest
with over 30 contemporary pamphlets analyzing her character and the trial.
I'm going to focus on three versions of the case.
The quasi-legal account in the form of a reported trial narrative
compiled from public records by 19th century editor William Ruffhead,
a theological jurisprudential literary account in the form of a history
authored by magistrate novelist Henry Fielding,
titled Examples of the Interposition of Providence in the Detection and Punishment of Murder, 1752,
and an autobiographical account in the form of an apologia by Mary Blandy,
written in her Oxford jail cell immediately before her death.
Miss Blandy's own account of the affair between her and Mr. Cranstone.
Let me just say that I think Blandy was guilty of murder,
and that what interests me in these stories is the way in which her guilt gets depicted.
Even I would say unwittingly by Mary herself because of the model of storytelling that she adopted.
So first, here is what the text of notable state trials records as having happened.
On April 6th, 1752, Mary Blandy was hanged from murdering her father,
a lawyer from Henley upon Thames in Oxfordshire.
She was charged with poisoning him by feeding him a love filter
under the instructions of her lover, Mr. Cranstone,
who claimed he wished to encourage Mr. Blandy's consent to their marriage.
The love filter was actually arsenic, a fact that Mary denied knowing.
Mr. Cranstone, who was already married under Scottish law to a Roman Catholic woman
from a Jacobite family, was apparently attracted to Mary by the rumour that her father
would settle £10,000 on her at marriage.
It's a very large sum for that date.
The source of the rumour was actually Mary Blandy's own father, Francis Blandy,
who hoped thereby to attract the right sort of man for his daughter.
In fact, when Blandy died, he was worth less than £4,000.
Mr. Barthas, the leading Crown lawyer at Blandy's trial,
and a man who became Lord Chancellor in 1771,
excused Mr. Blandy's deception as a pious fraud.
Francis Blandy had hawked his daughter on the marriage market in Henley
and spent a season at Bath.
Repeatedly, Mary was wooed and repeatedly her father prevented marriage
because the catch was insufficiently wealthy or prestigious enough to satisfy his social ambitions.
Finally, through her father's business relationship with Lord Mark Kerr,
the 26-year-old Mary Met Captain, the Honourable William Henry Cranstone,
grand-nephew of Lord Mark, who had taken a house at Henley named, ironically, the Paradise,
something that the prosecuting attorney seized upon in characterising Mary as Eve
and Cranstone as the serpent.
The following summer, in 1747, Cranstone simultaneously declared himself to Mary
and told her of a Scottish lady who was, he said, falsely claiming to be his wife.
Accepted provisionally by Mary, Cranstone formally asked Francis Blandy
for his daughter's hand in marriage, telling him nothing of the action of declarator of marriage
that had been raised by his wife against him in Scotland the year before.
Unfortunately for Cranstone, his great-uncle Lord Mark, more particular about such matters than the nephew,
wrote to Francis Blandy, informing him that his daughter's fiancé already had a wife and a child in Scotland.
Apparently two years before his proposal to Mary Blandy, Cranstone had privately married Anne Murray.
After living with his wife in a private manor for six months, Cranstone returned to his regiment in London,
with the marriage still unpublished, for fear that as the lady was of a Roman Catholic and Jacobite family,
Cranstone's chances for promotion might be prejudiced.
In 1745, Anne Cranstone gave birth to a daughter.
Despite having already privately acknowledged both to her family and to his own that he was married to Anne Murray
and that the child was indeed his daughter, Cranstone disavowed his marriage rather conveniently
given that the Murrays had supported Prince Charlie in the 1745 rebellion against the English crown
and that Anne's brother was under sentence of death for treason.
Cranstone claimed that Anne Murray had been his mistress and that although he had promised to marry her
if she would become a Presbyterian, her refusal to convert freed him from his engagement.
He said that he had pretended to be married merely to save her honour before her family.
Perhaps Mary Blandy believed Cranstone because she was desperate that she would be left an old maid.
Certainly Francis and Mrs Blandy were blinded by the aristocratic connections of their putative son-in-law.
Cranstone's story, regardless of the light into which it cast him, was common enough to be believable.
Many young women had been seduced and ruined by the promise of a secret marriage
and Cranstone's excuses would have confirmed for the Blandys that they were dealing with a man of fashion.
However her parents felt then, their patience and trust must have been stretched thin over the next months
when Cranstone either stayed with them at their expense or was unable to leave London because of the debt until freed by Mary.
Mary's mother died in September 1749 and as her father became more dubious about the marriage
Cranstone introduced Mary to the idea that Mr Blandy's rancour against him might be softened with a love powder
he could obtain from the famous Mrs Morgan of Scotland.
Cranstone left Blandy's house late in 1749 and did not return until the next year, August of 1750.
By way of proving the potency of the love powder, some of which Cranstone had brought with him
he apparently introduced a little into Blandy's tea and miraculously transformed his hostility into amity.
Mr Blandy appeared to suffer no ill effects.
Francis Blandy however was not the only one who needed to be mollified.
While at Henley Cranstone confessed to Mary that he had a daughter by a Miss Capel a year before he had met Mary.
Mary forgave him and hoped he had repented of his follies.
It was harder for her to forgive him when she discovered a packet of letters among his clothes from a woman he was keeping in London
presumably supported partially by Mary Blandy's own loan to Cranstone.
Somehow Cranstone was able to persuade Mary to forgive him again.
Soon after Cranstone's mother became dangerously ill in Scotland and once again relying on Mary for his solvency
he set off to see her.
It was November 1750 and it was the last time that Mary saw him.
Determined to end the affair with Cranstone Francis Blandy ordered Mary to write to him telling him not to show his face until he had settled his marital difficulties.
Sometime in the spring of 1751 Cranstone sent Mary a supply of Mrs Morgan's powder along with some scotch pebbles which were highly polished stones and a hot fashion item.
In August Francis Blandy ate some gruel prepared for him on Mary's instructions and within five days was dead after suffering horrible pain and bouts of vomiting.
In the meantime one of the servants had grown suspicious and secured the pan in which the gruel had been cooked because of the white powder in the bottom.
Advised that she was under suspicion Mary wrote to her lover the following letter
Dear Willie my father is so bad that I have only time to tell you that if you do not hear from me soon again don't be frightened.
I am better myself.
Lest any accident should happen to your letters take care what you write.
My sincere compliments I am ever yours Mary.
By the time her father died Mary had been confined to her room.
The inquest found that Francis Blandy was poisoned and that Mary Blandy did poison and murder him.
The constable was issued a warrant to conduct Mary to the county jail at Oxford until her trial.
Apparently Mary's alleged murder of her father posed such a threat to the stability of the social and political order that the Secretary of State the Duke of Newcastle
solicited an opinion from the Lord Chancellor Hardwick on the question of whether the crime would assume the cost of prosecuting Mary Blandy
because her relatives the parties that would normally prosecute were unable to undertake the burden.
The Lord Chancellor heartily endorsed the Crown's assumption of the cost of prosecution.
In March of 1752 Mary Blandy appeared to answer the charges against her.
Including the Honourable Mr. Bathurst there were five Crown lawyers.
Mary Blandy was defended by a local lawyer and two assistants.
The trial lasted 13 hours during which the prosecution called medical witnesses and servants in the Blandy household.
The defense then called its own witnesses who testified that the evidence of the servants was not to be trusted because they had a grudge against Mary.
Other character witnesses asserted that they had never seen anything but filial duty from Mary towards her father.
Without retiring the jury consulted for five minutes and returned a verdict of guilty.
She was allowed six weeks to settle her affairs before hanging.
Mary's lover Cranston fled to France where he stayed with a kinswoman Mrs. Ross and published pamphlets that rather unganently laid the blame for Blandy's death on Mary.
It hardly mattered. By December of 1752 Cranston was also dead.
On his deathbed he not only converted to Roman Catholicism but also arranged for a pretentious and elaborate funeral complete with procession.
Let me turn now from that version of events collected for public consumption to the trial account to show how the legal account borrowed from the political, social and mythical narratives to represent the theological implications of Mary's crime.
In his opening statement Henry Bathurst, Solicitor General, suggests how the natural structures of affiliation, familial, theological and jurisprudential must be marshaled against the threat of Mary Blandy's undaughtily, unnatural and finally unnarratable behavior.
What would be thought, he says, of one who has murdered her own father, who has designedly done the greatest of all human injuries to him from whom she received the first and greatest of all human benefits,
who has wickedly taken away his life to whom she stands indebted for life, who has deliberately destroyed in his old age him by whose care and tenderness she was protected in her helpless infancy,
who has impiously shut her ears against the loud voice of nature and of God which bid her honor her father and instead of honoring him has murdered him.
The piling up of rhetorical questions amounts to an almost pathological refusal to narrate the events and joined with the increasing pitch of disbelief constructs an accusation against Mary for which there is only one response, a confession of guilt.
Emphasizing the social and political consequences of a crime whose story cannot be told, Mr. Sergeant Hayward, cram prosecutor, directs his comments specifically to the future lawyers and political leaders of the country in the courtroom.
The trial was being held at Oxford University.
To you, young gentlemen of this university, I particularly beg your attention, earnestly beseeching you to guard against the first approaches and temptations device.
Learn hence the dreadful consequences of disobedience to parents and know also that the same mischief in all probability may happen to such who obstinately disregard, neglect and despise the advice of those persons who have charge and care of their education,
of governors likewise and of magistrates and of all others who are put in authority over them.
In this argument, the prosecutor presents parental disobedience as the prime cause of social instability, invoking both the first crime of that kind of disobedience, that is, eaves against God,
and also calling upon the pervasive political threat to stable society manifest in both internal and foreign unrest.
The rhetoric of disobedience and punishment moves in a widening circle outward from the familiar to encompass the network of personal, social and political bonds, from parents to teachers to governors and magistrates and finally all others in authority.
The historical and political range of the prosecutor's rhetoric, the paradigmatic nature of the story of Blandi's crime, is suggested in the paraphrase of the trial offered to readers of a contemporary newspaper account in the gentleman's magazine.
Posterity may know and blush that such a monster in cruelty had existed in female form who, without provocation, had coolly and deliberately meditated and accomplished the destruction of that life which had given her being.
And that children in after-ages may be warned by her example that how secretly so ever such deeds of darkness are carried on, they are always open to the all-seeing eye of heaven whose providence seldom fails to bring them to the knowledge of men.
God's providential intervention in human affairs by which the trace of arsenic is preserved is juridically represented as circumstantial evidence.
In fact, the trial of Mary Blandi is one of the first to use this term in its specifically modern legal sense. Such a development is consistent with the increasing reliance upon trial by jury.
Moreover, the modern conception of the jury, unlike its medieval equivalents, relies upon the juryman's ignorance of the facts of the crime.
He is not there to tell what he knows about the facts of the case. Instead, he is there to be persuaded of the guilt or innocence of the accused, a persuasion that must rely to an unprecedented extent upon verbal representations by witnesses of what really happened.
What cannot be seen here and now in the courtroom must be inferred.
And to begin that process, there must be at least one irrefutable fact that generates the chain of inference linking apparently unconnected circumstances into a causal sequence.
That one irrefutable fact or circumstance in the Blandi case is the sight of God's intervention.
Thus, it is the origin of the narrative that leads inevitably to discovery, accusation, conviction and punishment.
The relevant legal test is not the likeliness of an event. Rather, it is how well that particular event can be accommodated in a chain of events and how inevitable that chain of cause and effect seems to be.
Another way of saying this is what counts as relevant circumstantial evidence is its plausibility as part of a narrative, not its capacity to imitate lived experience.
In the narrative of Mary Blandi's criminality, circumstantial evidence takes on the power and conviction of providence.
The jurisprudential narrative mirrors and sanctions the seemingly inevitable logic of the Judeo-Christian narrative.
Circumstances that tally with one another are beyond human contrivance claims, Mr. Sergeant Howard.
This seemingly inevitable and connected narrative, pervasive, injuridical, theological and historical narratives was contrasted with the absurd and unaccountable actions that occur in some romance novels, that is, novels authored by women.
Other novels, however, can imitate that natural and divine ordering of events upon which 18th century jurisprudence relies as its model for revealing the truth.
And it is precisely this capacity to imitate what appears to be the inevitable sequences of events presented in a court of law that causes so much cultural anxiety.
If fiction can be made to seem like the truth, how are the uneducated and the ill-informed know the difference between the truth and an imitation of that truth?
The novel thus trespasses upon the moral and epistemological territory previously reserved for the law and the church.
The trial account returns again and again to insist that the crime can be properly and truthfully narrated only within a jurisprudential theological rhetoric and form to which, by definition, only those who can speak in court with authority, the lawyers and the judges, have access.
Having established the prime cause as filial disobedience, an original cause that is sanctified by the intervention of God in the discovery of the wicked act of poisoning, the prosecutor repeatedly shapes the testimony of its witnesses to reflect this original sin.
The defence likewise reinforces this narrative of the events by bringing witnesses who dispute the reports of Mary's disobedience.
Thus the defence in effect confirms that there is no more powerful or more persuasive place than filial disobedience to begin the daughter's story.
Mary Blandy's own account of the events leading up to her father's death does not, however, follow the model proposed by the prosecution and defence, and it is in part precisely because she cannot displace that master narrative that she is unconvincing.
Furthermore, she is already condemned as guilty even before she details her defence because she adopts a form and a rhetoric that cannot speak of innocence, no matter what its content, and that is the form of the romance novel.
Before moving to Mary Bland's apologia, however, I would like to look at a text that appears to position itself midway between the semi-official legal version and the fictional histories published by the popular press.
Although structurally and rhetorically, it aligns itself with the authority of the courts. This is Henry Field, Fielding's examples of the interposition of providence in the detection and punishment of murder.
Like the prosecutor's narrative, Fielding adopts a narrative structure that reaches back to the first familial slaughter of Abel by Cain and forward to the final day of judgement.
Like the prosecutor's narrative also, Fielding's exemplary history assumes what appears to be a natural rather than an invented or contrived structure.
Fielding achieves this effect in part by directly claiming authorship only for the introduction and conclusion of the narrative.
As the intervening tales, he says, were collected from various authors ancient and modern and had fallen into their natural and circumstantial order apparently of their own accord.
The formal structure of the text thus imitates the natural and circumstantial intervention of God in human affairs.
The stories of divine intervention, numbering 33, are taken from classical and biblical narratives as well as popular sources.
Special attention is given to stories that detailed the murder of husbands by wives, usually with the assistance of a lover.
Wives by husbands, seduced by younger and wealthier women, revenged mistresses against their errant lovers and sons against their fathers.
In all the stories, discovery of the crime is synonymous with conclusive evidence of the guilt of the accused.
In other words, divine revelation still constitutes the origin of the legal narrative.
Although other explanatory evidence, the bloodstained handkerchief, the fevered confession, is brought to bear on what would otherwise be only miraculous.
Theologically, we have then both the medieval reliance upon miracles and the modern reliance upon the evidence of the human senses.
Jurisprudentially, medieval conceptions of divine providence are gradually giving way to the modern concept of circumstantial evidence.
Taken together, however, Fielding's exemplar also assumed the structural sequence of events and the realistic detail of the novel.
Both within the individual tales and throughout this exemplary history as a whole, circumstances pile upon circumstances, making the implausible seem plausible, and the merely accidental seem predictive.
Despite his intent to represent an inevitable and divine uncovering of guilt, Fielding's narrative nevertheless relies on novelistic techniques to generate that aura of authenticity and authority.
Fielding's story of Mary Blandy perfectly illustrates the genre mixing produced by the struggle for supremacy between various forms of narrative and various theories of what constitutes evidence.
In Fielding's narrative, the stuff of the fabulous competes with the theological and jurisprudential narratives of innocence and guilt and of plausibility and implausibility.
Wearing the hats of both the fabulous and the magistrate, Fielding weaves back and forth between sometimes contrary cultural representations of truth.
Finding a cause for Blandy's weird behavior is essential to restoring order to the familial and state body.
Like a gap in the text, Blandy's crime is an ellipsis of meaning.
Her crime disrupts the logical and necessary chain of cause and effect that operates in a sound and sober world to inscribe God's work.
As Fielding explains, in the politic, as in the natural body, no disorders ever spring up without a cause.
Much less do any diseases become epidemical by mere accident.
These must all have their causes and such causes must be adequate to the effects which they produce.
Thus the search for adequate causation for an explanation of disease in the natural body or disorder in the political body becomes the equivalent of identifying the moment of the narrative's origin.
The point at which Providence intervenes in human affairs is synonymous with the discovery of that chain of inference that leads to an understanding of the adequacy of cause and effect.
Narrative, then, in its true form, that is, in its historical, theological, and jurisprudential form, renders the logic and sight of God's intervention in human affairs visible.
It is precisely Blandy's failure to render the causes adequate to the effects which they produce that mark her own narrative as untrue.
For Miss Blandy's own account of the affair between her and Mr. Cranstone, relying as it does upon her memory of conversation and events and her reconstruction of motive and sentiment,
contends with the apparently neutral, objective, jurisprudential discourse of the law and the exemplary narrative of Fielding's history.
These authorized versions are replaced with the contrived, self-conscious narrative of the novel.
Drawn from the private domestic world rather than the public world of the law and the Bible, Blandy's account falls under the suspicion that shadows all individually authored texts, particularly autobiographical ones,
and that is that truth has succumbed to self-interest, that self-representation is inherently partial and not subject to any final proof.
Moreover, Mary Blandy had already had the opportunity to speak to the jury and the public in her trial and had clearly failed to convince them of her innocence.
Properly speaking, Mary ought either to confess to parasite and thus satisfy her readers with closure or remain silent as a proper lady would.
The Apologia was published after the trial in response to considerable popular support for her case.
By adopting as her model the immensely popular sentimental novels of the late 17th and early 18th century women writers, Mary Blandy seemed to speak about herself as if she were a heroine in a fictional text.
Despite the appeal of Blandy's story for the popular audience, an appeal reflected in the sentimental newspaper accounts of her trial that spoke of her delicacy in distress,
the model of the sentimental novel only situated her more firmly against the jurisprudential and theological discourses that had condemned her.
Unlike other popular and by the mid-18th century conventional criminal autobiographies, Blandy's Apologia is not both an account of her sin and a model for repentance, as for example Defoe's fictional Maul Flanders claims to be.
Blandy adopted a form particularly associated with women writers who however much read were frequently castigated as having abandoned the proper task of their sex, the guardianship of the private domestic space of their husbands and fathers,
and who were therefore asserting sexual and thus political aggressiveness improper in ladies.
Moreover, Mary's explanation of the apparently incriminating evidence against her did not merely have to counter the presumption of guilt, but had to revise what the prosecution had argued was a divinely ordered narrative.
In attempting to substitute her own narrative, her own testimony in place of the version offered by the prosecution, Mary Blandy not only appeared to belie the truth of legal discourse, but she had also raised her voice against the voice of God.
She had thus tempted Providence.
