Lecture 4, Community, in Sophocles, Oedipus Taranus
Like the previous lecture on the Aristaia, this lecture also examines the contribution
that Greek culture in general and Greek drama in particular has made to our understanding
of the nature of justice and law.
As with the Hebraic constructions of these fundamental cultural concepts outlined in
the second lecture on the Hebrew Bible, the Greek version of law and justice is intimately
linked to the relationship between the human and divine worlds in which the Greeks believed.
No expression of human law or its articulation in specific acts of justice or injustice could
be understood in isolation from its relationship to how the gods regulated or remained indifferent
to human behavior.
By extension, no individual human action could be understood in isolation from its relationship
to the society of which it was a part or to the larger cosmic reality within which human
society flourished.
Before we turn to these dramatic enactments of these relationships in Oedipus Taranus,
let me briefly set the historical context for the play.
Sophocles lived from about 495 to 406 BC and thus was born about 15 years after the last
tyrant ruled in Athens.
And his early years were lived under the Athenian democracy, a democracy limited to free men
over 18 to be sure, but nevertheless significantly different from the rule of the tyrant Hippias,
who had been driven from Athens in 510 BC.
After the leadership of Cleisthenes, classical Athenian democracy was born.
Cleisthenes reforms reshaped Athenian society by breaking up traditional family and regional
allegiances and secured the stability of the state by instituting the law of ostracism
by which those who were a danger were forced into exile.
Thus political and social institutions were mutually reinforcing and laws that governed
the political exercise of citizenship were seen to be synonymous with the social rights
that accrued to one who inhabited the Demos, literally the village.
Sophocles lived through the early years of this great political experiment as well as
the military assaults upon Athens by the Spartans and the threats to democracy that grew more
powerful in his old age.
He was obviously admired by his fellow citizens, he was both a treasurer for Athens and a general,
as well as one of those who led the city during its struggle against the Spartans.
His plays reflect both the political and military tensions that were ever present during his
lifetime.
Sophocles was the most successful playwright of the 5th century BC, although few of his
120 plays survived.
The dating of his plays is uncertain, but scholars accept the period 428-425 BC as the probable
date for the first production of Oedipus Tyrannus.
Just a quick observation here about the title.
I use a translation of the play that employs this title rather than the more familiar Oedipus
Rex, because as scholars have demonstrated one should distinguish between a legitimate
king, the Greek for which is Basilius, the Latin Rex, and a ruler who has ascended to
the position because of his actions, a Tyrannus.
In this case, because Oedipus solves the riddle and thus saves thebes from the sphinx, Tyrannus
does not mean necessarily tyrant.
Sophocles was drawing on an ancient myth when he adapted the story of Oedipus.
Both the Iliad and the Odyssey mentioned the story, and the version of the myth was dramatized
by Sophocles' contemporary and author of the Aristia, Escalis, in his play Seven Against
Thebes, the third play in a now lost trilogy.
All Greek playwrights felt the freedom to represent the myths of their culture in a
way that functioned best for their particular purposes.
As we saw in the last lecture where we noted how Escalis had adapted a version of the myths
of Agamemnon, Clytemnester, and Orestes.
In this play, Sophocles ignores the version of the myth that ties Oedipus' fate to a
family curse inaugurated when Oedipus' father, Laos, rapes a young boy.
For Sophocles, Oedipus brings the curse on himself through actions that seem to be preordained,
and yet, nevertheless, are Oedipus' responsibility.
Moreover, Sophocles intensifies this focus on an individual who must bear the burden
of his own fate by making him, Oedipus, the prime investigator of his own crime.
Thus, Sophocles is able to ratchet up the unbearable tension between Oedipus' passion
for justice and the revelation of his own criminality.
In thus stressing the individual nature of one's response to the fate dealt by the gods
and to the complex social laws that bind us to communities into which we are born, as
well as to those of our own choosing, Sophocles is able to articulate for his contemporary
Greek audience the tension between the desires and demands of family life and the desires
and demands of the community.
Oedipus never acts only for himself, even when he believes he is most isolated from
that which he believes to be his own family and homeland.
Indeed, one of the great ironies of the play is that Oedipus moves ever closer to his real
home and his real family, that is, his biological family, even when he seems furthest from them.
The tragedy culminates when Oedipus recognizes with adorning horror that he is simultaneously
both the most intimate with and yet the most exiled from his natural home.
It is hard to interpret this play in the 21st century without Freud's reading casting
a long shadow.
Before Freud so persuasively recast the myth as a metaphor for individual male psychosexual
anxiety, other philosophers like Nietzsche, for example, had offered readings of the play
that relied on the Greek understanding of what made a man like Oedipus susceptible to
tragedy.
Two terms are necessary to our understanding of this reading of tragedy, hybris and nemesis.
Hybris or hubris is frequently translated as pride, usually suggesting an unwarranted
pride in one's own actions or character.
Such a translation obscures what a Greek audience would have understood by this term, that the
individual does indeed possess virtues or attributes that single him out from ordinary
men and thus his pride is warranted.
He has been chosen by the gods to be more fortunate than others, but it is precisely
his singularity, his ability to rise above the ordinary that attracts the gods envy
and thus their nemesis, their retribution.
There is then one might say an essential irony to the nature of the tragic figure.
Desiring to be heroic, he more than any other human confronts the limitations of the human
condition.
Thus certain men like Oedipus or Arestes or in the Old Testament, Noah and Job, having
been chosen must suffer because only through that suffering can the heroic figure understand
his relationship to the non-human and thereby transmit that wisdom to everybody else, those
ordinary ones who are not heroic.
The hero is therefore a scapegoat for all humanity, a victim one might say of his own
heroism.
This irony to that to be heroic is to suffer is of course a way of speaking about the human
condition to be human is to suffer, but only the hero fully inhabits the agony of such
a state.
In Oedipus Tyrannus, Sophocles teases out the implication of such suffering, suggesting
that only in confronting the unimaginable incest and parasite can the hero completely
taste the bitterness of what it means to be a man.
That confrontation, which is at one level between the individual man and his society,
finally culminates in that ironic moment when the hero simultaneously transmits his knowledge
to his community and exiles himself from it, a moment whereby the full meaning of justice
is revealed.
How does Sophocles craft this confrontation with the unimaginable and reveal the irresolvable
tension between the fate of the individual with his idiosyncratic desires and demands
and the needs of the state?
As in the depiction of Adam and Eve's disobedience or the unthinkable demand made by God that
Abraham sacrificed his only son, we are exposed to powerful and primitive emotions, but emotions
that are constrained and channeled by the generic demands of the tragic form.
A hero must die or be utterly defeated.
The plot must move inexorably to the disclosure of his tragic fate.
The hero must bring that fate upon himself through some characteristic that is both his
strength and his weakness.
The chorus will reflect upon the actions of the principal characters but cannot be said
to actively guide the moral action of the play.
Even with the form of the tragedy as a kind of bollock against the raw emotions that its
plot raises, the audience will nevertheless be both tormented by and yet relish the suffering
of Oedipus.
This strange paradoxical response, which produces what Aristotle calls catharsis, or the release
of fear and anxiety, constitutes one of the pleasures of representation, of literature.
Such a paradox is also embodied in the structure of the myth upon which Sophocles relies, being
metaphorically enacted once before the play begins and once during the course of the play.
I refer here to the two great riddles that Oedipus solves, the first that brings him to
the throne of Thebes and its queen, Jocasta, and the second, the riddle of his own identity
and paternity, that brings the horrific revelation of his parasite and incest and thus forces
his self-ostracising from Thebes and his family.
Let me briefly rehearse the events that have taken place before the play, information that
of course would be well known to Sophocles' audience.
His father, Laos, king of Thebes, has learned from the oracle at Delphi that his own son
will kill him.
Remember how Zeus swallows Athena's mother, Metis, to prevent his own son from usurping
him.
So, he has learned that his own son will kill him and thus with the agreement of his wife
Jocasta, he has abandoned his son on a mountainside, believing the child will die.
However, a shepherd takes pity on the child and rescues him, giving him to a Corinthian
who takes him as a gift to Polybus Amirope, rulers of Corinth.
The child is named Oedipus, which means swollen foot, a reference to Oedipus' lameness caused
when his feet were yoked together when he was abandoned.
Oedipus grows up as the son and heir to the throne of Corinth, but as a grown man he is
taunted with being adopted and thus seeks out the oracle at Delphi to learn his true
parentage, beginning the relentless search for identity that will end in his own exile
and the death of both his parents.
At Delphi, Oedipus learns that he is destined to kill his father and marry his mother and
seeking to avoid this prophecy, he avoids Corinth and travels towards Thebes.
On his way he encounters a man and his entourage at a crossroads who abuses him.
Enraged, Oedipus kills them, all except one who flees.
When Oedipus arrives at Thebes, he finds the city laboring under a curse imposed by the
Sphinx, a winged creature, half lion and half woman, a curse that can only be lifted when
a riddle is solved.
Creon, brother to Jacasta, wife of Laos, who has ruled Thebes since Laos failed to return
from a journey to the oracle, has promised both kingdom and queen to whomever solves
the riddle.
Inevitably it is Oedipus who answers the riddle posed by the Sphinx.
This is the riddle.
It is two-legged on land and four-legged, not one shape and three-legged two.
It changes its single nature when on earth.
It moves crawling or in the air or on the sea, but when it goes bustling along on three
legs then the speed in its limbs becomes most feeble.
The answer is, of course, man.
And Oedipus not only wins a kingdom and a wife, but also, of course, the ironic fulfillment
of the destiny he has sought to avoid.
And thus as a scapegoat for all humanity takes on the suffering that is an inevitable
aspect of human existence.
All this action takes place before the events of the play, but the opening of the action
reminds us immediately that Oedipus has already manifested those qualities that makes him
a man distinct from other men.
The city of Thebes is once again suffering under a plague and the citizens turn to the
man who has saved them before, Oedipus.
His response to the citizens' lamentations further reinforces the tension between Oedipus's
belief that his will and knowledge are sufficient to manage human affairs and secure his kingdom
and the destiny assigned to him by the gods over which he has no control.
Oedipus has sent his brother-in-law Creon to the oracle at Delphi to seek guidance,
a proper thing for a king who cares for his people to do.
This is of course the same oracle that prophesied that Oedipus would murder his father and marry
his mother, a prophecy that Oedipus has sought to avoid and believes he can never fulfill,
having exiled himself from his mother and father he believes in Corinth.
On this occasion however, Oedipus is eager to follow the commands that the oracle delivers
to him through Creon.
Drive out defilement nurtured in your land, cherish it no longer, it must be purged.
The cause of the defilement, asserts Creon, is that Thebes harbors the murderers of Laos,
its former king.
In a speech rich with ironic implications, Oedipus bows to the chorus to be the god's
true instrument of vengeance.
He says, so I stand side by side with the god, fighting for the rights of the murdered
man.
I damn the killer whoever he may be, I damn myself if I should come to know that he shares
my hearth and home, then I call this curse to fall on me.
His cause is mine and I will fight for him, as if he were my own father, and I will stop
at nothing to find the one who has this man's blood on his hands.
Oedipus stands at this point in the play then as the human representative of divine justice,
as the agent of divine retribution, arguing for lex talionis, the law of retaliation in
its strictest form, a life for a life.
When Oedipus seeks further guidance from the prophet Tiresias however, we discover the
limitations of his obedience to the divine law.
At first the blind seer refuses to answer Oedipus' questions about who is responsible for the
death of Laos.
Although he knows the answers, his is the vision of the gods, particularly Apollo, he
tries to protect Oedipus from the awful knowledge.
He only retorts in anger when Oedipus asserts that his hostility is unlawful and accuses
him of being a traitor to Thebes and of being part of a plot that murdered Laos.
It seems then that Oedipus' sense of justice, as righteous as it might be when he speaks
of bringing retribution to others, is inadequate to the absolute demands of divine justice.
Not surprisingly, when Tiresias accuses Oedipus of being the land's defiler of being the
curse, Oedipus refuses to believe it.
Although his disbelief is a thoroughly human response to the mystifying circumstances that
surround Laos' death, Oedipus' enraged reaction to Tiresias' claim that he, Tiresias, is
only speaking for the gods and not for himself, Oedipus' response to that symbolizes the excessive
reliance that Oedipus has upon his own talents and will.
In his speech to Tiresias where he accuses him with crayon of plotting to bring him down,
Oedipus reveals that, despite his insistence that he will act as an agent of the gods,
in other words that he accepts the necessity for impartial, objective, natural laws that
should govern all, despite this he actually believes that his heroic nature makes him
an exception to those universal laws.
He says, you cheating old beggar, all you can see is personal profit.
To the future you're blind.
Tell me, when have your prophecies been proved?
When the sphinx sounded her deadly song, did you speak to save our people then?
The riddle could not be solved by just any man.
It needed the skills of a seer, but where were you?
You saw no omens, you made no revelations, there was no divine inspiration, you knew
nothing, then I came, ignorant Oedipus, I silenced her by using my mind, not signs from
the sky.
Oedipus' irreverence for Teraeus as the diviner of the gods will is reinforced when Jocasta
also cast ads on prophecy, when she hears from Oedipus what Teraeus has said.
You can't, she says, rely on merely human, sooth says.
Such disdain about seers is not to be confused with the rejection of the gods themselves,
but Oedipus is refusal to listen to Teraeus and his angry outburst because the seer does
not confirm Oedipus' power as Teraeus, but on the contrary completely subverts it, suggests
the limitation of Oedipus' reliance on Apollo's will.
Given that the Greeks had no sacred books, no forms of revelation, no authorized and institutionalized
priesthood or doctrine, the importance placed on oracles and the interpreters, the seers,
was paramount.
Such faith in human divination was not absolute, sometimes humans got it wrong, but that human
fallibility did not alter the essential truth of the oracle itself.
If you couldn't believe in the truth of the oracles, then there was nothing divine in
the world.
As the chorus laments when faced with the irreverence shown to Teraeus, now Apollo's
fame and honor die away and everything divine departs.
It is entirely appropriate then, as well as one of the most painful ironies of the play
that Jocasta should inadvertently plant the suspicion that Teraeus might be right about
Oedipus' part in the death of Laos.
Jocasta has walked in on a bitter argument between her brother and her husband, provoked
by Oedipus' suspicion that Creeon has conspired with Teraeus against him.
In seeking the cause, she hears that Teraeus has accused Oedipus of murder.
Her response is to condemn Teraeus as one of those merely human diviners, citing as
evidence the inaccuracy of the Delphic oracle's prophecy about Laos' death.
Laos was not murdered by his own son, she says, because the baby was cast out of the
thieves.
And Laos was, in fact, killed by strangers where three roads meet.
It is that final detail, the death of Laos at the place where three roads meet, that
propels Oedipus irrevocably towards his own doom.
From this point on, Oedipus becomes the primary witness against himself, even as he is the
primary investigator of his own criminality.
To a 21st century audience, Oedipus' insistence that he must find out the truth of Laos'
death, even if it condemns him to be a pariah exiled from his home and family, is heroic,
the epitome of the fiercely intellectual, self-questioning, modern man.
To the original Greek audience, however, Oedipus' pride in the power of his mind, his belief
that he could solve anything, would have come perilously close to equating himself with
the gods.
That is his hubris.
When Oedipus responds to Jocasta's insistence that the seers can be wrong by narrating his
own story of the death at the crossroads, the double nature of his position vis-a-vis
the truth of the oracle becomes clear.
He is at once both challenging that truth, even as he, unbeknown to himself, confirms
it.
His story of the encounter at the crossroads where he kills the old man with his walking
stick is a confession, but he is as yet unaware of his guilt.
A single detail separates Jocasta's version of the story from Oedipus'.
The eyewitness to the attack, a herdsman, claims that several thieves killed Laos.
If he is right, Oedipus cannot be guilty of his death.
Everything hinges on his testimony.
By the time the herdsman arrives, however, the apparently important facts of Laos'
death no longer matter.
Another more powerful narrative has overwhelmed the scene at the crossroads.
While Jocasta and Oedipus await the arrival of the herdsman, the chorus proclaims the
central message of the play, reverence for the law, that's nomos, of the gods is what
orders the human world.
The customs of men may change with the time and the place, but the divine law is constant
and unaffected by the temporal affairs of man.
The chorus says, these laws were not made by men.
Men are born to die, but the law shall never sleep forgotten.
Great among gods, it never ages.
Moreover, this eternal law restrains those men who would aspire too high, who would
appear to be challenging the gods.
The chorus specifically addresses the hubristic power of the tyrant whose irreverence manifests
itself in injustice and greed.
Sophocles' audience would have resonated to such a warning against the corruption of
political power given their own recent experiences.
The chorus is insistent that the oracles must be revered prepares the way for the disclosure
of the truth about Oedipus' identity.
A disclosure that comes from the only source that can absolutely confirm Oedipus' relationship
to Polybus and Marriott, that is the shepherd who delivered Oedipus to the royal house of
Corinth.
The Corinthian comes to Thebes to deliver news that appears to exonerate Oedipus from the
charge of killing his father.
Polybus has died of old age, therefore Oedipus cannot be the killer.
Interpreting Polybus' death as another sign of the unreliability of prophecy, Oedipus further
distances himself from the reverence with which mortal man should regard the gods.
From discounting human seers, Oedipus turns to scawning the oracle itself.
Why, why dear wife, he says, should I observe the oracle at Delphi, or strain to see signs
from birds screeching in the sky?
They led me to believe that I would kill my father, yet he's dead and buried deep in the
earth, and here I am who never raised a hand against him unless my absence made him die
brokenhearted.
One I suppose I could be called his killer, but not the kind contained within these worthless
oracles Polybus has taken with him to Hades.
But further questioning of the herdsman's story reveals that he is the very one who
received a baby from another shepherd who had found him abandoned in the mountains.
This news alerts Jacasta to the truth, and she begs Oedipus not to seek more information,
but once again Oedipus' pride both in his capacity to reason out mystery and to exercise
authority compels him to bring more incriminating evidence against himself.
The central irony of the play now becomes clear, that the only knowledge worth knowing
for Oedipus is about the nature of his self and his parentage, but it is at the same time
the very knowledge that will destroy him.
I have to know, he says, who I am.
That is my nature, and I will never play the part of someone else, nor fail to learn what
I was born to be.
And what is true for Oedipus, the tragic hero, is true to a lesser extent for all the rest
of us, because what knowing the self means inevitably is knowing the limitations and
frailties of the human condition.
Knowing our beginnings means that we also know our end.
When the full calamity of Oedipus' position becomes clear to him, which is ironically
only after he threatens to torture the shepherd who saved him from death, and Oedipus has fled
in horror from the revelation, it is the chorus who universalizes Oedipus' suffering.
Oh, what a wretched breed we mortals are.
Our lives add up to nothing.
You are my pattern, your fortune is mine, you Oedipus, your misery teaches me to call
no mortal blessed.
As the horror of revelation grows, there seems nothing more to torment Oedipus, but there
is no end to his agony.
Jocusta hangs herself, and in his passion Oedipus takes the pins that hold her clothes
and blinds himself.
Even in this moment of his greatest despair, Oedipus cannot relinquish control of his destiny
to the gods.
He can grant to Apollo the agency that has fulfilled his fate, but he insists, I did
this, blinded myself, by my own hand.
When the chorus chides him, he responds, don't tell me that what I did was not for the best,
I do not want opinions, I do not need advice.
In the final scenes of the play, Oedipus is still commanding all those around him, as
he once did when Tyrannus, when King.
Only Creon, now ruler of Thebes, resists his imperious commands, and reminds Oedipus that
his future will not be of his own choice, but will be, as was his past, enacted according
to the gods' wishes.
Still, he says, you try to take control of everything.
Go, your power has not followed you through life.
As Oedipus is led out of the city that once called him king, the audience would be reminded
that even the most heroic of men cannot rise above the limitations of the human condition,
and that that condition inevitably produces, but cannot resolve the conflict between human
desire and divine law.
