This lecture will establish the context for the three Shakespearean plays that follow,
The Merchant of Venice, Measure for Measure, and The Winter's Tale.
We will see how the cultural values of Elizabethan England, political, religious, and aesthetic
were both produced by and disseminated through three great social institutions of the period,
the royal courts, the legal inns of the court, and the playhouses.
Given that the royal family would not attend plays in the playhouses, companies of players,
including Shakespeare's Chamberlain's men, or as they were afterward called, the king's men,
often performed at court, and the possibility that there might be such an audience must
have influenced Shakespeare's aesthetic practice.
Plays were also performed in the Inns of Court, the collective name for the Four Societies,
the control admission to the bar, and which date from before the 14th century.
The first recorded performance of Twelfth Night, for example, took place in the Middle Temple in 1602.
Moreover, many of the playwrights of the Elizabethan age were trained in the law,
and their plays reflect the Inns' reliance on traditional values of loyalty to the crown,
and fostered the growth of a specific English national identity.
They were not afraid, however, to criticize established political authority when necessary.
In the Merchant of Venice, Measure for Measure and the Winter's Tale, the cultural presence of the law
as an institution that both directly and indirectly regulates social morality is kingly felt.
Even though the plays are set in Venice, Vienna, and Sicily, respectively,
each draws on a combination of legal, regal, and moral concepts that is identifiably English.
The intersection of powerful ideas is common to all cultures, of course,
but there is something about the way those ideas are bound to dramatic representations
at this historical moment that seems specifically English.
Or perhaps it would be more correct to say that the confluence is specific to London,
for it is the physical proximity of the institutions that produces those influential ideologies
that generate the intensity of these connections and their dramatic representations.
In Elizabethan England, political, religious, and aesthetic philosophies
flowed between the royal courts, the Inns of Court, and the playhouses of Elizabethan England
with ideas, influences, laws, and information all circulating endlessly through the streets
and up and down the river.
All three institutions, monarchal, legal, and theatrical,
were intimately associated with the city of London,
whose central feature is, of course, the River Thames that runs through the city,
connecting the royal courts of law at Westminster Hall
to the training ground of lawyers in the Inns of Court on the Strand,
and linking the Globe, Shakespeare's playhouse on the south bank of the river,
and other Elizabethan theatres like the Rose and the Swan,
to the symbol of royal authority across the river, the Tower of London,
and further west to St James Palace and on up the river to the royal courts at Hampton.
During the 16th century, the River Thames was, of course, the major form of transportation
within London and its suburbs, which included Southwark,
where many of the theatres were located.
It carried both inhabitants and visitors, as well as goods,
diplomatic pouches, theatre costumes, lovers, gossip,
the news, rumours, secrets, and all the scandal that make up such a culture.
These physical and cultural connections are, of course, not accidental.
Important buildings are built next to already existing important buildings,
and rivers are always ways of connecting people and places,
so I'm not suggesting that it was something peculiar to the English
that produced this confluence of institutions.
But it was, I believe, something particular to that historical moment in London
that produced the intense intermingling of the worlds of the law courts,
the royal court, and the theatre.
One reason for this intense interconnectedness was the position and function of the law
in Elizabethan society, so let me turn now to that institution.
From the time of the Norman conquest in 1066 until 1820,
the three major English courts, that is, the Court of Common Pleas,
the King's Bench, and the Chancery Court, were all held in Westminster Hall.
The hall was designed originally as a place for feasting and entertaining,
but its very size, it was about 1850 square yards,
was what, in the 11th century, was the largest in Europe,
helped to make Westminster the judicial and administrative centre of the kingdom.
The Palace of Westminster was one of the monarch's principal homes
throughout the later Middle Ages, and for this reason the institutions of government
came to be clustered in the Westminster area.
The hall was identified with the institution of royal justice,
and many notable state trials, including that of Thomas More, took place there.
We should not imagine the hall in the Elizabethan period as if it were a contemporary law court
with a formal and regulated atmosphere, a place of dignified behaviour and serious business.
No doubt serious business went on there, but the hall also attracted many who thought
they could make a living out of those practicing the law,
or the many suitors who filled the hall seeking legal advice,
or waiting for their case to be heard, or the clerks administering the monarch's business,
members of the royal administration, or the general public.
Obviously, such a gathering are some of the most important and influential men of the kingdom,
and of those who came from all over the realm to petition the court for relief
must have generated a vibrant and often vexed social world,
in which political affairs of great consequence mixed with individual concerns
of little note to anybody but the petitioner.
With its many shops and stalls selling wigs, pens, books, and other legal paraphernalia,
as well as tradesmen, such as fruit sellers or booksellers,
milling around in this vast open space, it became one of the chief centres of London life,
and obviously the site of much gossip and news.
As in our contemporary world, the law in its many forms saturated the everyday world,
determining both matters of great import to the state,
and matters of lesser concern to the individual.
For those of a certain standing, that is the gentry and the aristocracy,
knowing the law was essential to their position.
As a consequence, many young men of the upper class studied law at the ends of court,
not necessarily so that they could practice it as a profession, income being unnecessary,
but so that they could protect their property and inheritance from what was a highly litigious culture.
For those who could not afford to attend the ends of court or study the law privately with a tutor,
many self-help guides to inheritance law or land law were available,
including surprisingly legal guides for women.
One critic has said that every man in those days was to a certain point his own lawyer,
that is he was well versed in all the technical forms and procedures.
Therefore, counsel were brought into very close relations with their somewhat exacting clients,
by whom they might be said to be chiefly instructed,
the solicitor or attorney being rather in the position of an agent for the general conduct of cases.
At no other time has a legal training been so clearly recognised
as the necessary complement of a university education for a man who was to play a part in public life.
The ends of court are four law schools in London,
namely the Inner Temple, the Middle Temple, Grey's Inn and Lincoln's Inn.
The Inns got their name from the site, the Tavern or Inn, where barristers had for centuries met to conduct business.
Sometime before the 14th century, these Inns were formally recognised as the location for training lawyers
who would eventually practice as barristers,
that is the class of lawyers who could plead before the court of common pleas.
Each Inn still has a great hall, chapel, libraries and sets of chambers for many hundreds of barristers and elaborate formal gardens.
The Inns of Court were one of the great social as well as educational institutions of the Elizabethan and early Stuart period.
They did not simply educate young men in law,
they educated them as do elite institutions today in culture,
in how to advance socially, in how to improve one's material standing.
Moreover, because of the close connections between the Inns of Court and the class of men who were trained there,
that is the upper class, the governing set,
they generally fostered loyalty towards the Crown,
as well as an enthusiasm for literary and other intellectual interests,
particularly the philosophical and theoretical analysis of English common law.
English common law was a source of national pride and is often valorised in Shakespeare's plays over other legal systems.
The common law was valued for its reliance on precedent,
that is past cases, and its protection of individual liberties, and claimed a history that was timeless.
The superior wisdom and authority of the common law over other forms of judicial action, such as the Court of Chancery,
was manifest, for example, in the success of the common law in bringing property cases entirely under its provenance,
which was the result of the statute of uses passed under Henry VIII in 1535,
in order to guarantee to the King the benefit of taxes on land and his state transactions.
A quarter of a century later, when Elizabeth I ascended the throne in 1558,
the legal system was still trying to resolve the great number of cases that had resulted from the statute's insistence
that the common law and not the Court of Chancery determined title to real estate.
In his plays, Shakespeare frequently relies on a sense of national pride about the common law to distinguish the English from their enemies.
Indeed, the question of how the English could conquer and impose their system of government on another culture
that had no experience with the common law was a very real political issue for the Elizabethans,
intent as they were on expanding their empire.
This question of the conflict between laws is one that is posed in the Merchant of Venice,
where both the Duke of Venice and Portia, as Balthasar, find themselves bound by precedent,
that is the English system of judicial decision making,
and constrained in terms of how they might settle a contract dispute between Antonio and Shylock
that cannot be strictly accommodated within a Christian, read English, legal tradition.
In addition to, or perhaps because of, the demands made upon the upper class
that they acquire certain skills in law, the Elizabethans were, as I said, a litigious culture,
so much so that breaking all gender stereotypes, even women, waged law on their own behalf.
In particular, though, Shakespeare's father, John Shakespeare, was intensely active in the courts.
As high bailiff of the twice monthly court at Stratford upon Avon, he presided over the court proceedings.
In addition, his standing in the town meant that he was constantly involved in legal affairs,
assessing fines, serving on juries, or trying to mediate disputes.
Moreover, he was constantly engaged himself in legal action, either as a plaintiff or a defendant.
To put this litigiousness into context, Stratford's population at the time was only about 1800,
and yet it could support at least six lawyers and needed a court session every two weeks.
Those court sessions were, of course, a prime source of entertainment, as well as a place to resolve disputes,
and one can easily imagine that Shakespeare accompanied his father on many occasions to the court
and witnessed the inherently dramatic nature of legal performances
when plaintiffs and defendants debated, no doubt with great passion, the claims and counterclaims of their case.
Shakespeare himself was almost as equally litigious as his father
and must have drawn repeatedly on his memory of his father's legal cases and his own experiences for his plays.
Both the rhythm and the language of this courtroom drama saturate many of Shakespeare's plays.
In particular, one can see that the court scene in The Merchant of Venice
is merely the culmination of the many previous scenes between the Christians and Shylock
that are structured as dramas of accusation and defense.
And there are, of course, many other plays in which the emotional and intellectual energy of the play
is both circumscribed by and channeled through the trial.
Leonti's Charge of Adultery against Hermione in The Winter's Tale.
Isabella's defense of her brother Claudio before Angelo in Measure for Measure.
Leia's mad trial of his daughters in King Leia, Hamlet's dramatic trial of his uncle's guilt in the play within a play.
Although Shakespeare's plays are saturated with terms from the law,
they are almost entirely terms applicable only to the common law and not the Court of Chancery,
which was an expensive venue for any litigant and only met in London.
When Shakespeare came to London himself as a young man in the late 1580s,
leaving behind in Stratford his wife and three children,
he would have found a world as filled with legal affairs as the one he had left behind.
For he mixed with young men who were as passionate about the theatre as he was,
but who had in many cases also studied law at one of the inns of court.
Although the royal courts and the legal inns were institutions for the elite,
this was obviously not the case in the taverns and playhouses,
where the circulation of intellectual, political and artistic energy was intense and unchecked
by the kinds of barriers between social classes that would preclude such an exchange today.
Poets, lawyers and gentlemen mixed freely with the less elite members of society.
You might recall how the young Prince Hal is rebuked for his tavern friends in Henry IV, Part 1.
And those same groups were to be found in the audiences at the playhouses,
although there they were more distinctly separated according to their class.
Moreover, Shakespeare might well have found himself in a tavern drinking with a group of dramatists,
where he was in the minority as a playwright who did not have any formal legal training.
Contemporary with Shakespeare, there were between 75 and 100 writers of plays and some of them were very prolific.
Thomas Hayward, for example, said that he had either an entire hand or at least the main finger in 220 plays.
However, a large percentage of the dramatic literature of this period has not survived.
We do know among Shakespeare's contemporaries that there were, for example, John Ford,
whose best known work is Tis Pity She's a Whore, 1633.
Ford's mother was the sister of the Lord Chief Justice,
and he himself was a student in the Middle Temple, but never took the bar.
One of Ford's collaborators was Thomas Middleton, who was also a student at Grey's Inn.
Another contemporary was John Marston, a student at the Middle Temple,
and thus following in his father's footsteps.
He left for the theatre and is best known for his brilliant satire of aristocratic life called The Malcontent,
published in 1604.
Conservative estimates put the number of active playwrights with formal legal training at about 20%.
That the lawyer was often a practicing dramatist, or at the very least a frequenter of the playhouse,
was in part the consequence of the fact that plays were often staged in the Inns of Court.
We know that plays and masks were frequently performed there, sometimes in Latin,
and nearly always written expressly for the occasion.
For example, the earliest known English tragedy, Ferex and Porrex,
was performed in 1562 by gentlemen of the Inner Temple before the Queen.
And in 1566, two plays by George Gascoigne of Grey's Inn,
Jocasta and Suppose were performed there,
while Tankred and Gismonda was played before the Queen at the Inner Temple in 1568.
When the misfortunes of Arthur was acted also before the Queen in 1588 at Grey's Inn,
Francis Bacon, who would go on to become the Lord Chancellor,
devised the dumb shows, the mimes, that introduced the acts.
We also have accounts of Shakespeare's plays being staged at the Inns.
For example, in 1594 the comedy of Errors was put on at Grey's Inn,
and in 1601, Twelfth Night was staged at the Inner Temple.
In those days, the Inns of Court vied with each other in masks and pageants and plays,
as much as in the record of how many chancellors and chief justices they could produce.
The Inns thus helped to revive the ancient connection between law and drama,
and also nurtured the growth of a specifically Elizabethan drama.
Moreover, they provided the dramatists with powerful allies in the constant battle
they waged with those authorities who feared the subversive and immoral potential of playwriting and playacting.
At this historical moment then, in the mid to late 16th century,
and in this one respect, the space of the playhouse and the space of the legal court became interchangeable.
But despite the apparent ease with which actors and playwrights moved from one social space to the other,
there were of course significant differences in the dramatic space.
A speech about the abuse of authority took on a very different sense when voiced in the Inns of Court before the Queen,
as opposed to the Globe Theatre in front of a crowd of gentlemen, lawyers, tradesmen, prostitutes and poets.
We should not forget that the physical space of the play is part of its meaning.
The performer's relationship to their theatrical space, whether that space be the public space of the playhouses,
the private space of the law courts, or the even more private space of the royal court,
that relationship of the speaking body to a physical space that is itself structured to convey certain social, aesthetic and political ideas
is crucial to an understanding of the play.
Think what it means, for example, for Shylock to walk into the Court of Venice,
a court that represents the power of a Christian state aligned against the alien.
Now imagine that scene performed in the banquet hall of one of the Inns of Court,
in a space that embodies the supposed timeless quality of a system of law that eventually defeats Shylock.
When Shakespeare speaks of the world as a stage, he suggests more than the most immediate metaphoric meaning
that we are like actors playing at our lives as if we were on a stage.
He is insisting in a very real sense that any location, any place in the world,
can be converted into a stage and therefore into a place for representing certain realities.
And this includes the most humble space and the most exalted,
from a piece of wood elevated a few feet above the spectators to the most elaborate and costly stage upon which the monarch sits.
It is in part because of the play's ability to create these new realities,
to transform a wooden stage into a king's prison, say, as Shakespeare does at the beginning of Richard II,
that authority is always suspicious of imaginative literature in general and the play in particular.
The Elizabethan stage was a site for the public display of emotional as well as social diversity
and thus was always suspect to authorities, especially given that as many as 3,000 people could attend a performance.
The various devices for creating special effects, tractors, cranes with ropes, fire and smoke,
suggested that the world was not a stable reality, that things could be made to seem other than one supposed.
The theatre stands as a place where illusion and tricks create a world of surprise and uncertainty,
precisely the opposite effect sought by the law, which strives for predictability and stability.
As the theatrical space becomes more clearly separated from the legal space and the royal space,
something that certainly begins to happen by the middle of the 16th century when Puritan theocracy reigned,
the theatre takes on more of a potentially subversive and dangerous aspect.
Even with this interchangeability of the legal stage and the theatrical stage during the Elizabethan period,
Shakespeare's Globe was quite clearly not the social or political equivalent of, say, Grey's Inn.
While gentlemen might be entertained and even perform themselves in selected plays in the Inns of Court,
they would not consider doing the same thing on the stage of the Globe or the Swan Theatre.
Moreover, the very location of the two cultural institutions attested to their value and power in the city.
The Inns of Court are located within the city walls, while the outdoor theatres,
even those that were on the north bank of the Thames, were outside the walls and thus beyond the reach of city authorities,
who were generally less sympathetic to theatre and actors.
Even those theatres that were located within the city were in districts of dubious reputation known as the Liberties,
which fell under the control of the Crown and not the city authorities,
the city being generally more puritanical in outlook.
Playhouses were often forcefully closed during outbreaks of the plague and thus became associated with the disease,
an association intensified by the location in these suburbs of other unseemly social practices like prostitution
and unwanted citizens like leper hospitals.
Take this description, for example, from Shakespeare's contemporary Thomas Nash.
London, what are thy suburbs but licensed stews?
Can it be so many brothel houses of salary, sensuality and six penny hoarding?
The next door to the magistrate should be set up and maintained if bribes did not bestow them.
I accuse none, but certainly justice somewhere is corrupted.
Whole hospitals of ten times day dishonest strumpets have been cloistered together.
Night and day the entrance unto them is as free as to a tavern.
Not one of them but hath a hundred retainers.
Prentices and poor servants they encourage to rob their masters.
Gentlemen's purses and pockets they will dive into and pick even whilst they are dallying with them.
Awake your wits, grave authorized law distributors,
and show yourselves as insinuative subtle in smoking this city-sodderming trade out of its starting holes,
as the professors of it are in under propping it.
If the law courts were not the play houses, even less so was the royal court.
Despite the appearance of Elizabeth I at the performance of Romeo and Juliet in the movie Shakespeare in Love,
monarchs did not go to the plays.
The plays went to them.
Shakespeare and the Chamberlain's men performed before the Queen in her palace at Greenwich
in two separate comedies during Christmas of 1594 and during Christmas of 1597,
the Chamberlain's men performed Love's Lever's Lost before the Queen in her palace at Whitehall.
In 1603 we know that Shakespeare performed multiple times before King James I at Hampton Court.
Performance at the court would have conferred considerable prestige on the theatre companies
and the authors of those plays chosen for performance.
But there must have been an uneasy tension between aesthetic demands and political pressures.
Both Measure for Measure and The Winter's Tale were written and performed after James I came to the throne,
and both show evidence of an effort to instruct a wise king how to rule.
But one has to wonder if Shakespeare played to the monarch and toned down criticism of royal abuses of power.
The performances of plays at the Royal Court was an extension of an already well-established tradition
of court entertainment in the form of masks, that is elaborate staged representations of mythic stories or cultural narratives.
These masks remind us of the way in which early Christian ceremonies co-opted the pre-existing native customs,
in that the masks relied upon pre-existing stories to re-present the monarch in a special relationship to her people.
The masks were not confined to the court at Whitehall or Hampton Court,
but were performed at excessive cost to the host whenever Elizabeth travelled around the country.
These celebrations and festival-like performances established points of contact between the monarch and the people
and were linked to the traditions of the morality plays.
Queen and people played out a myth of solidarity as part of the political ideology of national unity.
Masks were typically an offering to the prince, combining pastoral setting, mythological fables and ethical and political debate.
Symbolic rituals in the mask affirmed social bonds and royal power, the play itself being a kind of offering.
Many of Shakespeare's pastoral comedies, like A Midsummer Night's Dream, As You Like It, or Twelfth Night,
are an extension of such celebrations, incorporating very traditional beliefs into a more sophisticated and courtly celebration of royal and English power.
One might say that the royal court collected together all the elements of authority, spectacle and drama that one finds in the theatre and in the law court,
elevating them to a level that made the queen or king seem like the magician Prospero in the Tempest, able to make ships capsize or storms abate.
Or perhaps the monarch came to see herself or himself like the playwright who could conjure up the city of Venice or Vienna with a phrase and a gesture.
That indeed would be a royal prerogative.
