Lecture 2 The Old Testament as Law and Literature
In this lecture I will explore the manner in which the ancient stories in the Old Testament
that narrated the history of God's chosen people, the Israelites, simultaneously legislated
how the individual and the society should construct its affairs in relationship to God
and also made myths out of those contracts.
Those myths from the Greek word mithos, meaning story, tried both to fix an origin for the
human race, one suggested, for example, in the Genesis story of God's creation and the
Edenic narrative, and also to give coherence to its subsequent history.
In so doing, these stories endeavour to articulate the relationship between God and His chosen
people in terms drawn from the political and legal structure under which these ancient
peoples lived.
I will focus particularly on the question of legality and justice as it is found in
the social forms of contract, property, and inheritance as articulated in the Genesis narrative,
Abraham's covenant with God, and the story of Moses and the Ten Commandments.
As I noted in the first lecture, it would be impossible in a series of lectures, even
ten times as long as this one, to cover all the varieties of literary and legal stories
of the last several millennia.
For the purposes of this course, then, I have selected, as I've said, stories that appear
repeatedly in Western culture and seem to have some special resonance for us, because
they offer some recognisable picture of ourselves, as individuals, as members of a family, as
members of a society, and, within the Judeo-Christian context, as members of a shared faith.
Thus the course begins with those two sources of cultural identity best known to our Western
tradition, the Hebrew Bible and tragic Greek drama.
To focus on these two traditions, or to be more explicit, to focus narrowly on stories
within these two traditions, is not to suggest that other texts and oral histories are irrelevant,
but to promote one beginning of the many possible beginnings to the human story.
Within these Judeo-Christian and Greek narratives, we find considerable attention given to the
concept of beginnings, and this longing to identify the beginning is one of the ways
that we might define our particular Western cultural narrative, as caring about beginnings
and looking towards endings, as having to use the Greek term, a telos, an end in mind,
of being teleological, or conceptualizing human nature as fundamentally grounded in
a linear ontology.
In what may be something of an over-generalization, I would argue that the various manifestations
of justice that we will examine in this series all rely, to some extent, on this search for
origins and a desire for endings, even if that desire for closure is resisted, deferred,
or disguised.
Moreover, I would suggest that these founding texts, the Old Testament and certain Greek
tragedies, are examples of what I call law and literature.
By this I mean to suggest that the distinct categories of talking about reality, of experiencing
the world around us that we now recognize as literary, on the one hand, and legal, on
the other, are not ahistorical terms.
Such ways of knowing have not always been with us.
Indeed, relative to human history, they are fairly recent development in marking off territory,
and as we instinctively understand, the boundaries between these kinds of texts and the kinds
of behavior that they designate are porous.
One only has to think of the popularity of true crime narratives, some of which might
be said to rise to the level of literature, or the overt dramatic nature of trials, even
those that are not televised.
Nevertheless, we do acknowledge that a legal contract is unlikely to provoke the kind of
complex, intellectual, and emotional response to its language, as opposed to the demands
it might make on us, that poetry does, and that a novel will not require us to act in
certain ways, or else be subject to punishment.
The texts that I will discuss in this lecture, and the two that follow on Escalus's Arestia
and Sophocles' Oedipus, however, are of a kind where the literary and the legal are
so tightly intermingled that separation in terms of their purpose or vision is impossible.
The narratives themselves embody and act out the legal prohibitions or demands that they
describe, and thus one cannot say that they are literary texts that given account of or
describe legal systems, or legal texts that occasionally rise to literature.
The two terms are inseparable.
In this lecture, I will focus specifically on those Old Testament narratives in which
the human struggle to comprehend the nature of divine justice is represented, particularly
as that struggle appears in matters of inheritance, property, and authority.
Let us begin with the beginning, the story of creation in Genesis, and examine what
that story suggests about the nature of divine law and its relationship to human affairs
as understood by the ancient Hebrews. Genesis is the first of the five books of Moses, the
other four being Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. These five books constitute
the books of the law, known in Hebrew as the Torah. These books had no individual titles
in their original Hebrew, but were assigned names in the earliest Greek translation. Thus
we have a double source for our understanding of ancient biblical traditions, both Hebraic
and Greek, a doubleness that continues to sustain our literary and legal traditions.
The Old Testament narrates retroactively what might be called a testament or confession
of the Israelites' vexed response to God's authority. It should be noted that the word
testament comes from the Latin translation of the Greek word for covenant. The account
of the creation of the world that appears in Genesis has to be understood as part of
the totality of what the five books of the Torah narrate, rather than as a discrete account
of divine creation. In other words, the creation myth is the prelude to the account of how
humanity has managed that creation in terms of our relationship to the Creator. The creation
myth then sets the terms for that ongoing contract with the Founding Father.
What those first five books narrate is the story of the special protection afforded to
a divinely chosen people and the direct connection between Adam and the line of Jacob and his
offspring. The metaphor of this special relationship is the covenant, a formal agreement in which
there are mutual obligations and expectations. This mutuality is a vital part of the tradition
of justice that we still respect. The authority that resides in the law, as that law is articulated
in its human form in the Magistrate, has no legitimate power if it ignores its obligation
to promote the well-being of those over whom it passes judgment. Of course, throughout
human history we have struggled to define exactly what the nature of that well-being
might be, a struggle recorded in the literary and legal articulations of the many possibilities.
Chapters 1 through 3 of Genesis gives one answer to the question of what is best for
us. The first and best version of human society was that which God created from the primeval
disorder of chaos. It is worth noting that in the Old Testament only God creates. The
Hebrew word for this is bara. One might say then that this version of the origin of human
society is an act of the imagination and so consequently is the nature of justice as conceived
by God because there cannot be any pre-existing system or model upon which God's justice
is based. This is a difficult concept that the English poet John Milton exhaustively
examines in his 12-book epic poem Paradise Lost, which we will discuss in a later lecture.
If God has created these divinely created concepts or realities ex nil hillo, that is
out of nothing, then humanity must re-imagine or re-create in every new beginning what God
has already created. What does this Hebraic creation story tell us about the nature of
justice and its relationship to human affairs? Let me remind you of the narrative. In six
days God creates the universe out of nothing. First the light, which he separates from the
darkness, then heaven and the earth, after which he creates the plants and the sun, moon
and stars to mark the day, the night, the seasons and the years. Then God creates the
animals and creeping things and finally he creates male and female in his own image and
grants them dominion over the fish of the sea and over the fowl of the air and over every
living thing that moveeth upon the earth. This creation myth tells us first that one
of the essential elements of man's world is order and thus that all that pretends to
promote the well-being of mankind must also bring about order and this includes conceptions
of law and justice. Second the narrative, which is itself an enactment of the act of
the imagination it describes, that is the narrative of God creating orders the order
it depicts. This narrative also tells us that law brings about hierarchy. The plants, the
animals and then man are positioned relatively to God and as we discover, as we read further
in Genesis, not all men are positioned equally with respect to God, some being by their own
actions exiled from God's justice and mercy as our first Adam and Eve when they disobey
God's only commandment and then their offspring Cain who murders his brother Abel. Thus law
requires the recognition that not all the claims made by man are equal and not all those
who stand before the magistrate in judgment have an equal claim to his mercy. Recall
that this is the Old Testament version of God's law and justice, one that Christians
believe is modified by the New Testament although according to some interpretations
not even that version of God's law promises salvation to all sinners. So then first the
Old Testament narrative records that order is an essential aspect of creation and that
second with that order comes hierarchy. Third the story of the creation tells us that there
was once a time and a place where law functioned in perfect accord with the demands of human
society and its obligations to God. That place was Eden and that time was before the fall
of man. In the second and third chapters of Genesis we encounter essentially the same
narrative of God's creation of man as in Genesis chapter one. In this narrative which
resembles other oral folktales that account for the beginning of the human race God's
relationship to man whom he has formed out of the dust of the earth and into whom he
has breathed life is more immediate and God specifically directs Adam both to enjoy and
yet also to be responsible for the paradise he has created. And the Lord God took the
man and put him in the garden of Eden to dress it and keep it. Adam must be both free
to exercise his will over the garden but also obliged to remain obedient to God. And the
Lord God commanded the man saying of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat
but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not eat of it. In chapter
three of Genesis we also read about the creation of Adam's partner Eve and this brings us
to one of the most contested aspects of the creation story and its relationship to law.
Note that this is an alternative version of the creation of Eve, the first being that
she is created at the same moment as Adam both in the image of God. This contending version
in chapter three reminds us that these narratives succumb to the same uncertainty and instability
that inheres in all myths and in all laws molded out of language they resist fixity
and the single interpretation. It is perhaps significant that the inherent instability
invoked by the nature of language and storytelling should first become evident in the story of
Eve. In this version of Eve's creation she is made after Adam and indeed is crafted
from him literally enacting the metaphoric union of the two beings that Adam celebrates
in his prayer. This is now bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh. What does this version
of the creation of Eve tell us about the relationship between man and woman under God's law?
It suggests that woman is under the authority of man. She is created after he is and he
defines her being as one that exists only in relationship to him and thereby through
him to God. Moreover, since it is through Eve's failure to control her desire that Adam
and Eve fall from grace, we understand that excessive desire and inherent disobedience
are an essential part of women's nature. Thus the law must exercise itself more directly
and powerfully to control women than it does to control men. In this reading of the story
of our beginnings, it is not that the law is gendered because it is constructed by men.
Rather, the law is neutral, but women's natural tendencies demand that the law respond in
a certain way to their excessiveness. There is a further consequence to Adam and Eve for
their sin besides the loss of Eve, and that is the loss of the sexual innocence that marked
their relationship before the fall. Thus with the inevitable gendering of sin as inherently
female, also comes the concept that female sexuality is the original cause of women's
disobedience. To be a woman is to symbolize sexual transgression and thus to be always
already in a state of exile from God. To look forward to a later lecture and Hawthorne's
mid-19th century novel, The Scarlet Letter, the Scarlet Letter that Hester Prynne wears
on her dress not only marks her specific transgression, her adultery with Dinsdale,
but also marks literally and symbolically the inherent potential of all women, no matter
how innocent, to transgress, a myth that Hardy specifically contests in his novel, Test of
the Dervervils, which we will discuss later. Needless to say, this is not an interpretation
that revisionary feminist readings of the creation myth have suggested. In those readings, Eve
is seen as a model of the heroic human desire for knowledge and an inherently natural refusal
to accept limitations. She thus models the behavior of an Oedipus or an Odysseus rather
than being a figure of evil. To summarize then my reading of the Genesis narrative
and its relationship to justice and law, what this creation story tells us is that the source
of law and therefore of retribution and justice is one in the same as the being or force that
created the universe and peopled it with mankind. That the nature of this law is that it brings
order and hierarchy into the chaos of the uncreated universe and that it entails certain
mutual obligations. A mutuality that is in the first pure relationship between God and
mankind, one that is perfectly balanced. God's divine creation and subsequent protection
produces mankind's perfect obedience. Once God's law was broken, however, the covenant
is transformed into a contract between unequal partners, that is a suzerain vassal covenant
in which the primary obligation of obedience rests with the vassal, with mankind who is
like the chosen people forever wandering in exile from God.
Obedience requires an act of the imagination on the part of the human being, an act that
is only different in degree from that which God employed in his creation of the universe.
Thus there can be no difference between the faith required to uphold God's laws and the
faith required to believe in and promote mankind's laws because the latter is no more than a reflection
of the former and both are according to this narrative derived from the same source. According
to this logic, only a theocracy, a state governed by priests, can manifest this perfect accord
between God's laws and mankind's. This parallel between God's laws and man's laws and the
unequal nature of the relationship between God and man is articulated in the repeated
expressions of the covenant that occur in the Torah. These covenants add both theological
and historical organization to the Israelite's relationship with God. The first of these covenants
is between Noah and God where we see the original act of creation reenacted in the story of
how the world is reborn from the flood. This repetition of the movement from chaos to order
marks another aspect of the nature of law and justice in both its divine and human forms
and that is that it must be constantly recreated, that it must be constantly re-energized with
faith without which both the laws and the faith that sustains them will fall into disuse.
This reiteration of the covenant with God occurs as a formal feature of the Genesis narrative
when we turn from the symbolic, mythical accounts of man's place in the universe as narrated
in Genesis chapters 1 through 11 to the story of Abraham, father of Jacob and the Israelites,
a story that occurs in historical time. God promises Abraham that he will be both the
father of a nation and the father of a son and in Abraham's willingness to abandon his
home and become a nomad in search of the promised land, Abraham represents the absolute faith
that is required in exchange for this blessing. Being human, however, that absolute faith
is always under pressure, even in one such as Abraham, and so the covenant must be re-established
with once again that free granting of gifts that has marked God's relationship with Abraham.
Reiterating his promise of an heir and of a nation, God answers Abraham's complaints
that he is without a son and that his steward will thus inherit his property by telling him
that his seed will be as numerous as the stars. This exchange emphasizes the concern over
descendants that is central to the plotline of the Old Testament and manifests itself
not just in this anxiety about having heirs but also in the constant threat that the heir
will die. This agreement between God and Abraham is a unilateral divine promise, not a covenant
in which there is mutual responsibility, and thus it announces another form of law and
justice. In this construction of the juridical religious arrangement between God and mankind,
there exists the promise that divine justice is not always distributed in response to righteous
action, to a quid pro quo structure of commitment, but can be exercised just out of mercy. In
effect, faith can be seen to have the same consequences as righteous action. Faith thus
becomes action.
In the ritual of animal sacrifice that seals the bond between God and Abraham, in which
animals are divided into two, God not only reiterates his promise to Abraham of both
land and a son, he also implicates himself in the agreement, calling down whatever the
divine equivalent of mutilation and death might be should he break his word. In the
same day, the Lord made, literally, cut a covenant with Abraham, saying, unto thy seed
have I given this land from the river of Egypt and to the great river the Euphrates.
The fundamental aspect of this charter is that it is a deed of property, a land grant,
and that it also ensures a legal and orderly transfer of property through Abraham's son.
The ritual of circumcision that accompanies this land grant reminds us that while God
has given the promises willingly and without expectation of return, yet still Abraham must
act in perfect obedience to God's laws. The extent of that demand becomes clear, however,
in the story of Abraham's response to God's demand that he sacrificed his beloved son,
Isaac. In this story, we see the perfect chord between the literary and the legal that I
spoke of at the beginning of this lecture. The story of the sacrifice remains one of
the most often represented events from the Bible. We hear how Abraham is told by God
to prepare a sacrifice of his son, how he and Isaac travel to the site of the sacrifice,
and that Isaac carries the wood for his own funeral pyre on his back as they climb the
mountain together. We experience the suspense building as they draw closer and closer to
the site and the poignant irony of Isaac asking Abraham, where is the lamb for the burned
offering? Only to be told that he is the lamb that will die. The narrative is perfectly
structured as it moves from Abraham's relationship to God to his relationship with his son,
Isaac, and then back to Abraham and God, each father and son bond answering and balancing
the other. These are literary forms and images, but at the same time, the narrative represents
the exact nature of God's legal, that is, the juridical religious relationship with
Abraham, and only one of Abraham's faith could withstand such demands. We might compare
the sacrifice of the child and its function in the depiction of a covenant between God
and his subject here and other versions of infant sacrifice, like that depicted in the
Aristaia to which we will turn in the next lecture, where Agamemnon is forced to sacrifice
his daughter, Ephiginia, to satisfy the gods, or the mother's sacrifice of the child in
beloved to prevent her return to slavery. The third covenant we will examine in this
lecture is that between Moses and God, in which the specific moral and religious laws
that are to govern the life of the chosen people are announced. The laws are the consequence
of the covenant rather than its condition. In other words, accepting God's special protection
and blessings already made manifest in Moses guiding the Israelites from captivity in Egypt
requires the acceptance of the laws that Moses brings down from Mount Sinai. Thus we
have a return to the Suzerain Vassal Covenant that existed between God and Adam and Eve,
a return emphasized by the absolute nature of the Ten Commandments, which recall the
absolute nature of God's single commandment to Adam and Eve, not to taste the fruit of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Unlike the collection of conditional laws
that followed the declaration of the Ten Commandments in Exodus chapter 20, these commandments,
the Ten Commandments, are categorical imperatives, not conditionals. The commandments are twofold
in nature. One set regulates society's relationship to a monotheistic that is a single god that
insists upon strict obedience to his commandments, and the second set regulates the relationships
within that society in terms of a patriarchal hierarchy that holds individual life and property
sacred, as well as prohibiting the kinds of divisive struggles over property and women
that can destroy a fragile nation. The metaphors that control the narrative account of the
relationship between God and his chosen people in the first five books of the Old Testament
are drawn from the political and legal activities of human society. Although it must be noted
that there are very few laws in these books that cover marriage or commercial activities.
The predominant metaphor of the covenant expresses a firm belief in the hierarchical arrangement
of human society, with special privileges and responsibilities accorded to the monarch,
to God, who is both all-powerful and yet redemptive. Under the conditions of the covenant, the monarch
attempts to bind his subjects to him with the bonds of affection, but reserves the right
to punish those who fail to observe their obligation, which is strict obedience to the
laws. Thus Israel's obligation to God, as monarch of the world, was to obey the Ten
Commandments, the words of God, and to construct a society based upon those laws. The sacred
nature of the bond between God and mankind is mediated through the metaphors of political
and legal systems of order. The inseparability of the sacred and the secular, of the religious
and the political, is fundamental to the narrative of these early books of the Old Testament.
God was the sovereign and the magistrate, and the Israelites were his subjects, and in their
repeated disobedience to his commands they were called to the bar of his justice to defend
themselves. Again and again in these narratives of the establishment of a faithful nation,
the Israelites were accused of breach of contract with God, an accusation that was articulated
as a political, legal, moral, and religious failure, and again and again they were found
guilty and sentenced to exile and suffering. The law is conceptualized as a sacred trust
between sovereign and subject, and that sacred quality infuses the political agreement between
king and subject in the secular realm. Looking at the structure and nature of the
law as it is represented in these early books of the Old Testament, we see that it is represented
as part of God's teaching, that it is not conceived of as a separate formal code that
exists in an abstract or theoretical formulation, but is always tied intimately to specific
historical situations. Thus the overall narrative of the prehistory and early history of mankind,
as articulated in this series of tales, represents law as a product of experience, as an essential
aspect of the daily struggle that constitutes what it means to be alive and part of a complicated
network of social and personal relationships. Moreover, it is impossible to separate the
literary expression of the covenant with God from its articulation in legal terms. Law
is not imposed upon or is abstracted from human behavior, but produced by and reflected
in the multiple human interactions that make up our lives. The literary expression of this
inherently legal model of society is, like law itself, also not separate from daily experience.
Literature too speaks to specific historical circumstances, although its persistence over
time demonstrates its ability to address the permanent concerns and values of human society.
Thus neither law, understood as a system of customs and regulations, nor literature,
understood as a humanizing of those customs and regulations, are fixed in their historic
moment, but exhibit a plasticity and open-endedness that can accommodate the necessities of a
changing society. And it is precisely this open-endedness that allows us to revisit them
and reinterpret them, so that despite their embeddedness in a specific history, they speak
to us anew.
