These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the Teaching
Company. The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines. The lectures
in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long. By listening, for less than an hour
a day you can finish even the longest course in just weeks. Browse our catalog or website
and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world. The lecturers are university professors carefully
selected by the Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching
excellence. These lectures are titled, Representing Justice, Stories of Law and Literature, Part
The lecturer is Professor Susan Sage Heinselman. Professor Heinselman is an Associate Professor
of English and the Associate Director of Women and Gender Studies at the University of Texas
at Austin, where she has taught since 1977 in the English Department and the School of
Law. She received her BA from the University of London and earned her PhD from the University
of Western Ontario, Canada. Dr. Heinselman is co-editor of Representing Women, Law, Literature
and Feminism and author of many articles on the representation of women in law and literature.
She is also President of the Association for the Study of Law, Culture and the Humanities.
Professor Heinselman teaches courses in literary criticism, the 18th century English novel
and feminist theory. She has won many teaching awards including the President's Associates
Teaching Award. Professor Heinselman prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a timeline, glossary, biographical
notes and an annotated bibliography. To get the most out of this course you may find it
useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Hello and welcome to this introductory lecture on literature and law. My name is Susan Say,
Heinselman and I teach law and literature, especially 18th century British novels, in
the English department at the University of Texas at Austin. Law and literature is a
scholarly field that has developed over the last two decades and which explores the rhetorical
and philosophical connections between literature and legal texts. An earlier version of this
scholarly field interpreted law as if it were literature. More recent scholarship, however,
recognizes the integrity of law as a creative enterprise in its own right without subsuming
it under the category of literature. In this first lecture I have three main objectives.
First, to define briefly how I understand the relationship between law and literature.
Second, to outline the approach to textual analysis that I will employ in these lectures.
And third, to introduce you to the overall concept of this 24 lecture series which will
explore the various ways in which law and literature interact in western culture. My
first objective then is to explain my understanding of the connection between the two terms law
and literature. Law and literature are two ways of understanding the world around us.
They are, if you like, two lenses through which we see what we conventionally call reality.
The primary way in which we encounter both law and literature is through language, but
one only has to enter a courtroom to understand that space, for example, can be organized
to reinforce the authority of the legal system. Likewise, when a book like Vladimir Nabokov's
Lolita is banned by officials of the French government, its primary status as a literary
representation, something that might seem to be outside the realm of law, is converted
into a symbolic challenge to the law. One can see then that this relationship between
literature and law is a complex one. We tend to think of law and literature as two separate
ways of thinking about reality, when they are, in fact, as I hope this lecture series
will demonstrate, deeply and subtly interconnected. In this series I focus on written texts for
my analysis of the connections between law and literature, but I hope that as you listen
to my comments on the various texts drawn from Western literary and legal tradition,
you will reflect upon how these texts were originally embedded in their larger cultural
contexts. That larger context is made up of more than language. Many other signs and symbols
that alert us to whether we are operating in a legal or literary framework.
The technical term for the assortment of words, images, signs and symbol systems through which
we understand the world around us is discourse. Discourse is a more inclusive term than language
to account for how we apprehend reality, because we understand the world we inhabit through
stories, films, TV shows, advertisements, the arrangement of urban space, action events,
individual and collective customs and rituals, and the social organization through which
we express our identity. Before we go any further, let me offer my definitions of law
and literature. What do I mean by literature? I think we all have some general sense of
what we mean when we talk of literature. We usually reserve that term for writing that
moves us emotionally and aesthetically. In other words, we believe that the writer has
deliberately crafted the language to bring about those effects. This is not to say that
we have to know exactly what the author had in mind to make sense of the literary text,
but that we presume that its general purpose is to move us in some way through the way
it employs language and form. For the purpose of this series, I have confined myself to
three major forms of literature, that is epic, poetry, drama and extended prose narrative
or the novel, because those forms most readily exhibit the two qualities that we also associate
with the law, that is storytelling and dramatic performance. I do suggest however in my penultimate
lecture that lyric poetry, which seems far removed from legal prose, can both alert us
to issues hidden by the formal language of the law and tell a story in ways that might
not be admitted into the courts of law. What about the other half of my pair, the law?
How do I define law in this series? Let me say first that I do not intend to match every
literary text with its legal equivalent. Part of the point of this series is to argue
that there is no direct relationship between a literary text and a legal text, whether
that text is, for example, a judicial opinion, a statute or a contract. Nevertheless, there
is an indirect and often powerful connection between the way a literary text both shapes
and responds to our shared reality and the way a legal text also engages in this cultural
activity. Both literature and law, I am suggesting, contribute to the making of our culture and
its nature in similar ways, by offering us ways of imagining ourselves both at our best
and at our worst. So to come back to the question, how do I define law, the answer is on some
occasions as laws that mark a particular historical attitude, like the fugitive slave law of 1850,
but also as those often unwritten laws that regulate our social and moral relationships.
I will try to show how these two kinds of laws, both the written and the unwritten,
the juridical and the moral, together articulate a society's sense of its values. Let me turn
now to my second objective, a brief discussion of the approach I will take to the texts.
Let me say first what I will not do. I am not going to find specific legal examples of
situations raised in the literary texts, although I will point out when the work of literature
is based upon a real life incident. Nor am I going to use literature, as some critics
do, to show how much more empathetic and emotionally subtle literature is compared to law. This
approach suggests that literary texts and legal texts are trying to bring about the
same results, which I think is evidently a false assumption.
And finally I am not going to argue that literature is a more ethically subtle way of addressing
social problems than passing and enforcing laws. Again, this critique of law as indiscriminate
and heavy-handed in its approach to complicated problems does not help us appreciate the way
in which law constantly refines itself in its effort to accommodate the complex nature
of individual and social relationships. What I will do in this series of lectures is to
suggest how these two ways of representing reality, one legal, the other literary, reflect
and produce our individual identities and our collective identity.
In order to function in the world, we trust in our individual identity as unique and stable.
Both literature and law are responsible for constructing this particular version of identity
by presenting us with examples of that kind of self that reinforces our beliefs, stories
about characters who are identifiable by their unique qualities, or laws that define
the individual as a bundle of specific and consistent qualities.
But if law and literature create our sense of self, then they can also subvert that sense
of self.
In a different way, the laws that emancipated those who had once been slaves or enfranchised
those who had previously been disbarred by gender from claiming their full citizenship
required a radical rearrangement of both individual and collective consciousness.
This belief in a stable self that inhabits a coherent world is produced by the many ways
in which we mark ourselves as different from or alike those around us.
For example, marks of gender, of race, of ethnicity, of nationality, of class, of religious
persuasion or of sexual preference.
All these ways and more contribute to that sense of ourselves that we act upon in our
daily lives.
Moreover, we consolidate these markers by the literature we read, the literature we
claim is canonical, that which we ban or forget, or in some cases recover from history.
Likewise, we consolidate our identity by the laws we pass, the laws we feel we must obey,
the laws we feel no guilt about breaking, the laws that fall into disuse, and the laws
we look back on with shame.
But if law and literature can stabilize our identity, it must also be able to subvert
that identity. New stories or new laws can unsettle long established traditions or relationships
based upon a certain understanding of class or race or gender.
For the reasons sketched out already, I have attempted to situate these literary and legal
texts within their historical context, because I believe that one cannot properly understand
the connection between law and literature if one abstracts those texts from the culture
that produced them. As I hope to demonstrate in the course of these lectures, the relationship
between literature and law changes over time, and we should be alert to how specific historical
circumstances change the reception of both kinds of texts.
Let me turn now to the third objective, an account of the overall shape of the course,
where we will begin, and where the course will take us.
I have selected texts that I believe can enrich our understanding of our Western cultural
tradition, as well as shed light on particularly important historical moments in that tradition,
in terms of the significance we ascribe to literature and law as repositories of cultural
values. In this course, we will proceed in a generally
chronological fashion across roughly 3,000 years of Western experience, beginning with
the Hebrew Bible, and ending with contemporary accounts of maternal infanticide. Obviously,
one could make a series like this ten times as long, but I have tried to select those
texts that are either representative of their specific historical moment, as in the Hebrew
Bible or Kafka's work, or that illustrate a particular moment in the relationship of
law and literature, as in Moll Flanders by Daniel Defoe.
This journey across cultures and continents will reveal then the different ways of representing
reality in literary and legal texts, a difference that comes about as the purpose of representation
itself changes over the centuries. Let me explain this point further.
Scholars looking back to the origins of writing itself have found that its first function
was to record contracts and laws, in other words, to memorialize the basic structures
that ordered society. From this original intent grew the recording
of genealogies as a way of keeping a historical record, and from there it was but a short
step to elaborating upon the story of individual lives to encapsulate the values that the culture
privileged. We can see the evidence of the desire both
to memorialize a tribe and also to celebrate a hero in the tales of individual biblical
figures and the heroes of Greek epics and tragedies, and as well in the manner in which
law and literature both rely heavily on narrative, specifically storytelling as a way of structuring
the reality they try to capture. Through these stories of individuals, these
ancient texts inscribed laws, both divine and human, in the Hebrew Bible the narrative
of individual lives is directly intertwined with the encoding of a legal system, all within
a single text. In other texts that we will study in the first
half of this course, beginning with Escalus' Orestia and Sophocles' Oedipus Tyrannus,
the larger context and purpose of those narratives, in short, the overall discourse within which
they are situated, make the narrative of individual lives equally, if less obviously, inseparable
from the encoding of legal systems. Athenian drama thus modelled on the stage
the kind of legal and political order it aspired to bring about in its society. We will find
the same double purpose present in several literary texts or performances in this course.
For example, in English medieval literature, that is texts from the 12th to the 16th century,
we will see how in mystery and morality's plays, it is crucial that the story about
a God's intervention in human affairs are embodied in dramatic form, because then they
seem to be an extension of the Christian church's own dramatic reenactment of those moments
in its rituals, rather than competing with the church.
This tension between the religious and the secular forms of literature is also present
in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, written in the late 14th century, where we see in the
Man of Law's Tale a contest between the demands of the parable-like structure the Man of Law
has adopted and his need to remind the audience of pilgrims that he is a lawyer.
The still inseparable nature of the legal and literary in the cultural imagination is
physically embodied in the institutional mix of drama and law in the Elizabethan age.
As religious drama, like the medieval mysteries and morality plays, gave way fully to secular
drama, there nevertheless remained the sense that the dramatic performance more nearly
represented the spiritual and social values of the age than any other form of representation.
Playing out the rituals that embodied cultural values in the ins of court, which was the
training ground for lawyers, or the royal courts at Whitehall or Hampton, reinforced
the apparently natural relationship between these ways of imagining the world, the literary,
the legal, and the political.
And again, in the Three Shakespeare Plays we will examine in this course the Merchant
of Venice, Measure for Measure, and the Winter's Tale, we will repeatedly see how these three
systems intertwine, fictional trials and the dramatic representation of historical trials,
courtroom appearances where the legal space is also the court of the monarch, and regal
politics structuring both the specific dramatic performance and the worldview of those who
are represented on stage.
When we move from the Elizabethan age to the 17th century, a century of great struggle
and revolution in England, we will examine a literary text that is perhaps the last to
take as its sole subject those divine and human laws that structured contemporary society.
Milton's Paradise Lost returns us, as its title indicates, to the heroic struggles of
the Hebrew Bible and of Christ's martyrdom.
In this 17th century epic poem about the disobedience of Satan and mankind, Milton constructs the
ultimate Judeo-Christian drama and the justification for law.
An entertainment which he believed would be enjoyed by those fit, though few.
As we will see, the possibility of again ever achieving so complete a unification of literary
and legal form and content would be over by the end of the 17th century.
After we leave Milton, we come to a crucial part of the course because it is during this
historical period, that is the 18th century, that so many of the concepts and structures
were laid down for our modern understanding of the self and society.
Why was this?
Well, something happened from around the end of the 17th century to the middle of the 18th
century.
And that something was the combination of first, a new form of literature, that is the
novel.
Second, the explosion in the print culture manifest in the widespread distribution and
consumption of pamphlets, street ballads and newspapers.
And third, the growing professionalization of the legal culture.
The novel, a form at first associated with women because of their authorship of the French
romance narratives with which the early English novel was associated.
The novel appeared not to have any other purpose than to entertain, despite the protests of
its authors, that it was a moral form and designed to inculcate the right kind of moral
and political values in its readers.
Even though the idea of sin and the idea of crime were still inseparable in the popular
imagination, the novel was so popular, even among those who might publicly decry it, that
it no longer needed to embody explicit Christian practices or values to justify its existence.
Novelists like Daniel Defoe, for example, might insist that they were correcting the
immoral and illegal conduct of society by publishing the confessions of a whore like
Maul Flanders, but one imagines that most readers were at least as interested in Maul's sexual
adventures as her moralizing.
The possibility of imagining forms of social control that are not versions of God's laws.
In other words, the growing secularization of the legal system produces texts like Gay's
drama The Beggar's Opera, in which human law and the legal system has become the subject
of entertainment.
I would distinguish between this way of representing law in literature and the way in which Chaucer
speaks of law.
Despite the presence of those legal and clerical figures who were clearly corrupt, Chaucer's
narrative assumes a moral foundation provided by those divine laws that are reflected in
human law.
However we will see that this new way of representing law, that is the 18th century way, as the
subject of literary entertainment rather than as evidence of God's providence gradually
becomes more pronounced as we move into the second half of the course.
And so we will concentrate more and more on the literature itself while commenting on
the legal texts and structures against which and within which those literary texts are
written.
I will explore this crucial moment in my history of the relationship between literature and
law in lecture 13, where I examined three different versions of the 1752 trial of Mary
Blandy for the murder of her father, first a jurisprudential version, second a moral
version and third an autobiographical account that relies on novelistic techniques.
Another issue that will concern us more and more as we move into the second half of the
course is the relationship between law and specific social and individual characteristics,
especially race and gender.
It is easy to understand why race and gender will demand much of our attention in the second
half of the course.
As the concept of the law-abiding subject expands to include women and non-caucasians,
both law and literature have to expand their categories of representation as well.
The inclusion of those previously excluded would not come quickly, however.
Even by the late 18th century, law is still represented as operating outside the universe
of feelings and the moral sensibilities of women, even when they were clearly the heroines.
For example, in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, Elizabeth Bennet and her sisters can do nothing
to prevent their father's estate from being entailed away to a male relative.
While these heroines are charged with maintaining the moral agenda of their social world, they
are deprived of all access to the law that inculcates that moral agenda through legislation
and customs.
I am not suggesting that the law does not affect all that they do.
That is precisely my point, that it is everywhere present and yet nowhere available, and that
as women the heroines are constantly in its presence but forever powerless to change their
situation.
This positioning of women as without the necessary agency to either produce or change law was
part of a larger movement to separate the domestic space, the space of women, from the
public space wherein men practiced their professions, like law.
This distinction between the realms of activity for women and men is maintained in Dickens'
account of the pervasive but nebulous quality of the law in Bleakhouse.
The fog of law makes all citizens, male and female alike, impotent before the law, but
the domestic space provides a sanctuary from this disabling miasma.
The absent center of the fog, the chance record, embodies nothing, no significant ritual, no
dramatic performance of the law in action, no moral agenda and no order.
It is not the absence of law that Dickens identifies and condemns, it is rather the pervasive
but ineffective presence of the law, the tangle of positively harmful bureaucratic loops and
hoops that the legal system has become.
Its role as the promoter of social order, harmony and justice has been completely perverted
and it now tolerates chaos, disharmony and injustice.
As the fusion of law and religion gave way to a dysfunctional secular law, 19th century
writers also began to look back and reflect on the previously but no longer fused relationship
between law and religion.
Nathaniel Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter recalls the English Puritan tradition of John Milton
and the common law origins of the American legal system.
And Hawthorne explores the relationship of law and theology under a system in which an
individual moral failure is punished as a criminal offence against the community.
Hester Prynne refuses to recognize the legal authority of her community.
She will not reveal the name of the father of her child despite the promise of leniency
and converts her mark of shame into a badge of virtue.
At the same time she privately acknowledges her moral failure and thus demonstrates that
religious belief can be distinguished from legal authority.
This perception is reinforced when one considers that Hawthorne recalls the history of Salem
in his Prefatory Essay, a history that inevitably evokes 17th century witchcraft trials which
were initiated and prosecuted within a legal system that was at that historical moment inseparable
from its religious foundation.
Another sometimes insidious connection between law and religion is the question examined
in Twain's Huckleberry Finn, a novel that asks how a legal system that claims a Christian
moral and theological foundation can also tolerate slavery.
Slavery is perhaps the most extreme issue confronting those concerned about the relationship
between morality, religion and the law, a concern that was raised in a number of different
ways by 18th and 19th century philosophers.
Although slavery did end, the relationship between morality, religion and law still troubled
English and American society into the late 19th century, and indeed is still a deeply
divisive issue even in 21st century America.
Late 19th century novelist Thomas Hardy specifically addresses the consequence of a moral code
based upon Judeo-Christian religious principles and reinforced by law that is particularly
harsh for women.
In Tess of the D'Urberhills and Jude the Obscure, both published in the last decade
of the 19th century, Hardy also identifies one of the contradictions of the late Victorian
age.
On the one hand a resistance to the authority and power of the Christian faith in secular
affairs as exhibited in demands for reform from the working class and women, and on the
other hand the church's still considerable authority, especially among those institutions
that made and enforced both law and conventional moral codes.
This continuing conflict between the secular and religious bases of society was just one
of the many tensions that produced the cultural forms of 20th century culture, and it was
a conflict that, as Hardy's novel suggests, was worked out in one of its manifestations
over the bodies of women.
Susan Glassbell's short story A Jury of her Peers takes on precisely this conflict between
the secular and religious bases of law in the context of marriage and domestic abuse.
In Glassbell's story an abused wife is charged with the murder of her husband, a crime that
both violates her proper role as a dutiful wife, and also suggests a power to confront
inequity, albeit through physical violence, that is presumed to belong only to men.
Glassbell provides the accused woman with a jury of her peers, that is with two women
who piece together the story of her abuse and render their judgment on her rather than
submitting her to an all-male jury.
Glassbell thereby indicates the limitations of a legal system that still derives its authority
from Judeo-Christian beliefs that have a long history of bias against women.
In the 20th century the perversion of law already vividly portrayed by Dickens takes
on a more terrifying aspect in the work of Kafka.
Perhaps no one more clearly exemplifies the fragmentation and disharmony of modern life
produced by a legal system that is profoundly confused by its relationship to faith than
Franz Kafka, an early 20th century non-practicing Jew.
Tormented by a pervasive but inexplicable sense of guilt, Kafka converts his personal
anguish into an account of a society bereft of any moral guidance, sufficient to replace
the vanishing power of the law, understood as one of the pillars of the Judeo-Christian
faith.
Vladimir Nabokov directly confronts the relationship between law and morality, specifically sexual
morality, in his mid-20th century American tale of perversion and redemption Lolita.
The novel also returns us to questions of how society should respond to representations
of behavior that would be either illegal or morally deeply offensive if acted out in
the real world, a question raised in the lecture on Huck Finn.
We return to the world of Twain's novel as perceived by the 20th century when we moved
to Toni Morrison's Beloved.
Morrison specifically addresses the devastating double burden of being enslaved and a woman
in her retrospective exploration of the horrors of a system of slavery carried out and tolerated
by the Christian Church.
Morrison suggests that one must draw on a code of action and principle produced by the
relationship of an individual's or a racist history to the present rather than to codes
of behavior that entitles some to enslave others.
This call to history and the power of the individual narrative is also explored in the
penultimate lecture on judgment and maternal infanticide.
The lecture employs courtroom testimony and a poem to address difficult questions of judgment.
In the final lecture, we will return to the many of the questions raised in the lectures,
in particular the nature and function of law in contemporary society.
We may seem then a long way from Escalus's vision of a world in which divine forces
influence the actions of humans.
When one considers however that Escalus specifically associates the production of a new kind of
justice with the ability to craft a certain kind of narrative, we will see that we are
still fundamentally tied to that same version of what constitutes justice.
The ability to tell a story that is plausible and offers some resolution, however partial,
to the inevitably irresolvable issues that plague civil society.
It is this need for stories and yet more stories to make sense of our world that has produced
the seemingly endless portrayals of crime, detection and punishment that appear on TV
in films and in the popular press.
In what has almost become a substitute for the drama and ritual of religious belief,
media produced drama and its many spin-offs in popular culture now function to bite the
community into a shared web of emotional and social relationships.
These dramas are both entertainment and perhaps as importantly ways of cementing a social
consensus about our values, which brings us back to where we started.
The ritualized expression of social beliefs and values found in the Greek literature and
the Hebrew Bible to which we will turn in the next lecture.
