Lecture 12, Maul Flanders, Beggar's Opera
We turn from Paradise Lost, a text that Milton predicted would be appreciated by only those
few readers whose learning matched his own, to two enormously popular texts of the early
18th century. A novel about a woman who lies, cheats and whores her way from England to
the New World and back again, and a comic or ballad opera that relies upon the audience's
ability to identify the highwaymen and pickpockets as metaphors for corrupt government.
The shift from Milton's epic to the novel and Gay's popular musical indicates more
than a shift in aesthetic taste. The success of these two forms of popular entertainment
was a reflection of a dramatic change in both the production and form of entertainment.
The success of Defoe's novel, Maul Flanders, published in 1722, indicated that something
new, something novel, was happening in the culture's expectations about how their lives
should be represented. This change can very generally be identified as a demand for a
more democratic and therefore less aristocratic version of life, and an insistence that the
production of that version be reproducible, as in a printed text or a ballad opera that
generated song sheets and imitations of the original. The audience was no longer the elite
and the powerful alone, but the rapidly growing middling classes and their servants, who eagerly
devoured tales about people much like themselves, or like those who inhabited the same social
spaces as they did. Moreover, this middling class was growing as wealthy, if not more
wealthy than the aristocratic classes, and desired a model of the self-made individual
who rose through the ranks by virtue of his ingenuity and mercantile skills, rather than
being born into the highest class. As Defoe puts it in one of his pamphlets, wealth, how
so ever got, in England makes lords of mechanics, gentlemen of rakes, and antiquity and births
are needless here, as impudence and money makes appear. Despite Defoe's apparent disapproval
of this breakdown in traditional social categories, he specifically exploits this ability to trade
places with the aristocrat in Moll Flanders, where Moll's desire to pass as a lady drives
the plot, a theme of class mobility through exploitation and seduction, taken up in Hogarth
series of engravings entitled The Harlots Progress, published in 1732. In addition to the model
of the self-made man, or in the case of Moll Flanders, the self-made woman, the merchant
class also projected a model of the best citizen in the form of the consumer. Success was produced
by trading goods and taking risks with investments and trading ventures. Success was measured
by how much material wealth one could accumulate. The men made their money, but it was the
wives and daughters who displayed it. Their clothes, jewels, household purchases like
spices, sugar, coffee, and luxuries like perfumes and all manners of exotic items from
overseas trade, all of course made possible by the labour of slaves. But fortunes made
from speculation could also be lost, and such social instability, with its consequent psychic
cost, produced another compensating narrative, a religious narrative, a providential narrative
that argued for God's active involvement in the life of the individual and could be
employed to explain or justify secular events.
Defoe's fiction repeatedly represents these two apparently conflicting forces, the urge
to acquire, contending with the desire for salvation, the material struggling with the
spiritual. Indeed, so intimately does Defoe relate these two forces in an individual's
life that one is often represented in terms of the other, the religious manifested as
material wealth and material wealth metaphorically described in religious terms.
The fortunes and misfortunes of the famous Moll Flanders, like Defoe's bestselling earlier
novel, Robinson Crusoe, is structured on the model of the spiritual autobiography in
which the individual struggles to remain true to God in a world of distractions and temptations.
Moll's conversion experience, where she suddenly realizes the moral despair into which she
has fallen, occurs in Newgate Prison, which appears to her as an emblem of hell, and is
ironically where Moll's life had begun, being born to a kendem thief whose death sentence
is commuted into transportation to the Virginia colonies. Incidentally, Daniel Defoe would
have been familiar with Newgate Prison, having been imprisoned there himself in 1703 for
authoring a pamphlet censored by the government, as well as on at least another occasion for debt.
But unlike the traditional spiritual autobiography, the novel Moll Flanders displays an uneasy
alliance between two narrative forms, the economic and the spiritual, because it is both a record
of her movement from innocence to corruption and then to redemption, which one might say is a narrative
of disburdening oneself and giving up one's desire for material well-being, but also it is
synonymously a narrative of acquisition, of accumulation, the mercantile narrative of the
self-made individual. By the end of the novel, the two narrative strategies have collapsed into one.
It is precisely her wealth and success as a plantation owner in the new world
that signals her redemption in God's eyes. One might argue then that the strict code of
prohibitions in the Ten Commandments and the codes of criminality that reflect Judeo-Christian
religious principles have been compromised by worldly concerns that temporize the unequivocal
clarity of those ancient commands. This tension between the two narrative strategies,
the spiritual and the material, is also reflected in the tension between the explanations Moll
offers for her criminality and promiscuity. Again, one sees how the clear sense of responsibility
manifest in accounts of biblical sin has been compromised by arguments that pitch nature
against nurture. The confusion about the source of Moll's criminality is not that of the heroine
alone. Moll frequently wonders whether she was destined to be a thief in a whore because she
was the daughter of a thief or because she was taken up by the gypsies or perhaps because she
was seduced and then abandoned by her first lover. But the text gives no clue about how we should
judge these speculations. At times it seems that Defoe wishes us to see Moll as nearly a victim
of her circumstances and one who in the best mercantile tradition trades what she can for
security and that therefore society must be held finally responsible for her crimes. At other times
Defoe seems to suggest that we should condemn Moll for her immorality and that her decline
into an ever more promiscuous and deceitful practice is entirely her own fault. An example
of this compromised view occurs early on in the text when Moll declares that she wishes to be
a lady when she grows up having identified a well-dressed prostitute as a lady. Of course the
irony is not lost on the reader that the adult Moll recalling her early desire to acquire status
manages to do so without commenting on the difference between a real lady and an immoral imitation of
one. An inability that is the moral equivalent of not knowing the difference between innocence and
guilt. What is even more interesting about this scene however is that although one recognizes
that Moll's desire is the foolish wish of a child the mares of the town where Moll live and to whom
Moll expresses herself remarks that Moll has a lady's hand. This observation then suggests that
Moll's background born to a convicted felon in Newgate prison might be wrong that she might in
fact be a changeling child a Cinderella awaiting her prince. If this is the case then how can she
be condemned for wishing to become what she has a natural right to be that is a lady.
Perhaps the clearest example of the confusion between the spiritual narrative Moll's story as a
confession of guilt and a plea for redemption and the economic narrative Moll's account of her losses
and gains in the marketplace perhaps the clearest example occurs in the description of Moll's amorous
encounters. All of Moll's erotic relationships are quantified in terms of how much they are worth
financially speaking indeed her first relationship which robs her of her virginity is a series of
escalating scenes of foreplay each one marked by the increasing value economically that her
lover applies to her virginity. It is finally his gift of a hundred guineas that seals the deal
and Moll's response indicates her inability to separate money from love and her confusion of
both with sex. I was more confounded she says with the money than I was before and began to be so
elevated that I scarce knew the grand I stood on. This first relationship foreshadows all future
erotic encounters in which Moll is seduced by both sexually and financially. After each encounter
Moll does her accounts evaluating her financial worth what she has spent what she has earned what
investments might turn profitable what ones are too risky indeed the word account meaning both
financial reckoning and narrative form occurs repeatedly in Moll's autobiography the trajectory
of her spiritual life mapping exactly onto her financial worth. We are acutely aware of the value
of everything in this novel and a value determined not by a moral calculus but by a commercial one
and this distinction marks the separation between a society that understands wealth in terms of land
the stability of the family estate and a society that understands wealth in terms of disposable
property in other words a capitalist economy where wealth and its symbolic representations
are fluid and mobile. This mobility is both literally and figuratively represented in the
degree of movement in the novel. Moll is always traveling from one place to another from town to
city from London to the country from the east end of London to the west from the old world to the
new and back to England and this is what wealth does too as the world becomes one bustling cycle
of getting and spending. The interchangeability of the financial and the erotic in Moll's narrative
reflects the growing legalization of both private and public relationships as well as the voicing
of a critique of marriage as legalized prostitution a representation manifest for example in Hogarth's
satirical series of engravings Marriage à la Mode. In the first plate the marriage settlement we
see the lawyers negotiating the marriage between the son of Earl Squander and the daughter of a
wealthy city merchant. The marriage ends calamitously after the son contracts venereal disease is
murdered by his wife's lover and the wife commits suicide. The marriage plot in many 18th century
novels and plays as in Hogarth's series frequently revolve revolves around the attempt by the father
to force his daughter into a materially advantageous but emotionally sterile marriage
with disastrous consequences to both parties. This representation of marriage as a commercial
transaction bound by laws of contract and negotiated by lawyers is as I have suggested part of the
growing legalization of personal and public relationships that would occur in the 18th century.
I would suggest that it is no accident that the professionalization of the legal system as we
understand it today it's concentration in the hands of trained readers and writers and the
development of a serious moral narrative the novel that is likewise concentrated in the hands of
trained practitioner that is the professional writer should have occurred at precisely the same
historical moment that is from approximately the last quarter of the 17th century to the mid 18th
century. It is perhaps also no accident that it was during this period that a recognizable criminal
class came into being one that could be disciplined by the law and chronicled by the novelist as
Defoe does with Maul and John Gaye does with the narrative of the highwayman McKeith in his beggars opera.
The advent of a criminal class is some critics have argued the corollary of the modern concept of
individuality and the establishment as a legal and moral principle of the right to private property.
Only when individuals own property as opposed to collective ownership can there exist a concept
of crime against the individual by virtue of the theft of that individual's property.
Note that all of Maul's crimes are crimes of property even one might argue the selling of her
own body for sex because in a patriarchal structure a woman never owns her own body.
It is the combination of individuality property and the desire for it and anonymity that produces
the idea of criminality a concept that is different from the concept of sin.
We have moved from a society based upon the absolutes of the Christian faith absolutes that
is in terms of the strictures of the Ten Commandments to a society whose definition of crime is no
longer synonymous with its definition of sin. This discontinuity in what had been at least
theoretically a seamless web of prohibition and punishment produces the uncertainty that
I have already spoken about in terms of Maul's moral culpability. Maul herself is unsure whether
she is merely unfortunate to be poor or driven by sin and the devil a devil who seems especially
busy in places where luxury goods are to be found silks fine linens silver and gold watches.
Is Maul the way she is because she is morally inadequate or is she a criminal because she
happens to find herself on the side of the have nots rather than the haves in a society that
equates moral value with material value in a society that permits the powerful to lie and
cheat with impunity and actually protects the powerful by punishing those who dare to steal
or con them out of their property. The similarity between the moral values of the criminal class
and those who claimed moral superiority is precisely the subject of John Gay's beggars opera
in which the denizens of London's underworld manifest qualities and values that imitate
those of the upper class especially those politicians whose power extends to enforcing
laws against the criminals. It is a symbiotic relationship in which the corruption of the
lower world not only mirrors the corruption of the judges and legislators but where each world
depends upon and feeds off the other. The beggars opera is a three act comic farce satirizing both
the rage for Italian opera in the royal court of George III as well as the political and social
follies of the day rather like an 18th century Gilbert and Sullivan opera. Its heroes were
anti-heroes thieves and highwaymen and the fences who put the stolen goods back into circulation
and its songs were not operatic arias but recognizable melodies from the world of English
folk ballads. This musical about the London underworld of prostitutes pimps and thieves
was an instant success. Despite its comic appeal the play clearly has a serious moral purpose
one that articles in political newspapers were quick to seize upon pointing out the serious
damage done society by the behavior of the establishment the party of the wig leader Sir
Robert Walpole whose corruption they argued was no better than highway robbery thus equating the
prime minister with the anti-hero of the play MacHeath the highwaymen. Popular audiences were
familiar with the exploits of daring highwaymen like Jack Shepard whose life Defoe had chronicled.
These true crime narratives were enormously successful and depicted their heroes as
larger than life and like the protagonists of Greek tragedies determined to withstand
the fateful consequences of their actions. Audiences then has now devoured these stories
responding paradoxically with both admiration and disapproval. Part of that admiration certainly
comes from the tendency to root for the underdog the one who is on the outs with the authorities
and that there was one law for the rich and one for the poor was evident to all who followed the
accounts in the broad sheets of scandals and notorious criminal deeds. For example, highwaymen
and prostitutes could be hung or transported for their activities. Actions often committed they
would argue under the stress of poverty while the very men who frequented houses of prostitution
would go unpunished. Lords charged with crimes of rape and assault against female servants were
rarely brought to trial and when they were would be exonerated or pardoned. This hypocritical
and corrupt world is the subject of the opera's first song sung by Peacham the original for whom
was Jonathan Wilde whose exploits would be celebrated by another novelist Henry Fielding in
one of his first novels. Peacham both received stolen goods and sells them back to their rightful
owner as well as turning into the authorities those thieves who have a price on their head.
This is his cynical comment on life. Through all the employments of life each neighbor abuses his
brother whore and rogue they call husband and wife all professions be rogue one another. The priest
calls the lawyer a cheat the lawyer benaves the divine and the statesman because he's so great
thinks his trade as honest as mine. His wife Mrs. Peacham is a partner in the business leaving
all the difficult decisions of who should live and who should die to her husband arguing that
women are too sentimental for such affairs. Her stereotypical characterization of women is in
fact accurate but not of herself for she's as hard as nails but of her daughter Polly who has
secretly married the highwayman McKeith. Part of the comedy in this opening scene is the representation
of Peacham and Mrs. Peacham as morally upright middle class merchants who seem oblivious to
their own complicity in the business of crime and are therefore horrified that their daughter
who they had trained and prepared to be the wife of a wealthy merchant or perhaps even a lord
should prefer one of the criminal class should choose one of her own rather than seeking to rise
through the ranks. Their moral abduceness is as the opera suggests not merely the result of their
occupation and their contact with criminals but because they are radically confused about the
nature of moral value which like Mulflanders they appear to have mixed up with material well-being
which of course is produced by self-interest alone. The Peachams are outraged that Polly
might marry McKeith because she has given up her virginity for nothing essentially given it away
when it had value and because she has confused love with the real business of living which is to
make a profit. In fact the Peachams it turns out model the relationship they would prefer Polly
to have adopted a contractual relationship built on mutual business interests rather than an
effective bond built upon the belief in love. Do you think your mother and I should have lived
comfortably so long together if we'd ever been married our speechum? Mrs. Peacham seconds her
husband's unromantic view of their relationship by reminding Polly that marriage is not about love
but is a business arrangement. Can you support she says the expense of a husband hussy in gaming,
drinking and whoring? Have you money enough to carry on the daily quarrels of man and wife about
who shall squander most? There are not many husbands and wives who can bear the charges of
plaguing one another in a handsome way. Such an account of marriage conforms the view held by
defoe and fielding that marriage without affection was merely a form of legalized prostitution.
What Polly's parents object to is not the nature of contemporary marriage however but the Polly
will not get the benefit of selling her body to the highest bidder. Moreover Gay makes clear that
even though the elite would reject this characterization of marriage as one held only by the lower
classes it is precisely the men from that elite world who keep the whorehouses the gambling dens
and the taverns going and it is the wives of these aristocratic husbands who fuel the need for luxury
goods gold and silver silk and linen that keep the Peachams in business. In other words the
economics of morality and the lower class is a reflection of and is produced by the morals of
the upper class. In what seems to be an ever escalating series of dirty deeds and betrayals
the Peachams decide that they can still retrieve Polly's fortune by turning McKeith into the
authorities and collecting the reward for his capture. But Polly overkeers their plans and
warns McKeith who rather than escaping to safety merely retreats to a tavern where he is pampered
by a crowd of prostitutes whose social manners rival those of the upper class. Gay constantly
keeps this double perspective before the audience on the one hand these are thieves and whores who
have little in the way of moral standards on the other hand they are maintained in their moral
degeneracy by those who claim to have the highest moral standards but whose behavior were even when
among their own class rivals that of the criminal class. Turned into the authorities by two of the
whores with whom he plays McKeith is taken to Newgate prison. The great central scenes of this
musical drama occur here in the prison that same prison where Moll Flanders was born and where she
has her conversion experience. In Moll's fictional universe the prison is the place of last resort
a place located at the margins of society however psychologically hovering as a threat it might be
for the criminal world. In the beggars opera however Newgate is the center of the fictional
world of the opera. It is where all the characters and all the various threads of the plot come
together. In this way gay signifies the importance that the prison holds in the popular imagination.
It was a place where the criminal and the merely financially insolvent as Defoe once was
mingled without distinction. In Newgate prostitutes might very well encounter their clients who were
being held for bankruptcy and murderers rubbed shoulder to shoulder with the tradesmen driven
out of business by the profligate lord or the pregnant pickpocket like Moll's mother who was
awaiting the birth of her child before she was hurried off to execution or transportation.
Traditional class hierarchies were maintained by the ability of the more affluent to secure
themselves special privileges like a private cell or special food but at the same time those
class boundaries were dissolved by the new society that the prison created. Thus Newgate is a perfect
metaphor for gay's moral message in which the high women and the prime minister are connected
through function and behavior just as the whore and the respectable wife who has been
sold into marriage are connected in their parallel worlds. The entire social system then dependent
as it is upon the faith of the governed in the moral authority of those who govern comes under
attack. Newgate is the place where the system of justice and all that that suggests about the role
of the government in the life of the citizen should be unimpeachable. What gay argues however
is that Newgate is at its heart the seat of corruption that Peacham and the prime minister
are inextricably linked in a system that meets out justice as if it were a commodity as indeed
it proves to be under their dispensation. In Newgate prison McKeith who is after all the hero
of this drama reveals himself to be unworthy of Polly's affection. He has also apparently
promised to marry Lucy Lockett the prison warden's daughter and has it appears several other wives
with children waiting in the wings to claim him. In the scene painted by Hogarth who was present
on opening night Lucy and Polly plead with their fathers to spare McKeith's life an ironic reminder
of who actually determined whether the sentence would be carried out and an indication of the
radical corruption in the system whereby the very authorities who should ensure the execution of
justice are themselves the worst offenders. Harassed by claims of love rather than the
legal authorities McKeith declares himself ready for death. If the opera is to remain comic however
McKeith must be saved and marriage to Polly must ensue and so like the Deus ex machina the god
out of the machine of the traditional theatre the beggar who has been absent since he first
introduced the audience to his composition the beggars opera one that he claims he has not made
unnatural like those in vogue the beggar explains that although he was for doing strict poetical
justice with McKeith hanged and the others either hanged or transported now he says he will comply
with the taste of the town and rewrite the ending of the play so that McKeith can be reprieved and
returned to Polly. In a world of petiums and their aristocratic counterparts Polly's romantic ideal
of marriage cannot survive at least not outside the world of the comic opera. Polly's love for
McKeith is perhaps the only totally unself-interested affective relationship in the play and its triumph
at the end of the opera is achieved by the same artificial dramatic means as McKeith pardoned
that saves him from the gallows. The absurdity of this revision is embodied in the celebration of
McKeith's reprieve in which the chained inhabitants of Newgate dance together as if they were at a
high society ball. It also corresponds to the absurdity of having justice in the hands of the
unjust and the criminal a point made sardonically by the beggar who has the final word. Through the
whole piece you may observe such a similitude of manners in high and low life that it is difficult
to determine whether in the fashionable vices the fine gentlemen imitate the gentleman of the road
or the gentleman of the road the fine gentleman. Had the play remained as I at first intended
it would have carried a most excellent moral. It would have shown that the lower sort of people
have their vices in the degree as well as the rich and that they are punished for them.
What is not said but intended of course is that while both classes have their vices
only the lower sort of people are punished for them. The beggar's opera is not subversive because
it poked fun at the authorities. That after all is the function of comedy and was certainly the
expectation of the London theatregoer. It is subversive because there is no space outside
the totally ironic view of the play for any morally proper public authority to exercise itself.
It is then a thoroughly cynical representation of the value and claims of those in authority
specifically those who would assert that they have the moral authority
to execute punishment on the supposedly immoral and illegal.
