Lecture 5 Ritual Order in Mystery and Morality Plays
In this lecture we will turn from the ancient biblical and Greek sources of law and analyze
a form of dramatic performance that emerged in Europe in the Middle Ages, breathing new
life into the juridical religious concepts of law found in the Old Testament and the
life of Christ.
The emergence of mystery and morality plays was a response to the church, by the church
rather, to the irrepressible desire of the laity, that is the non-clergy, to play out
the stories from the church calendar that structured their lives, as well as to mark
the natural passage of the seasons.
In so doing, the church was able to instruct the laity in those lessons which rendered
as they were in Latin would otherwise have remained unintelligible.
These plays focus primarily on the story of man's fall and redemption and the lives of
the saints and martyrs.
Through the complex interactions of religion, law and literature, we see how cultural uniformity
was maintained across multiple national and local sites, and we can also see how the secular
professional drama of the Renaissance is prefigured in these medieval, amateur religious performances.
As has become clear from the previous lectures in which we examined the dramatic renditions
of God's relationship with the Israelites and the relationship of the ancient Greek
gods with their human subjects, there is an ongoing relationship between religion and
drama.
All cultures, however important or marginalized they may be in terms of their political or
social influence, celebrate certain ritualistic moments in their existence, sometimes tied
to natural events like the change of the seasons, sometimes produced by mystic narratives of
origin and growth that require recommemoration.
Such recommemoration both provides a persistent and thus reassuring structure to the individual
and communal life, and connects those lives to an order that is in some way greater, more
permanent than human life.
This longing to be connected to something that is not subject to human frailty and mortality
seems to be a persistent and universal desire, producing sacred texts and their aspirational
ideals.
In the Judeo-Christian world and in other civilizations that we consider fundamental to the development
of Western political and social ideology, the concept of justice is closely allied with
the concept of a God or gods who order human affairs.
One might say that in the traditional Western philosophy to think about justice has been,
at least until very recently, to think also about God or the gods.
We have already heard in lectures three and four on the Aristae and Oedipus that to speak
of divine intervention in the human world was to address the question of how human justice
could be made to reflect and represent an ideal of justice that was not paradoxically
available to the human world.
Divine intervention was necessary, it seemed, in order to remind that mortal world that
however heroic and far-reaching human vision might be, it could not finally do more than
offer a partial and impermanent connection to the divine.
And nowhere was this more obvious than in the way the gods apportioned success or failure.
For Escalus, no human solution to the problem of intra-family violence was suffice.
Limited by their own mortality, Agamemnon, Clytemnesta and Orestes can only imagine death
as a just response to injury.
Justice then as an ideal is beyond imagination, and Escalus represents its source as divine
and its ideal condition as unavailable to the human world except through some kind of
divine intervention.
Likewise, Sophocles Oedipus insists that human existence is controlled by events beyond
our control, and thus any resolution to the conflict or riddle posed by these events must
come from the gods, even if their resolution seems unjust from a human perspective.
In both ancient and Greek ideas of justice, then there is this constant and consistent
representation of the relationship between God, gods and the individual and justice.
As long as the audiences for these narratives are essentially in agreement about what constitutes
the proper order of things, morally, theologically and politically speaking, these rituals act
to unify the communities.
Even when new versions of the individual's relationship to God begin to transform earlier
ritualized representations, accommodations can be made so that the dramatic enactments
do not become divisive.
We see this in the way, for example, in which the Christian Church calendar was superimposed
over a pre-Christian calendar that celebrated the vernal or spring equinox, so that the
rebirth of the earth in spring was co-opted, as it were, to celebrate Christ's rebirth
after crucifixion.
Unable to suppress the popular celebration of spring or the harvest, the Christian Church
employed those celebrations, through which to dramatically re-enact the crucifixion
and rebirth of Christ, not to suppress the vernacular, that is, the local representations
of the passage of time and the seasons, but to incorporate those natural events into what
then came to be seen as a pre-existing narrative of God's creation of the universe.
Thus, the Bible was read by even those who could not read, as a book of nature, a narrative
that dramatically articulated not merely the events in the life of Christ, the Old Testament
patriarchs or prophets, but which incorporated all that human life could imagine or experience.
At first, these dramatic renditions would be enacted by the priests at the altar, and
by directing the laity's attention to certain crucial events or relationships, these dramas
would impress by repetition the lessons the priest wished to inculcate in his congregation.
Early plays in the Church may have been no more than dumb shows, with actors moving
mutely in harmony with the sermon.
For instance, on Easter, a play focusing on the adoration of the cross may have been
acted out before the altar.
A Christmas, a play celebrating the nativity.
On other feasts or holy days, some other event may have been celebrated.
Bound only by their desire to instruct their audience in the proper religious sentiments,
the priests could enlarge the scope of their dramatic narratives to point out the consonance
between Bible stories and secular law.
Thus, representing the story of Adam and Eve, the priests were able to instill the appropriate
obedience required of wives and remind women in the congregation that secular laws that
enforced wifely submission were based in holy scripture.
Medieval religious drama existed primarily then to give religious instruction, establish
faith and encourage piety.
There were two dramatic forms used by the Church that we retroactively define as mystery
or miracle plays and morality plays.
Mystery plays derive their name from the French mystère, which means an act.
Or an alternative explanation is minister, because the ministerium, the clergy, were
the first actors.
Mystery plays were primarily concerned with scripture narrative, with prominence given
to the story of man's fall and redemption.
Miracle plays deal with the lives of the saints and martyrs, but you will find that
the terms are now used pretty much interchangeably.
As the demand for these dramas increased and the plays themselves became more elaborate,
requiring more players, sets to depict biblical scenes and elaborate costuming to create the
necessary vestimilitude, the incongruity of such entertainment, even if it was to increase
religious attendance and conformity, became evident.
By the early 13th century, priests were banned by papal edict from participating in such
performances, and the plays were gradually moved from the church to the churchards and
then eventually to the marketplaces and other communal gathering points.
Originally, these mystery plays were presented as isolated incidents intended to awe the
congregation and reinforce their sense of God's ineffability.
But as the dramas moved out of the church and into the public space, the demand for
extended plays produced mysteries that narrated the history of man from creation to the day
of judgment.
Once outside the church, the priests lost direct control of these plays, and the laity
gradually assumed not only the responsibility for creating the elaborate sets and costumes,
but also for the roles previously under the guardianship of the priests.
In England, as the local people became responsible for acting these plays, individual craftsmen
and guilds took charge of particular plays or particular parts of those play cycles,
that is, the whole narrative from the beginning, from the dawn of time to the day of judgment.
Thus, for example, the Goldsmith Guild might take charge of producing and performing in
a play that represented the three wise men approaching the birthplace of Christ, and
they would lavishly decorate the costumes and gifts of their magi to demonstrate their
wealth and influence the community.
So the drama that once exemplified the priest control of his text and message, only he spoke
in Red Latin, of course, eventually became the proud property of the commercial citizens
of the community, but they still retained their close connection to the religious sentiments
that had inspired the drama in the first place.
In effect, during the 12th and 13th centuries, there was no secular, no non-sacred drama.
At this point then, moving further along towards the 14th century, English drama then became
a delicate balance of the secular and the religious, under the control of the laity
in terms of its production, but still very much infused with conventional Christian religious
and moral doctrine.
The mysteries, at least in old and New Testament cycles, followed a pre-existing narrative from
which they rarely departed, because, of course, the foundation was borrowed from Holy Scripture.
The traditional doctrine and the larger than life nature of the chief personages had to
be respected, but the huge scope of these plays, often 30 to 40 plays in a cycle, spread over
several days and over several sites, allowed the performers to recall not only the events
of this world, but to depict the terrors and hopes of the next.
They represented heaven, earth, and hell, and the passion of Christ and his resurrection.
Not of course as a play subject to various interpretations, but as truths known since childhood.
The powerful social effect of entertainment that reinforces a unified religious doctrine
that in turn is the foundation of moral and political order cannot be overestimated.
One sees why, as the religious content of the plays gradually gave way during the 15th
and 16th centuries to a more secular content, that the church and the state resisted the
growing appeal of the theatre and eventually stepped in in the form of censorship.
As I have already mentioned, as these plays became more elaborate, they required more
and more support from the local community, and thus the plays were divided, as I've said,
amongst the guilds, each one taking responsibility for producing a part of a whole cycle.
We now identify these cycles by the district in which they were originally performed,
the most significant cycles being performed at Chester, York, Wakefield, and Coventry.
These cycles are not coherent works of literature with a unified form or content, that is, they
would not be represented today as a text that's been authored by a single author, because
they were the result of many authors who knew that the audiences came prepared to be satisfied
not by terms of phrase, not by wonderful new inventive interpretations, but by a well-known
story well displayed.
These cycles reinforced the authority and power of the church precisely because they offered
no contending interpretations of biblical narratives.
The plays were not the plays for innovation, but for reminding the audience of the importance
and comfort of religion in their lives.
But they were plays, they were entertainment, and inevitably some subversive and comedic
elements found their way into the performances, spontaneous farce and slapstick, that eventually
became a conventional part of the cycle.
I will return to the significance of these non-sacred elements later in the lecture.
The selection of episodes for dramatization in these play cycles is, with local variations
of emphasis strikingly common to all the surviving cycles, and this conformity once
again signals how church doctrine was disseminated and enforced.
Across England, in communities far apart, on certain days of the church year, huge numbers
of people, sometimes numbering in the hundreds, were involved in mounting and acting in these
productions and many, many more gathered to watch.
The cycle of plays would begin early in the morning with a play about the fall of Lucifer,
or the creation of the world, put on by a specific guild society, and moves through
the day with plays concerning the chief events of the biblical narrative, Abraham and Isaac,
Noah's flood, the nativity, the harrowing of hell, the crucifixion, the resurrection
and so on, toward a final climaxing play concerning the day of last judgment or doomsday.
Such a cycle would illustrate what I refer to in the second lecture on the Hebrew Bible
as the belief in telos, or an ending to history, the idea that history is a linear process
with various specific stages, all indicating that God has a plan for humankind, and that
He makes various covenants with humankind along the way.
In addition, the plays demonstrate a theological adherence to the concepts of justice and law
as portrayed in the Old Testament and modified through the New Testament.
Thus, episodes from the Old Testament were dramatized because they prefigured the central
drama of Christ's life.
For example, the temptation and fall of Adam prefigures the temptation of Christ.
Noah's flood anticipates the last judgment, and Moses' story prefigures elements of Christ's
ministry.
The story of Abraham and Isaac, a particular popular story that appears in all the mystery
cycles, parallels the story of God and His Son, Jesus.
In the case of Abraham and Isaac, of course, Isaac is not sacrificed, whereas Jesus is,
but it is clearly meant to prefigure that relationship.
I would like to give a brief taste of the mixture of the realistic and the ritualistic,
the commonplace and the mysterious, that some versions of the Abraham and Isaac story offered.
I have chosen the parchment makers and bookbinders play from the York cycle.
Abraham asked God for the strength to fulfill His command that He sacrificed His Son.
And at this point, Isaac is poignantly unaware of why his father needs strength.
Great God that all this world has wrought and worthily governs good and ill, now grant
me strength so that I might your commandments here fulfill.
And if my flesh groan or grieve ought before my soul fully ascent their till, to burn
all that which here I've brought, I shall not spare, though it should me kill.
Isaac says, Lord God, great in power, to whom all people pray, grant both me and my father
to work thy will always.
As I say, he doesn't at this point know what that will is.
But Father, now I must know this thing, whereof should our offering be made?
Abraham can no longer hide the truth from Isaac.
And he says, my son, I must leave this lingering, yourself that bitter blow must abide.
To which Isaac responds with such simplicity and heartbreaking trust.
Why, Father, does God wish that I be slain?
Abraham, yes, truly, son, so has he said.
Isaac is immediately ready to do God's bidding, and confronts the reality of his imminent death,
but then offers his father some advice.
Isaac, I shall not groan there, against, to work his will I am well paid.
Since it is his desire, I shall be glad to be bludgeoned and burned in fire.
Therefore more not for me.
Father, since God our Lord alone agreed to send, when you did pray a son to you, when
you had known, and wishes now that he go his way, therefore be willing me to kill as an
offering in this place.
But first I shall tell you my counsel in this case.
I know because of nature's kind, my flesh will quake in mortal dread.
I am afraid that you shall find my strength, resist your covenant.
Therefore it's best that you should bind me fast, in bands both foot and hand.
Now while I am in might and mind, safely you'll keep God's command.
For father, when I am bound, my strength may not avail, here shall no fault be found,
to make your covenant fail.
For you are old and all unwell, and I am strong and bold in thought.
Thus this ancient narrative is invested with a reality that does not lessen its power,
but rather enforces the ongoing and present bond between God and the individuals who witness
the play.
Let me turn briefly to the other religious entertainment in the medieval world, the morality
play, before I return to discuss the gradual movement away from religious drama toward
the secular drama of the Renaissance.
Morality plays developed at the same time as mystery plays, and like those plays reflect
the importance of shared understandings of law and morality, and the source of both forms
of social expression in the church.
Morality plays were sprawling and long-winded, but they reached their popular audience by
relying on allegorical figures to inculcate ethical and moral truths, and the dramatic
personae are abstract personifications such as virtue, justice, the seven deadly sins.
The character called the vice is especially interesting as a precursor of Shakespeare's
fool.
Depending on allegory to speak of abstract qualities, these plays bridged the divide
between on the one hand the word of the church and the aristocracy, those whose education
had prepared them to respond to the world philosophically, and on the other hand the
word of the uneducated, mostly illiterate laity, whose understanding of those things
not evident to the senses was severely limited.
Generally speaking, these morality plays reinforced the message of the Catholic Church about the
hardships of this life and the promise of the next.
Abstract qualities embodied in living actors made church teachings real, relevant and powerful.
The best known morality play is Everyman, probably originally written by a Dutch author
and popular until well into the 16th century.
Its title suggests its appeal to a European society still linked across nations through
its shared faith, a narrative that represented the struggle of the Christian soul to find
its way to God and which claims therefore a universal relevance.
Everyman places his faith in material things, his friends, relatives and goods, but of course
has to learn that those things will not be sufficient for redemption.
Abandoned by the allegorical figures of fellowship, cousin and kindred, Everyman realizes that
fair promises meant to me make, but when I most need they me forsake.
Since man will not help him, he turns to material possessions, but he soon realizes that these
goods have stolen his soul and have merely prevented his redemption.
Only when he turns to God does he receive the promise and performance that his soul
longs for.
It is hard for us to imagine a single piece of literature speaking so directly and so
uniformly to a contemporary audience.
This sense of a shared religious ritual was central to the way medieval audiences experienced
their relationship to one another, and that shared faith would continue until the Elizabethan
age to shape not just the way people experienced the church teachings, but also the way they
responded to secular laws and moral customs produced by those teachings.
I would like to return now to the question of subversion and comedy in the mystery plays
because it is out of these marginal moments that Renaissance drama developed, and this
tells us something about the way literature can escape the boundaries patrolled by social
convention and religious doctrine, even as it appears to be reinforcing those conventions.
While the expression of religious longing and the articulation of religious beliefs
can bind an audience to higher things, that same need to articulate the relationship of
the human to the divine can produce moments of bathos, that is the unexpected juxtaposition
of the sublime and the commonplace.
And those moments can in turn open the door to comedy.
Comedy does not necessarily undermine religious awe and worship, in fact in many mystery plays
it sets up a deliberate contrast with that world of great drama and ritual performance
that marked the medieval experience of the church.
The various guilds added comedic moments deliberately as they sought larger audiences,
although with the exception of one or two plays, comedy remained marginal and never
overshadowed the central dramatic story.
One can see, however, where Shakespeare's tragedies, for example, with their intervening
moments of comedy recall the gravedick as seen in Hamlet.
One can see where they have their origin.
Each of the comedy is merely slapstick, naively realistic efforts to get a quick laugh.
And corresponding to this physical comedy is the verbal comedy that relies heavily on
profanity, coarse jokes about sex and digestion, sort of adolescent humor.
Not one would think appropriate material to include a play about sacred things.
But of course it is precisely because of its comparison with the gross material things
of this world that the sacred world takes on its value.
And when the dirty language and swearing comes from the mouth of Satan as he tumbles into
hell, who wouldn't be amused?
These plays also incorporated social and political satire on everyday topics like the miseries
of married life or the oppression of the poor by the rich.
And one can see why, as these strains of social and political protest became more pronounced,
the authorities would move later to close the theatres and censor the playwrights.
Moreover, once one opens the stage to representations of ordinary people, or the concerns of ordinary
people, rather than the mythic figures from the Bible or Christian history, then one is
acknowledging that those commonplace characters have value as representative figures.
They are not merely abstract qualities personified, but real people experiencing real poverty
or oppression.
Let us take a closer look at the late 14th century play that prefigures in its comedy
and realism the plays of the Renaissance.
The second shepherds play from the Wakefield cycle is generally considered to be the crowning
achievement of the religious drama of the Middle Ages.
In this play, the anonymous playwright known only as the Wakefield Master has moved from
the slapstick and vulgarity of dirty jokes to creating a genuinely comic character, Mac,
a sheepstealer, who narrowly escapes hanging by the three shepherds from whom he has stolen
a lamb on the night of Christ's birth.
In the late medieval cycles of play celebrating human history from the creation through the
incarnation to the day of judgment, there was a place, apparently, for a play about
shepherds, to whom came an angel with tidings that a saviour was born.
In the cycle at Wakefield, in Yorkshire, there were two such plays, called simply the first
and second shepherds plays.
The world of these plays is not confined by the particularities of time and space.
For example, in the second shepherds play, although Christ is not yet born in the early
scenes, the shepherds call upon his cross and his name, and also upon Christian saints,
calling them St. Nicholas, who lived more than three centuries after Christ.
Moreover, the shepherds are watching their flocks near Wakefield, but when sent by the
angel, they appear to travel to Bethlehem overnight without crossing water.
Obviously, we are not to expect realism in this play, and yet there it is, in the characters
like Mac and his wife Jill, who steal and shuffle their way through life, and the oppressed
herdsmen who find a brief pleasure in the song.
Even the figures of Mary and her little day star are invested with a reality and particularity
that would have reminded the audience that someone they knew was playing the part of
the Virgin Mary.
And yet at the same time, that young woman was also, however briefly, transformed through
the power of ritual drama into a sacred figure.
The central message of the play, like that of every man, is that redemption comes from
doing good deeds rather than worrying about material goods.
A proper message perhaps to deliver to those who have little in the way of worldly prosperity.
The three shepherds, Kohl, Gibb and Dor, move from a world of complaining and obsession
with worldly concerns to the stable of Christ's nativity.
But only when they have performed a charitable deed that makes them worthy to visit that
manger in Bethlehem.
Kohl voices the complaint of all the shepherds.
We are all so hammed, foretaxed and rammed, we are made hand-tamed with these gently men.
Oppressed by the gentry, these shepherds can think only of how to remedy their earthly
condition, and thereby they jeopardize their spiritual well-being.
Only after they offer kindness to the sheepstealer, Mac, and forego hanging him, are they able
to receive charity from God.
And this mutual covenant is simply and movingly portrayed when they, in imitation of the three
kings from the east, arrive in that stable in Bethlehem and present their simple gifts
to the child.
Thus the first shepherd says, Hail, cumbly and clean, hail, young child, hail, maker as
I mean, born of maiden so mild, Thou hast banned I, deemed the devil so wild, the evil beguiler
now goes beguiled, Lo, merry is lo, he laughs my sweeting, a welcome greeting, and he offers
the child some cherries.
The second shepherd says, Hail, sovereign Saviour, for Thou hast assort, hail, nursing,
leaf and flower, that all things hath wrought, hail, full of flower, favor that made all
of nought, and he offers him a bird, hail, I kneel and I cower, a bird have I brought
without mar, hail, little tiny mop of our creed, Thou art the crop, I would drink from
thy cup, little day star.
And then the third shepherd, hail, darling dear, full of Godhead, I pray thee be near
when that I have need, hail, sweetest thy cheer, and my heart must bleed to see thee
sit here, clothes so poor indeed, with no pennies, hail, thy hand put forth to us all, I bring
thee but a ball, take it and play with it with all, and go to tennis.
The power of linking literature with religious rituals and doctrine that enforce moral and
secular laws is evident.
But religious and political unity is necessary, as I have said, for the continued success
of this effect.
The breakdown of that religious and political unity, the separation of the English Church
from the Roman Catholic Church, and the development of nationalist sentiments, will by the end
of the 16th century break up the monopoly of Church authority and its secular equivalent.
Like the Lollards, a religious group who insisted on the right to read the Bible in their native
tongue, dramatic production in England would gradually begin to represent a nationalist
agenda, even if that nationalist sentiment was still tied to religious doctrine.
Eventually, the dramatic performance that at first had advanced the religious and political
agenda of those in power escaped their authority, and began to assert itself as an autonomous
secular site of resistance and subversion.
