Lecture 14 Property and Self, Edgeworth, Bernie, Austin
In this lecture we will examine the way in which social rules, especially those constructing
class and gender are reflected in and produced by the law, specifically the law of property
and inheritance. We will explore two of Jane Austen's predecessors, upon whom she relied
in learning her own craft, Francis Bernie and Mariah Edgeworth. Both authors engage directly
with the way in which legal standing impinges upon the most intimate of personal relationships,
in Bernie's case in England and in Edgeworth's in Ireland. We will then turn to one of Austen's
own texts, Pride and Prejudice, in which the legal questions that ground the plot manifest
themselves as questions of moral character and romance. In this way we will explore how
late 18th century and early 19th century novels embrace the inherently legal nature
of the self in modern society, even as they represent that self as apparently indifferent
to or unaffected by such unromantic concerns. Issues of property and gender and the relationship
of both the class dominated the English novel since its first appearance in the late 17th
and early 18th centuries. Commercially successful writers like Daniel Defoe, Henry Fielding
and Samuel Richardson all wrote novels in which the relationship between gender and
property did to herment the plot. An example of this interest in how men and women differ
in their access to and assessment of the value of property include Daniel Defoe's
Moll Flanders, which we discussed in lecture 12, where Moll tells the story of her life
of prostitution and theft as simultaneously a story about acquiring wealth and becoming
a gentlewoman, thus emphasizing that being a gentleman woman was something that one
could learn how to be rather than a condition one was born into.
Another enormously popular novel, one that set off a craze for spin-off items like women's
fans and jewelry, much like a contemporary Hollywood movie would, was Samuel Richardson's
Pamela, subtitled Virtue Rewarded, published in 1740, a middle-class success story that
details the attempted seduction of its heroine, the servant Pamela, by her aristocratic master.
Pamela's enormous success attests to the popular interest in stories of a woman's virtue
rewarded by marriage and rank. Pamela relies on the conventions of romance novels, first
made popular in England in the late 17th and early 18th centuries by women writers like
Afra Ben and Eliza Hayward, but it's also tied to issues of female virtue and concerns
about class and property. Richardson firmly linked the increasing power of the middle class
to their moral and material values, in contrast to the decadence of the aristocracy. One can
recall also from lecture 12 how Gay suggests that not much separates the gentleman and
the highwayman in terms of their moral values. When we turn to the novels of Francis Burney,
Mariah Edgeworth and Jane Austen, all published in the late 18th century or early 19th century,
we see that the boundaries between the middle-classes and the gentry and aristocracy were dissolving,
and it was through marriage, that is primarily through the marriage of the middle-class woman
to the aristocrat, that such a change in social class was being achieved. This transformation
was not achieved without considerable anxiety, however, on the part of those who had always
considered their status to be secure in terms of its superior moral as well as material
wealth. It is interesting to note in these three women-authored novels how the woman
bears the burden of uniting the values of the middle-class with those of the upper-class,
and that as we move from Jeep Francis Burney to Jane Austen, the character of that woman
changes from the kind of virtuous female represented by Richardson in his novel Pamela to the still
virtuous but delightfully witty and lively Elizabeth Bennet in Austen's Pride and Prejudice,
published in 1813. Before I turn to these three women writers, let me briefly describe
the class system in England during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. First one should
understand that land was the major source of wealth in England until the late 19th century,
so that even if one possessed considerable wealth in terms of movable property, that
would not place you in the upper-classes. Even a totally impoverished landowner would
outrank a merchant or professional man with ten times his wealth. We see this in Austen's
novel Persuasion, where Sir Thomas Eliot, the father of the heroine Anne, has to retreat
to Bath and rented lodgings to recoup his squandered fortune while an admiral of the
British navy occupies his house. His bankruptcy does not, however, deprive him of his social
standing in the eyes of his peers. Generally speaking, the peerage which constituted roughly
one percent of the population and consisted of all those in the rank of Duke, Marquis,
Earl, Vicant and Baron, owned twenty percent of the land. At the next level, the gentry,
constituted by baronettes, gentlemen, knights and esquires, owned about sixty percent of
the land. Thus the top three percent of the population owned about eighty percent of the
land. And remember that land ownership was until the first reform bill of 1832, the requirement
for voting candidates into parliament. Even after 1832 and a second reform bill two years
later, ownership of property remained a primary requirement for suffrage.
Below the gentry came the middle class, the professional classes like lawyers and the
clergy, ranked members of the navy and army, merchants, tradesmen and farmers. This class
accounted for about forty percent of the population and some owned land, farmers of course, but
many had their wealth tied up in their businesses. Below the middle class came the labouring
class, accounting also for about forty percent, and below them the poor and destitute.
One can see then that possession of an estate or the potential to inherit such property
was the single most important determinant of one's social standing and was intimately
related to a complex set of moral values, all of which was supported and protected by
English law, which had of course been legislated into being by exactly those who would most
benefit from its enforcement. The most important repository of legal learning and tradition,
the common law, was primarily occupied with litigation related to the multiple ways of
possessing and transferring land and property. With the result that much of the litigation
that arose from other sources, like the growing negotiation of commercial transactions and
other legal business associated with trade, had to be dealt with in the court of Chancery.
And we can see the result of this burden of lawsuits in the nineteenth century as satirized
by Dickens' novel Bleak House, to which we will turn in the next lecture.
But let me turn now to Francis Burney's novel, Evelina, published in 1778. Evelina is, like
Richardson's story of Pamela, an epistolary novel. That is a novel written in the form
of letters, most of which are authored by the heroine Evelina. The novel is subtitled
The History of a Young Lady's Entrance to the World. And the world that Evelina must
enter is one that is constructed through a complex web of class and gender associations,
all of which are regulated by subtle but powerful social rules. Evelina has not grown up in
this social world, having been raised in a rural paradise by her guardian, the reverent
Mr. Villas. She possesses no fortune, and apparently no family, having been given her
last name Anvil by her guardian to disguise her origins. That her mother, named Evelyn,
had contracted a marriage with a young rake, Sir John Belmont, who refused to acknowledge
the liaison, thus making their child Evelina illegitimate.
One sees then immediately the significance of her name. Evelina is from the line of
Eve, and therefore is automatically under suspicion as a sexual being, even though she
is herself entirely without guile. And as an Eve, she must, of course, find her Adam.
That entering the world was synonymous with marriage would be automatically assumed by
Bernie's audience, and that Evelina's virtue would be tested as part of this entrance would
also be a natural assumption, given the history of the novel from the late 17th century, with
its reliance on a plot that linked a woman's virtue to her class prospects.
What Evelina discovers when she enters this world is that despite her guardian's moral
standing in the rural community as a man of great moral worth, she is in the high society
world of London a nobody. As a woman without family, property, and apparently the daughter
of an unchaste mother, she is subject to multiple moral and physical assaults, both from men
of the upper class who presume that she must be available for romantic and sexual trists,
to her vulgar middle class tradesmen-cousins who state boldly that she has come to London
only to find a husband. Which is, of course, in some sense true, but which Evelina cannot
acknowledge without appearing to be far wiser in the ways of the world than is appropriate
for a young woman. This central tension in the novel is between the need for Evelina
to protect her virtue at the same time as she circulates through the society in order
to advance her material prospects. An impossible position to be in if one was not protected
by the name and power of one's father or family. Indeed, Evelina is powerless to answer these
attacks upon her moral and physical being until she finally claims her father's protection
and thus inherits both his name and his wealth. Before Evelina's parentage is declared, however,
her inherent worth is recognized by her future husband, Lord Orville, a man whose social
standing she eventually equals when her father acknowledges the legality of his marriage
to Evelina's mother. Thus, in this novel, as in so many other narratives of the 18th
century, the romance narrative is synonymous with, one might say, a mask for a narrative
of acquisition and status. To secure a husband is also to proclaim one's paternity and to
inherit property. If we turn to Mariah Edgeworth, the absentee
published in 1812, we see some of the same issues of a woman's virtue and property represented,
although the tension between the English and Irish systems of land ownership creates a
further layer of complexity. Moreover, Mariah Edgeworth was herself an active partner with
her father in the management of his estate in Ireland, and so her position as a woman
with property was quite anomalous for her age. Before I turn to that novel, however,
I would like to talk briefly about her first book for adult readers published in 1800 called
Castle Rackrent. In this comic novel, Edgeworth focuses on the growing power of the middle
class and its acquisition of property in Ireland, specifically addressing the relationship
between landowners and their tenants in 18th century Ireland from a moral, religious and
practical viewpoint. Castle Rackrent satirizes all levels of Anglo-Irish society, the absentee
English landlord, the reckless Anglo-Irish aristocracy, the avaricious Irish middle class
manager, and the illiterate Irish peasantry. Even though she claimed she was depicting
only past abuses, Edgeworth was clearly attacking contemporary rack-renting, that is, charging
an exorbitant rent, and absenteeism. The novel also satirizes the ongoing struggle between
the politically powerless Irish Catholics who had no vote and under the penal laws were
forbidden from owning or inheriting land, and the Protestant Anglo-Irish who owned 95%
of the land. In both Britain and Ireland at this time, ancient feudal customs were being
displaced by laws passed by a parliament controlled by landowners. Agrarian capitalism was promoted
by a middle class trained in law and eager to serve the interests of the landowners.
And of course the situation in Ireland was exacerbated both by religious oppression and
by a further split between the Protestant Anglo-Irish land owning class on the one hand
and the Irish Protestants on the other hand who owed a double allegiance both to Ireland
and to Britain. The narrator of the Castle Rackrent is Thaddee Quirk, the representative
of the Irish peasantry whose son Jason has gained possession of the rack-rent estate
after it had been ruined by the litigiousness of its former owners. Jason understands that
knowledge of the law is the key to rising through the ranks. His father is however torn
between loyalty to his own class and his son on the one hand and loyalty to his former
employees, the ancient family that once owned the rack-rent estate. Through her satiric
portrait of the generations that have squandered the family fortunes in lawsuits and drinking,
Edgworth argues for a more enlightened and economically sand system of governing the
estate which would then become a model for the government of the country. Thus insisting
on putting herself into the public world of economics and government by making the connection
between the family and the country as systems of economic and emotional relationship. Even
though Castle Rackrent now occupies a significant place in the tradition of novel writing,
it was an anomaly at the time of its publication. That a woman writer would address issues of
law and estate management even satirically was considered ill-advised at best and subversive
at worst. In the absentee published in 1812, Edgworth seems to return to the more conventional
domain of the woman writer, that is the romance narrative. But she links the romantic relationship
of an English woman, Grace Nugent and her cousin, the absentee Anglo-Irish landlord
Calambri, to the union between Great Britain and Ireland in 1801. The political and social
consequences of this union are depicted in the journey of Calambri from London, where
the fashionable Anglo-Irish lived, to the detriment of their Irish estates, from London then to
his Irish estate, which he visits interestingly in disguise, thus reminding us of the Duke's
return to Vienna in measure for measure. However, the powerful and often highly amusing account
of Calambri's discovery of his Irish roots often marginalises the romance story. There's
a kind of uneasy alliance between the two. The question of how to unite two countries,
whose customs, religion and laws seemed impossible to reconcile, was first fiercely debated in
the years leading up to the union in 1801. And again, when the novel was published in
1812, debate had been revived by the continuing protests of the un-emancipated Catholics who
felt betrayed by the failure of the British to deliver the vote as promised by the union.
The action of the novel alternates between England and Ireland and the romantic relationship
between Grace and Calambri, which enacts the complicated relationship between England and
Ireland through which the national identity of each country is defined. Moreover, the
heroine's illegitimacy, like that of Bernie's Evelina, marginalises her in the social worlds
of both England and Ireland. Although the constant allusion to the meaning of her name,
Grace, makes her symbolic position important to Edgeworth's resolution of the tension between
the two nations. Grace is the answer. Both are, after all, Edgeworth seems to suggest
Christian countries. A direct answer to the ongoing and generally accepted representation
of the English as civilised and the native Irish as barbaric.
In the final chapters of the novel, as the romance narrative assumes dominance, Grace
is able to assert her mother's virtue and therefore to claim her legitimacy. This act,
as with Evelina's discovery of her paternity, is synonymous with her engagement to the man
of property, Lord Calambri, and thus emphasises once again that for a woman to come into possession
of an estate requires that she first be in possession of a good name.
Let us turn, finally, then to Pride and Prejudice, published in 1813, where Jane Austen employs
the conventions of the romance novel to explore the gender contradictions of the laws of inheritance
and property. In Austen's novel, the subtle connection between laws that control property
and those that regulate personal and social relationships is explored. The central legal
feature of the novel is the entailment that controls the disposition of the Bennet estate.
I cannot bear to hear the entailment mentioned, exclaims Mrs. Bennet to her husband at breakfast.
I do think it is the hardest thing in the world that your estate should be entailed away
from your own children, and I am sure if I had been you, I should have tried long ago
to do something or other about it. Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the
nature of an entail. They had often attempted it before, but it was a subject on which Mrs.
Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and she continued to rail bitterly against the
cruelty of settling the estate away from a family of five daughters in favour of a man
whom nobody cared about. In this novel, as in so many 18th and 19th century novels, to
speak of estates is also to speak of other connected systems of meaning, such as the
family, society, and those less visible forms like morality and manners. What this connection
means socially is that those who own estates have some prior claim to owning the other
things that make society function smoothly and harmoniously, like the right wife or the
right manners. Often obviously employs the entail in this novel to set a romance narrative
in motion. It is because the Bennet estate is entailed away to Mr. Collins that the Bennet
girls are subjected to the often humiliating discussion of their poor marriage prospects
and that both Bingley and Darcy hesitate to pursue Jane and Elizabeth. Entailment was
the method employed through the law to guarantee that the estate would pass into the male line.
Thus, because Mr. Bennet has only daughters, it must go to the next closest male relative,
Mr. Collins. Entail became very popular in the 17th century when it was frequently employed
by those merchants and professionals who were rising into the gentry class and wished
to protect their estates from being squandered after their death by reckless sons. They could
threaten to or actually entail them away to a more reliable heir. Austin also employs
the entail, however, to open up a conversation about the obligations and expectations that
such a society as the one depicted in this novel relies upon. Critics Sandra MacPherson
goes so far as to argue that land law, rather than marriage or class, is the ground upon
which Austin works out the way in which persons are or ought to be connected to others. In
her argument, we read the significance of Bingley's rushed departure from Netherfield
as a display of his unreliability, both as a member of the local community and Maritain
neighborhood and also as a fit husband for any of those young women who lived there.
We know that part of Darcy's arrogance comes from his possession of a large estate, but
we should also recognize that his pride is the result of his knowledge that he fulfills
his obligations to those who work for him, as his housekeeper reports when Elizabeth
visits Pemberley, and indeed, when Lydia elopes with Wiggum, it is Darcy's sense of obligation
that brings about a proper resolution. That the possession of land determines the manner
in which one circulates through the social world is clear. Even though he will not pass
on his estate to his children, Mr. Bennett nevertheless still owns it, and thus can move
freely through the world, while his daughters are presumptively dispossessed by the entailment,
and thus are restricted both literally and figuratively in their movements. Recall that
Elizabeth and Jane do not travel unless invited to accompany their relatives or friends,
and that they are entirely dependent on local entertainment for their circle of acquaintances.
Elizabeth however, unlike her sister Jane, refuses to accept that her every movement
should be thus constricted. One symbolic representation of Elizabeth's flouting of these restrictive
social conventions that are produced by laws of property and inheritance occurs early in
the novel, when Elizabeth walks to Netherfield to visit Jane who is sick. She refuses the
offer of the carriage, preferring to walk freely through the fields, fields that would be owned
by her father, before she passes then on to land rented by Bingley at Netherfield. She
is in a way, I would suggest, then sort of symbolically claiming them, if only briefly
for herself. Elizabeth crossed field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stars
and springing over puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at last within
view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a face glowing with the warmth
of exercise. When she meets Bingley and his sisters in the parlor, her appearance created
a great deal of surprise that she should have walked three miles so early in the day in
such dirty weather and by herself was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and Ms. Bingley,
and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it. She was received however
very politely by them, and in their brothers' manners there was something better than politeness.
There was good humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr. Hurst nothing at
all. The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given
to her complexion, and doubt as to the occasions justifying her coming so far alone. The latter
was thinking only of his breakfast. In the response of the occupants of Netherfield
to Elizabeth's appearance, Austin brilliantly articulates the values of each character,
and in particular we note the mixture of admiration and disapproval in Darcy's response, which
perfectly accords with his ambivalent feelings about Elizabeth, feelings which are like
everything else in the novel, conditioned by the entail on her father's estate.
Later, Bingley's sisters returned to their attack on Elizabeth's character, this time
making the connection between property and propriety quite clear. Mrs. Hurst exclaims,
to walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is, above her ankles
in dirt, and alone, quite alone, what could she mean by it? It seems to me to show an
abominable sort of conceited independence, a most contrary to her indifference to decorum.
Ms. Bingley says, I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in meritan.
Yes, and they have another who lives somewhere near Cheepside. That is, capital, added her
sister, and they both laughed heartily. This exchange occurs early in the novel, but it
is matched by another that takes place just before Darcy proposes to Elizabeth the second
time. I am referring to the conversation between Lady Catherine de Berg and Elizabeth Bennett
when Lady Catherine believes Elizabeth to be engaged to Darcy, thus pre-empting Lady
Catherine's design to marry her daughter to Darcy and unite the estates, something that
would produce the very opposite for the de Berg daughter compared to what will happen
to Elizabeth on her father's death. Lady Catherine suggests that Darcy may have forgotten
what he owes to himself and all his family. Are you lost, she says, to every feeling of
propriety and delicacy? My daughter and my nephew are formed for each other. They are
descended on the maternal side from the same noble line and on the fathers from respectable,
honourable, and ancient, though untitled, families. Their fortune on both sides is splendid.
They are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their respective houses.
And what is to divide them? The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections
or fortune. Is this to be endured? But it must not, shall not be. If you were sensible
of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you have been brought
up. In marrying your nephew, Elizabeth's response, I should not consider myself as
quitting that sphere. He is a gentleman and I am a gentleman's daughter. So far we are
equal. True, you are a gentleman's daughter, but who was your mother? Who are your uncles
and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their condition. Are the shades of Pemberley to
be thus polluted? He is a gentleman and I am a gentleman's daughter, says Elizabeth.
So far we are equal. It's a very romantic sentiment, but despite its literal accuracy,
everything that we have witnessed in the novel tells us that they are not equal. Despite
the scorn which Mr. Bennet casts on his wife for her failure to grasp the complexities of
the entail, Mrs. Bennet is actually the most insightful of all of them when it comes to
assessing the value of her neighbors and the contribution they can make to ensuring
that her daughters have some means of support once their father is dead, because as Mr. Bennet
himself admits, he has done little to guarantee them any kind of financial security.
When Mrs. Bennet first sees Darcy, she believes him to be the most handsome man in the room,
ten thousand pounds handsome. But when he slights Lizzie, and therefore is clearly not a suitor,
she falls rapidly in her estimation. Mrs. Bennet is superficial and constantly exposing
the family to humiliation, but she clearly understands that one's personal value is the
direct result of one's property. Only a man who already owned Pemberley could afford to
choose a wife who had those family connections, as Darcy rather unromantically puts it to Elizabeth
in his first proposal. And there is nothing in the rest of the novel to change that claim.
When he proposes the second time, and they revisit that moment, he is embarrassed to
recall this scene, but not by what he said, but by how he said it, or rather that he said
it at all. By the end of the novel, Elizabeth is in perfect agreement with his assessment
of her family as she could afford to be. She may have had her father's estate entailed
away from her, but she has entitled herself to an estate of far greater magnificence.
