Lecture 18 Victorian Limits, Tess, and Jude the Obscure
In this lecture we turn to the last of our texts from the 19th century
and move back to England to the work of Hardy
who, like Hawthorne, is often described as a regional novelist.
Thomas Hardy characterized both Tess of the Derbavills and Jude the Obscure
as novels of character and environment.
The environment in which the title characters lived their lives
and suffered their tragic fates consisted not only of the physical environment
of Dorset and Oxford respectively,
but the strict Victorian moral environment that for both Tess and Jude
compounded the limitations of their own natures.
Hardy draws upon the classical Aristotelian definition of tragedy
as a fateful and fatal combination of character and circumstances
to tell two stories in which he examines the social power of law and morality
to shape individual lives.
Both novels probe the relationship of law to morality,
an issue that had become increasingly more important to the Victorians
as political and social reforms began to weaken the religious underpinnings of law.
The Victorian age has been described variously as an age of faith and an age of doubt.
The paradoxical quality of these accounts is perhaps explained by the nature of faith itself
that it never seems more intensely present than when under attack.
The sense that the traditional and unquestioned acceptance of Christian doctrine
was under assault was captured in Matthew Arnold's poem Dover Beach,
written at mid-century in 1851.
The sea of faith was once too at the foal
and round earth's shores lay like the folds of a bright girdle furrowed,
but now I only hear its melancholy long withdrawing roar
retreating to the breath of the night wind
down the vast edges drear and naked shingles of the world.
This account of the world left naked by the slow retreat of faith
might also be an apt description of the protagonists in the Hardy novels under discussion.
Both Tess and Jude suffer from the slow withdrawing of that faith and joy
necessary to sustain a belief in the goodness of life.
It is not in either case described as a formal religious doctrine,
but rather an innocent and idealized faith in their fellow human beings.
It cannot therefore be said to be Christian in the institutionalized sense
of a church-going faith with its attendant rituals,
but it is a deeply religious sentiment nevertheless.
The lives of both Tess and Jude are riven with conflicts
produced by the clash of this essentially innocent faith in human goodness
and the fixed restrictive codes of morality and legality
produced by those who relied on the Bible and traditional church doctrine.
Neither novel offers an optimistic solution to what would replace that faith once lost
or those social conventions once abandoned.
These two novels document an age caught between the conventions and traditions of the 19th century
and the new age that was coming into being,
accompanied by what Hardy calls the ache of modernism.
Hardy's is an essentially tragic perspective on the way individual lives are to a large extent
predetermined by social and legal restraints.
His belief that tragedy is produced by the combination of individual character traits
and social environment is, as I have said, essentially Aristotelian
and structures both novels.
One could compare this way of seeing the human condition with Greek tragedy,
which also suggests that tragedy occurs when there is a fateful mix of the individual's character
and the historical moment over which the individual has no control
and which carries with it certain social determinants.
Thus one could say that Tess determines her own destiny
to the extent that she accepts her husband, Angel Clair's definition of what it means to be pure.
On the other hand, she cannot avoid her fate
because history has already determined that she will, as a woman of a certain class,
be victimized by men of a higher class
and that their definition of purity will prevail, however unjust that may be.
Similarly, Jude determines his destiny to the extent that he longs for a life of their mind
to attend university, to become a bishop,
but he too cannot avoid his tragic destiny
because history has determined that a man of his social class must tread a limited path
and that if he should throw off the social restraints that bind him to that class
he will pay a terrible price for such arrogance.
In both novels, a rigid Victorian middle class system of morality prevails,
one that is enforced both by positive laws and social conventions
and one that limits the possibilities for happiness for the major characters
even after they recognize the rigidity of the conventions under which they labor.
Like many of his contemporary Victorian writers and philosophers,
Hardy recognized the crushing weight of dogma, rules and customs
and institutions that prevailed but which no longer seem to speak to the needs of the late 19th century.
In a century that had witnessed more rapid industrialization than at any previous time
as well as an accompanying reform of political practice,
the laws that governed individual social relations like marriage and divorce
still reflected the moral determination of the church to control sexual practices
both before and after marriage.
Prior to the Divorce and Matrimonial Causes Act of 1857,
divorce in England was regulated by the ecclesiastical courts.
Marriage was a permanent state of being for the most part.
The Matrimonial Causes Act was passed in 1857
and no longer required those wishing for divorce to petition Parliament for a private act.
Obviously a very expensive proposition and far beyond the means of most ordinary people
and only four women had ever achieved a divorce in this way.
The passage of the Act was in part the result of the campaigning of Caroline Norton
who was married to a physically abusive husband
and she had tried leaving him several times but always returned for the sake of the children.
Under the terms of the law at that time the children were his property
and if she left the family home he had the power to deny her access to her three sons.
In 1836 Caroline's husband bought a malicious lawsuit claiming that she had had an affair
with the then Prime Minister Lord Melbourne.
When he lost the suit he refused to let her visit her children.
This is her account of that time from her English Laws for Women
published in 1855 as part of her campaign for reform of the divorce laws.
After the adultery trial was over I learnt the law as to my children
that the right was with the father, that neither my innocence nor his guilt could alter it,
that not even his giving them into the hands of a mistress would give me any claim to their custody.
The eldest was but six days old, the second four the youngest two and a half when we parted.
I wrote therefore and petitioned the father and husband in whose power I was for leave to see them,
for leave to keep them till they were older.
Mr Norton's answer was that I should not have them,
that if I wanted to see them I might have an interview with them at the chambers of his attorney.
What I suffered on my children's account none will ever know or measure.
Mr Norton held my children as hostages.
He felt that while he had them he still had power over me that nothing could control.
Caroline Norton even wrote a letter to Queen Victoria
complaining about the crotesque anomaly which ordains that women shall be non-existence
in a country governed by a female sovereign.
The Matrimonial Act allowed secular divorce for the first time in England
and also achieved some significant victories for women.
Under the Act a court could order a husband to pay maintenance to a divorced or estranged wife.
A divorced wife could inherit or bequeath property in her own right
and a divorced wife could protect her earnings from a husband who had deserted her.
The Act was weighted against women in that a husband only had to prove
that his wife had committed adultery in order to obtain a divorce
but a woman had to prove adultery plus either incest, bigamy, cruelty or desertion.
In the stories of Tess and Jude, Hardy makes the case for further reform of the law
especially in its relationship to sexual morality.
A morality that had been seen for a considerable amount of time by many
as self-serving and rigid.
In Tess at the Durbervils Hardy explores this late Victorian dispute
about the relative importance of Christian theology in the framing and execution of law.
In particular Hardy focuses on the double standard
by which men were not only permitted to have sexual relations before marriage
but generally encouraged to do so while women were of course expected to remain chaste.
The double standard is exacerbated by the control men exercise over women's sexuality
in part by limiting their opportunities to live independently.
In Hardy's reading of the tragedy of Tess, a pure woman as he calls her
despite her illegitimate child and her execution for murder
Tess's unquestioning acceptance of the male prerogative
and the historical circumstances of her birth determines her fate.
She is as she herself proclaims just one in a long line of women who had been abused.
Once a victim, always a victim, that's the law she cries.
The narrator underscores the historical determination of women's lives
when he suggests that perhaps Tess is rape by Alec Durberville to whom she is not related
is retribution for a rape committed against a peasant girl
by one of her mailed, that is an ancestor in armour,
one of her mailed ancestors from the ancient family of the Durbervils.
This historical determinism situates Tess between two epochs.
One is embodied in the rural world with its ancient customs and natural moralities.
The other is embodied in the modern world of railway trains,
threshing machines with its mercantile interests and conventional moralities.
Both men who victimize Tess, that is Alec Durberville and Angel Clare
are by birth and education alien to the natural world.
But their dominance of Tess suggests the gradual incursion
of their middle class values and morality into her world.
Those values produce a relentless and irresistible transformation
of Tess's innate sense of what is good and what is right.
Thus when she returns home pregnant with Alec's child
she hides herself from the eyes of the world believing herself to be a figure of guilt and shame.
Hardy's rendering of Tess's grief and sense of guilt
recalls Hawthorne's descriptions of Hester struggling to come to terms
with her own sense of shame as distinct from that imposed upon her.
He describes her looking at the landscape.
A wet day was the expression of irremediable grief at her weakness
in the mind of some vague ethical being whom she could not class definitely
as the god of her childhood and could not comprehend as any other.
But the narrator insists that this irremediable grief is based on shreds of convention
peopled by phantoms and voices antipathetic to her,
a sorry and mistaken creation of Tess's fancy,
a cloud of moral hobgoblins by which she was terrified without reason.
It was they that were out of harmony with the actual world, not she,
walking among the sleeping birds in the hedges,
watching the skipping rabbits on a moonlit Warren
or standing under a pheasant laden bow,
she looked upon herself as a figure of guilt intruding into the haunts of innocence.
But all the while she was making a distinction where there was no difference.
Feeling herself in antagonism, she was quite in accord.
She had been made to break an accepted social law
but no law known to the environment in which she fancied herself such an anomaly.
The narrator then insists upon this distinction between the accepted law,
social law and Tess's innate sense of value
and asks the question if she could have been but just created
to discover herself as a spouseless mother with no experience of life
except as the parent of a nameless child,
would the position have caused her to despair?
No, she would have taken it calmly and found pleasure therein.
Most of the misery had been generated by her conventional aspect,
not by her innate sensations.
This conventional aspect is at first linked to Alec Durbeville, the father of her child,
a man who bears the same name as Tess but who has no natural claim to the rural world he inhabits.
Alec is, in fact, the son of Simon Stoke who had made his fortune as an honest merchant,
some said moneylender, think Shylock, in the north,
and who had decided to settle as a countryman in the south of England,
out of hail of his business district.
And in doing this he felt the necessity of recommencing with a name
that would not too readily identify him with the smart tradesmen of the past,
and that would be less commonplace than the original bald, stark words,
and Durbeville was accordingly annexed to his own name for himself and his heirs eternally.
Yet he was not an extravagant-minded man in this,
and in constructing his family tree on the new basis was duly reasonable
in framing his intermarriages and aristocratic links,
never inserting a single title above a rank of strict moderation.
Thus Alec is, like Bingley in Pride and Prejudice,
the son of a man who had made his money in trade and now wishes to advance his class.
One notices again how the concern about class standing
is linked intimately to questions of the moral value of women.
Alec proves to be a perfect example of the conventional and hypocritical middle-class morality.
His seduction of Tess is heartless and without sentiment,
as befits a man who looks with disdain on the local inhabitants.
Tess's second encounter with that middle-class morality comes on her wedding night
as she discloses to her husband, Angel Claire, that she has had a child.
Her confession is preceded by his,
in which he speaks of his remorse for his sensual abandonment in London before he met Tess.
Angel's sense of Tess has very little to do with who she really is,
but a great deal to do with his own idealized model of the rural world and marriage.
A model that relies on a thoroughly conventional understanding of women's roles,
despite Angel's belief that he is a radical free thinker.
His strict Protestant moral code condemns Tess for the very same sin he has himself committed.
He is our modern version of precise Angelo from measure for measure,
but here there is no duke to come and restore order and harmony.
We are in a different world now.
Although Angel and Alex seem completely unlike one another in terms of their attachment to Tess,
a sense supported by the fact that they never meet,
these two men are mirror images of one another,
each advancing different aspects of a deadening middle-class morality
that threatens not just Tess, but her whole way of life.
After Tess has been abandoned by Angel, she is forced to labor in the fields to support herself,
and Hardy specifically links the loss of a rural world with its spontaneous and joyful natural morality
to the gradual erosion of this traditional life by the growing power of the mercantile class
and its technological advances, like the steam engine and the threshing machine upon which Tess labors.
In this world caught on the cusp between traditional morality and modern skepticism,
the middle class embodied in Alec and Angel wrestle over the body of Tess to articulate a new morality.
Despite Tess's fall from conventional purity,
she eventually becomes Alex's mistress and then kills him after Angel returns to claim her,
Hardy calls her a pure woman,
and once again we are reminded of Hawthorne's characterization of Hester Prynne and her hard-won moral redemption.
In this novel, however, the redemptive narrative has been converted into a tragedy of lost innocence,
and it is a martyrdom that brings no solace to anyone.
After Tess's execution for the murder of Alec,
the narrator concludes the novel with the statement that justice was done
and the president of the immortals in the Eschelian phrase had ended his sport with Tess.
The Eschelian phrase refers to the punishment of Prometheus for stealing fire from the gods,
and indicates that Escalus viewed that divine justice ironically,
since it punished Prometheus for stealing fire and bringing it to man.
Prometheus's crime was heroic and ennobling.
Tess's crime, however, seems to be to have been born at the wrong time and into the wrong class.
When Jude the Obscure was initially published,
the severity of the attack upon the novel caused Hardy to abandon novel writing forever.
Critics labelled the book Jude the Obscure,
and were horrified by what they perceived as an attack upon public morality,
specifically its criticism of holy wedlock and of the laws controlling marriage and divorce,
as well as its frank treatment of sexual relationships,
its scathing criticisms of late Victorian hypocrisy,
and its depiction of the new woman.
Hardy responded that he was writing as a man to men and women,
and argued that he was trying to tell a story without mincing words of a deadly war between flesh and spirit.
In his Postscript to the novel written in 1912,
Hardy insists that the marriage laws depicted in this novel are used to show that, in Diderot's words,
the civil law should only be an enunciation of the law of nature.
A statement not likely to pacify those English patriots who believed that only bad things ever crossed the channel from France.
The plot of the novel is constructed around the relationships of the four principal characters,
Jude, his wife Arabella, Sue Brideshead, Jude's cousin, and Philotson, Sue's husband and Jude's former teacher.
In a dance of the flesh and the spirit to use Hardy's terms,
Jude and Sue each marry someone unsuited to them, leave that partner to live with one another,
have children whose lives are shortened by the child of Arabella and Jude,
and then return to their original partner to live out their remaining lives in suffering.
Both Sue Brideshead and Jude aspire to live outside the reach of that spirit-deadening morality that has already trapped them in marriage.
For Sue, this means throwing off the social conventions that define her as a woman.
The new woman, as she was called, appeared in the late 19th century as a natural development of the reform campaigns of the mid-19th century,
like that conducted by Caroline Norton, and the new woman would go on to produce those suffragette women who fought for full political equality.
One can see that those who warned that reforming the marriage laws would lead to a wholesale change in society were indeed right to be alarmed.
The model for Sue Brideshead is generally accepted to be Barbara Boddishon, a contemporary of Caroline Norton,
and with her one of the voices raised in protest against the unequal treatment of women.
As a young woman, Barbara and her sister Bessie went unshaperoned on a walking tour of Belgium, Germany, Switzerland and Austria,
and they were reported to have been seen wearing heavy boots and blue-tinted spectacles.
Barbara Boddishon's major contribution to women's rights came in 1854 when she published a brief summary in plain language of the most important laws concerning women.
This remarkable document listed for the first time the legal disabilities and restrictions under which women lived.
It was a thin pamphlet, but a powerful wedge in overturning the established system of laws governing women, especially married women.
In the novel, Sue Brideshead articulates the position of the free-thinking woman like Barbara Boddishon when she speaks to Jude about marriage.
If I should think I should begin to be afraid of you, Jude, the moment you had contracted to cherish me under a government stamp,
and I was licensed to be loved on the premises by you, ugh, how horrible and sordid.
Although as you are free, I trust you more than any other man in the world.
No, no, don't say I should change, he expostulated, yet there was misgiving in his own voice also.
This is her response.
Apart from ourselves and our unhappy peculiarities, it is foreign to a man's nature to go on loving a person when he is told that he must and shall be that person's lover.
There would be much like a chance of his doing it if he were told not to love.
If the marriage ceremony consisted in an oath and signed contract between the parties to cease loving from that day forward in consideration of personal possession being given,
and to avoid each other's society as much as possible in public, there would be more loving couples than there are now.
Fancy the secret meetings between the perjuring husband and wife, the denials of having seen each other, the clambering in at bedroom windows and hiding in closets.
There'd be little cooling then.
Even though the question of how conventional morality restricted women's sexuality is clearly a crucial part of what the book explores specifically through the character of Sue,
the novel's focus is, as the title suggests, Jude, one who is born into the working class but aspires to become part of a larger intellectual community which he has idealized.
Part of the cultural anxiety generated by the novel, an anxiety indicated by the venomous attacks not only on the book but upon Hardy personally, comes from the way in which the book treats issues of class.
Despite political reforms that had granted universal male suffrage in 1887, the country had yet to reflect the consequences of that change in its institutions.
Indeed, it would be a very long time before the major bastions of class privilege, the universities, the church, the parliament, would come to resemble the population at large.
Jude's desire for education, and especially the consequences of the kind of education offered at Oxford University, which is Christminster in the book, is not a wish for material success.
Such ambition could be recognized and therefore contained as a version of those middle class values that were prized.
Hardy, however, represents Jude's longing for some world larger than that circumscribed by his labor as a stone mason, as both a spiritual and sexual longing,
and it is the intermingling of the two desires, or rather the representation of one in the form of the other, that provokes cultural anxiety.
It is the same kind of anxiety that was expressed, for example, when D. H. Lawrence published Sons and Lovers in 1913,
a novel in which the son of a coal miner aspires to become a writer, and in which the aesthetic aspiration is couched in sexual terms.
One can see the consequences of this convergence of the two, the sexual and the spiritual, in Lawrence's story of the relationship between the gamekeeper and his titled employer in Lady Chatterley's Lover.
Jude, of course, cannot attend university. It is not a question of intelligence, but of class.
His bitterness at being excluded from the world that had promised to satisfy his intellectual and spiritual ambitions converts those spiritual desires into physical ones.
He abandons himself to the world of the flesh, symbolized in his marriage to Arabella.
In a parallel move, Sue converts her sexual desire for Jude into a spiritual relationship with Jude's former teacher, Philotson.
One sees in this exchange of desires the spirit for the flesh in Jude's case, the flesh for the spirit in Sue's case, the confirmation of conventional representations of gender.
Sue takes on the traditional characteristics of the wife, Jude of the husband.
However, what is also clear from the way that Hardy characterizes Jude and Sue's continuing longing for one another is that such limitations on the full expression of the self are doomed.
Even when they leave their partners and live together, believing that their mutual desire sanctifies their relationship, they find that cultures' laws are too powerfully a part of what they are as social beings.
They seek refuge in the natural world, just as Tess does when she flees from Alec, but Jude and Sue discover that the natural world is inevitably compromised by the world of social convention.
The world is too much with them, as Wordsworth puts it, a world that condemns their relationship.
As Jude reflects towards the end of his life, our time was not ripe for us, our ideas were fifty years too soon to be any good to us.
In the end, the novel seems to suggest that all laws, natural or civil, are constructs of the human imagination and thus subject to the distortions and perversions of the human will.
There is no satisfying resolution to the dilemma of Jude and Sue's search for a law that justifies their relationship.
Thus Hardy marks a moment when Victorian culture could no longer claim to know or represent some transcendent vision of truth and order.
Call it God, call it the law, call it the father.
Nowhere was this more destabilizing to the moral certainties of the Victorians than in law and religion.
If the forms by which society expresses its version of truth or certainty are themselves subject to uncertainty to doubt,
then those artistic representations lose the power to bind that society together in a single unifying belief system,
one that will form the basis for the laws and conventions through which that society constructs its identity.
Thus Hardy's novels prepared the way for the radical instability of those aesthetic and cultural forms that we associate with the modern age.
