Lecture 23 Maternal Infanticide, Myth and Judgment
In this lecture we will continue our examination of the representation of maternal infanticide
in literature and law, drawing on a literary text, a poem, and two actual contemporary
cases to explore the way in which we come to judgment, about a crime that has been depicted
as the most unnatural of all crimes, the cremium exemplum.
From Medea to Andrea Yates, from ancient Greece to contemporary America, the struggle to assess
the appropriate punishment for the woman who kills her children is intimately tied to the
assumptions about women and mothering that the culture holds.
While it is easy in the abstract to condemn the mother who kills, it is less easy to assess
the proper punishment for the deranged mother who believes her actions are protective rather
than destructive.
In this lecture then we return to the question of moral and legal judgment that recalls one
of the classical dilemmas of ancient myths, the murder of a child by its parent, the obvious
example being Medea's murder of her children to revenge herself upon her husband Jason.
I want to compare how we assess responsibility and thus decide on appropriate punishment
in two different circumstances, two actual cases, and a literary version of infanticide,
a poem by Seamus Heaney.
Approaching the terrible scene of child murder from the fictional perspective allows us to
think about the crime and its moral repercussions in ways that would otherwise be impossible.
There are, to put it reductively, two popular versions of the mother who kills her children.
She must either be mad or bad.
As a corollary to these stereotypes, one might say that the mother must be perceived
either as a victim of society, it's that that makes her mad, or as a fully responsible
moral agent, and therefore deserving of the title of bad.
Maternal infanticide has always been represented as a crime so unnatural that it seems beyond
comprehension.
Like witchcraft, with which it is often connected, it is the sure sign of Satan in the world,
the work of hidden and unknowable forces.
By its very nature a quintessentially domestic crime, and therefore often represented as
an attack upon the power of the patriarchy to reproduce itself, maternal infanticide
is frequently employed to suggest a moral sickness pervasive in the society.
In this lecture I want to analyze this myth of motherhood upon which the charges of madness
or evil are predicated by telling several stories.
The first is the story of a young woman in Texas charged with the murder of her newborn
baby.
The second is the story of a woman who tried to drown her children in a Houston bayou and
succeeded in killing two of them.
And the third is the story told by Irish poet Seamus Heaney in a poem that explores the
question of a mother's moral agency and responsibility in a repressive society.
Before I turn to these particular narratives, however, let me sketch what I believe to be
our contemporary myth of motherhood, one that draws on ancient representations of the
mother figure.
Motherhood is inevitably represented in the media and in our cultural narratives as synonymous
with nurture and affection.
To be other than caring for your children is by definition to be unmotherly and therefore
both unnatural and unfeminine.
As the mother who kills loses both her status as a mother and her status as a woman, leaving
her in some non-gendered and non-human space in a social and moral limbo, that the mother
is always a caring and nurturing figure and that failure is not an option, is a universally
held Western belief, despite considerable empirical evidence to the contrary.
Let me turn to the case of Susan Bynick, convicted of murder in the death of her newborn son.
Both the prosecution and the defense in this case crafted their strategies around the myth
of the perfect mother, arguing respectively that Susan Bynick was a bad mother, in fact
the worst kind of mother, or that she was a good mother, such a good mother that she
had only in protecting her family from the burden of the newborn's death.
Given that the jury could only choose between two versions of this same essential narrative
and that no alternative was offered that might make sense of what she did, it is not surprising
that it convicted her.
Susan Bynick was 34 years old when charged with the murder of her infant son, Daniel,
a name he was given after his body was found.
She was accused of abandoning him in a garbage bag which ended up in a canty dump and was
traced to Susan Bynick through the mail and assorted household items in the garbage bag.
Susan came to trial with a court appointed lawyer and after six hours of deliberation
a jury of seven men and five women returned a verdict of guilty of murder, rejecting lesser
verdicts of involuntary manslaughter or criminally negligent homicide.
She was sentenced to seven years in prison.
In the USA there is not, as there is in England and Canada for example, a category of infanticide
that specifically applies to the death of infants within 12 months of their birth and
where it can be shown that the mother's balance of mind has been disturbed by the birth of
the child.
Thirty-four year old Susan Bynick had been married for 17 years and was the mother of
four children ranging in ages from 14 to 5.
She had left school after 12th grade and frequently worked a 60 hour week in addition to a one
hour drive each way to her work.
She was the sole support of the family and she took home approximately $1600 a month
after taxes.
She lived in a four room, 500 square foot house.
Her husband Kelly had not worked for some years because of back injuries that required
surgery.
She got up at four each morning, left home just before five and arrived at work at six.
After work and the drive home she was still responsible for the care of her family.
She had never been involved with the police before in any way.
Susan Bynick claimed that her baby had been born dead and that she had disposed of him
by leaving him in a roadside bin.
She said she did it, quote, because the baby was dead and I can't afford funeral expenses.
I didn't take it to a doctor because it was dead and they'd say I did it.
The baby was dead.
He wouldn't move.
He wouldn't breathe.
He just laid there.
Very blue.
He was very blue.
I picked his arm up.
It fell down.
I tried to make him cry.
He looked like a rag doll.
I hit his bottom to try and make him cry but he did not cry.
He didn't breathe.
I thought he was dead.
The prosecution repeatedly emphasized Susan Bynick's secret and duplicitous manner and
her controlled, rational behavior, thus undermining any attempt by the defense to argue that she
was mad rather than bad.
Susan's court-appointed lawyer did not mount a temporary insanity defense, relying instead
on a court-appointed psychiatrist who was treating Susan to argue that she had been
in a state of severe, untreated depression for several months before the crime.
Susan's only defense, as argued by her lawyer, was that she had believed the child to be
stillborn.
Her crime, he said, was disposing of the body in a garbage bag.
She was a good mother who had made a terrible, but not feloniously criminal, mistake.
In contrast, the prosecution's narrative asserted that Susan was, despite the evidence
of 14 years of good mothering, a bad mother, a force of evil in the community.
The confrontation of these two versions of the maternal myth occurred most prominently
in the presentation of the forensic evidence and in the lawyer's closing statements.
The forensic evidence produced by the prosecution suggested that the child had indeed been alive
and, even if distressed at birth, could have been saved by medical intervention.
Arguing that no natural mother would abandon her newborn infant without seeking some assistance,
the prosecutor insisted that Susan's failure to call for help only confirmed her secretive
behavior and her cold-hearted cruelty toward her son.
On the other hand, a county pathologist argued for the defense that there was sufficient
evidence to suggest that the air in the child's lungs and stomach could have been caused by
decomposition and not because he was born alive.
Under this narrative, Susan had acted in a state of shock and distress when she took
the body of her child and placed it in a sheet and then in the garbage bag.
As the epitome of the good mother, Susan was momentarily deranged by the death of her son.
What both advocates lacked, however, was a specific motive for the secrecy.
While the necessity for a motive that drives the plot in a jury of her peers, the absence
of a compelling motive that would conform to the mother narrative of both lawyers was
disconcerting.
Both agreed that Susan's behavior that night was unnatural.
What they disagreed about was the significance of that unnaturalness.
From one point of view, Susan was the scapegoat for all that is evil and disruptive in society.
In another version, she is the scapegoat for all the frailty and instability of women,
especially reproducing women.
These are both mythic narratives, which cloak Susan's specific identity and story.
When I invoke the category of scapegoat, I do so deliberately to call up its associations
with Greek tragedy, just as either consciously or unconsciously both the prosecuting and the
defense lawyer do in their closing remarks.
The case of Susan Beineck, the prosecutor argues, is not simply the case of an individual
mother who has harmed her child.
Her conduct, he claims, is a threat to the community.
This is not about Susan Beineck, he said.
This case is about a whole community, an outraged community.
This community will never know that this kid would have had an effect on all of them.
Believe it or not, the whole concept of justice and the importance of human life falls into
your hands.
You've got to stand tall.
The prosecutor moves the jury's attention from the specifics of this case to the threat
of anti-communal behavior.
But he offers the community through its jury the chance to cleanse itself of the transgressor,
someone he said some force brought this woman to justice.
In this account of the uncovering of Susan's crime, we hear echoes of Henry Fields' narrative
of providence, of God's intervention, that we recall from the lecture on Mary Blandy.
The prosecutor further asked the jury to compare the death of the newborn to the savagery of
a mother gouging out the eyes of her child, blinding a child in cruelty.
Summoning up vaguely edible images of abandonment and blindness, the prosecutor, in fact, is
evoking deep cultural myths about the fear of unnatural mothering.
He says, the trust was broken in this case by a mother, the trust placed by God in a
mother to a child.
That's a violation of a duty so sacred that it should tear the very strings of your heart.
Her crime must be punished, argued the prosecutor, punished severely, not even five years, not
even ten years.
Susan's lawyer relied on an equally essentializing narrative about motherhood in his closing
statement, a narrative that differs from the prosecutors only in its conclusions.
He says, mommas don't kill babies, especially this mother don't kill babies, this mother
of these four children who love her, if she did kill babies these four children wouldn't
be here.
Rejecting the myth of the devouring mother, the defense offers instead the ultimate symbol
of the nurturing mother.
Daniel Beineck, he says, has been wrapped in the arms of God since before his birth.
In this drama of maternal suffering, Susan Beineck is the medium through which the infant
is united with his ultimate parent.
No longer the cruel and cold-hearted murdering mother, she is transformed in this representation
into the anguished mother, consoled by the knowledge that her son is with God.
Her error is transformed into a fortunate fall.
She has, in some way it appears, worked God's will.
In both narratives, the power of the mother myth to compel assent to a certain kind of
judgment overwhelms any opportunity for an alternative narrative, one that might come
closer to Susan Beineck's individual story and one that appeared after the trial and
told of spousal abuse and intimidation.
And again, the narrative here reminds one of the untold story in a jury of her peers.
Let me turn now to another case that involves the myth of motherhood.
But in this case, the myth is one that was not familiar to the court or the culture in
which the acts of infanticide occurred.
This case is also an anomaly in another way, that the murdering mother was an illegal Mexican
immigrant and thus one who would normally be perceived with suspicion and therefore
make her susceptible to harsher treatment.
Juana Flores was a 16-year-old girl when she first met 20-year-old José Luis Lecha
in Matamoros, Mexico.
She wanted to work to study and more than anything she said she wanted to be a teacher.
One day, José Luis picked her up from school offering to take her home, but instead he
raped her.
Unable to face the shame, she dropped out of school and married him in 1973.
Soon after, they entered the states illegally, heading for Houston.
In 1975 and 1987, Juana had seven children.
In 1983, José Luis lost his job and essentially stopped looking for another.
Juana says, every day it was the same.
He would leave the house, he would stay gone all day, and he would come home in the evening
very drunk and very angry, and every night there were beatings.
Eight months before she tried to kill herself and her children, Juana was found in a delusional
state at a hospital with her hands cupped.
The doctor said that she seemed to believe that her children were tiny and contained within
her hands.
After years of this kind of abuse, 29-year-old Juana Lecha took her children to the edge
of Buffalo Bayou in Houston and threw them in the water, intending afterward to drown
herself.
In her testimony, she said, I saw no way out for us, I saw that the best thing to do was
to end my life and their lives as well, and that would end all our suffering.
All but two of the children were rescued, and Juana Lecha was charged with two counts of
capital murder.
Her lawyer faced an extraordinarily difficult task, to defend a mother and illegal Mexican
immigrant against charges of infanticide.
Every class, race and gender prejudice seemed to be overwhelmingly against her.
The psychiatrist, engaged by Lecha's lawyer, who believed that the evidence would support
an insanity defense, pointed out that the most difficult issue would be, quote, to
convince the jury that it is not wrong for a mother to want to take the lives of her
children and herself if she believes, knows that it is the only safe way for them.
That is a psychotic and unreasonable thought process, but is, I believe, the way that Mrs.
Lecha was functioning at the time.
We are reminded when we read this statement of Sethé's response in Beloved, when she
believes that the slave owners are coming to repossess her children.
We have to ask the same question, is it a psychotic response, or is it the only response
for a mother under the circumstances to kill her children?
And how would or should a normal mother react?
One is case never went to a jury.
Her priest was able to secure the assistance of local Hispanic leaders, and they in turn
managed to convince Dick DeGurion, a well-known criminal lawyer, to take her case.
DeGurion obtained a hearing before a judge, and Wanaleha pleaded no contest to murder
and attempted capital murder charges.
She received a 10-year probated sentence used when there is no judgment of guilt or innocence.
To bring about the probated sentence, Wanaleha's lawyer had situated her actions, her belief
that she was saving her children rather than murdering them, within a narrative that addressed
the pain of her life, the desperate way in which she tried to end that pain, and the
active agency of that solution.
She was so distraught by physical and sexual abuse at home, says Mr. DeGurion, that, quote,
she felt that the only way out was to kill her children and herself rather than let them
suffer at the hands of a brutal father and husband.
Desperate situations cause desperate reactions, says DeGurion.
It's almost as if these women see the act as one of love instead of murder.
DeGurion presented Wanaleha's case as a version of a widespread Mexican myth about mothers,
the story of La Girona.
The central components of the legend of La Girona are that she appears weeping and as
a ghost in the form of a woman.
Closely associated additional elements include white clothing, walking at night, appearance
near water, continuous searching, betrayal, and what is the most emotionally impressive
attribute, the loss or murder of the child who is the object of the search.
What's more, in contrast to the male dominated promotion and circulation of official legends
like La Malinche and the Virgin of Guadalupe, La Girona remains largely in the hands of
women.
That is, based on available data, it is clear that it is usually women who narrate this
story.
This then is not a voice that is imposed from Wanaleha from the outside.
Indeed, she said in one of her interviews, you're so La Girona, I am La Girona.
Under pressure from these cultural narratives, the legal narrative discloses the complexity
of an individual woman's life and generates, I believe, the appropriate ethical and legal
judgment.
Otherwise, Wanaleha's narrative remains unavailable to most of us.
She is on Eletro, on the other side, covered by our myths of maternity.
It might be useful at this point to look at a specific critical response to a literary
text to illustrate this ethical act of interpretation that I am suggesting.
I do not mean to say that the consequences of literary interpretation are analogous to
those that result from legal interpretation.
I am suggesting, however, that we might learn from our acts of literary interpretation how
we can arrive at what we might call a balanced and ethical judgment.
What I want to read to you now is a poem by Seamus Heaney about infanticide called Limbo.
Fishermen at Ballishana netted an infant last night along with the salmon.
An illegitimate spawning, a small one thrown back to the waters.
But I am sure as she stood in the shallows ducking him tenderly till the frozen knobs
of her wrists were as dead as the gravel, he was a minnow with hooks tearing her open.
She waded in under the sign of her cross.
He was hauled in with the fish.
Now Limbo will be a cold glitter of souls through some far briny zone.
Even Christ's palms unhealed smart and cannot fish there.
Seamus Heaney's poem is about a child drowned by its mother in the cold waters of the Irish
Sea.
That the body is ever found as pure luck.
The fisherman net the child along with the salmon.
What judgment might we render if faced with the facts unmediated by this poem?
It is not that the poem excuses us from judgment.
Indeed the poem forces us to comply with its own reasoning articulated through the imagery
of Christian sacrifice and Christian theology or to take a stand against its ethical position.
In either case we cannot simply condemn the mother as the epitome of evil or sympathize
with her as a passive victim of a harsh patriarchal world.
What the poem insists upon is the complexity of the narrative through which this incident
must be viewed.
Critic Elizabeth Butler Cullingford alerts us to the aesthetic techniques through which
complexity is implied.
The poem assumes the first person pronoun and like a defense lawyer guarantees that her
act was not lightly undertaken.
He does not speak in her voice.
He speaks on her behalf with empathy.
The poet assumes the voice of the mother and thereby compels the reader who must literally
voice the mother's words in her reading of the poem to assume the mother's position at
least for the duration of the poem.
The mother who ducks her child tenderly in the water is both the specific woman trapped
like the spawning salmon in the nets of men and the representative Irish woman who lives
in a culture that prevents her from controlling that spawning that is reproductive body.
Abortion has been illegal in Ireland since at least 1869.
A 1983 referendum added a clause to the constitution which guaranteed the right to life to the
unborn from the moment of conception.
This clause came under attack in 1992 in a case involving a 14-year-old rape victim
who was denied the right to travel to have an abortion in England.
The Supreme Court lifted the injunction and a referendum followed in which the right to
information about abortion and the right to travel to receive an abortion was acknowledged
but not the right to receive an abortion in Ireland.
However, the mother is not just the passive victim of her culture.
She ducks her child.
She wades in under the sign of her cross and in that moment she becomes both the sacrifice
and the sacrifice identified thus with Christ.
What happens to us, the readers, when we enter into the experience of this poem?
I think we are moved by its narrative, moved beyond the first horror at the thought of
a mother drowning her child.
We see that mother as neither evil nor innocent.
The murdering mother is not isolated from her community, scapegoated to carry the burden
of violence and sin, but rather she is reinserted into her community, immersed as it were in
the waters of a shared cultural narrative.
Her terrible deed recapitulates the actions of others who have been driven to kill their
children, like Setha, and thus situates her in human history.
Throwing back the small one, she becomes one with the community of fishermen who have netted
her baby.
But as the spawning salmon, she is netted herself by the men who fish and by that most
charitable fisher of men, Christ.
Set against this potentially redemptive reading, however, is the image of the cold glitter
of limbo, where the baby's unbaptized soul must linger forever.
Even Christ cannot fish there, and so the mother who seems redeemed by the promise of
Christ's forgiveness is nevertheless sentenced to remember her crime forever.
She too must dwell in limbo.
The judgment rendered by the poem on the mother then is ambivalent and fraught with a resolution.
But it is for these very reasons more ethically just than condemnation or exoneration would
be.
I recognize that the legal system, generally speaking, requires a verdict of innocence or
guilt, and that therefore there must be some conclusion.
However, many cases are adjudicated outside the formal constraints of the courtroom where
there is considerable leeway in sentencing.
Even if the case gets to the courts, one frequently sees the presence of the kind of ambivalence
I am addressing here, probated sentences or probation instead of jail, reduced charges
or pleas.
The poem demands that we respond as members, albeit temporary ones, of that same culture
that has produced the crime, and that we put aside our habitual responses and enter into
the simple system of the poem, and thereby respond fully to the question of the mother's
guilt.
This response is not the equivalent of recasting the mother as an innocent victim.
That simply reverses the view that would demonize her.
The point is not to avoid judgment or punishment, but to make that judgment consonant in its
complexity with the crime.
I am not suggesting that we equate the poetic representation of infanticide with the real
death of children.
I am suggesting, however, that our response to literature can teach us something about
how we might respond to the same event in the real world.
Literature offers us an as-if world, a world of temporary verisimilitude, of provisional
truth, and for the duration of the literary experience we can suspend our usual reaction,
our conventional judgments, and meditate upon alternatives.
Such a suspension of the quotidian moral response is akin to what the poet courage describes
as the necessary prelude to engaging with imaginative literature, that is, the willing
suspension of disbelief.
In cases of maternal infanticide, we must will ourselves into a place where judgment
is deferred until we can understand both the individual circumstances that motivated such
a crime and the larger cultural narratives within which the individual narrative must
be accommodated.
This way of understanding the nature of moral judgment, that is, through narratives of individual
and collective responsibility, is closely allied to what Aristotle meant by catharsis.
Catharsis, or purgation, describes the experience of those who witness the dramatic representation
of a tragic event, and is a term that can serve to define the experience of responding to
both a literary as well as a legal representation.
This is enabled by both compassion and judgment.
Recall how we feel about Oedipus' crimes, and guarantees the health of the state by
enabling a reconciliation between the offender and the offended.
Such reconciliation and the consequent reintegration of the offender back into community is the
goal of justice.
These are difficult cases to talk about, but the difficulty only makes the need for
a balanced ethical and moral response the more pressing.
And as we will see when I discuss contemporary representations of crime and the criminal
in the next lecture, the more sensational the media version becomes, the more difficult
it is to resist the impulse to rely upon ill-considered judgments.
