Welcome.
My name is Michael Weissession, and in these 48 lectures, I'm going to introduce you to
how the Earth works. Yes, I'm going to talk to you about earthquakes, volcanoes,
mountains, oceans, rocks and minerals, rivers, glaciers, deserts, climate change,
shifting continents, planets, stars, atoms, dinosaurs, the whole thing.
But you can get that all off the internet.
So much more importantly, what I'm going to do here is give you an intuitive understanding
of how all that fits together and insight into how the processes of physics and chemistry
and biology and geology all work together in intricate, complex, sometimes subtle,
sometimes violent and often very beautiful ways.
How it all works, why our planet ended up this way, how we got here,
why there's such an incredible diversity of landscapes as you travel around the world,
why there may be no other planet in our galaxy like ours, and how we fit in the picture.
Now to begin with, our planet is not at all the way you think it is.
You know, our lives today are so busy and hectic, it's sometimes really appealing to think
that at least the ground beneath our feet is steady, constant and unchanging.
We know nothing could be further from the truth.
We live on a vibrant, dynamic planet that is constantly in motion, always changing inside and out.
You know, as Ed and James sang, we're standing on shaky ground.
And in the 24 hours of this course, you'll see that there is incredible drama, intrigue
and complexity in the story of the earth.
You know, much more than any fictional Hollywood spy show that might also be presented over 24 hours.
And this is real.
It's the interconnectedness of all the different earth science systems.
That's the most fascinating part of the story, to me at least, and often the hardest to grasp.
You know, I wish I could present these 48 lectures to you all at the same time,
on a grid of 48 different television screens, all reaching your brain at the same time, woven together.
Then you'd really see how interconnected all the aspects are,
themes bouncing back and forth between the different lectures.
I mean, I don't really recommend it.
Humans just don't really learn very well this way.
But remember, laying out all the lectures one after another is kind of artificial.
All this goes on at the same time.
Now, separate things that seem like disconnected unrelated facts
are all interconnected and related in fascinating ways,
and will keep popping up again in new and different ways.
Sort of like the clues on a detective show.
And one thing I can guarantee to you, by the end, you will see things in a totally different way.
You're never going to look at the world the same way.
A rock, a shell, the sun, a pot of soup, even your own face in the mirror.
A very wise old Irish woman once told me that with every language you learn, you gain another soul.
Well, the same certainly holds for the language of the Earth.
Only this is the original one.
Spoken by the rocks long before there were books or people
or even any living organism on this planet.
I mean, this is the language of how planets work.
And it holds over great spans of time and enormous distances of space.
And, you know, you just think differently when you know this language.
For one thing, you'll see that you are not a passive observer in this show.
You are a central character in it, connected to all the other parts of the planet.
And that this story of the Earth doesn't have a written ending yet.
We can't predict what will happen,
but everything we do is going to play a vital role in shaping its future.
Now, we know that Earth is obviously biologically alive,
crawling with life forms everywhere you look.
I mean, many millions of different species.
But in a sense, it's also geologically alive,
meaning that there are geologic forces at work that cause its interior and exterior
to be constantly changing and evolving in a way over time.
The challenge for us comes in that fact that Earth's movements
are sometimes very, very slow compared to human time scales.
Now, not always.
I mean, there are plenty of earthquakes, volcanoes, hurricanes, floods, impacts from outer space,
you know, catastrophes of all sorts to keep things lively.
But within the Earth itself, rock is constantly flowing
on the order of centimeters a year, slowly,
but it gives the illusion that Earth is static and unchanging,
and that's not true.
The entire Earth has changed dramatically over its history
and will continue to do so long after we're gone.
That's right.
Rock flows.
Solid rock.
I mean, the rock of Earth's interior really is solid,
but it also flows much like tar on a hot day.
The key to this for the Earth is time.
The fact that Earth operates on a totally different schedule than we do.
In fact, I'm going to spend the whole next lecture talking about geologic time.
Now, if you could view Earth's history sped up like a movie on Fast Forward,
our planet would look more like the swirling eddies of a whirlpool
than a ball of rock floating around in space.
You would see continents whizzing about the surface of this planet.
You would see rocks continuously cycling from the surface
down in the deep interior of our planet and back up again.
In fact, you would no more be able to recognize the planet of our past
than you would the planet of our future.
Our surface changes so much over time.
And this actually makes it really hard for Earth scientists.
I mean, you think historians have a hard time.
We try to figure out things that happened billions of years ago
with almost no evidence left on the surface from then.
You know, the analogy of the movie or the TV show actually really isn't a bad one.
What we have essentially is with current scientific investigations
is a snapshot of our planet as it is just today.
And from this single image, we try to reconstruct its past and predict its future.
It would be sort of like trying to reconstruct the plot of some complex detective movie,
like Humphrey Bogart's The Big Sleep from just one still.
You know, that movie's plot with all its twists and turns is hard enough
to follow even after seeing it several times.
But to jump in the middle and try to figure things out.
But that's what we do. That's what geologists do.
We're like detectives examining the geologic clues that we can dig up
in order not only to reconstruct Earth's history, but also make predictions about its future.
Now, fortunately, we get some help.
As far as we can tell, there are definite laws to the universe.
The fundamental physical forces that control all the motions of objects
and the flow of energy between all different systems seems to be constant and unchanging.
And this means two things.
It means we can trace back the history of our planet all the way back in time,
way back to its start.
In fact, even back to the supernova of a previous star
in which all the heavier atoms of our planet were made.
And even further back, back to the time of the Big Bang,
13.7 billion years ago, when all the matter of the universe was formed.
It also means that given these laws, once the Big Bang occurred,
the eventual formation of stars and planets and maybe even life was inevitable.
Now, why this is, we aren't really sure.
And there's a large debate about this.
It's an enigma called the anthropic principle that I'll talk about right at the end of the course.
But once the machinery of our universe was set in motion,
the four fundamental forces, gravity, electromagnetism,
and the strong and weak nuclear forces,
made sure that there were lots of planets orbiting lots of stars in lots of galaxies.
And yet, and this is going to be an important theme,
I'll come back to several times on our own favorite little planet, Earth,
perhaps the existence of life was not so inevitable.
And this is equally strange.
Though there are likely to be several hundred billions of planets in just our galaxy alone,
it turns out that very few might be like our own.
The conditions required to maintain liquid water on a planet's surface for four billion years.
The time it took for single celled life to evolve into something that could solve a crossword puzzle
or understand our tax code.
This is remarkably unusual, and I'll also talk about this more at the end of the course.
Figuring out the laws of nature, the rules of how our planet works helps in another way.
Not only do we go back in time, but we can visit places that we can't ever actually get to,
which is most of the interior of our planet.
I mean, for instance, by the time you get one percent of the way down to the center of the Earth,
the temperature is already more than a thousand degrees Celsius.
That's about 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit.
And in addition, the pressures there would make you flat as a pancake.
You know, we're never going to get down there, in the near future at least.
We have figured out how to see down there.
It's a kind of remote sensing.
It's like what the satellites do to map out the services of other planets.
We figured out also how to use computers to predict what it would be like down there.
And what we have found has been absolutely amazing.
But it has required scientists of all different backgrounds working together to figure it out.
Now, let me make one thing clear here.
This is not a geology course.
I mean, of course it's a geology course.
In the original sense of the word, geology, study of the Earth.
But for much of the 20th century, geology came to mean something a little bit more narrow.
It was often a qualitative study of rock and fossils, a small part of the big picture.
As a result, most geology departments at major universities have actually changed their names.
In fact, in the mid-1970s, my own department at Washington University in St. Louis
actually changed its name to the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences.
Now, we have a few geologists, but most of us doing research about the Earth
are geochemists or geophysicists or geobiologists, geotechnologists, geomathematicians, biogeochemists.
We're a heavily quantitative department combining all the sciences together.
You know, nowadays, Earth science is really not for the faint of heart.
In a modern-day university Earth science department, if you go to hear a lecture,
you're as likely to hear about the biological DNA of some rock-chewing bacteria
or the physics of the magnetic field of Jupiter or the chemistry of ozone reactions in the atmosphere.
As you are to hear about more traditional topics of geology.
And that's because the divisions between different sciences are entirely artificial.
I mean, nature doesn't know about biology and physics and chemistry.
There's only nature and all the sciences are involved and integrated within it.
And this is nowhere more true than in the study of a planet and how it works.
So, let me start.
We have a general name for how the interior of our Earth works.
We call it plate tectonics.
It's the unifying theory of geology that provides a framework for understanding
how our planet evolves and changes over time.
Earth's outermost layer, the top 100 kilometers or so, about 60 miles,
is actually made of about a dozen broken pieces.
We call these plates of Earth's outermost body.
This layer has a name. We call it the lithosphere.
And as these plates move, they drag the continents about the surface embedded within them.
It turns out all ocean seafloor, part of what we call oceanoplates,
forms from molten magma at long ridges that run down the middles of oceans.
These are long chains of underwater volcanoes that stretch all the way across the ocean floor,
sort of like the seams of a baseball.
When ocean plates form, they then move away from these mid-ocean ridges,
getting older and colder with time, that makes them heavier,
and they eventually sink back down into the mantle at ocean trenches,
which are usually along the edges of continents.
These regions we call subduction zones.
So, the plates are moving about horizontally at our surface.
They are dragging continents with them and often causing these continents to collide very dramatically.
And it's the history of these collisions of the continents
that has been largely responsible for much of the geology we find all about us.
You know, the locations of mountains and oceans are not randomly or accidentally distributed,
and nor are the locations of gold deposits, oil reserves, fossil dinosaur bones.
I mean, all of what we call geology at the surface of our planet
is a result of where these plates have been over time,
and even more importantly, the history of their collisions.
For example, Saudi Arabia currently has a quarter of the world's oil.
In fact, five countries in the Middle East have two-thirds of the world's oil.
Why?
Well, it's just a chance result of plate tectonics.
It turns out that the continent of Africa is currently rotating into Asia,
squeezing the Arabian plate in the process.
And this squeezing has subjected ancient ocean seafloor in that region
to just the right conditions that cook the fossil remains of ancient ocean creatures
hundreds of millions of years old to convert that material into oil
and keep it concentrated and also trapped underground,
allowing OPEC countries to drill down and pump it out.
And every day, the most active parts of geology, you know, the earthquakes and volcanoes,
the raising of mountains, all of this is a direct result of plate tectonics.
And in the process, it releases unbelievable amounts of energy,
sometimes with terrible consequences for humanity.
Earthquakes and volcanoes, these are some of the most destructive processes
and are obviously of tremendous importance to humanity.
Well, any good story has to have conflict.
And the story of the earth certainly has it because plate tectonics has anemesis.
The sun, as fast as mountains go up from these plate collisions,
as fast as new lands are formed, sun-driven erosion tears them down.
The sunlight drives a cyclical flow of water through the oceans and the atmospheres,
and all across the land is streams and glaciers,
and the scouring of water and ice destroys rock, pulverizes it,
and carries it back down to the oceans.
Rivers are highways of this whole destructive process,
carrying thousands of millions of tons of former mountain rock
back into the oceans every single year.
The surfaces of continents are therefore like battlegrounds.
They are continuously torn and ravaged by these two armies,
Earth's interior and the sun, each relentlessly expending huge amounts of energy upon it.
The evidence of that battle can be seen all across Earth's surface.
Ash-rem erupting volcanoes blasted across the land.
Mountains sliced and diced by glaciers, landscapes continuously altered
over sometimes short amounts of time, geologically speaking at least.
For instance, visit the Appalachian Mountains in the eastern United States,
and they appear quite tame now, right?
They're mostly gentle and rolling.
Well, there's granite exposed at the surface that initially formed deep in the course,
I mean tens of kilometers in the cores of the Appalachian Mountains
back at a time when they were as high or higher than the Himalayas are now.
You know, at a time when North America was smashing into other continents like Africa,
and it's now only exposed at the surface because erosion has removed many miles
of intervening rock, bringing that granite all the way up to the surface.
At various locations or times in Earth's history,
one or the other tectonics erosion may appear to be winning out,
but it's that constant struggle between the two that we call, quite unassumingly,
the rock cycle that has shaped the lands we lived on dramatically.
Now, where does all this energy come from?
Energy that shapes the surface of the land.
Well, as two parts.
For the sun, it's due to atomic processes of nuclear fusion.
Essentially, it's huge numbers of hydrogen atoms constantly fused together to form helium atoms.
In the process, a tiny amount of mass is destroyed, which gets converted into enormous amounts of radiation,
and that reaches the Earth as sunlight, either in the visible spectrum, but also ultraviolet and infrared.
For Earth's interior, interestingly, you have another atomic process happening.
Only here, we have the radioactive decay of certain elements that involves the splitting of atoms,
and that also destroys mass in the process that gets converted into radiation.
Actually, in a very real sense, you owe your existence to three elements.
Can you guess what they are?
You're probably thinking hydrogen, oxygen, silicon, something.
Well, actually, it's uranium, thorium, and potassium.
It's these three elements within the planet that produce heat that's given off from the natural decay
through the process of radioactivity, and it's entirely responsible for Earth being geologically vibrant and active.
I mean, our planet would just be a dead cinder floating in space if it weren't for the continuous heat
that keeps our planet simmering on a slow boil.
It drives the cycle of convection of rock within the Earth,
and this moves the plates and causes continents to bang around against each other.
Over four billion years, it's like some giant long demolition derby of continents.
Now, how does sunlight make such a big impact?
Well, sunlight drives the water cycle, which in turn drives the rock cycle at the surface.
Sunlight controls evaporation and wind and rain, ocean currents, weather, climate.
Water evaporates up off the ocean surface, gets carried over land by atmospheric currents,
falls on Earth's surface through precipitation,
and the flow of that liquid water and solid water ice across Earth's surface
is an unbelievably powerful mechanism of erosion, especially at mountains.
Erosion hates mountains. It tears them down as fast as they go up.
I mean, just look at the miles of sand built up all across the Gulf of Mexico.
All this sand is former rock that's torn off the Appalachians and the Rockies
and carried out through the mouth of the Mississippi River.
But those sediments brought into the oceans will eventually become new rocks themselves,
squeezed together over millions of years,
and that rock may get smashed up into a new mountain by some future plate collision,
only to get eroded and then washed back to the ocean again,
and this rock cycle occurs over and over and over again.
Now, sticking with our movie theme, there are several other important characters in this story
that I'm going to talk about throughout the lectures.
They'll keep reappearing as I go from one topic to another.
Gravity. Gravity is responsible not only for the initial formation of our planet
and making it into a layered structure, a layered ball.
It drives much of surface geology because rock and water fall downhill.
That's sort of the first law of geology, rocks fall downhill.
Entropy is also vital.
It's also known as the second law of thermodynamics.
It's the idea that heat flows from hotter regions to colder regions.
Well, it's more than 6,000 degrees Celsius at the center of the Earth,
and it's almost zero degrees at the surface,
so heat is going to flow from the center out,
and that is going to control the way our whole planet evolves over its lifetime.
It drives the convection of mantle rock, and in the process drives plate tectonics.
The law of conservation of energy is important.
It controls all the transfers between heat and motion.
Within the Earth, within the oceans and atmosphere,
conservation of energy also determines all chemical reactions that form.
Minerals, rocks, and fluids, all of this is driven by the very laws of energy.
Perhaps the most important material on Earth, water,
which is not only needed for life, but is vital in how our planet works,
because water weakens rock.
It makes it melt easily. It makes it flow more easily.
In fact, water actually turns out to be the cause of many volcanoes,
and it's the reason why solid rock is able to flow and convect as easily as it does within Earth's interior.
Now, there's another requirement for a good story.
A surprise twist of the plot at the end, and that would be us humans.
First of all, as you'll see throughout these lectures,
biology plays many absolutely key roles in how the Earth works.
You can't separate the two.
The biosphere is a critical part of Earth's geology.
To begin with, it's responsible for most geochemistry at Earth's surface.
I mean, you can't even make rocks and minerals at the surface
without bacteria and other creatures getting involved.
And the biosphere has totally altered the air, land, and water over the past four billion years.
And don't forget, you are an integral part of this,
constantly sharing your atoms with the Earth.
I mean, there are atoms right now in your body that were in dinosaurs,
that were in volcanoes, that were once in the body of Julius Caesar,
that have flowed out of the mouth of the Nile River many, many times.
You know, we're not separate from geology. We're an inextricable part of it.
But humans are now something more than that.
We're Earth's experiment in consciousness.
We have become the dominant agent of geologic change on this planet.
We now shape and reshape Earth's land, water, and air faster than any other geologic process.
It's therefore vitally important that we understand,
in the context of how the Earth works, the nature and form of these geologic powers,
if we're to have any hope of being able to control them.
However, it's also the case that everything that goes on in this planet affects us tremendously.
Okay, here's a question.
What do the collisions of continents, the erosion of mountains, Earth's orbit around the sun,
the tilt of Earth's orbit, sunspots, ocean circulation patterns, and volcanoes,
what do they all have in common?
Well, they all control and drive climate and climate change.
And these climate changes have continuously shaped the course of human history.
For instance, what caused the French Revolution?
I bet you didn't realize it was caused by a volcano, two volcanoes actually, in Iceland and Japan.
These volcanoes emitted enough volcanic aerosols that it blocked out a lot of sunlight.
A sun actually shone very weakly for a while.
These were the coldest years of the century following these eruptions.
Crops failed, people were starving.
Remember the whole thing about let them eat cake because they didn't have bread?
Well, they didn't have bread because their crops had all failed.
The winter before the storming of the Bastille in 1789 was the coldest winter in over a century.
And France was just one of about a dozen European governments that collapsed around that time.
I mean, history books give all sorts of wonderful reasons for the French Revolution,
but they usually failed to recognize the most obvious point.
The people were unhappy because they were starving,
and they were starving because volcanoes had affected climates.
I mean, you will be amazed to find out how much of human history, the migrations of peoples,
the wars, the whole rise and fall of civilizations,
how all of that has been shaped by geologic events like volcanoes.
Now, as I go through these lectures, I want you to keep in mind that we don't have this all figured out.
I mean, I'm not reading from a book. There is no book.
Earth science is an incredibly new field, and there's so much to learn.
In fact, I'm going to try to point out ideas that are actively debated within the geoscience community now.
It's actually very hard for any one person to keep up with everything that's being learned,
but it also keeps things really fun.
It keeps me humble as a scientist knowing that the research that I do,
the papers that I write are going to be out of date in a few years.
Now, I bet that the major themes of this whole course will still be correct in a decade or so.
But I also bet that most of the details, the facts, will have changed, and that's a good thing.
It means that our science is vibrant and changing and growing
and constantly moving towards a better understanding of reality.
Now, over the length of the lectures, it's my hope that you in the process will develop
not only an understanding, but also an appreciation for the many fascinating, complex,
and interwoven processes that constantly shape our planet.
And I hope for you that this will even make the Earth more beautiful.
I mean, nature is aesthetically gorgeous at all scales.
You know, the colors of a sunset, the sparkle of a gem,
the trickle and flow of water in a mountain stream, for me personally,
you know, what does it is sitting on top of a tall mountain and watching the sun rise or set?
I mean, it's an experience that for me is beyond words, at least any that I can possibly come up with.
It's poetry in a language so much older than ours.
But I've also found that the more I've learned about the Earth, the more beautiful I find it to be.
I mean, the Milky Way on a clear night is a stunning sight, right, just purely aesthetically.
But to know that it's composed of hundreds of billions of stars,
many surrounded by large numbers of planets, some perhaps like our own,
I mean, for me that adds a whole additional layer of beauty to it.
The sheer vertical granite walls of Yosemite Valley, you know, if you go there, they tower above you,
they are, they're a stunning and overpowering sight.
But to look at them and not only see them as they are today, but also see them over time,
you know, rock cooling and hardening from underground magma,
tall mountains eroding away until the granite is exposed to the surface,
the glaciers of relatively recent ice ages just ripping and gouging out rock valleys.
And all of this happening over just tens of millions of years,
that adds a whole new dimension of beauty to it.
And lastly, I hope that this course incites you to get out and see more of our planet as well.
You know, there are so many varied and diverse environments out there.
Each one with its own beauty and surprises, deserts and shorelines,
mountains, jungles, forests, glaciers, you know, none of them like the other.
Some of them are truly spectacular, like the Grand Canyon or the Swiss Alps
or the volcanoes on Hawaii.
You know, but you also don't need to go to the ends of the earth to see amazing geology.
It's all around us.
Sometimes it just takes getting a short ways outside of a city to find it.
For instance, if you're in New York City, look across the Hudson River
to the Palisades Cliffs of New Jersey.
That's volcanic rock that formed 200 million years ago
when New York was being torn away from Africa.
I mean, before then you could have walked straight from New York City across to Africa.
And in that process of rifting, actually parts of Connecticut and Rhode Island were left behind,
bits of African crust that got ripped off.
Sure, go to Vegas.
You know, but rent a car and drive to the Grand Canyon
and think about how that huge canyon formed in only five million years.
In the process, also appreciate that you are now viewing five million years
as a short amount of time compared to the two billion years of geologic time
that's exposed within that canyon.
If you're in San Francisco, take a ride up nearby Mount Tamil Pius
and look at the shiny green rocks right near the top.
This is ancient ocean seafloor that got scraped off onto the edge of North America
when part of the Pacific Ocean seafloor used to sink all along the full edge of California.
If you're in the Seattle area, look at the ground around you.
There is a good chance that it was made from a burning ash flow
or a boiling hot mud flow from a very recent eruption of nearby Mount Rainier.
And remember that this could easily happen again during our lifetimes.
You know, or just look out your backyard
and marvel with awe at the immense number of factors, the laws of physics,
the chance of ancient geologic history,
all these things that had to all happen in just the right way
for that backyard and its rocks and soil and plants to even exist.
So, get ready for a remarkable journey.
