Welcome. I've gotten a little ahead of myself here. So far I've talked about the remarkable
relevance of geology for humans, just how incredibly our own history is affected by
geology. And I've given you a sense of the deep geologic time that all these processes
operate by, but I actually haven't introduced formally the main character of our story.
So let me do that. So viewer, earth, earth, viewer. And in this lecture, I want to take
you on a tour to a place that unfortunately you or I are known as ever going to get to.
And that is the inside of our planet, the inside of the main character of the story.
Now during this lecture, I'm going to begin to give you a sense of what the inside of
our earth is like, what it's made of, what its temperature and pressures are like, what
the conditions are within, what the structure, the dynamics, how it changes over time. Now
I'm obviously only going to be able to do a little bit of this in this lecture. But
I've got a lot of lectures ahead of me and I'm going to introduce a set of themes that
I'll be able to really explore further on. Another thing I want to do today that's really
important is talk about how we actually get to see inside this planet and how we use the
seismic waves from earthquakes to make three-dimensional pictures of Earth's deep interior. And then
I'll take you on a brief tour, sort of from the surface down to the core of the earth.
Now when you look at earth from space, what you see is something that's incredibly varied.
We have clouds, oceans, ice caps, mountains, valleys, jungles, forests, deserts, I mean
a tremendously varied set of conditions. What I want to begin to give you a sense of is
that inside our planet we have variations that are as extreme if not more so. However,
I really have to begin with an apology. Geology suffers from a real handicap that a lot of
the sciences don't have. And it's just very simple. Light doesn't travel through rock.
So 1677, Anton von Levenhoek is looking at the structures inside cells, looking in to
see these incredible structures. And 1929, Edwin Hubble is using a telescope to look
across the deep reaches of space to look at galaxies. And you know what? I can't even
tell you what's three feet beneath my feet, you know, or beneath the building, beneath
the ground, because light just doesn't travel through solid rock. And that's a problem
that we're going to have to overcome in a set of very creative ways. But it's also
something that's really held back our field tremendously. Now, we should start with the
beginning. All planets are layered and Earth is no different. And the layers are three
general, take three general forms. Earth has a core, mantle, and a crust. And perhaps the
easiest way to show this is with a little kitchen chemistry, which is always good. You
can try this at home if you like. Take a hard-boiled egg, and a knife, and cut through, and here's
your Earth, okay? What we have is a set of three layers. We have an inner core, we have
a core that's for the Earth is made of iron. That would be the yolk. Surrounding the core
is the white of the egg, which is our mantle. And the very, very thin outer part of this
hard-boiled egg, the shell of the egg, would be Earth's crust. However, it turns out that
the crust of the Earth is so thin, it's actually much thinner than the shell of this hard-boiled
egg. Now, this isn't very exciting. This egg isn't doing very much. And it turns out,
I hope you will get a sense over the course of today and the rest of the lectures that
our planet is actually a lot more exciting. Now, one of the first sort of complications
that I want to add to that is that the top part of the Earth actually is a little bit
more complicated than just having a crust. It turns out that the crust and the top part
of the mantle form a layer called the lithosphere. Now, I already talked about this briefly in
the first lecture. This is known as the plate and forms the foundation of plate tectonics.
Underlying this top lithosphere is a very thin layer called the esthenosphere. And
unlike the lithosphere, which is very stiff and rigid, the esthenosphere is very soft
and weak, and this is going to essentially play a vital role in the foundation of how
plate tectonics works, giving you all a lot of the exciting things I talked about in the
first lecture. Now, people have tried to figure out for a long time what's going on inside
our planet. Again, with this handicap of not being able to see inside the planet, you can
come up with just about anything. So, scientists, philosophers, theologians, writers, artists,
everyone was in on the game. I'm trying to come up with some model, some understanding
what's down there. Actually, one of my favorites was the work of a theologian, who was also
a scientist, Sir Thomas Burnett. Back in the 17th century, he was actually the royal chaplain
to King William III. But he came up with a brilliant model that he published in a book
in 1681, called The Sacred Theory of the Earth, the Tellurus Theorius Sacra. And in
his book, he described the earth as having three layers, essentially a crust, a mantle
and a core, which was the first time that I know that that had been proposed. Now, in
his model, the mantle was actually a layer of water that broke out upon the surface to
provide all the water in the time of Noah's flood. But the breaking out of that water
is what broke apart the continents and gave them their jagged edges, which he thought
was something unusual. He also had the idea that the earth formed from an initially homogeneous
ball of rock that then became layered over time, which actually, as we'll show later
on in the course, is exactly what happened. Now, the idea of plate tectonics, which as
we'll see in later lectures is the foundation of geology, is the idea that if I take this
egg, and I take pieces of the shell of this hard-boiled egg, they would start moving about
the egg. And frankly, this was really hard for people to accept. And in a couple lectures,
I'll talk about how difficult it was for people to come up with the theory of plate tectonics.
But an inherent part of plate tectonics is the idea that the plate actually has two
forms. It has two flavors. It can contain at the surface continental crust or oceanic
crust, and they have almost nothing in common with each other. The ocean crust, the rock
beneath the water of the oceans, turns out to be very young geologically. It all forms
the same way at these mid-ocean ridges, like the mid-Atlantic ridge, which are seams of
underwater volcanoes where the plates move apart, lava comes up to form new plate in
the gap, and the plates grow over time. Those same oceanic plains, isn't Italy, because
the earth isn't expanding, have to be destroyed. They're created at the mid-ocean ridges.
They sink down and plunge down into the mantle at ocean trenches in what we call subduction zones.
Now continents do something very different. Continents are too buoyant to be able to sink.
It's hard to think of continental rock as being buoyant, but compared to the heavier
rock of the mantle beneath, continents actually float on the surface of the mantle. They can't
sink. They get bounced around over time. As a result, they can be very, very old. In
fact, some of the continents have rocks that are older than four billion years in them.
These continents over time bang with each other, move around. It reminds me of cars
in a demolition derby. These continents retain the scars and tears of billions of years'
worth of collisions. The geology that you see in these sometimes shows rocks that are just
incredibly tortured, twisted, fractured as a result of all these years' worth of interactions
and collisions between other continents.
The plates move. We know that they move because we can actually put out GPS sensors and measure
that motion. We use sensors sort of similar to the navigation GPS instruments that you
might have in a car, but they're actually much more sensitive. They have a sensitivity
on the order of about a millimeter a year of motion. We've got the continents covered
with these GPS sensors, and we can actually track the plates, the continents, as they move
now. The motion turns out to be incredibly slow. It's on the order of centimeters a year.
This is the rate that your fingernails grow, or your hair grows. It's not something that
you can... You don't see your fingernails growing, but over a period of weeks or months,
you can measure the amount of the distance that they've grown. The exact same thing happens
with plates. We can't see the move, but over years, we actually see that effect.
Now, on a day-to-day basis, is this going to affect air fares between New York and London?
No, not in our lifetimes, but over geologic lifetimes, this rock moves thousands of kilometers.
For instance, 200 million years ago, the Atlantic Ocean wasn't there. You could have walked
directly from New York to West Africa. It was directly connected. Now, you might say
200 million years, that's a lot of time, but remember in the last lecture, 200 million
years, that's only 4% of the age of the Earth. So, short times geologically, we can end up
having the plates move tremendous distances. The other thing that's very important about
plate tectonics is that most of the interiors of the plates are fairly rigid, and they're
not changing very much. There is some exciting geology that goes on, but most of the action,
the earthquakes, the volcanoes, most of this sort of geology occurs at the boundaries between
plates. We'll explore this a lot in the course on how the interactions of these plates create
some of these catastrophic events. Now, earthquakes are exciting, they're dangerous, they're deadly,
but that's actually not the reason that I study earthquakes. The earthquakes in seismology
are a focus of my own research. What has attracted me to the phenomenon of earthquakes
is they provide our only means of seeing deep into our planet. Let me give you an analogy.
Suppose you're not feeling well and you go to the doctor. The doctor doesn't want to
cut you open unless he or she has to, so they use some remote means of taking a picture
inside of you, a CAT scan, an MRI, a sonogram, an x-ray, something that doesn't actually
go into your body to make a picture of what's in there. Why don't they use a camera? Well,
light doesn't go through a human body either, so doctors have the same problems that geologists
do because light doesn't go through rock. However, we don't have the option of cutting
open our patient. We would like to, we don't have a problem with it, it's not going to
hurt the earth if we do, but the deepest anyone has ever been able to drill down into the
earth is 12.7 kilometers. The earth is 6,371 kilometers from the center out to the surface.
So we've barely even scratched the surface, and the reason is very simple. The conditions
become so inhospitable as you go down inside the earth that your drill bits don't work
anymore. The pressure becomes intense, the temperatures become intense, your drill bits
melt and are smashed, so we can't get down there. The only thing we can do is take these
remote pictures, and seismic tomography, using the seismic waves to make three dimensional
pictures inside the earth is just like medical tomography. In fact, we actually use some
of the very same techniques. The basic idea is that you have lots and lots of earthquakes
happening around the earth. As I mentioned in the last lecture, there are 200,000 earthquakes
that we actually measure every single year are able to locate, and we have lots of seismometers
around the globe, and we look at all the paths of these seismic waves traveling all through
the earth, we're able to take all that information and turn it into a tomogram, like what you
would get from a CAT scan. So we have these images now of the inside of the earth, something
that we just didn't have a short time ago. What are we learning? Well, if you were to
watch some goofy Hollywood movie on going down inside the earth, you'd get some unusual
ideas of what's down there. What's down inside the earth is unusual, but let me give you
some examples. What would you actually see if you went down? Well, first of all, you'd
have to go down through the crust, and you may remember in the last lecture I talked
about sedimentary rocks forming, like at the Grand Canyon, and limestone, sandstone, shale.
The top of the crust of the continents is a lot of different types of rocks. It also
has volcanic rocks like granite and rhyolite and basalt. It will go through these more
in the class. Again, the continents are very layered and highly structured, and we actually
now know a great deal about that, because that's where our oil, natural gas, coal, and
minerals are all located. There's a saying that goes, if you don't grow it, you mine
it. So we have taken advantage of these resources inside our planet, and we've used seismic,
tomography seismic imaging to map them out. For instance, in the old days, if you wanted
to get oil out of the ground, you just had to put it in an oil well every 50 feet. There
were parts of the country like Texas and California that were just ugly, covered by oil wells
one after the other. Well, we don't have to do that anymore. I make grumble when I pay
several dollars a gallon for gas at the pump, but if it weren't for the seismic imaging,
I'd be paying several tens of dollars a gallon. Now, we can just go to the places where there's
oil and drill there and not put in all the drills everywhere else. As we go down through
the crust, we pass out of the crust into the mantle, and we go into rock that's denser
and heavier and hotter all the way down. Now, in some of these movies that I look at, never
mind that they're in some ship of some material that seems impervious to heat and pressure,
that's okay. They look out their front window as they're drilling down into the earth, and
they see all this different rock. Well, what would you actually see if you were down there
and look? I'll tell you, you wouldn't see anything. You would just see white. The reason
is the temperature is so intense that everything would be radiating white, it would be glowing
white. By the time you only get 60 miles down, about 100 kilometers down, the temperature
is already more than about 1,400 degrees Celsius. That's more than 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit.
It's intensely hot. By the time you get to the center of our planet, the temperature
is on the order of about 10,000 degrees Fahrenheit, more than 5,500 degrees, maybe even 6,000
degrees Celsius. The temperature inside our planet is so intense that the radiation would
really prevent you from seeing anything. Another thing that you'll see in some of the movies
is that they go down in, and stories as well, and they're walking around in these big open
places. Maybe they fall in through a 10 mile wide geode, or they're walking around in flimsy
spacesuits, or just the fact that they're walking around. This isn't new if you look
at Milton's Paradise Lost. Satan, when he gets kicked out of heaven, falls through this
giant chasm underground, or in Dante's Inferno. Dante walks through all these different layers
of the Earth. It was scientifically proposed for a while that the Earth was hollow. It
was a big mistake, but very reputable scientists like Edmund Halley, who Halley's comment is
named after, actually proposed that Earth's interior was hollow. Jules Verne and his Journey
to the Center of the Earth incorporated that idea into the story. Jules Verne, incidentally,
was always very up on what the science of the times was, and was usually not off in terms
of the science that he presented in his stories. The idea was that there was this hollow Earth
that had holes at the poles, the North and South Pole, that you could get into this hollow
land inside. Well, let me go out a limit here and guarantee you there are no open spaces
inside the Earth. The pressure is simply too intense. For instance, if you get down to
the base of the mantle, before you even get into the iron core of the Earth, the pressure
is 1.36 million atmospheres, 1.36 million times the pressure at Earth's surface. In fact,
that pressure is so intense that if you were to take a block of granite and put it down
here, it would get squeezed into half its volume. Just try to imagine the pressure actually
involved with taking a block of granite and pressing it into half its volume. There are
no open spaces deep down inside the Earth. By the time you get to the center of the Earth,
which is 3.64 million times the pressure at Earth's surface, the pressure is just remarkably
intense that this granite would actually have entirely changed into new minerals and wouldn't
even look anything like the rock it is at the beginning.
What is it that seismic tomography has shown us in terms of what the Earth is doing? I
talked about how our Earth is more exciting than just this hard-boiled egg. Well, one
thing that we have found is that within the planet, within the solid rock of Earth's mantle,
we actually have regions that are going up and regions that are going down. We have a
convection pattern that I'll explore a great deal in the next lecture, in fact. Well, how
does this work? Turns out that if you have an earthquake and the seismic waves travel
through the Earth, those waves will be sped up or slowed down if the rock is cold or hot.
If the rock is cold, it's very stiff, the waves travel quickly right across it. If the
rock is hot and warm, it's weaker and the waves get slowed down as they travel through.
So they arrive at a seismometer later than you would expect them to. So what we do is
we take these wave speeds and we can essentially convert them into temperatures. So when you
look at a picture, one of these 3D pictures inside the Earth, it doesn't look like a normal
picture. Usually seismologists represent it with red and blue colors. The red regions
in these images are places where the seismic waves are traveling slowly and that's hot
rock. And the places where you see blue are regions usually where the rock is cold and
that means that it makes the waves go fast through there. Now there's one other very
important and fortunate side to this and that is if something is hot, it expands. I'll
pursue this in the next lecture. But that means if you take rock and you heat it, it
expands, it becomes buoyant and then it's going to want to float up to the surface of
the Earth. So the red and blue are not only snapshots in time right now, but they also
give us a sense of motions. The red regions deep inside the Earth are going up, the blue
regions are going down. And so from today's current picture inside the Earth, we get an
idea of where the motions are going. Now I have to say this might be a little disconcerting
for all of us to think of. I would bet most of us have gone through our lives thinking
that the Earth beneath our feet is solid, it's constant, our lives may be hectic and
crazy but at least there's something we can count on that the inside of the Earth is the
rock that we stand on. Well it turns out it's just not so. The entire planet is churning
and convecting and flowing and if you could view it sped up in geologic time, it would
look like a churning whirling eddy of swirling rock and metal. I'll talk about why this happens
a little bit more in the next lecture. Let me give you one example. I can't do much here
but I'll come back to this more later in the course. Let's just take an example where
we've taken, suppose you could take the Earth and take a really big knife and cut it right
in half and let's cut it in half right through North America and peel away half of our planet
and look at what you would get. You'd get an image where you would see the continent
of North America at the top but extending all the way down beneath it, we'd see the
mantle rock and what we do in seismic tomography is we remove all the radial layers and we
just look at the variations within layers and what we see is quite remarkable. If you
look at this picture, North America and Africa show up as blue regions. That's because the
continents are old, they're cold and stiff and they've been sitting there for a long
time but if you go to some place like the mid-Atlantic ridge, that appears red because
that's where new rock is coming to the surface to fill the gap that's made when the plates
move apart. If you look directly beneath North America, you see a large streak of blue heading
all the way down to the core. This is actually a piece of ancient Pacific Ocean seafloor.
It has its own name, we call it the Pharrellon slab. It used to be the Pharrellon plate but
it's gone now, it has already sunk, it's subducted beneath North America but with this tomography
we can actually track its motion as it flows down beneath the earth, down towards the core.
Now we see also in the mantle some very large red regions. One of these is beneath Hawaii,
it's in the Pacific Ocean and one of them is beneath Africa and these are large mega
plumes. It turns out that there are regions of hot rock within the mantle that are buoyant,
that are rising up and they may be feeding a lot of the hotspot volcanoes that we see
at the surface like Hawaii or Tahiti or the Azores or a variety of other islands that
pop up in the middle of the ocean seafloor and are volcanically active. I'll get more
into that all this later on but I just want to make the point here that this stuff is
no longer hypothetical, it's no longer theoretical, we can actually now look at it and see, of
course it's hard to interpret some of these images as to what's going on but for the
first time now we are actually able to get some real views inside the earth in order
to figure out what's going on. Now there's another side to figuring out what's inside
the planet and that has to do with crystals and minerals, the composition. Incidentally
if you look at a lot of these old stories, even Jules Verne's journey to the center of
the earth, they go down inside the earth and there are these massive diamond crystals,
huge crystals. Now this is actually a region of some uncertainty for us, we don't actually
know how big the crystals are, we don't know whether we would expect small crystals or
enormous crystals down there but we have actually a good sense of what they are and let me tell
you why. Now it's an interesting thing, if you were to take my block of granite and you
were to actually begin to bring it down inside the earth and begin to squeeze those crystals
they'll change. The crystals at surface pressures are no longer stable down deep, the intense
pressures make minerals totally change their color and appearance and texture and I'll
talk about that more when I talk about minerals. For instance you can take graphite in a lead
pencil and squeeze it to pressures of more than 100 miles beneath the surface and it
will turn into diamond. They're the same material, the atoms, the carbon atoms are just ordered
differently. Well it turns out actually that diamonds turn out to be incredibly important,
geologically speaking because what we can do is we can take diamonds because they're
so hard, we can cut off the tips, put a little bit of rock in there, squeeze them to the
intense pressures on the inside of the earth, take a laser beam, zap it through the diamonds
and heat up that sample to give you the temperatures inside the earth and we can actually recreate
the conditions within the earth, granted for very small samples of rock. But now we can
get information from the seismic tomography about what stuff looks like down there and
then we can take the laboratory experiments using what are called, these are called diamond
anvil cells and we can compare the two and we've actually been able to figure out what's
down there and then later on in the course I'll give you a tremendous sense of, a greater
sense of what's actually down inside within our planet. Now once you go down through the
mantle you go through a set of rocks that are mostly silicon, these are rocks that are
mostly composed of silicon, oxygen and something else and I'll talk more about these. Now these
atoms by the way, atoms have protons, neutrons and electrons and just as a bit of review
it's the number of protons that determines what element it is. So if you have one proton
in your atom it's hydrogen, if you have two protons it's helium, well silicon is an atom
with 14 protons and oxygen is an atom with 8 protons. By the way if you change the number
of neutrons you don't change the element, it would still be oxygen or silicon, you change
its isotope and if you change the number of electrons in an atom you change its, it becomes
a different ion, this will become very important later on. The mantle turns out to be almost
entirely these silicate rocks and the core turns out to be almost entirely made of iron
and nickel. As you go down inside the core we find that the outer part of the core is
actually liquid and flows much like water does. In fact it's so actively convecting and
churning that it actually generates a geodynamo, it's incredibly complicated how this happens,
the material is slightly electrically charged, you set up these spirals of flowing iron,
in fact the field is almost, what actually happens there is almost as complex as its
name which is a magnetohydrogeodynamo. But it's this activity that gives us the magnetic
field that we actually measure at the surface. If you go down deep even beneath the liquid
iron outer core we get to a solid iron inner core. So this is iron that is solid, it's
frozen out and it's this inner core, it's actually very tiny, it turns out to play a very important
role in the magnetic field that we're just figuring out. In fact some recent seismological
work suggests that the inner core actually might be rotating relative to the rest of
the earth, rotating faster than the mantle and lapping it every hundred to four hundred
years. The magnetic field, we'll talk about this later on, is very unusual, it changes
with time, it randomly reverses with time, but it also plays a very important role for
us because it gives us a layer out in space called the magnetosphere that actually protects
us from solar wind and allows life to exist on the surface of land. We wouldn't be able
to be standing here walking around on the surface of continents if it weren't for the
activities of liquid iron four thousand kilometers beneath us churning and generating a magnetic
field. This is just one example of how connected our whole planet is and how things that go
on so deep without beneath us affect what goes on at the surface.
Well, I've summarized my trip from the surface to the core now. We've done it virtually,
which means we haven't vaporized, we haven't been squeezed and flattened into a pancake.
And what we've found and what we continue to find with every day that we research the
inside of earth is a planet that is every bit as strange as anything that Jules Verne
or some Hollywood script writer could come up with. Earth is an extraordinary planet.
It's a lot more interesting than this hard-boiled egg. And what I hope to do is give you a sense
in the later lectures of just how marvelous some of these details are.
