Welcome.
The last lecture, I gave you an overview of the interior of the earth.
And I showed you that even though the layers sort of look like a hard-boiled egg, there's
obviously a lot more going on.
It's maybe like the egg is still raw, stuff still flowing on in there.
There's a lot of motion, and that implies a whole lot in terms of how a planet evolves.
The question I want to address today, and this is really fundamental for all of planets,
is why?
Why are there motions within the earth's planet?
Why isn't our planet a dead cinder, a ball of rock floating around in space?
I'm coming back to that theme again, that rock is solid to us, but over geologic time,
it flows.
Now, today's lecture is going to take us into the world of geodynamics.
I'm going to talk about forces, and heat, and energy, and work.
But really, the key to all of this is that heat is the lifeblood of planets.
It's what flows throughout the planet, largely from the interior out, but it's what drives
all of the motions.
And if we're going to understand how earth works, we need to understand the flow of heat
and how that process happens.
Now, in the last lecture I showed you that there are slabs of ocean sea floor that are
sinking beneath North America, and there are giant mega plumes of rock rising up beneath
Hawaii and Africa.
Why are those motions occurring?
Well, if you had asked Sir Isaac Newton, he would have given you a fairly simple answer.
There are forces.
Things move because forces act upon them.
Newton's second law of motion is fundamental to much of the natural world, which is that
force equals mass times acceleration.
If you have some mass and you apply a force to it, it will accelerate and move.
For the earth, that acceleration is gravity.
It's the acceleration of gravity, which at the surface is 9.8 meters per second squared.
It's the rate that you would accelerate if you were to free fall.
So what we have within the earth is the fact that gravity is this overlying force that's
driving the motions, and to a large degree that's true, but it turns out there's a lot
more than that.
Now, by the way, I should define mass.
Mass is very different from weight.
If you go and stand on a bathroom scale, you're not looking at your mass, you're looking at
your weight.
Mass is the sum of all the atomic particles within you.
You take all your electrons, protons, and neutrons, add them all up, that's your mass.
Now if you were to take you and go onto the moon, your weight would be only 1-6 of what
it is at the surface of the earth, and that's because the force of gravity on the moon is
different from the earth.
So it turns out your weight is a force.
If you were to go out in outer space, you'd become weightless.
You would have no weight, but your mass would still be exactly the same.
Now gravity, as I said, is a primary force for planets, but it turns out it's only one
of four forces, and there are only four forces in our universe, and in fact all of geology
can be explained with these four forces, and they all play very important roles.
Now gravity ends up being the weakest of the four, interestingly, but it acts over the
largest spaces, the largest distances, and it acts over all matter, all particles.
So at a galactic scale, as Einstein showed, the gravitational attraction of stars can
actually cause space to become warped.
Now as Einstein also demonstrated, the gravitational attraction between small particles is almost
insignificant.
For instance, any two people sitting next to each other have a gravitational attraction
between them, but it doesn't do much.
Einstein actually said gravity can't be responsible for people falling in love.
If you're talking about the material of a planet, there are other forces that are equally
important, and one of the most important is electromagnetism.
Now it turns out electricity and magnetism are two sides of the same coin, the same
force called electromagnetism, and the foundation for this is the fact that electrons have a
negative charge and protons have a positive charge, and opposite charges attract, like
charges repel, and this activity makes matter.
It turns out that if you have atoms, they tend to form different ions, we'll talk about
this in the electron minerals, and those ions will attract to each other, will bond, and
that bonding gives structure to matter, so you wouldn't be you if it weren't for the
electromagnetic attractions between all of the atoms within your body.
The strong nuclear force turns out to be vital at a more fundamental level.
The strong nuclear force holds all particles together and actually holds the nucleus of
an atom together.
Think of it, the nucleus of an atom has all of these protons and neutrons stuck together.
All these positively charged protons, well, the electromagnetic force would want that
to fly apart, but the strong nuclear force holds that together, and so if it weren't
for the strong nuclear force, you'd never have any atom larger than hydrogen, and lastly
the weak nuclear force is a very unusual force.
It's called the weak nuclear force because it's about 10 trillion times smaller than
the strong nuclear force, but it determines a very important activity for the earth.
It determines the radioactive decay of certain elements.
They already have talked about how elements have isotopes that have varying numbers of
neutrons.
Well, some of those isotopes are not stable and they will decay, and when they decay,
they give off energy, and that energy turns out to be vital, as I'll show you at the
end of this lecture, in keeping our planet alive and heated.
Now, gravity determines so much of geology, and I'll come back to this over and over again.
In fact, it's even sometimes jokingly called the first law of geology, rocks fall downhill,
and the basic idea is within the earth, heavy things are going to sink and buoyant things
are going to rise, and this is really important because if it weren't for gravity, our planet
would be that hard-boiled egg.
It would just be layered, and gravity keeps it all layered to begin with, but it also
causes motions because as I talked about last lecture, if you have a region that's hot,
it's going to be buoyant and it's going to expand, and now that brings us into where
the heat and energy comes in because it's actually what we call the thermodynamics,
the flow of heat that's going to determine all these other motions that will eventually
power plate tectonics and give us things like mountains and oceans.
Now, I need to do a little bit of physical chemistry here, in the sense that I need to
talk about what atoms do.
I probably, when I was young, I had this image of atoms in a solid all being locked together,
and that's true to some degree, but the atoms of all material are constantly vibrating.
They're never sitting still, they're always vibrating, so even within a solid material
where the atoms are bonded tightly together, they don't move around, the atoms are vibrating.
Now, I should also say matter comes in different phases.
We have solids, liquids, and gases.
In the case of a solid, what you have is, these are atoms that are strongly committed
to each other.
They are tightly bonded, they bond for life, or close to it, and they may sit there and
vibrate and oscillate, but they stay in place.
At the other end of the spectrum, you have gas, where you have atoms that have just no
bonds, no ties to any other atoms, and they fly about freely.
They bump into each other, but then they fly away, and then you have this very unusual
phase of a liquid where you sort of have fickle atoms that are bond temporarily with
regional atoms, but they keep changing their minds, and they go off and bond with another
atom and then they change their mind and move around.
By the way, they don't really change their minds.
I use analogies like this sometimes to help me understand things better, but atoms don't
think, obviously.
It turns out to be one other phase of matter, which we won't get to until later, and that's
called plasma, and that's when matter is so hot that it actually strips the electrons
off of the nuclei of the protons and neutrons.
That's what happens inside a star like our sun, and we'll get to that later on in the
course.
Okay, so we have objects that are in motion, and the measure of that oscillation of the
atoms is their temperature, and interestingly, if you give objects more heat, you raise that
temperature.
So a temperature is actually a measure of the motion of atoms.
So here we have something happening at an atomic level that we see at a macro scale,
that we see as the temperature of something that might be hot, and we define heat as the
transfer of energy from one object to another.
Now throughout the Earth, that energy is constantly flowing, and it's very important
that energy is always conserved.
This is one of these basic laws of the universe, it's called the conservation of energy.
It determines how a planet evolves, and indeed how everything in nature occurs.
Energy takes many different forms.
It can be kinetic energy of a motion, a moving object.
It can be the potential energy that you, let's say, give an object when you might lift
it up high, you actually give that energy, and then if it comes down, it loses that energy.
There's also energy of electricity, electrical energy, there's chemical energy that's in
the bonds of material, and there's nuclear energy that's released for nuclear power.
Energy is constantly changing from one form to the other, and this is really important
for how geology works, but the energy is always conserved in any of these transfers.
Now, I should say a quick word about energy, I'll be talking a lot about energy, and energy
is something that's very hard to define.
I know what it does, I know that if I lift an object, I give it energy, and when that
object drops, that energy goes into something else, but it's actually very hard to define
what energy exactly is.
Now, what happens within any material if you begin to heat it is that the atoms vibrate
more and they do something very, very important.
They expand.
This is a process called thermal expansion.
A good way to visualize this, imagine you have a whole group of kids all standing together,
you pack them all together.
You can actually pack them fairly closely if they're standing absolutely still, but
suppose you put music on and they start to dance all of a sudden.
Well, they're all going to start bumping into each other, and that whole group of children
is going to spread out.
The only thing that pushed them out was their collisions with each other as they moved out.
The same thing happens within any material.
If you begin to heat it, the atoms bounce into each other more often, they need more room,
and that object will expand, and it's when it expands that it then becomes more buoyant
and gravity can cause a pressure that will cause that to rise.
So in the last lecture, I told you that these mega plumes beneath Hawaii were rising up.
Well, the reason is if the rock is hot, it's expanded, it needs more room, and that causes
it to rise up and eventually move to the surface.
Now, this is really important because for the first time now we have something that's
counter to gravity.
In other words, we have gravity going down this way, but now we have something that can
cause material to flow back the other direction.
By the way, just as an aside, a slightly mind blowing thought, the electromagnetic force
is so amazing that it causes atoms to be far apart from each other so that the atoms actually
never touch.
I mentioned that the atoms are bumping into each other, they actually never get anywhere
near each other to bump.
In fact, your body is almost entirely made of empty space.
In fact, if you could take all the neutrons and protons and electrons in your body and
get rid of the space between them, they would take one billionth of a teaspoon.
This is about the size of five human cells.
And in fact, this actually, by the way, does happen in nature.
That's what a neutron star is.
It's all the compacted neutrons.
One teaspoon of a neutron star weighs about 100 million, has a mass of 100 million tons.
So again, these forces are fundamental for our very existence.
Their existence, even though you're nothing but mostly empty space, is due to these forces.
So what happens with the Earth?
What happens when you have heating and cooling within a planet?
Well, it turns out that for most planets, and Earth certainly is true for this, the
heating for the mantle of the planet comes from two sources.
You get the radioactive decay of certain elements that generate heat.
You also have some primordial heat from when the planet formed in the core that's heating
the base of the mantle.
Well, how does the mantle cool?
Well, really, the planet's really cool only one way.
It's from having their surface in contact with the chill of space.
And so the lifeblood of the planet, the job of the planet, what it's been doing for the
last four and a half billion years is taking that heat from the inside of the planet and
bringing it out towards the surface.
Now a couple interesting things happen.
The Earth is squeezed together.
I talked about enormous pressure that could squeeze blocks of granite into half their volume.
Well, the pressure causes the atoms to collide with each other and that raises the temperature.
So much of the high temperature inside the Earth is actually due to simply the pressure.
If you could suddenly release the pressure off the inside of our planet, its temperature
would drop tremendously.
Another very important aspect for the Earth, it's called the second law of thermodynamics,
which determines that heat will always flow from a hotter region to a colder region.
This makes intuitive sense to you.
Imagine that you had a pot of water on your kitchen counter.
That heat that's concentrated in that pot is going to eventually dissipate throughout
the room.
The pot will get cooler.
The heat's going to go from the hotter to the colder.
It doesn't happen the other way around, right?
You wouldn't have that pot and have it suddenly absorb all the heat from the room and the
pot would mysteriously get warm and the rest of your room would get colder.
Our time only flows in one direction and it's in the direction of entropy, of disorder.
Heat flows go from an ordered state with heat all packed together in one place to a
disordered state with that heat dissipated.
That process of entropy, that process of the second law of thermodynamics is what's
going to drive the heat from the inside of the Earth out to the surface and then eventually
out into space.
Why does this happen?
Remember, Earth is about 6,000 degrees Celsius in the center and it's about zero degrees
Celsius at the surface.
So that heat is going to flow from the center out and it really does flow.
We can measure it.
In fact, you can go to the surface and measure the rate at which heat is leaving the surface
everywhere and that heat is leaving at a rate of about 44.2 terawatts or 44.2 trillion watts.
Now a watt is a measure of the rate of flow of energy.
So if you have a 60 watt bulb, that's the 60 watts is the rate at which energy is being
used for that light bulb.
So the amount of heat, 44.2 terawatts is equivalent to about 700 billion 60 watt light bulbs.
And to give you some sense of scale for that, that's about three times as much as the amount
of energy that all humans use in all different sources.
Our total human use of energy is about 15 terawatts and this is about three times that.
Now I'll come back more later on to radioactivity, but radioactivity is so important.
Our planet really would be cooled and chilled and immobile like how we see the moon is if
it weren't for the heat that we're constantly being created internally.
It's somewhat ironic because so many of scientists for centuries tried their hand at alchemy.
Even Sir Isaac Newton was an alchemist trying to turn elements from one form to another.
Actually they were mostly trying to make gold and none of them ever succeeded.
But it turns out that with radioactivity alchemy happens naturally all the time.
Carbon 14 is an unstable isotope.
It will naturally decay to become nitrogen 14 over time.
And this is very important for a planet.
It's actually four isotopes uranium 238, uranium 235, thorium 232 and potassium 40.
And by the way those numbers potassium 40, 40 is the number of neutrons and protons within
the nucleus.
These four isotopes constantly generate heat within our planet and it's sort of like keeping
your planet on the slow warm on your stove.
It's keeping it at a slow boil at a simmer and it's kept our planet geologically active.
Now heat flows from one place to the other in only three different ways.
It can occur through radiation conduction and convection.
And radiation is the natural emission of electromagnetic waves.
And waves are things like light, infrared, ultraviolet, radio waves, microwaves.
And all objects automatically emit them.
And this radiation is not the same as radioactivity.
The spectrum, the wavelength of radiation is a function of temperature.
And if objects are hot they emit a different frequency of radiation.
So for instance you are currently emitting radiation largely in the infrared spectrum.
If someone looked at you at night with infrared goggles they'd still be able to see you because
your skin is emitting that radiation.
If I were to take you and put you in an oven and heat you up you might eventually begin
to glow red and then glow white within the visible spectrum.
Now light as I've already determined has a real problem though.
It doesn't pass through rock.
So it turns out that radiation doesn't play a big role for getting the heat out from the
inside of the earth out into space.
Once we can get heat to the surface that's great.
But before then it's not very efficient.
So we have to go to the next possibility, conduction.
Well conduction is the transfer of heat by atomic motions from one to the next and it
happens in two ways.
Within rock a process of thermal conduction occurs and here you actually have the excited
motions of one atom bumping into the next atom which bumps into the next atom and that
heat propagates down atom by atom.
It's a very slow process.
When metals, something very different happens, the electrons in metals are free to move
around.
You can think of these atoms as being a bit on the wild side.
The electrons get to move around freely.
They're not staying close to home like within rock.
And these electrons carry the energy very rapidly throughout.
So for instance I can demonstrate this process with a coffee mug and you experience this
all the time.
I have a coffee mug with a metal spoon in and I'm going to take some hot water and if
I pour the water in here then I get to experience both electrical conduction and thermal conduction
because almost immediately my spoon becomes hot.
Those electrons are just zipping up and down the metal.
However I can hold this mug for quite a while and it's still going to be cool.
Why is it?
Because the atoms have to oscillate one atom to the next all the way across this coffee
cup and it takes a tremendously long time.
So turns out in earth's core electrical conduction works wonderfully.
In fact heat whisks across the core because the core is made of iron, it's made of metal.
And our mantle and crust are made of rock and so conduction just doesn't do it, doesn't
cut it.
So what do we do?
Well radiation doesn't work, conduction doesn't work, we've got to go to the third option.
And what happens within the mantles of planets is that the rock is actually flowing and it's
convecting.
What happens in convection is instead of having the energy try to flow through the rock you
move the rock and you take the energy with it.
So something's hot here, it becomes buoyant, it expands and it moves and carries the heat
to the surface.
So we're obeying the second law of thermodynamics.
We've got heat flowing from hot regions to cold regions but we're doing it by a means
of convection.
And this again is something that you see in your life often.
Those of us who grew up in the 60s and 70s may have old lava lamps sitting on our shelves.
And what happens in a lava lamp is there's a light bulb at the bottom and it heats up
the base of the liquid there and there are actually two liquids in a lava lamp.
There's a watery substance and a waxy substance and when the waxy substance heats up it expands,
it becomes more buoyant than the watery fluid.
It rises to the top where it cools off but when it cools off the atoms now shrink together
a little bit and then it becomes heavy and it sinks back down, comes in contact with
the heat source and the light bulb, rises back up and you get a convection cycle.
You get the material carrying, it's like a conveyor belt.
Takes the heat from here, expands, brings it to the top, releases the heat, cools off.
Same thing happens in a pot of soup on a stove.
The heat comes up from beneath, expands the bottom of the soup, the soup rises up, releases
the heat and sinks.
Actually one of my favorite ways of looking at the process of convection is with a bowl
of miso soup.
If you can go to a Japanese restaurant where you get the soup with a lid on, while the lid
is on there's no convection occurring because there's no opportunity for the soup to cool
at the top but the moment you take the top off, now you cool the surface and then that
surface soup begins to sink and very quickly that soup will begin to develop small rolls
and you can actually see the little particles of miso developing these rolls that will change
and move around over time.
By the way, if you have miso soup with scallions and tofu in it, that's like our continents.
They get dragged about at the top but they're too buoyant to be able to ever sink.
So what we have now is a situation where our heat is trying to get from the inside of the
planet all the way out to the surface, out into space, to cool off.
And I'm reminded of a wonderful set of stories by Italo Calvino, the Italian writer.
He has a brilliant book called Cosmic Comics where he has this fictional character that
spelled QFWFQ, I'm not sure how to pronounce it, maybe Kufk, who's there at the time in
the Big Bang and experiences the whole evolution of the universe right to the evolution of
the solar system in the Earth.
And it's interesting if you use F as the equal sign then you have Q equals W equals
Q and Q is what we use in science to represent heat and W is what we use to represent work.
And the first law of thermodynamics is that work and heat are equivalent.
So I'm wondering if his character Kufk isn't a bit of energy, but let's imagine that this
character Kufk is there at the center of the Earth's core and is tired of it and wants
to get out to the surface.
How's he going to do it?
How's it going to happen?
It's going to happen differently from every layer.
Within the inner core that energy is going to flow almost entirely by electrical conduction
just like the spoon in my coffee cup.
Once it gets into the outer core though, remember our outer core is actively convecting and flowing.
But we also have electrons flowing through it as well.
So we're going to very quickly move that heat from the bottom of the outer core, the
liquid iron there that's on the order of about 5000 degrees Celsius, up to the top of the
outer core and that's going to happen very quickly and easily because it's both convecting
and it's both electrically conducting.
Now we hit a real bottleneck though because the iron is so heavy it can't go up into
the mantle.
So that heat has got to now conduct into the base of the mantle.
But I talked about how conduction through rock is incredibly slow.
And so crossing from the core into the mantle is sort of like a traffic jam on a highway.
It's like a toll booth where all of a sudden all the traffic's got to back up and go really
slowly through this one place.
This creates a very unusual layer that I'll talk about later on in the course called the
core metal boundary region.
It seems to have upside down mountains and a whole other separate world down there.
This heat gets across this boundary very slowly but once it's into the mantle now we can do
our convection just like our miso soup.
We can actually carry that rock with the heat and take it from the base of the mantle all
the way to the top.
And this process we call of mantle convection turns out to be the driving force as I'll
show you in the next lecture for what moves the plates and why plate tectonics occurs.
Well we get that heat up to the surface, we're not done yet because we've got to get that
heat right up to the surface for it to radiate out into space.
Well there are a couple places on earth where we have volcanoes but there aren't that many.
In most cases you get that hot rock up near the surface and it still has to conduct across
the top and that conduction is incredibly slow and that creates another what we call
a thermal boundary layer just like the core metal boundary region.
This thermal boundary layer is like another toll booth on our highway and the heat has
to very slowly work its way across this.
As a result the temperature increases tremendously across the lithosphere, it goes from 0 degrees
Celsius to about 1400 degrees only over about 100 kilometers.
It actually only increases by about another 1400 kilometers or 1400 degrees going from
the bottom of the lithosphere all the way down across towards the base of the mantle.
And that's because things that the highways flowing really well there in the mantle we've
got convection going.
You get the heat conducting across it everywhere around us, you go outside that heat is coming
out at a rate of about 80 milliwatts per square meter.
So it's a very small amount but it's still measurable once it gets to the surface it radiates
out into space largely in the infrared spectrum and earth over time is cooling off is losing
its heat out into space.
Well try this, try it at home, go get some miso soup, go pour some cream and hot coffee
which is another wonderful way by the way to see convection.
Take hot cup of coffee and put a little bit of cold cream in it and you'll see these cycles,
these convection cycles that will go for a while in one direction and then we'll actually
stop and turn back the other and we'll talk about that process later when we talk about
why supercontinents form and then break and open up again.
But it's this very same process that you can see in a coffee cup or a bowl of soup that
drives the mantle convection of the earth, that drives our plate tectonics and that's
going to end up giving us everything else that we see in geology that's going to give
us gold in California and oil in the Middle East and all of the details of geology that
we find that come about from these plates moving about earth's surface are driven by
this lifeblood of heat trying to get from inside the planet and out into space.
