Welcome. In this lecture, I want to give you a deeper sense of how plate tectonics works
and what it is. It almost doesn't make sense to dedicate a single lecture to plate tectonics
because this whole course is about plate tectonics. The whole idea that the Earth's surface is
divided into plates that move about the surface of our planet and bang into each other creating
mountains and all the geology we see, this principle of plate tectonics is so fundamental
to the geology of our planet that to just put it into one lecture doesn't give it justice.
So I'm really just going to give you an overview and a little bit of the history of how it
came about. But be aware that this theme of plate tectonics is going to run throughout
all the lectures of this course. Now, I was actually born before plate tectonics was discovered.
Not that I'm that old, but it's just that plate tectonics was discovered fairly recently
in 1967. And it's hard for me to imagine what geology would even have been like. I mean,
it's like trying to do chemistry without knowing anything about atoms or trying to do biology,
knowing nothing about DNA or genetics. It just wouldn't have made any sense. And for
studying our planet, for figuring out how the Earth works, plate tectonics gives us a framework
that takes all the different facts of our planet, all the observations that we've made
and puts them into one unified set of understandings of processes and methods. For instance, you
know, biology. For a long time, you know, biologists had dissected frogs and knew all
the different body parts and the plant names and the file of this and that. But without
genetics and understanding DNA, none of this made any sense why they were the way they
were, how they came about, why children look like their parents. But that sudden understanding
of genetics was a breakthrough for the whole field. For geology, we had exactly that situation.
Geologists had done relative ages and had the geologic record and had categorized rocks
and minerals and looked at mountains and glaciers, but had no framework for understanding why
they came about, where they came about, when, how, none of that made any sense. I've actually
gone and looked back at old geology textbooks. They had a whole separate vocabulary that seemed
totally contrived to me. There were these mysterious forces that lifted land up to make
mountains and then dropped it back down to make oceans. And I look at it now and it looks
like nonsense. And I wonder how they could have even believed this. It just doesn't make
any sense to me. You know, how did they miss the obvious? The fact that the plates fit
together and all these clues of plate tectonics, many of which had been around for years and
years or even decades or centuries. I try to imagine if I were back 50 years ago, wouldn't
I have been able to see that? Wouldn't it have been obvious? I guess not. And that's
how science works. Sometimes there just needs to be a paradigm shift in how we view anything
and you can have lots of good data and lots of good information that's correct and accurate,
but somehow there's a missing key. There's a shift in the way we think. And as soon as
we can think that way, all of this information suddenly makes sense. For biology it was DNA.
For physics it was quantum mechanics or relativity. And for geology it was plate tectonics. Finally
for the first time, all this information made sense. And immediately in 1967 when it was
finally discovered, it was wholly embraced as being able to finally explain why our
Earth behaves the way it does. I have to say this understanding gives me one bit of sort
of caution and that is, what is it now that we believe that we're missing that's wrong?
In other words, have we really got it all figured out now or are we somewhat like the
people 50 years ago? It makes sense to us, but somebody 50 years in the future is going
to look back at the work that I do and my peers and say, how could they possibly have
believed that? We'll just have to wait and see. Now, I talked about there being clues
of plate tectonics that were around for a long time. The first obvious one that was
noted by the earlier early map makers, going back into the 1500s, was that the continents
on either side of the Atlantic Ocean fit together like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. Any child
can notice this on a globe. Francis Bacon back in 1620, a philosopher and early proponent
of the scientific method wrote about this. He described how the continents look like
they were once together. Benjamin Franklin in 1782 actually proposed something fairly
similar to plate tectonics. He wrote that the crust of the Earth must be a shell floating
on a fluid interior. Thus, the surface of the globe would be capable of being broken
and distorted by the violent movements of the fluids on which it rested. I mean, this
is a really bright guy. He's figured out that the Earth is acting like a fluid, like
mantle convection, and that it's breaking the plates up and it's moving them about.
This is 1782. It still took 200 years of good science before we finally figured it out.
Some geologists had been seriously proposing this. In 1908, an American geologist by the
name of Frank Taylor had proposed that the continents were moving. In 1915, we actually
had the opportunity for this big paradigm shift. A German meteorologist by the name of
Alfred Wegener came up with the ideas of continental drift. What he said was that all of our
present continents had once been together as a large supercontinent that he called Pangea
and that these continents had broken apart. He looked at all sorts of good evidence, not
just that the continents fit together, but if you look at different rocks, you'll find
the same rocks on the west coast of Africa and the east coast of South America that must
have formed when those continents were together. You can find the same fossils, plants and
animals of organisms that lived 250 million years ago on parts of India, Africa, Antarctica,
and South America. His point of view was they must have been together because these plants
couldn't have floated across the ocean and these animals couldn't swim. Now, it turned
out that Wegener kind of shot himself in the foot here because he was a weatherman. He
was a meteorologist and he didn't understand about things like rocks and flow and geophysics.
He came up with the idea that the reason these rocks were moving was because they were fleeing
the pole from some centrifugal force or the tides from the sun and moon were breaking them
apart or once they were moving their own momentum would move them. It turns out plates move
so slowly, their momentum is on the order of ocean liners. So the geologist looked at
this and said, it doesn't make any sense, this doesn't work. They couldn't get over
the fact that the continents must plow through solid ocean rock in order to be moving about
and they just couldn't get it. In other words, geology at that point wasn't in the right
place for that paradigm shift. It took a lot of work to get to the point where we could
understand how the continents could move. For instance, if I take a rock and I put it
here on the table, is this flowing? Do you see it flowing? Geologists looked at rock
and said, how can you possibly have continents plowing through rock like it's a liquid?
I've already talked about how if you take it and squeeze it at the base of the mantle,
you'll press it into half its volume. And I've talked about how the rock inside the
mantle must be flowing because it's convecting. But we see that now. Back then, it didn't
make sense to them. Couple things changed and I'll talk about these a lot in the lectures
in this course. A large part was we did a lot of good work that discovered what the ocean
seafloor looked like. It turned out the ocean seafloor with these mid-Atlantic ridges and
these deep ocean trenches and all these scars from the opening up of the plates at mid-ocean
ridges finally gave geoscientists the clue that it wasn't that the continents are plowing
through the oceans. It's that the continents are embedded in something bigger and the continents
are just being dragged about like they're on these big conveyor belts. In 1967, there
were really two scientists, Jason Morgan and Dan McKenzie and a bunch of others like the
Canadian scientist, Jay Tuzo Wilson, finally took these clues largely from the ocean seafloor
and came up with the idea and invented the term of plate tectonics. And as with any good
paradigm shift in thinking, how we view plate tectonics now is really not that different
from what they came up with back in 1967. If you look at a map of the Earth's surface
but don't look at political boundaries or land boundaries but look at the plate boundaries,
you see something that's very interesting. Our lithosphere is divided up into about
twelve major pieces of plates, twelve plates, but also a lot of many smaller microplates.
And if you look at the outlines, they're fairly unusual. For instance, North America
contains within its plate not only the continent of North America but also much of the Atlantic
Ocean, the northwestern part of the Atlantic Ocean. And interestingly, North America actually
extends over the North Pole and contains the eastern part of Siberia and even the Northern
Island of Japan within it. Something like South America contains the continent and part
of the southern Atlantic Ocean. And that's a common pattern that we notice. A lot of
these plates contain ocean crust as well as continental crust. They're often part of
the same plate. The other major plates are the African plate which involves Africa as
well as surrounding oceans in both the Indian Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, and the Mediterranean
Sea. The Eurasian plate which contains both Europe and Asia and additional oceans surrounding
it. And the Indo-Australian plate which contains both India and Australia. The last continental
piece is Antarctica which contains the oceans around it. Now it's very interesting if you
look at some of these plates, if you actually get down to what's going on, some of these
plates as we'll talk about later are actually broken up into other plates. For instance,
the African plate is in the process of rifting apart into two separate plates, the Somalian
and Nubian plates. That's what these African rift valleys are. Those will one day be oceans.
And we have plates like the Indo-Australian plate which is actually broken into three
plates. Australia and India are actually moving slightly differently and there's a separate
small plate called the Capricorn plate in between. As I talk about the different types
of boundaries between these plates in later lectures, we'll go into this more in depth.
Now the action as I talked in previous lectures, the action of plate tectonics largely occurs
at plate boundaries. This is where mountains are made, this is where volcanoes form, this
is where earthquakes occur and these boundaries take three separate types and it's not very
complicated. If you have two plates, you can pull them apart, that's called a divergent
plate boundary, you can push them together, that's called a convergent plate boundary
or you can slide them past each other and that's called a conservative plate boundary.
And we'll have a separate lecture for each of these. Now these boundaries are often very
easily identified. For instance, the mid-Atlantic ridge halfway in between the Europe and North
America represents the boundary between those two plates, the Eurasian plate and the North
American plate. Sometimes you have mountain ranges that might develop. So for instance
there's a piece of plate in the Pacific Ocean called the Nazca plate that's sinking beneath
South America, it's actually reaching South America, turning the corner and plunging down
into the mantle. That has created the Andes and that mountain belt there has grown and
is a result of this convergent plate boundary. Likewise we have the San Andreas Fault which
is the boundary in California between the North American plate and the Pacific plate.
There are times however where you actually can't see these boundaries at all. For instance
the boundary between North America and South America is somewhere in the Atlantic Ocean
but it doesn't create any geological features that we can observe. And that's because the
two plates, North America and South America are sort of connected, they sort of look like
an hourglass and they're moving together and their difference in motion is very slight
and that hasn't yet created a plate boundary. Now I talked in the last lecture about how
the plate tectonics begins at Mid-Asian ridges where you have plates that are moving apart
and we'll talk about how oceans actually go through a whole cycle of existence. They're
initially born when pieces of cotton and rift apart just like you see in the African rift
valleys now. And as that rifting continues that rift actually will eventually become ocean.
We see that in the red sea now between the Arabian plate and the African plate. And if
that continues over time and opens up you get a mature plate like the African, like
the Atlantic Ocean. And over time that ocean plate, that ocean lithosphere will begin to
sink back down into the mantle and that will cause the ocean to close up again. The Atlantic
Ocean heat that we have today is actually the latest in a succession of Atlantic Oceans.
There have been previous Atlantic Oceans but they went through a life cycle of opening
and closing and when they closed up the continents collided, in fact the Appalachian Mountains
that run all the way from south of Virginia up into Maine, these mountains are the scars,
the remnants of that collision. In fact the Atlas Mountains in Africa are the accompanying
scar in Africa from that collision. The rifts when they become mature like the Mid-Atlantic
Rich form an interconnected seam of underwater volcanoes. It's hard to imagine, lava's erupting
every day all around the globe, most of it's happening underwater though and we don't
ever see it. And these mid-ocean ridges, it's like a baseball seam, 70,000 kilometers of
continuous volcanoes all connected up underground weaving together the plates of our ocean.
Although again, it would be like a baseball but the leather's all moving apart away from
every one of the seams. Convergent boundaries are the other major type of boundary where
we see some of the most violent geology occurring. Convergent boundaries where plates smashed
together make our biggest volcanoes, they make our most damaging earthquakes. So the Sumatra
earthquake that killed nearly 300,000 people in 2004 is one of these convergent boundaries
where the Australian, Indo-Australian plate is colliding into Asia sinking beneath Sumatra
there, right nearby is Krakatoa volcano which erupted dramatically in 1883. In fact you
can go almost all the way around the rim of the Pacific Ocean and find this process of
subduction, of colliding plates and ocean sea floor sinking and that's where the term
ring of fire comes from because this process of subduction creates volcanoes all the way
around. Now continents don't always collide with ocean, sometimes continents collide with
other continents and in that process mountains are made. The most dramatic example we have
today and I will talk quite a bit more about it later on is the Himalayas. India up until
fairly recently was actually connected to Antarctica back when Pangea existed and has
moved all the way across the Indian Ocean and slammed into China. In the process it
has pushed up the whole rock of the Himalayas to make a huge enormous high scar of rock.
But you can look all the way around the globe and find previous examples of that. It's just
erosion wears them away fairly quickly. For instance the Appalachians don't look much
like much in comparison to the Himalayas, they're only about a mile high at their highest.
But the Appalachians used to be five miles higher, taller than they are now. They represented
that mountain range when Africa collided with North America. They were the Himalayas of their
day but over the past 300 million years weathering and erosion processes I'll talk quite a bit
about later on in the course have just torn them down and washed them through streams
to the oceans. If you go further inland actually from the Appalachians and get to other mountains
like the Berkshires and the Teconics and the Adirondacks these represent even older collisions
between North America and other continents. The Ural Mountains interestingly sort of politically
represent the dividing boundary between the European and the Asian parts of Russia. Well
the Urals actually are a former plate boundary. Europe and Asia were separate once and they
came together and that collision made the Ural Mountains. The third type of plate boundary,
the conservative plate boundary occurs when plates slide past each other. This is called
a transform fault and the best example we have of this is the San Andreas fault. It
actually turns out that the westernmost part of California is on the Pacific Plate. So
as some of my colleagues have wondered and have thought for a long time Los Angeles really
is different. It's really not part of our plate. It's on a totally separate plate and
in fact Los Angeles is moving northward relative to the rest of the country at the rate of
about two inches a year. In fact in about 13 million years Los Angeles will be a suburb
of San Francisco. There are other transform faults but they mostly occur within the oceans.
They mostly are part of the mid ocean ridge system. The ridge turns out to be broken up
into a very complicated jagged set of spreading centers and transform faults where plates
slide past each other and we'll spend quite a bit of time explaining why this happens.
By the way there are some other significant transform faults that are on continents and
do a lot of damage. One of the most dangerous is called the Anatolian fault that runs through
Turkey and actually runs right through Istanbul and there's a tremendous amount of concern
that an earthquake in the near future might possibly destroy that city.
Well if you go back to 1967 when Plato-Tonis was first formed people didn't know that
they didn't have the ability back then to look into the earth with seismic tomography.
That technique that I demonstrated during our journey to the center of the earth previously.
So initially when Plato-Tonis was discovered it was only in terms of describing where the
continents were moving, what the plates were doing, how they were moving about at the surface.
They really had no idea what was going on beneath. In fact if you look at pictures and
textbooks for years and years the plates sort of went away from the surface and down into
the mantle and then there was just sort of a dotted line because they had no idea what
happened. Well with the advent of seismic tomography and the understanding of mantle
convection we've now completed that second half of plate tectonics, maybe complete as
a strong word. We're now getting a strong sense of what that second half of plate tectonics
is, of how that whole process works. I will say it hasn't been without a lot of growing
pains. I went to a geophysics conference about ten years ago and we spent almost the whole
day arguing with these two sides where we had one side of the room with people saying
that plate tectonics caused mantle convection and the other side of the room saying mantle
convection caused plate tectonics. It was sort of like the story of the blind men holding
the elephant and one holds the tusk and one holds the tail and one holds the trunk and
they're all seeing different or not seeing, they're all feeling different aspects of the
same thing that happened for a while in our field. I remember somebody stood up in the
room and said look it's all the same thing, plate tectonics is mantle convection and indeed
at a fairly profound level you can really view this process of the plates moving as
simply the surface expression of a mantle wide convection. Now I talked about in the
previous lecture how when you have thermal convection you get these cells that move material.
I gave you the example of the miso soup flowing. What's very interesting is if you actually
do quite complicated experiments you come up with a very interesting situation for how
convection should happen within a planet like Earth. Now how do we find out what's actually
going on beneath the surface? Well I said we can get these images from seismic tomography
but I have to say they're somewhat blurry. It's not really the same as taking a nice
photograph and so the interpretation of these is sometimes a little dicey. We can also use
convection modeling on a computer and here we write computer programs that try to simulate
the whole process of having a whole planet simultaneously convecting. These are enormous
calculations. They take supercomputers and they crank away for months in order to come
up with realistic models but what they come up with is quite remarkable. And lastly we
can actually do some experiments in the laboratory and there are scientists who take giant tanks
of corn syrup and heat it up and look at how this gooey thick corn syrup rises and then
sinks in convection cells. I'm told that after a short while of doing these experiments the
whole building is sticky from this hot corn syrup. But all three of these, the seismic
tomography, the computer convection modeling and the experiments with corn syrup show us
the same thing and that is that the style of convection that you get in an Earth or really
in any planet is really dependent upon very particular characteristics. It depends upon
the difference in temperature between the top and the bottom of your mantle. How viscous
your material is, how easily it flows, how large your planet is, what the density of
the rock is, how large gravity is, how much the rock expands when you heat it, all these
different factors each play in a role. And so it turns out that you can actually get
mantle convection taking many different forms other than plate tectonics. And in fact we
think that the fact that Earth has plate tectonics is actually quite rare and quite remarkable.
Well what are the major factors here? Well you're heating things up and you're cooling
them off. Well in pretty much every situation you're cooling the rock, you're cooling the
planet at the surface. And what that does is it makes down going sheets. So you end
up with rock at the top getting very stiff and brittle and when it sinks down it has
a slab like shape that it actually retains going down deep into the Earth. Because remember
remember my coffee cup from the last lecture, it takes a long time for heat to conduct through
rock. So once you take a cold sheet of rock that's sitting underneath an ocean for 200
million years and you plunge that down into the Earth, that sheet is going to stay in
the shape of a sheet for a long time. We see that in the convection modeling on a computer
and we see it in the seismic tomography. But as I already talked about we have two ways
that we can heat our mantle. We can have heat coming up from the core and we can have heat
generated internally by radioactivity. And here's a problem because we don't know how
much of both of these play a role. We know there's radioactivity, we know that there's
heat generated internally, but we also know that there's heat coming up from below. And
there's a really important difference here and that is that if you have heat from below
like in a pot of soup, you end up generating what are called plumes. You create a temperature
instability that causes material to become more easily flowing and that forms these bubbles
that end up rising up in these mushroom shaped plumes. For a mental image think of a mushroom
cloud from a nuclear explosion, this large rising mushroom, in that case it's hot air
within the earth, it's hot rock. Now these plumes are solid, they're still solid rock,
but they're rock that's flowing more easily because they're hot and they rise up through
the mantle. Now it's very interesting, if you were to have only internally convected
heat, so only heat that comes from radioactivity, you don't generate any mantle plumes at all.
If you only heated your mantle from below with no radioactivity, you'd have massive
plumes rising up everywhere. And when these plumes get to the surface, they create volcanoes
like Hawaii or Yellowstone or Iceland or the Azores, places where you have volcanoes that
aren't necessarily near plate boundaries. So it's been a real struggle for us to figure
that out. And in fact we haven't really, this is an argument that's still very much rages
within our field. When I go to my annual geophysics meeting every December in San Francisco, there
are many sessions dedicated to how much of the earth convects in the form of plumes and
how much of it is just a broad return flow replacing the sheets of rock that come down.
So we're still trying to figure this all out. Best is we can tell the earth is somewhere
in between. It's like taking this bowl of miso soup that we had from the last lecture
and putting it on top of a stove, and then taking the whole stove and putting it in a
microwave oven. So you are here, you are here, you are here.
Taking the whole stove and putting it in a microwave oven. So you are heating our mantle
from below, like the heat from the core, but you're also heating it internally, which is
what a microwave does, which is what happens with the heat from radioactivity. More work
is in the process and hopefully within time we'll have a better sense of the difference
of all this. Well, so where does that put us? Well, here's a rock here. It's been here
all lecture long. Has it flowed yet? Did you see anything? Actually, if you said no, then
you weren't paying close enough attention. In fact, during the course of this lecture
in 30 minutes, this rock has moved 60 millions of an inch away from Europe. All right, great
granted, the whole studio has been moving as well. So if you're watching the rock, it's
not going to move relative to the table. But everywhere in North America is moving 60 millions
of an inch from Europe every 30 minutes. And Earth takes its time here. Plate tectonics
move slowly. It doesn't need to impress us. We're just the latest new kid on the block.
And really, to impress this upon you, we are such a new species that 20% of all the adult
humans that have ever lived are alive today. We've only been around not even 200,000 years.
It's the story of the tortoise and the hare here. Plate tectonics takes its time, but
the results, the Himalayas, supercontinents is really spectacular. I'll come back to
plate tectonics more in the course. But I'm going to take a break in the next set of lectures
because before I can talk more about plate tectonics, I really need to talk about what
the Earth is made of. It's made of rocks, and the rocks are made of minerals, and the
minerals are made of atoms. And so starting with the next lecture, I'm going to start
with a big bang and stars, and I'm going to make atoms that we can eventually make a planet
out of.
