Welcome.
In the last lecture, I made atoms, both at the start of the Big Bang and also in the
last stages of stars, in supernova explosions, and in this lecture, I want to take those
atoms, I want to do something with them, I want to make a planet Earth and its surrounding
solar system.
Now there are a few things in our history that have caused more thought and discussion
and often controversy than how the Earth formed.
In fact, if you go to any culture and any civilization, it has rich creationists that
tell the story of how our planet came about.
These stories are incredibly creative and tell us a tremendous amount, if not about
how the Earth formed, then at least about the people who wrote these stories.
Often our Earth was formed out of mud or out of a void.
In some, like in the Norse mythology, it's from the remains of a slain god, or sometimes
it's hatched from a cosmic egg.
In some cultures, the Earth is resting on top of a giant animal, and in some cases that
creation occurs spontaneously, and in other times, it's the work of a god or gods that
may take a week or so.
And in fact, some of these stories of creation creative still exist to this day.
There's a wonderful anecdote attributed to Bertrand Russell.
Apparently as the story goes, he was giving a lecture once on our universe and the whole
structure of our solar system in the galaxy.
And after his lecture, someone stood up in the back and said, well, that's all very well
and good, but you know that the Earth is resting on the back of a giant turtle.
And Bertrand Russell apparently was a little taken aback by this, but was quick on his
feet and said, well, that's very well, madam, but what's the turtle resting on?
And the woman unfazed said, you think you're a very smart young man, but it's turtles
all the way down.
Well, every culture has its own creation story, and now most everybody's story is the story
that I'm presenting here in this lecture about how our Earth and all the other planets
form simultaneously out of a single cloud that formed around our sun and that this whole
process, this whole solar system came about, occurred at the same time.
I say it's most everybody's story.
It's really for the first time that we have a creation story that's accepted all around
the world by people from all different cultures.
The reason for this, of course, is there's just an overwhelming body of scientific evidence
that now supports this idea.
But also it's amazing and beautiful in its own right, and I hope you get a sense of that
from this lecture.
And I will go out of limb and say, I don't think Earth rests on a pile of turtles like
some Dr. Seuss story.
Our Earth and the rest of the planets revolve around a sun as part of a solar system that
contains not only planets, but asteroids, meteoroids, all sorts of comets, and a ton
of small debris all orbiting our sun.
Now figuring out this story is kind of like detective work.
As a child I love the books of Arthur Conan Doyle, the Sherlock Holmes stories, where
someone would walk into Sherlock Holmes' study, and before they even opened their mouth, Sherlock
Holmes would tell from the mud on their shoes or the cigarette in their hands what the story
was and why they had come to visit him.
And geologists are kind of like Sherlock Holmes.
They really are experts on mud and things.
And by looking at the clues that we have around us in our solar system, we've been able to
figure out what the story is, how our solar system and our Earth came about.
Now any model that explains the solar system has to be able to do two things.
It has to be able to explain the observations that we actually see around us.
In other words, it has to fit the data of what's there today.
It also has to be able to predict new observations as they come up.
And the best model that we have for that is the idea that our whole solar system formed
out of a protoplanetary disk.
Now let me give you the clues that we have to go by.
First of all, our sun is almost all of our solar system.
It's 99% of the mass of the entire solar system.
Any model of how our solar system formed has to fit with that.
Also, this is very important, if you look at the planets closest to the sun, like Mercury,
they tend to be very metal rich.
As you move away from the sun, the planets have more and more rock in proportion, and
then more ice and gas as you move out towards the outer part of the solar system.
Another bit of evidence is that some planets show tremendous amount of cratering.
But not all.
For instance, on Earth we don't see very many impact craters at all, but if you look
at Mercury at the moon, they're almost entirely covered with these craters.
So we have to be able to explain where all these impact craters came from.
It's also a very important observation that all the planets revolve around the sun in
the same direction and in nearly the same plane, what we call the solar ecliptic.
In other words, if this table, if this were a giant table and the sun were in the middle
of it, all of our planets are moving all around in the same direction.
It's counterclockwise if you take the north pole as being up.
This is true for meteoroids, it's true for many comets as well, and so something has
to be able to explain that.
And interestingly as part of this, most planets also rotate in the same direction, though
there are some unusual exceptions.
Venus is hardly rotating at all, and Uranus is actually on its side rotating 90 degrees
away from the direction that it's moving around the sun.
And lastly, the planetary orbits, the orbits of these different planets don't intersect
with each other.
So this is our evidence, the plane Sherlock Holmes, this is what we have to work with.
Well, as I mentioned, the best model is this protoplanetary disk, also called the accretionary
disk model.
And the basic idea is we started with a very, very broad and diffuse cloud of gas, dust
and ice particles.
Now some of this stuff had been around for a while, the hydrogen had obviously been around
from the time of the Big Bang, but a lot of the other material came from a very recent
supernova.
It probably happened only millions of years before our solar system began, but it also
would have incorporated a lot of other material from previous supernovas as well.
And all of this matter would have begun to be pulled together by gravity.
In the process, it would have begun to shrink by many thousands of times into a much smaller
volume.
Now as the universe, as our solar system would have begun to shrink, it would have begun
to spin.
And what would have happened here is that a very small initial amount of rotation would
have begun to spin faster and faster through the process of conservation of angular momentum.
Now it turns out that if you have any object that's moving around, that's rotating, the
product of its mass and the distance from its axis of rotation has to be conserved.
You probably have a sense of this already if you've ever watched someone skating.
When a skater begins to spin, their arms are out.
And then as they pull their arms in, they go much faster.
Very quickly, they begin to rotate fast as they pull their arms in.
What's happening is that angular momentum is conserved, they pull the mass in, they
spin faster.
Well, the exact same thing has to happen with any beginning solar system.
Now if you look at how this initial protoplanetary disk formed, very quickly it would have had
a fried egg shape.
Now one thing that's very nice with the Hubble Space Telescope, this is no longer hypothetical.
We can actually look into regions where new stars are forming and we can find this fried
egg looking disk where stars are just beginning their lifetimes.
Well there are two factors at work here.
First of all, gravity is pulling everything together.
So gravity wants to pull everything into one star.
And if that were the end of the story, we wouldn't have planets.
Everything would have come together to form a star.
However, we have essentially what I call a merry-go-round effect.
It's an apparent centrifugal force.
And that is, as our protoplanetary disk began to spin faster, material got thrown off along
the equator of that rotation.
Material couldn't get pulled in and that centrifugal force combated gravity and caused a small
amount, again only about 1%, but enough to make planets with about 1% of the mass of
our solar system to stay out in the disk of our fried egg shaped solar system.
At the beginning of the disk, our sun began to form initially entirely in the dark.
So long before there was light in our solar system, the sun was already beginning to
compress under the self-gravitation.
The temperature in the process was becoming intense.
When the temperature at the core reached about 10 billion degrees or so, fusion would have
begun.
Hydrogen would have begun fusing to make helium and light would have been created.
For most of our sun's life, certainly for the 4.567 billion years our solar system has
been around, hydrogen has been burning to make helium, giving off the light that we
see in our solar system.
Near the end of our star's life, again 4 to 5 billion years, as I mentioned in the
last lecture, the temperature will increase when it goes above 20 billion degrees, helium
atoms will begin to fuse to make carbon and oxygen, and by the time you get above a trillion
degrees or so in the core of our star, it will begin to create silicon and all these
other elements up to iron and nickel.
If our sun were larger, it would undergo a process of explosive nucleosynthesis, which
I discussed in the last class, where you'd have a supernova that over a period of weeks
would eject this material violently out into space.
In the case of our sun, it won't ever reach that supernova stage, but it only needed to
be a little bit larger and it would have.
In fact, it's interesting if our sun were only three times bigger than its current
size, it would have lived for only about 230 million years, which would be rough for
us because we took 4 billion years to evolve out of single celled life.
Now early on in the sun's formation, it went through a very important phase called the
T-Tory phase, and this is named after a star that we observed, T-Tory.
It was a pressure explosion that would have sent a shockwave through our solar system,
removing a lot of the debris in the inner solar system, and in the process, stripping
away the inner planets of their atmospheres.
This turns out to be really important later on in the course because we wouldn't have
any air to breathe, we wouldn't have any atmosphere if it weren't for the process of degassing
the interior of our planet through volcanoes.
So when we get to volcanoes, we think about volcanoes as erupting lava, but they also
eject gas into the atmosphere, and indeed our entire atmosphere has been created by
since the formation of the Earth.
We have no idea what Earth's early atmosphere was entirely removed.
Now going to the outer parts of this protoplanetary disk, things would have happened really quickly.
Initially our disk would have been very, very smooth, lots of small particles all moving
together around the sun, mostly gases, mostly hydrogen and helium, of course, that's what
our universe is mostly made of, but also little bits of rock and metal, and what we
call ices, which are frozen methane, ammonia, and water.
These are gases on the Earth, or liquids, but out in the cold of space they tend to form
ices.
Well, as this disk was rotating, the material would have begun to clump up.
Now, interestingly at this stage, gravity would have had no effect.
Remember, I said that gravity between any two objects is almost insignificant.
I don't feel these two objects being pulled together by any means.
So initially the first little bits of clumps of matter were entirely held together by very
weak electrostatic forces, essentially they're like dust balls, it's like the stuff under
my bed, little bits of dust that begin to clump together, that's what happened early
on in our solar system.
Now, at first I had a hard time understanding this because I pictured our initial solar system
as being very violent and things moving quickly, but in reality, material was moving together
fast around the star, but slow relative to each other, so little bits of dust were maybe
only moving centimeters a second relative to each other, and they began to come together
and form these clumps.
Early on close to the sun, the temperature was very, very intense and was heating up,
and some of this material may have begun melting, which would have helped material clump together.
Now, early on at this time, the inner solar system became so hot that actually it was
too hot for things like gases or ices to form solids, so the planets that formed at
the closest inner part of the solar system were almost entirely metal, which is what
could solidify out at those temperatures. Then as you got further away, you would have
rock forming, but where the earth formed at this distance from the sun, it was still too
hot for all those ices, that water and methane and ammonia, to become solid or liquid, it
remained in a gas form, and as a result, the planets like Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars
never got big enough so that they had a gravitational field that can hold onto gases. What was different
by the time you got to Jupiter, however, was that you were far enough from the sun that
methane and ammonia and water were solid. They were in an ice form, so they began to
be part of the planets that were growing out at that distance, and as a result, they got
heavy enough that they could then hold onto gases like hydrogen and helium. When we talk
about what's in our solar system later on in the course, we'll see that these large
gas giants, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, are mostly hydrogen and helium, the material
that our universe is mostly made of. We didn't get it because Earth never got large enough.
It was just too close to the sun, and it was too hot. But I'm getting a little ahead of
myself. Let me go back to that early time where material was clumping up. I've got big
dustballs floating around, and they're getting larger and larger. By the way, we actually
think that the asteroids are remnants from this time and are essentially these large
rubble heaps, these large dustballs that contain material that just was loosely glommed together
and never actually formed a planet. By the time these dustballs reached more than about
a kilometer in size, gravity began to take over, and you got a runaway effect that very
rapidly, probably on the order of thousands of years, which is incredibly fast, geologically
speaking, would have swept up much of the material of our solar system and formed millions
of these baby planets that we call planetesimals. At this point early on, you would have had
an unbelievably violent period, with literally millions of planetesimals whizzing about continuously
climbing into each other. In the process, they were growing larger, and as they grew
larger, their gravitational field was larger, so they began to sweep up all the debris
that was in their orbit. Eventually, this process happened until the eight planets, Mercury,
Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, had orbits that no longer crossed
and had swept up all the material in their orbits. By the way, Pluto was recently demoted
from a planet largely for this reason. Pluto swings within the orbit of Neptune for part
of its traverse around the sun, and therefore it doesn't sweep up all the material in its
orbit, and so it's been demoted to a dwarf planet.
The very last period of this stage, we call the late heavy bombardment period, would have
been a period of extreme violence in the solar system. It actually lasted for a few hundred
million years, but it's at this time when the last of the large planetesimals were all
colliding with each other. We see impact basins on the moon and Mercury that are more than
a thousand kilometers in size, and this is a period when these enormous large baby planets
were smashing into each other the last collisions that were going on.
Now, Earth has had two major phases in its history. A brief period of heating up up to
this time of this late heavy bombardment period, and then everything since, which has been
a long extended period of cooling down. And these two stages have almost nothing in common
with each other. The early stage would have been fast, violent, largely catastrophic,
like that whole debate in terms of catastrophism versus uniformitarianism. Well, the first part
of Earth's history was really dominated by this catastrophism, large impacts, tremendous
heating. And in the last four plus billion years, this period of cooling down has been
dominated by uniformitarianism. Indeed, by the time Earth got to be the way it is four
billion years ago, its geology was very much in place, and what was going on back then was
probably quite similar to what we see today. Now, that period where Earth heated up, the
heating occurred for several different factors and brought Earth to a point where it was
probably entirely or very close to entirely molten. So, imagine our planet Earth being
a liquid ball of magma floating in space around the sun. Now, this heating up occurred for
several reasons. First of all, you had simply the gravitational compression of the Earth.
As I previously talked about, temperature is a measure of the internal activity of the
atoms of any material, and if you increase the pressure, you increase the temperature.
So, as Earth began to compress, the internal temperature began to rise simply from that
pressure. The atoms had less space, they banged into each other more often, and that created
higher temperatures. Secondly, there was the addition of energy to the Earth through all
of these impacts. What happens during these impacts? Well, what happens is, let's say,
I've got a meteorite that's coming towards the Earth on the order of, let's say, 30 kilometers
a second, and as it comes down, it has gravitational potential energy, which it then loses to energy
of motion, that's kinetic energy, and then all of a sudden it hits the surface of the
Earth. Well, where did that energy go? Well, remember I said energy has to be conserved,
it's one of the fundamental laws of our universe. So, if you take the gravitational potential
energy, you convert it into kinetic energy of motion, and then you hit the surface of
the Earth, that energy all goes into heat, and if you have lots and lots of objects impacting
the surface of the Earth, you get a whole lot of heat, and that Earth began to continuously
heat up through the process of these multiple impacts. Now, similar to this conversion of
gravitational potential energy from outside impacts, you also converted some of the gravitational
potential energy of Earth's own structure into heat through the compression of the Earth,
because if you take a planet and you have that planet squeeze and compress, you're dropping
rock, you're taking gravitational potential energy, and you are releasing that, and that
goes into heat as well. And the most dramatic example of this would have been the formation
of our core. Now, as I've already talked about when I showed the hard-boiled egg for the
Earth, we have an interior of our planet that is primarily iron, but our planet, of
course, didn't begin that way. It began as a homogeneous ball of dust and rock and metal.
Well, it turns out that metals melt at a much lower temperature than rock does. So, as the
interior of our planet began to heat up, at some point you would have begun to reach the
melting point of iron. Now, at this point, small bits of iron are going to become liquid,
and liquid iron has two important properties. It's heavy, and because it's liquid, it's
mobile. So, these droplets of iron would have begun to sink and plunge towards Earth's
center. But in the process, they would have released more gravitational potential energy
that would have gone into more heat, that would have raised the temperature and melted
more iron, and you would have had a runaway process that very quickly would have removed
most of the iron from our planet and concentrated it into the core, a molten core in the interior
of our planet. Now, interestingly, we see fragments of meteorites, fragments that we
think came from the asteroid belt, that also show this separation of iron out of rock,
and these would have been from planetesimals much, much smaller than the Earth. So, we think
that Earth's core actually formed quite early on in the process of Earth's formation, and
as more and more impactors came, the iron just kept separating out and adding to Earth's
core. Now, there's another very important source of energy that caused the Earth's melt,
and that's through the decay of short-lived radioactive isotopes. Now, I've already talked
about how if it weren't for uranium and potassium and thorium, we wouldn't be here. We wouldn't
have plate tectonics. Our planet wouldn't be geologically alive. But these radioactive
isotopes have very, very, very long lifetimes. They last a long time before they decay and
give off energy. Soon after that supernova explosion, right at that time, there would
have been enormous amounts of very short-lived radioactive elements, and these materials
would have been generating a tremendous amount of heat. Now, we don't see them anymore. They're
long gone. They all decayed through radioactive decay early on in Earth's history, but during
that decay, they would have given off a tremendous amount of heat as well. Now, all of these processes
were fairly continual, okay? We're fairly gradual, except for the moment that the Earth's
core began to first separate. But even then, through much of Earth's growth, it already
had a core, and the iron just kept melting and separating out. However, the final source
of heat for the Earth was very catastrophic. And interestingly, it is actually the moment
that our Moon was formed as well. At the end of this period of Earth heating up, our planet
was hit by a Mars-sized planetesimal, and the collision would have been unbelievable,
cataclysmic. In the process, an enormous amount of Earth's rock got ejected out into
space, as well as rock from whatever this protomoon object was that hit us. Now, it's
interesting, if you look at the composition of the Moon and the Earth, they're very, very
similar, though not exact, which is why we think that the Moon formed from some combination
of both Earth and some other object. But one significant difference between the Moon and
the Earth is that the Moon is very devoid of iron. It's missing a tremendous amount
of iron. And we now think that in that collision, the iron core of the Moon got absorbed into
the Earth, and very little of the heavier iron got thrown back out. Now, this debris
of the, that would become our Moon would have been orbiting the Earth, but gravity would
have very quickly pulled that material together to make a Moon. At that point, the tidal forces
from the Earth would have been huge, the Moon would have been tremendously molten itself.
However, the Moon, being a small object, would have cooled relatively quickly, at least compared
to the Earth. And so, within about a billion and a half years, the Moon became essentially
frozen, just a dead cinder of rock floating around, orbiting the Earth. So, if we look
at this impact process, it's another one of these great examples of this whole spectrum
of events between catastrophism and uniformitarianism. Again, there are impacts that are happening
all the time. We're constantly getting bombarded by small impacts, bits of comet and meteoroid.
But, you can also get these rare, enormous catastrophic collisions, like the one that
formed our Moon, and they dramatically and instantaneously changed the course of history.
Now, I should say, we didn't always think that the Moon formed this way. There were a lot
of very creative ideas. Some people, early on in previous centuries, proposed that the
Moon was a separate planet that was captured by the Earth, much the way Mars' small little
asteroids were captured. Turns out this isn't possible. Our Moon is too big, and if it had
swung by the Earth, it would have just swung right past and back out into the Solar System.
Some people actually proposed that the Moon formed when a star came by and ripped part
of the Earth out to form what's now the Pacific Ocean. In fact, George Darwin, one of Charles
Darwin's sons, who was a very accomplished scientist in his own right, proposed this.
Well, we now know from plate tectonics that the shape of the Pacific is simply a coincidence
in time, and that if you go 100 million years in the past or the present, the Pacific Ocean
isn't there. It has a different shape. So, clearly, that wasn't the answer.
Well, what happened? Very soon after this dramatic period of Earth's heating, our Earth
began to cool down. A solid lithosphere began to form. Our continents began to rise up out
of the mantle. Essentially, the scum of the Earth, the light rock, floated up to the top
to form the top layer. The heaviest materials in the mantle began to sink down to form the
dregs of the Earth to form this unusual core mantle boundary region, this layer right at
the base of the mantle. And from that point onward, geology, as we know it today, began
with continents moving about, plate tectonics occurring, and the gradual reshaping of these
continents. Now, it's interesting. There's a large debate as to whether the continents
that we see today were all around back then but have been reworked, or whether the continents
have actually grown in size. But I'll talk about that more when I use North America as
an example and talk about how continents actually grow and increase in size over time.
So, in conclusion, Earth's creation was a dramatic and stunning event, as creative as
any creation story that any culture has ever thought up in the past. Collisions of Mars
size objects with planets like our own Earth, millions of collisions happening all throughout
our solar system, moments where the sun first began to undergo fusion and light first spread
out throughout a solar system that up until that point had only known darkness. These
events would have been truly dramatic and incredible. Now, since then, we've had a little
bit less drama, but we've replaced that drama with an increase in complexity. And in the
further lectures, I'll show you how the complexity of our planet continues to give us a very
unique geology.
