Welcome. Today we're going to go on a journey. Several, actually. Hypothetical, of course.
But I'm going to give you a job. Here's a piece of paper. It's made from a tree, and I want you to figure out how to get a carbon atom from this piece of paper back into another tree.
You see, today's lecture is on the rock cycle, and I was going to list out all the different components of the rock cycle. Break it down and categorize it. You have magma, you have crystallization, erosion, transportation, sedimentation, cementation, lithification, metamorphism, melting, magma, and then you're back around again.
But that kind of misses the point, because the rock cycle is something that you and I are very much a part of as well. And hopefully, by the end of this lecture, you'll have a sense of not only what the stages of the rock cycle are, but of your participation in it as well.
So it just makes more sense to have a job at hand. So let's get on about this carbon atom. This one here, let's say. And we want to get this back into a tree, and the one right outside, wherever you might be, for example. How do you do it?
Well, let's be creative. We can take this piece of paper, we can walk outside, we can bury it next to the roots of the tree, the paper will dissolve over time, the carbon atom will be absorbed by the roots of the plant. That's sort of like weathering the way this paper will decay.
The roots will absorb that carbon atom back up in to make the new tree. Okay? Well, that's good. How else could you do it? Well, I could burn it. I'm not allowed to do it here, but if I could, I would do two things. There'd be some carbon soot, particles of carbon that would be in the air, and these could float out, outside, into the ground, and then be absorbed by the roots.
Also, the process of combustion, however, would make some carbon dioxide gas. The CO2 gas is in the atmosphere, it goes outside, it gets absorbed, not by the roots, but now by the leaves of the plant back into the tree, and then the carbon goes into making new tree and eventually new paper.
That's a totally different other root through the cycle. Well, how else could we do it? Well, I could swallow it. If I were to tear up this piece of paper and eat it, then the carbon atom would be combined with oxygen within me to make carbon dioxide, which I would exhale, which would go back into the air and then absorb by the plant.
It's another root. Or I could take this piece of paper and I could tear it up or crumple it up, and I could flush it down the drain. It would go through the pipes of the building, out into the sewer, out through some sewage treatment plant, eventually into a stream, and then into a larger river, and then it would make it out into the ocean.
This is the process of transportation. I'm transporting material from one place to another. So now I have my carbon atom in the ocean. What happens there? Well, there are multiple paths at this point. My carbon dioxide could leave the ocean surface.
The oceans, as we'll see later on the course, are huge reservoirs of carbon dioxide. In fact, that's where most of the carbon dioxide that would have been on our atmosphere is actually sequestered away, that and rocks that actually have then been formed out of that ocean environment.
So it could leave the ocean surface. It could travel through the air and back to the tree. Okay, that's another path. Or once it's in the ocean, it could be eaten by something other than me. It could be eaten by a clam or coral. It could go into that clam shell.
And clam shell is made of calcium carbonate. The formula for that is CaCO3, calcium carbonate. That shell could get buried down and onto the bottom of the seafloor. Actually, if carbon goes into the ocean, it's more likely to be eaten by plankton initially and then die and either be eaten by something else or fall to the seafloor and get buried as this organic calcium carbonate ooze.
This is the process of deposition. So we take rock and we weather it and we transport it through streams and we deposit it into the ocean.
Now, you know all about calcium carbonate ooze. Did you brush your teeth today? If you did and you use toothpaste, then you use calcium carbonate. That's essentially what most toothpaste is made of, that and some sugar.
Same thing with tums or chalk. It's essentially the skeletons of ocean organisms that have consumed carbon to make their skeletons.
Well, what happens to that carbon atom once it gets buried? Well, more and more shells and ooze and mud and sand could get buried on top of it.
So this now gets squeezed and compressed. Any spaces in between the shells get filled in with dissolved calcium carbonate.
Turns out that calcium carbonate can precipitate right out of water and that precipitate can fill in the holes in between the shells.
And that process is called cementation, making cement. And as you squeeze further, you squeeze the water out and eventually you have a new stone.
You have a sedimentary rock and this is a process called lithification.
So we've now taken our carbon atom and we've put it onto the bottom of the ocean seafloor.
Well, okay, that's a long ways away from the tree. So how do we get it back to the tree? Well, there are several routes.
Let's do the simple one first. We can lower the sea level. When does the sea level drop?
Sea level drops during times of cold climate. So we can go into an ice age.
The water leaves the ocean, falls on land as rain and snow becomes ice. The sea level drops.
Now that ocean rock that was forming on the bottom of the seafloor is now above the sea surface and it begins to erode.
And it's exposed to more weathering and rain. Or perhaps that erosion doesn't happen on the surface, it could happen underground as a cave.
Water could be flowing through the ground, dissolving rock out, and then removing that carbon atom from the rock.
See, it turns out that most of the geology on earth's surface, the erosional side that I'll talk about later on in this course,
happens when rainwater combines with carbon dioxide to make carbonic acid.
And this acid is present in rain naturally. So rain is already slightly acidic.
Now of course we've done some things with our industrial world to increase the acidity of rain, but on its own rain is already slightly acidic and it dissolves rock.
So we could then dissolve that calcium carbonate, which by the way forms a rock called limestone, which I've already talked about.
And that carbon dioxide could go back into the atmosphere or it could go back into the streams, back down into the ocean, back into another clam.
Or we could get a little more complicated. We could take that rock and we can put it in between a plate collision.
Continents could converge and that carbon atom could be trapped in between.
What happens here? Well, that whole region that contained that carbon atom could get pushed down deep.
And what happens to rock when it goes down deep is two things. The pressure goes up and the temperature goes up.
And the rock itself changes into an entirely new rock. New minerals grow, whole structures disappear, and this is a process called metamorphism.
So if you take your limestone, your calcium carbonate, that contains our carbon atom and you smash it in between two continents, that limestone becomes marble.
It's an entirely new rock.
So look at these paths already, okay? And we've just begun to investigate this and already our carbon atom has traveled many different paths.
We're not done yet, of course, because now we're stuck with a carbon atom down deep underneath a mountain range that's been created when these two continents collided.
Well, let's say the plate collision ends. The mountains stop growing and the mountains begin to erode.
Erosion hates mountains and tears them down as fast as they go up. The Himalayas are rising currently as India continues to move in towards China.
But erosion is tearing them down at almost the same rate that they're going up.
Well, what happens? If you take a mountain range and you erode away the surface, it's sort of like sitting up off of a spring mattress.
The mountain has compressed and pushed down the crust of the earth a little bit. You remove the mountain and it begins to spring up.
So the more you remove, the more it rises up and the more it rises up, the more it erodes away.
And soon that carbon atom, which was way down deep in the core of that mountain, is now exposed at the surface again.
That marble is now being eroded.
I've gone to visit family in Vermont and gone to factories where they mine and they cut marble.
And it's amazing to look at the colors and textures in this marble.
Now, it's the same calcium carbonate with a little bit of stuff added into it, but it doesn't look at all like the clam.
That process of metamorphism has so altered the material into new rock that it often doesn't look anything like the rock it began with.
Okay, so we've got our marble eroded at the surface and we've got carbonic acid, carbon dioxide gas, our carbon atom.
Again, can follow several routes. It can go up into the atmosphere at this point or it can go back down the streams and back into the sea.
Okay, back to the drawing board, back to the ocean.
I don't know who it was who said all roads lead to Rome, but in geology, all roads lead to the ocean.
And as far as the rock cycle goes, everything comes back to the ocean over and over in repeated cycles.
Well, we can do a couple other things with that ocean sea floor.
We can bring that ocean sea floor into a subduction zone.
So we can take that carbon at the bottom of the ocean sea floor and we can stuff it down into the mantle.
So now it's sinking deep down into the earth, moving centimeters a year.
That's where the rate that your fingernails grow.
And at about 100 kilometers down, any water or most of the water that's in that subducting ocean sea floor will leave and often will carry gases like carbon dioxide with it.
It goes up into the mantle above it and that water lowers the melting point of the rock and magma begins to form.
So we've now taken a solid piece of paper and we are now magma 100 kilometers beneath the volcano.
That magma rises up, the liquid is lighter than the surrounding rock, it's buoyant, it comes to the surface and it erupts at the surface as a volcano.
And that carbon dioxide gas gets put back up into the atmosphere and then absorbed by our tree again.
Or, as what happens actually most of the time, the magma comes up above the subduction zone but doesn't make it to the surface and it crystallizes underground.
And crystallization is the process of forming minerals directly out of magma as that material cools.
Now we have a new underground igneous rock which then can be eroded at the surface or buried in metamorphose again.
So we now have several processes that can happen to our atom once that happens.
But here's the big one. Suppose we take that subducting lithosphere and we continue to go down, way down deep into the mantle.
The carbon now is no longer stable at these deep pressures and if there's other carbon around it, the intense pressures are going to squeeze that carbon into a diamond.
So now the carbon that wasn't a piece of paper previously in a tree now finds itself forming diamond more than 100 miles beneath the surface.
That sea floor containing that little bit of diamond goes down, sinks down under the pull of gravity, pulling this cold ocean sea floor deep down into the earth.
Now it has to go from the upper mantle into the lower mantle and this actually, there's a little bit of trouble here because it turns out that the pressure is so great as you go down inside the mantle
that all the rock that exists in the upper mantle keeps getting reorganized into denser and denser packing.
We'll talk about this in the lecture on minerals and there's actually a barrier to this process of subduction.
It's about 660 kilometers down where the rock goes from a slightly more buoyant phase into a denser packing.
Sometimes the ocean lithosphere actually lays horizontally for a while at this depth and then turns the corner and plunges deep down.
When I say plunge again, it's moving at millimeters or centimeters a year, plunging in geologic time though not in our time.
So let's say eventually that slab of ancient ocean sea floor is able to penetrate and sink down.
Now it's going down across the mantle, sinking down where it will eventually end up at the very base of the mantle, almost 3,000 kilometers from the surface lying right on top of the liquid iron outer core.
This region is essentially a graveyard of subducted ocean sea floor and these sea floor slabs pile up there.
Why do they stay as slabs? Remember we talked about how slow and inefficient thermal conduction is.
So the slab retains its stiff slab shape even after hundreds of millions of years of sinking down through the solid mantle.
It may hang around for a few hundred more million years down at the base of the mantle, but it will begin to get hot.
Heat will come into it from the core and this rock will begin to expand and now we're part of this whole mantle convection cycle that we've talked about.
The rock becomes buoyant and then it begins to rise back up again.
As it comes up, it can go lots of places. It could come up underneath a continent, eventually to erupt at a volcano like Yellowstone in the middle of North America,
or it could come and come towards the mid-ocean ridge to form the volcanic rock that creates this continuous line of volcanoes that we see at the bottom of the ocean sea floor.
But as it comes back up, the carbon will begin to melt as it reaches the surface again.
It'll erupt, go back into carbon dioxide and back into the atmosphere.
Or if it goes under the continent, it might get buried as diamond deep beneath the continent and it may sit there for hundreds of millions or even billions of years
until some human goes down and digs it up and mines it, uses it as a diamond for lots of industrial reasons.
It might be ground up, powderized and eventually go back into the rock cycle that way.
There are so many different paths and I've really only touched on the obvious ones.
There are really so many more and each one is unique according to the geological environment that it's in.
I mean, who knew that so much could happen to a piece of paper?
It could take a day or it could take a billion years and Adam never knows what its fate is going to be.
There's an images poem by William Carlos Williams that I love.
It goes, so much depends upon a red wheelbarrow glazed with rainwater beside the white chickens.
Now, I don't know what Williams meant by that poem, but to me it means things that are seemingly unimportant,
that don't seem to have any meaning necessarily, can end up being tremendously important.
Small factors can lead towards huge consequences.
There's a whole mathematical field called chaos theory that's developed around it.
You may have heard of the butterfly effect.
The idea is that a butterfly flapping its wings in one region may over time cause enough of a change in the circulation of air
that it might cause a hurricane somewhere else, somewhere way down the line.
This was initially an idea of Edward Lorenz and is now used to describe so many systems within geology,
such as atmosphere, climate, weather, where very small changes at one point can have huge consequences.
I lived for a while in just north of Chicago, a block away from Ridge Avenue.
Now, most of Chicago, if you've been there, follows a grid of north-south and east-west roads,
but Ridge Avenue actually curves around parallel to the shoreline.
It turns out Ridge Avenue used to be a shoreline of Lake Michigan,
and it's called Ridge Avenue because you go up about three or four feet as you go to Ridge Avenue,
and then when you cross it, you go down about three or four feet on the other side.
Chicago is very, very flat.
Well, it turns out Ridge Avenue is a huge division between watersheds.
It turns out it's a huge divide that affects the whole rock cycle.
A drop of rain that falls on the west side of Ridge Avenue ends up washing down into streams
that eventually go into the Mississippi River and out into the Gulf of Mexico.
However, rain that falls a block away on the east side of Ridge Avenue, again,
Ridge Avenue is just a few feet in elevation, goes into Lake Michigan,
out the St. Lawrence Seaway, and out into the North Atlantic.
Whether that raindrop lands on one side or the other of the Ridge Avenue
will determine its whole fate of where it's going to end up going next.
But the point that I really want to make about this whole rock cycle
is that in this example, you played a vital role in this.
You made a decision that greatly affected the future of this carbon atom.
Did you bury it? Did you burn it? Did you swallow it? Did you flush it down the drain?
You affect the earth with every single action that you take,
but you can't always tell what the result will be.
When you flush that paper down the drain, did you know what would happen to the atom?
Did you know if it would leave the ocean as carbon dioxide, erupt as a volcano eventually,
or maybe eventually become a diamond and be buried underground?
These geologic systems are way too complicated for any simple predictions to be made.
Now, technically what I did here was the carbon cycle.
Carbon dioxide cycles continuously between air, plants, rock, and the ocean.
But the carbon cycle is intimately interconnected with the rock cycle and also with the water cycle.
You can't talk about one of these cycles on earth's surface without bringing them all in.
As I've stressed before, all of these processes of earth science are all interconnected,
not only in terms of the sciences of physics, chemistry, biology, and geology,
but also in terms of the whole processes, the geographical environments.
They're all interconnected.
And I did this example with something organic.
I started with a tree and paper, which has not traditionally been part of geology,
but we realize now that life is an integral part of everything on the earth
and affects all of the rock cycle and the water cycle and the carbon cycle,
especially the carbon cycle, obviously.
Now, traditionally rocks have had a very specific meaning, and that's been an inorganic meaning.
The definition of a rock is that it's made of one or more minerals.
And a traditional definition of a mineral is a naturally occurring solid, inorganically formed,
with a definite chemical composition and an ordered atomic arrangement.
Now, I'll come back later in minerals and talk about this last bit, this definite chemical composition
and ordered atomic arrangement.
This turns out to be vital to how minerals and rocks work.
But geology used to be an inorganic field.
However, now we realize that so much of the geology that happens on the surface of the earth
happens with life involved.
The concept of inorganic geochemistry is really gone now.
And it turns out that the chemical reactions that alter rocks on earth's surface
are intimately involved with largely single-celled organisms that turn one mineral into another
and are constantly involved with the whole process of erosion.
So long before we came onto the picture,
life already was significantly and intimately involved with the rock cycle.
But in a very intimate sense, you are part of the rock cycle all the time.
With every single breath you take, atoms go in and out of your lungs.
Materials are absorbed through your skin.
You become part of your environment.
The longer you stay in any one place,
the more blurry the line becomes between you and your environment
as you exchange atoms with that region.
As you move from one place to another, you carry part of the rock from one part to another.
You are responsible for moving atoms around the surface.
Did you go to the restroom today?
You're part of the water cycle.
Water goes in at one location and out another.
Water atoms of the earth are flowing through you.
For a short while, you are a reservoir, the biosphere, for a certain amount of water today
and a part of the rock cycle for a certain amount of solid materials.
People have long been aware of our connection to the land.
The expression, ashes to ashes, dust to dust,
gives us an almost painful awareness of our connection to the land.
But we're more than that.
We're more than our bulldozers and our factories and roads and dams and cities.
We trade atoms with the environment continuously.
You and I were all part of this.
It's interesting, religions for a long time have really wrestled with this idea of self,
of the existence of an eye, of having a separate identity
that is somehow other than the rest of the world or others.
For instance, if you go to Buddhism or Hinduism,
this concept is fundamental to the very understanding of reality,
the idea in Hinduism that every person has a separate soul, an Atman, that is individual,
but that true wisdom and enlightenment comes through the understanding
that your Atman, your individual soul is really no different
than the universal, all-encompassing Brahman.
Now, I grew up in the 70s with Star Wars,
so for me I can't help but thinking of this as being part of the force.
We're all part of the force.
However you look at it, it doesn't matter,
but we are all connected and even in theology and philosophy
we've had a sense of that for a long time.
Biology has weighed in this as well.
Biology has shown us that we're not single organisms separate from others.
In fact, we are walking colonies of organisms.
There are bacteria throughout our digestive tract.
There are mites in our skin.
In fact, there may be up to ten times as many foreign microbes in our body
than there are cells of our own body.
So what does it mean to say I or me?
I'm already a walking colony.
Well, it turns out geology shows us that too.
The line between us and the world we live around is not so sharp anymore.
Now, rocks have one big advantage over us,
and that is they retain the clues of their history for a tremendously long time.
Let me give you an example.
Here at the teaching company I needed a rock to demonstrate a point in one of the lectures,
and someone in the teaching company brought me a rock.
I hadn't seen this before, and they asked me,
how did this rock get this way?
Well, I looked at it for a while,
and I took the clues sort of like a detective, like Sherlock Holmes,
and I could begin to piece together the story of this rock.
You'll notice if you look at this rock, it has three different layers.
It has a dark layer on one side, a dark layer on the other,
and then a whiter layer in the middle.
But you'll notice that the rock, though it's rounded in this direction,
is flattened so that the whiter rock sticks out the sides,
whereas most of the darker rock is worn away.
Well, it turns out this dark rock is a schist.
It's a highly metamorphosed rock that probably began as mud,
and that mud got squeezed on the bottom of the ocean sea floor to make shale,
and that shale got continuously squeezed,
and then probably metamorphosed into make slate.
But the story didn't end there.
This probably ended up in the core of a mountain,
one of these metamorphic events where continents collide together,
and that initial mud has totally lost its shape.
In fact, there are shiny, small black minerals in here that are called biotite.
Biotite is a form of mica.
It's a flat mineral that likes to grow in regions
where there's tremendous amount of pressure.
So we have this rock, this dark mica schist
that probably existed at the core of a mountain at some point.
Well, then we have this white rock in here.
Well, this is actually quartz,
and this quartz came through and cracked into this rock
in a molten state sometime after this initial schist forms.
Now, just by looking at the rock, I can't tell when that happened,
but if I were to grind this up and take it into the lab,
I could actually determine the age of this rock,
and I'll talk about this later on about how we use radiometric dating
to actually determine the ages of rocks.
So that quartz crystallized and then solidified,
and then the top of this mountain wore away,
and this rock eventually got exposed at the surface.
But you notice that it's nicely rounded.
That means this rock has traveled down a stream.
It's been eroded from banging against other rocks over and over
as it washes down that river.
In the process, it wears and smooths away the rock.
However, quartz is much harder than this metamorphic schist rock.
So the schist has worn away and has almost entirely gone,
whereas the quartz remains behind,
and it's given this rock a sort of UFO-looking structure.
Given enough time, this rock, of course, would entirely crumble,
and only the quartz would remain, and that's what sand is.
So if you go to a beach, most of the sand is actually little bits of quartz
because everything else has long since worn away.
So this is just remarkable here.
I can take a rock and I can look and look at the clues
and learn its history.
Sometimes history that happened millions or hundreds of millions
or even billions of years in the past.
Now, speaking as a very ephemeral creature myself,
I have a tremendous amount of reverence for something with this degree of permanence.
As geologists, we're just beginning to explore and understand
the remarkable ways that rocks form
and how they can tell their often long and tortured past,
traveling in and around this tremendously complex rock cycle.
In the next lectures, I'm going to take a look at how these minerals actually form,
minerals, crystals, and gems, the building blocks of rock,
and see what's involved with making a rock like this
and then what will happen to it in its future.
