Welcome.
In this lecture, I want to talk about minerals.
Now geology may be described by the old saying that the present is the key to the past, which
was said by the famous Scottish geologist Charles Lyell.
However, when I'm talking about minerals, and in fact the whole field of geochemistry,
it's all about the atoms.
Because all the processes that I'm going to talk about in this lecture are occurring
at atomic scales.
They involve the interactions between separate atoms to make much larger minerals, which
will make the rocks that will build the earth out of.
Now I actually remember my first lesson in mineralogy.
It was watching Superman.
And no, I don't mean the movie, I mean the old black and white television show a long
time ago.
I remember as a kid watching the scene where Lois Lane loses her diamond in a jungle and
it falls into quicksand.
And Clark Kent, being the gentleman that he is, retrieves the diamond.
However, instead of going down into the quicksand, he gets a piece of coal, holds it behind his
back, and squeezes it until it becomes diamond.
Now looking back, I'm really impressed that they got this story partly right.
Because both diamond and coal are made of carbon, and diamond is a high pressure phase.
So if you take a piece of coal and squeeze it for a very long time, you will get diamond.
However, there are several reasons that the story actually wouldn't work.
There's no way that Clark could actually have recreated Lois' diamond.
And I'll give you the reasons why over the course of this lecture.
When you're talking about minerals, any minerals, whether they're diamond, asbestos, talc, quartz,
the properties that we use to describe these minerals are all a result of their atomic structure.
The hardness of a diamond, the color of quartz, the behavior of all the different minerals,
their density, how easily they break apart, all are a result of the particular interactions,
the particular structures that those atoms develop.
And I want you to carry away this message that there's nothing mysterious about this.
There's nothing magical.
It is the direct result of the forces in our universe.
It's the way atoms bond with molecular forces, and that it happens naturally and in the most
efficient way.
Now let me start with a question.
Why is there solid matter in the first place?
In other words, why are atoms even held together?
Why isn't our planet just a big ball of separate atoms floating around in space, held loosely
together by gravity?
I mean, why do you get a diamond or salt?
Well, the simple answer is this bonding process between separate ions, separate atoms.
In other words, atoms tend to form electrically charged ions.
They tend to lose or gain their electrons, so they take on an electrical charge.
And oppositely charged ions attract each other, so if you have a positive ion and a negative
ion, those ions will come together and you create a larger structure, a molecule.
If those molecules combine with more molecules, eventually you have minerals.
And again, we talked previously about the fact that the matter doesn't all collapse
in on itself.
There are certain interatomic distances because the proton-rich nuclei of these different
atoms repel each other and can only get so close.
So the whole process of forming minerals is simply a direct result of the electromagnetic
force.
It evolves naturally in our universe.
Opposite charges attract proton-rich, positive nuclei repel, material stays together to form
minerals.
But the answer is actually a little bit more complicated than this, because why do atoms
even form ions in the first place?
Here we have to get into the actual structure of an atom.
It turns out electrons don't just exist in some fuzzy cloud of a whole bunch of little
electrons orbiting the nucleus.
They actually arrange themselves into separate regions that we call orbitals.
Now the first orbital, the closest orbital to the nucleus contains a maximum of two electrons.
The next orbital contains eight, the next one contains eight, and the different orbitals
are different sizes on out.
Well it turns out atoms are not stable unless their outer orbitals are complete.
They will either gain or lose electrons so that that outer orbital has a full complement
of electrons.
As my ninth grade science teacher used to say, those then become happy atoms.
Now there are some atoms that are naturally happy.
They simply always have the right number of electrons.
Helium, for example, has two protons and two electrons, and those two electrons complete
that electron orbital.
Neon is another element.
It has ten protons and ten electrons, and there the electrons fully complete the first
two orbitals.
Argonne is the next one, with 18 protons and 18 electrons.
And these elements, helium, neon, and argon, we call the noble gases, they're totally inert.
They never interact with any other atoms.
As my science teacher would say, they're very happy atoms.
They don't need any other atoms.
But for most other materials, most other atoms, that's not the case.
Now let me redefine a mineral.
I talked about this earlier.
A mineral is a naturally occurring solid, inorganically formed material with a definite
chemical composition and an ordered atomic arrangement.
The key here for this lecture is that there are definite chemical compositions.
There are formulas.
It's like if you're going to make a recipe, you need so much of one material and so much
of another.
There's a particular formula to cook something.
Well, to make a mineral, you have a specific formula, so many atoms of oxygen, so many
atoms of silicon.
They have to order themselves in a very particular repeating atomic arrangement.
Now the pure example of a mineral, we call a crystal.
So for instance, if I take a crystal of quartz, such as this crystal here, it's interesting
most quartz crystals have six sides.
Why do they have six sides?
Because the silicon and oxygen atoms that make up this quartz arrange themselves in
a structure that has this six-fold symmetry that's based on this same structure.
And at a macro scale, at a whole crystal, we see essentially an expansion up of that
micro scale structure of the quartz and the silicon, of the oxygen and the silicon, the
way they bond together.
If you look at another crystal, for instance, take a mineral like salt, have you ever looked
closely at table salt or rock salt, which you might use to de-ice your sidewalk?
It has a cubic structure.
If you were to crush it together, you'd still end up with lots more cubes.
They would just be smaller, but they would always have 90-degree angles.
They'd form little boxes.
That's because the sodium and the chlorine interact together in a structure that takes
on a perfect cubic structure at a microscopic level.
Well, how do you get a mineral?
Well, to get a mineral forming, you need two conditions met.
One, the electrical charge of the mineral has to add up totally to zero.
And two, the atoms have to combine together and pack in a neat, stable manner.
Now the first one's easy.
If you have atoms that come together and they have a leftover electrical charge, they'll
keep grabbing more ions until the charge is all balanced out to zero and they don't grab
any more atoms.
The packing's a little trickier.
It turns out if you have atoms that come together that aren't well balanced, that don't fit
together neatly, those atoms will oscillate until they simply bounce out of the structure.
It's not a stable arrangement.
However, if you do get atoms that come together nicely and neatly and hold together, that
mineral will be stable and will last a long time.
Now the bonds take four different methods, four different styles.
There are ionic bonds, covalent, metallic, and intermolecular.
Ionic bonds are the most common.
And it's what we usually think of when we talk about bonding between atoms.
And these involve negative and positive ions held together by the electromagnetic force.
Let me give you the classic example.
Table salt.
Table salt is made of sodium and chlorine, which are two of the most corrosive, unstable
materials you can imagine.
If you take a strip of sodium, which is a metal, and drop it into water, it will explode.
And chlorine, combined with hydrogen, makes hydrochloric acid, one of the most corrosive
acids we know.
Put them together, and you get table salt that we put in all our food.
The reason is that sodium normally consists of 11 protons and 11 electrons.
But that's one more electron than a stable second electron orbital.
So it will lose that electron, and in the process, it becomes a positive ion.
It now has 11 protons, 10 electrons, it has a net positive charge.
Chlorine does just the opposite.
It normally has 17 protons and 17 electrons.
But if it gains an electron, it fills up that last electron orbital.
And so it usually goes around with 18 electrons, 17 protons, 18 electrons.
It has a net charge of negative one.
Take the positive one sodium, the negative one chlorine, put them together, and you have
salt.
Now, covalent bonds work a little bit differently, and they end up being actually much more
efficient in terms of holding atoms together.
Here, the electrons are actually shared between separate atoms.
They travel in between the two atoms.
Diamond, for example, the hardest naturally occurring substance occurs from carbon atoms
that are bonded covalently.
And the electrons actually travel back and forth in between those carbon atoms.
The basis for most of the rocks on earth, these silica tetrahedra, these pyramid shaped
combinations of oxygen and silicon, the building blocks of most of our planet are held together
by strong covalent bonds between the oxygen and the silicon.
Metallic bonds operate very differently.
Here the electrons are simply vagabonds.
They can travel anywhere they want through the material.
They can flow up and down from one atom to the other.
They're not held at all.
As a result, the bonds between most metals tend to be fairly weak, and that makes metals
quite pliable.
For instance, I can take this stiff copper wire, and even though it's quite solid, I
can bend it without too much trouble.
Why?
Because these copper atoms are just not very strongly bonded together.
There's no particular crystal structure between them.
The last example, the intermolecular bonds, are very weak bonds that often hold larger
groups of atoms together.
One of the best examples is graphite.
So for instance, if I take a piece of paper and a pencil and I draw on it, what is it
that's making that black line?
Well, the inside of this pencil is graphite.
It's carbon that occurs in sheets, and when I draw with a pencil, those sheets just slide
off because the sheets, which are very strong themselves, are held together with very weak
Van der Waals bonds, and they simply just slide right off and disappear right off one
after the other.
Now interestingly, the bonds of the different atoms change considerably as I go down into
the earth because of the changes in pressure and temperature.
So the minerals that I find at the surface are usually no longer stable as I go down
inside the earth.
Why does this happen?
Well, it happens because I actually change the sizes of the atoms.
In other words, take an oxygen atom and go down deep in the earth and squeeze it, you
actually reduce the size.
However, the negative ions, like oxygen and chlorine, tend to compress more quickly than
the positive ions.
Why?
Because they've got these extra electrons, they're bigger and fluffier, and so the relative
sizes of the ions change as I go down in the earth, and minerals that are stable at the
surface are no longer stable down deep.
For instance, diamond occurs only deep in the earth.
If you find a diamond at the surface, it must have originally formed more than 150 kilometers
beneath the surface.
Diamonds get brought up through a variety of interesting geologic processes, but they're
unstable at the surface.
In fact, they can even burn like coal.
Large diamonds have been known to explode in the pockets of miners.
The heat from the miner gives it enough energy to actually shatter and break apart.
There are many materials that have a variety of different phases that they go through.
Water has more than a dozen phases.
In fact, there's a famous book by Kurt Vonnegut called Cat's Cradle, where he invents a property
of ice nine, where if the ice gets in contact with any other water, it turns it into ice,
which obviously has very dire consequences, knowing how interconnected the whole water
cycle is.
Ice nine really exists.
It doesn't actually have that property.
Courts, if it's smashed under high impacts, will become a whole new mineral called stichivite,
and we've used this to identify regions where large meteorites have hit the surface in the
past.
Now, there's one problem with this whole process, and that is it takes a tremendous amount
of time for these atoms to either form or to rearrange into new atoms.
So this is why Superman was wrong here.
Clark Kent could never have created that diamond in a matter of seconds, because it
takes millions of years to compress carbon into a diamond.
Why?
Because all of those atoms have to go into just the right location.
Imagine if you had a box of golf balls, and you shook that box, you just stuffed them
all in.
Would those golf balls arrange themselves nice and neatly into rows?
No, it would take a while to get all of those balls perfectly lined up into the densest
packing, and that's what happens within the earth.
Glass and quartz are a classic example.
They're both the exact same material.
They're both silicon and oxygen, but with quartz, the mineral has had time to arrange
into the perfect crystalline structure.
With glass, the whole structure has just been frozen in place.
In fact, glass is often considered to be solid liquid.
It's frozen liquid glass, liquid quartz, and those atoms just stop in place wherever
they are.
You don't actually get a chance to line up into a crystal.
The same problem happens when you try to make synthetic gems.
For instance, I have here a ruby and a sapphire.
This is a real ruby and a real sapphire.
However, they didn't form naturally.
They were constructed artificially from plugs like this piece of sapphire and this piece
of ruby here.
It's very hard to make synthetic rubies and sapphires because you have to give them enough
time for all the atoms to arrange properly into those mineral structures.
Now, it turns out that only certain particular combinations of elements will actually meet
the criteria for having stable minerals.
Remember, having charges that add to zero and arrangements that pack those atoms properly
and correctly in the most dense manner.
There are very small variations of these formulas.
The mineral will stay as the same particular type.
You can get slight variations.
However, if the variations are large enough, the mineral will actually change into a whole
new structure.
For instance, feldspar, which are a major part of granite, and the most abundant mineral
in the continents, actually occur over a wide range of compositions that include aluminum
and potassium and sodium and calcium, all substituting for each other.
We see this in, for instance, the slight change in colors of many minerals.
Many of you may know of the hope diamond, which has a beautiful blue color here.
No, this isn't the real hope diamond.
This is a replica.
But what gives the hope diamond its blue color is a slight amount of boron that is included
in with the carbon.
Another classic diamond, of course, is the jubilee diamond.
Here's an example of a diamond that's one of the largest in the world, 245 carats.
In this case, the diamond is very valuable because it has no impurities in it at all,
so it's perfectly clear.
Actually, this is another reason why that Superman story was wrong.
Coal has all sorts of other stuff in it, and if you were to squeeze it, you'd never get
a perfectly crystal clear diamond.
You'd have all those atoms still stuck within.
You need enough time when that diamond forms for all those elements to go elsewhere.
One of the most interesting examples of the variations in color for mineral are actually
found in quartz.
Quartz is normally just silicon and oxygen, but, for instance, if you take small amounts
of iron and aluminum, you get amethyst, which has a purple color, or if you take small amounts
of titanium added to the silicon and oxygen, you get rose quartz.
Small amounts of just aluminum make quartz have a smoky color, and quartz can also take
on a variety of structures at a microcrystalline level, calcidine, agate, jasper, and onyx,
that all involve slight materials added to it.
For instance, a famous variation, a microcrystalline variation of quartz is called a tiger's eye,
and it involves small crystals of a crocatolite added in that give it a very shimmery look.
Now, as a result, when you're trying to identify a mineral, color is obviously not a very good
indicator.
Now, one of the most important aspects of all of minerals is the whole realm, the whole
realm of structures that we call silicate rocks, and these involve the tetrahedra of
silicon and oxygen added together with something else involved.
In other words, if silicon and oxygen combine together just by themselves, you get pure quartz.
But because silicon and oxygen are so abundant in our planet, we find these tetrahedra of
silicon and oxygen everywhere, and they combine with other atoms to make new minerals.
For instance, the mineral olivine involves separate tetrahedra that are bonded separately
to atoms of magnesium and iron.
The mineral pyroxene involves the tetrahedra actually connected in chains, also with other
atoms as well.
Sometimes these tetrahedra combine to make sheets.
We call these sheet silicates like mica, talc, and asbestos.
Let me give you some examples.
If you actually look at a mica example of mica, you can see it forms separate sheets
that peel off.
Within the sheet, the material is very tough.
It's hard as quartz, but the sheets themselves are separated by weak van der Waals bonds
and just peel off.
The same thing holds true for talc, which has a very smooth, soapy feel.
That's why it's ground up for talcum powder.
Again, the sheets of the mineral peel off from each other.
In a very unusual example of asbestos, asbestos interestingly is also a sheet silicate.
However, the sheets have two sides that are not perfectly balanced, and they tend to roll
up into very narrow crystals.
It's these crystals that if they get in your lungs and you breathe them in over time can
be carcinogenic.
You also can get fully 3D structures of these silica tetrahedra, and feldspar is a good
example.
Here, the different silicon and oxygen tetrahedra are actually entirely interconnected in a
large 3D structure.
As a result, these minerals tend to be some of the very hardest of the minerals because
the bonds between the tetrahedra are those very tough, strong, covalent bonds.
As we come back to several times in this course, that property of how well those silica tetrahedra
are bonded together is going to determine many of their other properties, how those minerals
will melt, how they'll crystallize, and then later on in the course, even how they weather.
The pure form of crystals, when they're cut, form what we call gems, and gems sparkle
beautifully due to a very unusual property of what we call the refraction of light.
If the facets of a gem are made just right, light will get inside and will bounce around
internally and will have a hard time getting back out.
As the light is bouncing inside the gem, it begins to separate into its different colors,
just like light going through a glass prism.
As a result, when light finally does come out, it may come out in a pure color of green
or blue or red.
Now interestingly, if you go by weight, the earth is made of actually a fairly small number
of elements.
Interestingly, the earth is primarily just four separate elements.
The whole earth is made of 35% iron, 30% oxygen, 15% silicon, and 13% magnesium.
This is remarkable.
Just these four elements occupy 93% of our whole planet.
The next one's after that.
Nickel is 2.5%, sulfur is 2%, calcium and alumina are each about 1%.
Everything else is about half of 1%.
I mean, there are 92 naturally occurring elements.
Actually, there are 117 elements that have been discovered, but some are only synthesized
made in the laboratory and they don't occur naturally.
And yet, eight of them account for 99.5% of earth's mass.
Why is this?
This is what we got from the supernovas.
This is what came out of that process of nucleus synthesis in the last dying moments
of the stars.
So that's what our planet's made of.
The iron is the most abundant by weight, but it turns out that most of it is in the
core and most of the nickel as well.
As a result, you remove the iron and nickel and what you have left over for earth's crust
is almost entirely silicon and oxygen.
Now actually, the values are actually quite variable dependent upon whether you're talking
about the mass or the volume or the number of atoms.
For instance, if you go by the number of atoms, oxygen is about 63% of earth's crust,
silicon is about 21%, and the next element, aluminum, is only at 6.5%.
If you go by weight, oxygen is about 47%, silicon is about 28%.
Interestingly, if you go by volume, oxygen is 91.7% of the crust and everything else
is just a few percent left over.
It's really remarkable to think that almost 92% of the solid crust of our planet is made
of oxygen.
I mean, it's hard to believe that this is the same stuff that we breathe, but again remember
at an atomic level, almost everything is empty space anyway, right?
The atoms themselves are very tiny objects held enormous distances apart at an intermolecular
scale.
Now if I go beneath the crust and I go into the mantle, I can look and see how these basic
few elements combine into just a few mineral structures to make up the majority of the
rock of our planet.
I said that olivine and perixene are the primary minerals in the upper part of our mantle.
Well olivine is magnesium and iron combined with silicon and oxygen.
These are our major four elements, silicon, oxygen, iron and magnesium.
Perixene also has magnesium, iron, silicon and oxygen.
Though it's interesting, their formulas are slightly different.
For olivine, it's four oxygens, one silicon and an atom of magnesium or iron.
For perixene, it's three oxygens, an atom of silicon and an atom of magnesium and iron.
Where did that extra oxygen atom go?
Where I said perixenes are chain silicates, so the tetrahedra actually share corners,
so they don't need as many oxygen atoms.
Well if you take olivine and perixene, they're stable in the upper part of the mantle, but
they're not stable as you go down inside the earth.
The increasing pressure and the increasing temperature cause the arrangements of these
minerals to change and both olivine and perixene end up forming primarily a structure called
perovskite in the lower mantle.
Now it's interesting, they both get there in slightly different ways.
As you go down in the earth, the olivine gets squeezed and squeezed and at a depth of about
410 kilometers, it rearranges into a slightly different structure of olivine.
520 kilometers down, it rearranges into spinel and 660 kilometers down, it again rearranges
into primarily perovskite.
The perixene minerals do something different.
They gradually change into garnet and as you go down across the upper mantle, the perixene
is continuously converting to garnet and then as you approach 660 kilometers down, the boundary
between the upper and lower mantles, that garnet converts into perovskite.
So our planet is mostly lower mantle and perovskite is most of the lower mantle, so most of our
planet is made of this structure.
Now it's interesting, it's not only perovskite in the lower mantle.
It turns out the formula doesn't quite work out right.
There's a little bit of magnesium iron and oxygen left over and this forms a mineral
called periclase, which is one atom of oxygen with one atom of either magnesium or iron.
They substitute for each other.
Well we've seen a structure like that before, table salt, which was an atom of sodium and
an atom of chlorine.
And this mineral in the lower mantle, periclase, has that same rock salt structure.
So across the whole rest of the lower mantle, the bulk of our earth, it's perovskite and
periclase.
Only at the very base of the mantle does the perovskite actually begin to break down into
a new structure.
In the core we see something slightly different.
The outer core is liquid, but interestingly it might actually contain minerals because
the inner core is growing with time and so the inner core is solid and there are some
theories that predict that there might be crystals of solid iron forming in the liquid
outer core, essentially raining down on the surface of the inner core.
Or it may just be that the inner core forms by crystallizing right at the surface, right
at the boundary between the inner core and the outer core.
The inner core has a very unusual property.
It's solid, it's solid iron, but our seismic investigations suggest that it's quite possible
that given the way that the crystal, the iron behaves there, that it actually exists as
one giant single crystal of iron.
If so, it would be the largest single crystal within our planet.
So this is our planet.
This is what it's made of.
You take the hydrogen and helium from the Big Bang, you add it to all the other elements
from previous supernovas, you pull it into a ball with gravity, you melt it and then
you let it crystallize.
These atoms are naturally going to begin to come together, bonded mostly by ionic and
the covalent bonds, which we talked about, to form the minerals and the rocks of Earth's
mantle and crust.
There's no magic involved.
It's remarkable and it's often beautiful and it's both complex and it's complicated,
but it's entirely predictable based on knowing the fundamental forces of the universe and
the materials that they had to operate on, which were mostly iron, oxygen, silicon and
magnesium.
Now, in the next lectures, I will begin to discuss what happens to these minerals after
they crystallize and become parts of rocks and get repeatedly dragged through the rock
cycle, time after time.
