Welcome. Today I'm going to talk about magma. Now, magma and lava and volcanoes are a popular
topic in lots of noven discovery shows. There's just something about the idea of rivers of
burning hot molten lava pouring out of holes in the earth that's both exciting and terrifying.
For those of us who live far from active volcanoes, volcanoes and lava, it's a very exciting and
fascinating topic. For people who actually live near volcanoes, however, it's a terribly fearful
and deadly phenomenon. We'll talk about this whole process, but to geologists,
magma and lava and volcanoes are absolutely vital because this is what our land is made of.
This is the start of the rock cycle in a very real sense. Now, a lot happens before lava can
actually flow out of the surface at a volcano. In this lecture, I'm going to talk about why
rocks melt, how magma forms. In the next lecture, I'm going to talk about what happens when that
magma crystallizes underground to make rock. And finally, in the next lecture in lecture 12,
I'll talk about volcanoes and what happens when lava actually erupts at the surface.
Now, let me start off with a question. Why do volcanoes even occur? Well, the obvious answer
is that magma reaches the surface. And again, magma is liquid rock with also a lot of dissolved
gas and often even solid crystals within it. By the way, the difference between magma and lava
is that magma is underground and lava is at the surface. So as you have magma coming to the surface,
magma, magma, magma bang lava. Though interestingly, lava actually tends to have many fewer gases
than magma. And that turns out to be very important later on. Well, so the easy answer is magma comes
to the surface, but why does magma form? And this is actually not a very simple question,
and that's what I want to focus on in this lecture. It turns out that different kinds of
volcanoes form from very different kinds of magma underground, and that it's the characteristics
of the magma that give us the different sorts of volcanoes. Now, I've been fortunate enough to be
able to travel to a lot of different volcanoes, and I'm constantly amazed by how different they are.
If you go to the Pacific Northwest, places like Mount St. Helens and Mount Hood in Oregon,
or Rainier and Baker in Washington, or Mount Lassen in California, you see a very particular
structure, a cone-shaped volcano with both lava and ash erupting at times. The rock is an unusual
intermediate composition called an andesite, which I'll talk about later on. But if you want to
have been to Hawaii and actually seen the salt oozing out of the surface, it has a totally
different appearance, and the volcanoes in Hawaii don't look anything like volcanoes like Mount
St. Helens. You can go to different places like Idaho, actually. You can go to the craters of the
Moon National Monument, where these dark black cinder cones of ash forming these very small,
tall cones. Obviously, something very different is going on here, and it's because of the
different compositions, the different temperatures, and the different behaviors of magma underground
that we get these different volcanoes with the surface. Now, try to imagine that you're traveling
down through the crust and into Earth's mantle. Picture this. What do you see? Well, we already
did this in lecture two. Remember, you wouldn't see anything. You'd just see white, because the
temperature in Earth's deep interior reaches 6,000 degrees, which is the same temperature as the
sun's surface. And, of course, you'd be flat as a pancake from the pressure and vaporized by the
temperature. But let's say you could get down there. What would you see? You'd see solid rock.
You wouldn't see liquid magma. As you went down through the crust and the mantle, the rock is
almost entirely solid. And this is very important, because there's been a misconception in our field
that happened with the revolution of plate tectonics. Before plate tectonics, people had viewed
the deep Earth as being really solid and immobile. And plate tectonics showed us that the rock of
the mantle behaved in a fluid way and was able to flow over time. But some people have mistaken
fluid for liquid. Solids flow, but they're still solids. They're not liquid. People also spend a
lot of time looking at lava lamps on their shelves and using them as a model for giant
hotspots of rock flowing up out of the Earth. And as a result, textbooks in many levels show these
massive plumes of liquid magma, sometimes thousands of kilometers across, rising up to the surface
beneath mid-ocean ridges. It's just not so. The mantle is solid, nearly entirely solid. There
are only tiny amounts of melt that form in the mantle. And frankly, because melt is buoyant,
as soon as melt does form within the mantle, it rises right to the surface as a volcano.
So at any given time, there's almost no liquid within the mantle.
Well, then we have to ask the question. If magma is so rare within the Earth,
then why are there any volcanoes at all? And how do they form?
Well, one answer that might be given is because the Earth is not yet fully solidified from its
early molten state. No, this turns out not to be the case. The Earth is fully old enough for the
mantle to be solid. Now, yes, it's true. When I talked about how the Earth formed, I left you at
four billion years ago with a molten Earth. But very quickly, that mantle would have crystallized
from the core mantle boundary up, because in fact, the pressure is so great at the base of
the mantle that even though the temperatures are hotter, the pressure squeezes rock into a solid
form. And so very quickly, the mantle would have crystallized through the bottom up and would have
been almost entirely solid long ago. Well, it turns out magma actually melts for many different
reasons. In different regions, there isn't one single answer. And in fact, if we go to the three
major regions of volcanism, mid-ocean ridges, subduction zones in the volcanoes we find there,
and hot spots, we find that the magma forms rock melts for very different reasons in each case.
Let me start with mid-ocean ridges. Now, this is a really important point here. It actually
affects all three. Rock in the esthenosphere is very close to the melting point. I've talked earlier
about how the temperature increases dramatically as you go across the lithosphere. By the time you
get down into the esthenosphere, the temperatures are on the order of 14, 15, 1600 degrees Celsius.
Well, what's important is that actually is very close or actually reaches the melting point of
rock. Now, let me define three terms to you. The geotherm, the solidness, and the liquidus,
because this is going to play a very important role. The geotherm is the actual temperature of
the earth, geotherm, earth's temperature. It's a profile of what temperature you would find
at any given point within the earth. The solidus, however, is a mineralogical property, and it is
the point at which rock would begin to melt at any particular depth. And the liquidus is the
temperature at which all of the rock would melt at that point. And here's really a very important
point. It turns out that there's a huge difference between the solidus, the point at which rock
begins to melt, and the liquidus, the point at which all of the crystals of that rock are molten.
And this will play a very important role in the next lecture. Well, so why isn't the esthenosphere
molten? Well, pressure is keeping it solid. So the rock in the esthenosphere is close to melting.
The geotherm, the temperature of the earth, is very close to the solidus, the melting point of
that rock. But the pressure keeps it in a solid form. However, if you take that esthenosphere
and bring it up a little bit, you reduce the pressure, and it starts to melt. The rock
crosses the geotherm, crosses the solidus, and melting begins. Now, you might pause for a moment and
say, well, wait a minute. Did you just tell me in a previous lecture that when you increase pressure,
you increase temperature? So if I decrease the pressure, shouldn't I be decreasing the temperature?
This is absolutely true. But it turns out the esthenosphere has much more residual heat there
than would just be caused by compression. So as you move rock from the esthenosphere to the surface,
the temperature does drop a little bit. But the pressure effect is more important,
and the reduction in pressure allows that rock to suddenly melt. And that's what happens at
mid-ocean ridges. Remember, at mid-ocean ridges, you have a situation where plates are moving apart
and you have a gap left there. Well, nature doesn't allow a vacuum to happen there. And so,
as the plates pull apart at the mid-ocean ridge, you get rock that's essentially just sucked up
to fill the gap. So you take this hot esthenosphere rock and you rise it, you make it rise up,
you raise it towards the surface, and what do you do? You reduce the pressure and it begins to melt.
Now, it doesn't melt very much. And the melting actually begins about 100 to kilometers down,
tiny little bits of melt. But the melt is more buoyant than the solid, and it's also mobile.
So it begins to actually percolate up. And it's interesting, it forms sort of like an upside
down stream network, because you have lots of little channels of percolating magma that begin
to coalesce into larger branches and eventually rise up to form a very small magma chamber,
perhaps only a few kilometers across, sitting beneath the mid-ocean ridge. And then as the
ridge continues to open, that magma rises up right to the surface to form the new rock that's
created in the new ocean crust there. Now, in subduction zones, you have a totally different
situation, because here we are taking cold ocean lithosphere that can be as old as 200 million
years old, and we're stuffing it down into the earth. Okay, now I really hear you complaining.
I'm taking rock, and I'm adding cold rock into the mantle, and I'm supposed to have it melt.
This seems totally reversed. It should stop melting. Okay, I'm chilling it, I'm cooling it off.
Well, yes, I'm adding cold rock, but I'm also adding water, and water amongst its many miraculous
properties lowers the temperature at which rocks melt. So even though I'm adding cold material in
there, I'm adding water, and it doesn't need a lot of water. It only takes a little bit,
but this water will mix in with the rock above. The water actually comes out of the subducting
ocean seafloor and rises up into the wedge of mantle rock above it, and it takes that rock that was
hot but happily solid, and now it causes it to begin to melt. That melt rises up and forms
all these subduction zone volcanoes that we often think of when we think of volcanoes, things like
Vesuvius and Mount St. Helens and Mount Fujiyama and Krakatoa. Now, as part of that magma, you've
got a lot of water, however, water and other gases, and those gases erupt violently out of the volcano
as steam, and as we'll see later, these volcanic eruptions tend to be very violent.
Now, interestingly, this is also part of the reason that there even is water in the
down-going ocean crust in the first place, because melting is like a sponge that sucks
water out of the rock, because since rock will melt more easily if it's in the presence of water,
back at that mid-ocean ridge where I had a centesphere rock rising towards the surface,
any melt that begins to form is going to take the water out of the rock with it. So,
that melt removes the water up out of the rock, brings it to the surface, and then it crystallizes
at some of it directly into the ocean sea floor, the ocean crust. When that ocean crust that has
water trapped within the mineral structures of the rock, when that ocean sea floor subducts back
down into the mantle at a subduction zone, there's not only water from ocean sediments sitting on top
of the ocean crust, there's actually water within the rock as well, and that water will also leave
the ocean sea floor and rise up to form these volcanoes at subduction zones.
Now, the third example, Hawaii, is an entirely different situation. Here, this is a hot spot
volcano, and in this case, the rock really is unusually hot. Now, I can attest to how hot the
rock is there. I've stood on lava as it's flowing near Kilauea, and it's over 1100 degrees Celsius.
It tends to melt your boots fairly quickly if you stand on it. In fact, I've taken a tree branch
and stuck it in the lava and pulled out a blob, and the heat radiating off of that lava instantly
singed off all the hair on my arms. This is hot rock. It's probably 300 degrees hotter than rock
around it in the mantle. Now, remember, these hot spot plumes as they rise up through the mantle
are still solid, so even though the rock is quite hot, the rock that feeds a volcano like Hawaii,
as it travels up through the mantle, it's entirely solid, but when it begins to reach a
centisphere levels, again, 170 kilometers beneath the surface, it will be able to melt more easily,
and it will begin to, therefore, percolate up towards the surface and form a volcano.
Now, it's also a very important point that I have to give a warning. I'm going to talk
a lot more about this in lecture 21 when I talk about interplate volcanoes and hot spots,
and that is not all hot spots end up being the same. In fact, if you go to a place like Yellowstone,
the rock there deep beneath the earth isn't any hotter than it is
under other parts of North America. What we think might be happening in a place like Yellowstone is,
perhaps there's a little extra water. There's an anomaly of additional water within the rock
beneath Yellowstone, and that that water allows the rock to melt more easily. So, in that case,
Yellowstone would be sitting not on top of a hot spot, but on top of a wet spot.
If you go to someplace like Iceland, which is also considered to be a hot spot in a
traditional sense, you have one of the few situations in Iceland where the mid-Atlantic
ridge is actually exposed at the surface. There's so much lava that's flowed out of Iceland that
it's built up this large island, and the ridge actually is seen. You can actually stand on Iceland
on either side of the plates. Here we think that it might be a situation where, somewhere back in
the past, rock that melts more easily, that the composition of the rock melts more easily,
such as a basaltic crust from some previous subduction event, got incorporated up towards
the ridge. As the ocean separated and it pulled this rock up, this particular blob of rock just
melts more easily, and so you get this voluminous outpouring of rock. We often tend to still call
all of these things hot spots, but it turns out that they seem to have very different causes.
Now, not surprisingly, in each of these different geographic and tectonic settings,
the magma is also tremendously different, and the magma is different in a very important way.
It's different in its viscosity. Now, I've talked about viscosity before, but I haven't really
defined it. Viscosity is a measure of resistance to flow, of how gooey a substance is, but gooeyness
isn't really a scientifically quantifiable term. So, we use this variable viscosity, which is
actually a quantitative measurement of how resistant a material is to flowing. Turns out,
magma can have a viscosity over a wide range. It can range from honey to that of sort of day-old
oatmeal to something nearly as solid as tar. Let me demonstrate. Suppose I actually take some of
these materials and show you what their viscosity would be. All right, so what I have here is
a day-old oatmeal. Well, it turns out this has a viscosity probably on the order of about
500 or so when we measure it in terms of Pascal seconds, and you can see that this stuff is
really quite stiff. Next to it is peanut butter. Peanut butter usually has a viscosity of about
250. You can see it flows a little bit more easily. Well, if I go down to something like honey,
honey would have a viscosity of about five Pascal seconds, and in this case, you can see it actually
flows much more easily. Believe it or not, some magma can actually flow even more easily than honey,
and in some cases it can approach, but not at quite equal, the viscosity of water, which is actually
one-thousandth of a Pascal second, and you can see the viscosity there is very low. Believe it or not,
magma can not only cover this range, but it can also have the same viscosity as this piece of tar.
So, magma can range everywhere from liquids almost like water or milk to something as stiff
as tar. Now, when I talked about viscosities for the mantle, just as an aside, I mentioned that
the viscosity for mantle rock tends to be on the order of about 10 to the 21, so that's about
one billion trillion, so that's obviously quite a bit larger than something like peanut butter
or oatmeal, but the rock of the deep mantle is not infinite, but it's still obviously much
stiffer than magma. Well, why does magma have this huge range in viscosity? Well, it turns out there
are a couple very simple reasons. First of all, just like we talked about in the lecture on minerals,
it turns out that the amount of silica within a magma tremendously affects how stiff it is,
how viscous it is. We're back again to these silicon and oxygen tetrahedra. If you have a situation
where you have a rock with a lot of silica in it, then these tetrahedra are very tightly linked,
and it's just very hard for this magma to flow. This happens in places like continental volcanoes,
like Yellowstone. They tend to be very resistant to flowing, and when they do erupt,
they tend to erupt very dramatically and very explosively. Another very important factor
is simply temperature, because remember, temperature increases the atomic oscillations
between all atoms, and it weakens the bonds a little bit, so if you have some material
and you begin to heat it up, it tends to flow more easily, and that process of flowing more easily
can be seen, for example, in some of these Hawaiian labas. People don't generally die on Hawaii from
volcanic eruptions there. Why is that? Because these eruptions are not usually explosive. The
magma tends to be very fluid, and it erupts out of the volcano, and it just quietly flows downhill.
That's because these labas tend to be both low in silica and also high in temperature.
Now, the third example, however, and this is very important, is that the water content
in a magma can have two very different roles. It turns out if you have dissolved gases, water
and carbon dioxide, within a magma, you tend to allow that magma to flow more easily. The water
and usually carbon dioxide as the primary other gas help to keep these different silica
tetrahedra separated from each other. They prevent these silicon and oxygen tightly bonded
pyramids from locking up and interconnecting. That's good. However, when magma gets to the
surface, and we'll talk about this later on when we talk about volcanic eruptions,
you have a situation where the water can suddenly expand and turn into steam,
and this can make eruptions tremendously explosive. Water can both make magma flow more easily. It
can reduce its viscosity, but it can also cause an explosive eruption. If you visit a place like
Mountain St. Helens or Baker and Rainier and Hawaii and any other volcano, you'll end up seeing a
tremendous variation in the appearances of these volcanoes, and they are due to total differences
in composition, temperature and viscosity. Now, it's interesting. We've long had a wide range
in perceptions of what the interior of our earth was like and where this magma comes from.
For instance, if you go back several hundred years, even to the time of James Hutton,
people thought that had a model of reality, a model of our earth, where earth was this living
organism. In fact, you can find quotes in literature like Shakespeare where the earth is described
as having a fever and shaking, and that's an earthquake, or having indigestion and belching,
and that's a volcano. James Hutton, interestingly, viewed the earth as being somewhat of an
organic system. In fact, he coined the term Gaia, named after the Greek goddess of the earth,
which viewed the earth like an animal as a physiological system that self-regulated itself
and maintained comfortable conditions for life at earth's surface. This was actually later developed
in the 1960s by James Lovelock and Lynn Mark-Uless into the Gaia hypothesis
that received a tremendous amount of criticism because it sort of went over the edge and described
earth as actually being a living organism. As far as we can tell, the earth is not alive,
it's not a living organism, but it's a very useful metaphor to view the earth as a single organism
with a variety of systems that are all interconnected, often with these strong negative
feedback processes that we'll see when we talk about climate, where situations can change in order
to maintain the conditions that are favorable for life, but earth is not alive. Though I will
say that this idea propagated for a long time. In fact, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who wrote all
my favorite Sherlock Holmes stories, also had a series of stories involving a character,
Professor Challenger. His best known story was The Lost World, where he discovers this plateau
of dinosaurs in Africa, but one of my favorite stories was called When the World Scream,
and in this story they drill down into the earth to go see what's down there and the earth screams,
and it turns out in this story that the earth is like a sea urchin with a hard shell but a soft
interior, and when you drill down through the crust and hit the interior, you hit this living
organism. Well, that changed over time and people tended not to view the earth as an organic creature,
and later on following Hutton's work on Plutonism, we actually view the interior as being
tremendously hot. Now, we associate, for instance, the devil with being red and lava
with the earth's interior, though it's interesting, even in that case, there was often a variety of
opinions. In fact, in Dante's Inferno, the ninth and very lowest circle of hell contains Satan,
frozen half, and ice, so some people thought the deep interior of the earth was actually very,
very cold. I talked previously in lecture two about concepts of the earth being hollow,
and there was a whole school of thought that involved layers of earth separated with separate
atmospheres. Part of this actually came about from work that the brilliant Sir Isaac Newton had done,
where he showed that if you had a hollow shell of a hollow solid shell, the gravity
everywhere inside that shell would actually be zero, and that if you had an earth that's spinning,
there would be some very small gravity that would allow you to stand on the inside of that shell.
Of course, if you were to have that shell, the gravitational attraction of all that material
would just cause it to collapse into a ball, which is what happened when earth formed early on.
Earth never had any hollow spaces. It just grew from the inside out and was always solid.
And then it wasn't until really plate tectonics later on, where our model of reality changed
so that we viewed the earth as being a flowing, moving area that could sustain plate tectonics.
This is a very important point actually that runs throughout the whole course here in the earth.
Our models are constantly changing. Throughout this whole process, I've been talking about
atoms and atoms combining and flowing and bonding and interacting, but it's interesting that even
over the course of my own lifetime in schools, I've been exposed to a whole sequence of models
that have actually recapitulated our own discovery of how atoms work. It's given me a very clear
sense that our models aren't necessarily truth or reality, but they're just a working model
that can allow us to make predictions about the earth. For instance, back in elementary school,
I learned that atoms were the very smallest things that rock was made out of. And then
when I got to junior high school, I learned that that wasn't really true, that atoms in fact were
made of neutrons and protons and electrons. When I got to high school, these electrons, which
previously I had thought of as sort of orbiting the nucleus of an atom like a planet, like a moon
orbits a planet, I learned that these electrons occurred in shells and that the protons and
neutrons were made of quarks, other subatomic particles. By the time I got to college, now
these electron shells had been replaced with electron orbitals. And there were all sorts
of other particles like gluons that held the quarks together and nearly massless neutrinos
and leptons and a whole pantheon of other particles. And in fact, by the time I got to
graduate school, we didn't even talk about electrons as being particles at all. They were
just wave-like quantum probability distributions. And in each case, a more complex model was needed
to explain whatever physical observations we were talking about at the time. It turns out,
science is very powerful this way. Its models never last very long and they are constantly
being replaced. It's almost like an evolutionary process of the survival of the most fit model
because all it takes is one good bit of evidence to prove a model wrong. In fact, Thomas Huxley
once wrote, the tragedy of science is the slaying of a beautiful hypothesis by an ugly fact.
It only takes one fact to contradict a model and give us the need for a new model.
As a scientist, it makes it kind of an unnerving field to work in because our field of geology,
our concepts of what the interior of the earth is like, is constantly changing. The papers that
are written one year go out of date within a couple years. And if we're lucky, we get to be the ones
who correct our own papers rather than having someone else do it. What I've presented to you
in this lecture is our current model of why rock melts, why we have magma flowing out at
volcanoes, at mid-ocean ridges, at subduction zones, and at hot spots like Hawaii. But I have to warn
you, our models may change. Future work is going to show undoubtedly that there are many other
factors involved, some that we don't understand, some that we haven't even come to realize yet.
And this will continue to change our field. In the future, this course might actually
tell you a very different story than what I'm telling you today. But nonetheless,
it will always be the most recent, the most up to date understanding and model of how our interior
earth works.
