Welcome. In the previous lecture I talked about the many different ways that rock melts to
form magma. Well, what melts must solidify again, and in this lecture I'm going to talk
about the many ways that magma crystallizes to form new rock again. Now, the whole process
of crystallization is a very unusual one, and it's often very aesthetically beautiful.
For instance, you're familiar with snowflakes. Well, snowflakes are a form of crystallization,
and it's remarkable if you look at a snowflake. Often it looks perfect, symmetric, complex,
these lacy, delicate, six-sided structures. They almost look like they've been designed
by a very creative artist, but they're even more remarkable than this, because if you
look closely, they're not perfectly symmetric. And in fact, each of the six sides of one
of these beautiful hexagonal snowflakes is actually slightly different, and this to
me is really remarkable. Let me explain. Our universe, as we've already established,
works by a very definite set of physical laws, and snowflakes form in clouds through these
laws. They are ice crystals. Now, in certain storm conditions, where you have convection
occurring within the air, a snowflake may go up and down many times within the clouds,
and this gives the ice crystals the opportunity to grow very large. Now, the six-sided symmetry
of the snowflake is the result of what we just talked about in the previous lecture.
It's due to the molecular bonding at an atomic level, and like we talked about in minerals,
the atoms of water bind together in this six-sided symmetry. However, the different structures
of a snowflake reflect the particular environmental conditions that existed when it formed. Was
it high up? Was it low down? Was it colder or warmer? Was it rising or falling? All of
these factors affect the way that that crystal of ice will grow, so no two snowflakes end
up looking the same, because they all have slightly different histories. So, in a sense,
the shape of that snowflake is actually a record of the history of its formation, even
if we can't read it and understand it. However, very slight differences across the width of
the snowflake will actually cause changes across the snowflake in the shape of the crystal,
because there are slight differences in temperature and pressure, even across the small scale
of a snowflake. Perhaps the snowflake bumped into another snowflake on another side. The
histories across that whole flake are slightly different, and yes, there certainly are laws
of physics and laws of the universe, but these laws also include a certain amount of chance,
and the chance history of that snowflake affects its appearance. In other words, random events
happen during the process of crystallization. Just like with the rock cycle, where I talked
about an atom can follow any one of a number of paths through the earth, the actual process
of crystallization has this element of uncertainty into it as well. Well, let me return to the
crystallization of rock now. It should be exactly the same as snowflakes, right? You've
got a big vat of molten magma, and it begins to crystallize, and you get solid rock of
that composition, right? No, it doesn't work that way at all. In fact, if you take a very
common rock, like a granite, that granite has lots of different crystals in it. The pink
color comes from potassium feldspar, the whitish colors come from a sodium rich feldspar, the
dark colors are often biotite, a form of mica, and the clear crystals are quartz. So this
formed out of a single magma, but it formed very different crystals, not a single composition.
Why? Why is this different than the process of how an ice crystal formed? Well, ice is
entirely water, it's all H2O, whereas this magma that formed this rock is some combination
of all the elements. Yes, it's primarily a few elements that we talked about, silicon,
oxygen, magnesium, iron, and a few others, but nonetheless there are lots of different
mineral, lots of different elements, and those elements will form different minerals,
and those minerals will crystallize at different temperatures, and this is really the key to
why rocks look the way they do. The minerals don't crystallize at the same temperature.
Let me break this down. Let me start with a magma and cool it, and I'm going to form
these minerals atom by atom. Picture yourself. You're down in some magma chamber beneath
a volcano. It's hot, it's fluid. Remember, we talked about the viscosity of magma going
anywhere from almost water to thick tar. So things start out hot and very fluid, and atoms
are moving all about, and over time that magma chamber begins to cool and things stiffen
up. Now, it's still liquid, it's still flowing easily, but the viscosity is increasing, so
the magma begins to mostly stay in place. The atoms are still moving around a little
bit, but there's not a lot of motion, and a process sort of like musical chairs begins,
where as the music stops, atoms start moving to the minerals that they best fit in. In
other words, as the magma begins to cool, different minerals will nucleate in different
locations, and the atoms will actually diffuse through this melt to find where they fit best.
Now, I talk about atoms moving to find where they fit best. Obviously, the atoms aren't
thinking about this. It's a process that happens naturally, and it's very simple. If
an atom ends up bonded in a particular structure where it doesn't have a good fit, it will
just oscillate till it bounces back out, and it will keep moving around until it finds
the crystal that it best belongs in, and then that crystal will grow. So out of that magma,
which begins to thicken, the crystals begin to form, and those crystals will all grow
until they're entirely solid, and you have this interlocking set of crystals. So you
end up with a rock like this granite, where all of the different crystals were forming
independently, and they all grew until they grew right into each other, and the whole
thing was solid. Now, you can get very different minerals forming at different temperatures
and different conditions, and this depends upon a variety of factors that involve the
type of material you have, the pressure that exists, the rate of cooling, and to geologists,
this is what's really exciting, because just like the way that snowflake, its texture and
appearance was shaped by its history of crystallization, the same thing happens for any one of these
rocks. The texture and appearance of a rock is a record of its history of formation, and
it's the Sherlock Holmes thing again. If you learn how to recognize those clues in how
a rock formed, you can tell the history of a region just by looking at the rocks that
it contains. Now, this process of having the rocks crystallize at different temperatures
has a name. We call it the Bowen reaction series, and the basic idea is that as the
magma goes from a very hot temperature to a very cool temperature, certain crystals
will be able to form long before others. Now, the final rock will have the same net composition
as the magma, only it will be separated out into different minerals. And by the way, this
Bowen reaction series for melting works the same in reverse. If you take a solid rock
and you begin to heat it up, certain minerals, the ones that were the very last to crystallize,
are now going to be the first to melt. And this is very important, and later on we'll
see how rocks like granite actually form. Well, what actually happens in the Bowen reaction
series? Well, let's say you take a rock, you take a magma, and you bring it down to about
1200 degrees Celsius. At this point, you have actually two branches of your Bowen reaction
series where minerals begin to crystallize. You have olivine, which begins to solidify
and crystallize out of the melt, and a type of felled spar that tends to be calcium rich.
Now remember we talked about olivine. I said that olivine is one of the primary materials
within Earth's mantle. And I also said that this olivine was made of single silicon oxygen
tetrahedra that are independently stacked in a 3D structure so that they're not actually
touching. This is very important. The mineral at an atomic level is fairly weak because
these strongly covalently bonded silicon tetrahedra are not touching each other. They're
bonded to other ions, their magnesium and iron ions, but not to each other. And so it's
fairly easy for this rock to form and crystallize. It doesn't take a lot of work to develop these
intense strong covalent bonds between the silicon and oxygen atoms. After olivine,
you then begin to crystallize perixene. Now perixene was the other major atom that I talked
about being within Earth's mantle. And perixene, again, is silicon and oxygen plus magnesium
and iron. But now we have those silicon tetrahedra forming chains. They're connected at their
corners. They take a little bit more work to form so they crystallize next. If you continue
to cool the rock, then you get to some of these sheet silicates like biotite, which is
a type of mica, and another mica muscovite. Here we have the silicon now attached to each
other in sheets. It takes a little bit more work. You have to cool it down even harder
to do that. And lastly, you get to the 3D structures of the silicon tetrahedra. Your
potassium and sodium rich feldspars, and by the time you get all the way down to about
600 degrees, you have quartz. So you need to cool the rock over a period of a range
of about 600 degrees to fully crystallize the rock. We talked about this previously though.
I said there was a big difference between the solidus and the liquidus. The solidus
was the temperature at which rock first begins to melt. At the surface, that would be about
600 degrees. And the liquidus would be the point at which the entire rock was melted.
At the surface, for a granite type rock, that would be about 1200 degrees. It takes a 600
degree range within which you have some crystals and some melt, but not entirely one or the
other. Now, not surprisingly, as we'll see later on in the course, the strength of a
rock and how resistant it is to weathering an erosion is directly related to the Bowen
reaction series. And it happens, in fact, in the exact same order. The olivine is, because
these silicon tetrahedra are not bonded to each other, tends to disintegrate and break
apart very easily. It weathers easily. It falls apart. It chemically and mechanically erodes.
All the way to the far end of that Bowen reaction series, where we end up with quartz, where
you have these tight, covalently bonded silicon and oxygen atoms, quartz is very, very tough.
As I said in the lecture on mineralogy, it has a hardness of seven on a scale from one
to 10. And it tends to be very resistant to weathering. And as a result, most beaches,
as I said previously, are made of quartz crystals, quartz grains. Now, this isn't just hypothetical.
You can go many places around the surface of our country and find this very same phenomenon
occurring. For instance, I grew up for part of my childhood in New Jersey, not far from
New York City. And as a child, I used to go and play along the Palisades Cliffs. Now,
if you've ever been to New York City or you're from there, you know that if you look across
the Hudson River to New Jersey from Manhattan, you see this thousand foot high cliff that
runs up and down the west side of the Hudson River. These are the Palisades Cliffs. And
as a kid, I noticed something very strange about them. If you go to the bottom of these
cliffs, they tend to have a slightly greenish color. And then as you go up along them, the
color is blacker and then it gets lighter as you get to the top. Well, it turns out
this is exactly what you would expect from the Bowen Reaction series, because that greenish
color at the bottom of the of the Palisades Cliffs is olivine. And what happened is the
Palisades Cliffs actually formed 200 million years ago, back at a time when Pangea was
existing. So it was inexistent. So all the continents were together as one supercontinent.
But 200 million years ago, Pangea began to break apart and magma came up right beneath
New Jersey and some of it erupted at the surface. But some of it squirted its way in between
layers of rock. That's something that we call a sill and I'll talk about that later. And
this rock, this layer of rock cooled underground. And as it cooled, the first thing to crystallize
were these greenish olivine crystals. When they became solid, they became heavier and
they sank to the bottom of the sill. The next thing to crystallize, remember, as I said,
was the Perixine. Perixine is a fairly black mineral. And so you had olivine transitioning
to this black Perixine. And then at the top of the sill, you moved more into these feldspars
that had a lighter color. So you can go to the Palisades Cliffs right there along the
Hudson River and you can see the evidence of the Bowen Reaction Series. It happened 200
million years ago, but there it is. It's right there for anyone to be able to see.
Now one very important factor in the appearance of a rock and one real clue as to how it cools
has to do with its rate of cooling. Because it turns out when rock cools underground,
it cools very, very slowly. And this is a really long game of musical chairs where the
atoms have a lot of time to move and find the mineral that they belong in just right.
As a result, you get large mineral grains that are visible. We call this an intrusive
igneous rock. So this granite that I showed is an example of these large grains. You can
actually see them all with the visible eye. Now interesting, if you take that same magma
and you erupt it out the surfaces of volcano, it's the same material. You still get crystals,
but you can't see them anymore. That's an example of an extrusive igneous rock. And
for the granite, that rock we call a rhyolite. Now the rhyolite has the same crystals. It
has the feldspars and the biotite and the quartz, but you need a microscope to see them.
Why? Because they cooled so quickly that the crystals didn't have a chance to grow very
fat, to grow very large. And the atoms very quickly had to just end up, had to stop where
they were in this process. Now, if you cool a magma very, very quickly, ultra-fast, you
end up with a glass. And the glass that we use for windows is actually pure silica, silica
and oxygen, and it's visible. But if you take a typical volcanic type rock and you cool
it instantly, you get a rock called obsidian. And this obsidian has the same properties
as glass. It has these smooth appearances and it fractures in entirely random locations.
And that's because it hasn't been able to form into a mineral structure at all. Now,
there are certain changes to these conditions that can occur. There are variations. For
instance, you could cool a rock very slowly and then suddenly rush it out of the magma
chamber and cool it at the surface in a volcano. This would have a very different appearance.
We call this a porphyritic rock. And what happens is the rock begins to crystallize deep within
the earth and you hit certain crystals that are very large that will begin to grow. Then
the rock gets rushed to the surface and everything else around those large crystals has to crystallize
very quickly and you get smaller crystals. By the way, this name, a porphyritic rock,
has an interesting history. It comes from the Greek word for purple porphyry. And it
just happens to be named for a very particular purple porphyritic rock that's found at a
particular quarry in the eastern desert of ancient Egypt. It was a very pretty rock that
was prized by Imperial Rome for making buildings. And that word stuck to mean any rock that
had large crystals surrounded by a matrix of much smaller crystals. Now, of course,
probably the most important factor in determining how a rock looks is its composition, what
it's made of. And just in the same way that we had different magmas coming out at different
parts of the earth, mid-ocean ridges, subduction zones, and hotspots, we get different compositions
of rock coming out in these locations. If you go to a mid-ocean ridge, and again, one
of the few places you can see the active mid-ocean ridge volcanism occurring is Iceland, most
everywhere else it occurs underneath the ocean, but you find are two different types of rock
forming. They are a basalt and a gabbro. And these two rocks don't look the same, but
they're the exact same composition. It turns out the black rock is what comes out of the
surface as lava. It's basalt. And all of the ocean seafloor is made of this rock. So in
fact, most of the earth's surface has this particular rock as dull and unexciting as
it looks as its primary ingredient. This rock, gabbro, is the exact same equivalent, but
gabbro forms underground. It forms slowly. The crystals have time to grow into their
separate crystal grains, and you can actually see them. Now, unlike the granite, it's dominated
by these greenish crystals, which are olivine, and black crystals, which are the paroxyne,
and also some whitish crystals, which are these calcium-rich feldspars. The basalt
has these exact same mineral crystal grains, only you need a microscope to see them. By
the way, these minerals, if you remember, olivine and paroxyne, are silicon and oxygen
with magnesium and iron. They tend to be dark, and they tend to be very heavy, because it's
metal, the magnesium and iron. And so we call these rocks mafic. That's the geologic
word for them. The mafic, the M stands for magnesium, and the F is for a ferrous, ferrum,
which is the Latin for iron. So these are mafic rocks. They found in the ocean seafloor
and they're dark, and they tend to be very heavy. Just holding these, they have a tremendous
amount of heft. Now, at the other end of the spectrum, if you go to continents, you get
a variety of rocks, as I've talked about previously, but one of the most prevalent is this granite
and rhyolite, which I already talked about. These tend to have more silica than the darker
basalt rocks, and they also tend to be richer in a variety of elements, including aluminum.
And so we give them a name, Cialic, in order to differentiate them from the basalt and
the gabbro. They tend to be lighter in color. They also tend to be lighter in appearance,
and lighter in weight. You can just feel picking them up that they're lighter than the basalt
and gabbro. Now, it turns out that granite forms in an interesting variety of ways that
I'll talk about later, and there are clues that we see in the granite to the different
tectonic settings that the granite forms. The amazing thing is though, with just these
four rocks, basalt, gabbro, granite, and rhyolite, we can already explain most of igneous rocks
that we see, with one big exception, and that is our third area where we had magma coming
out, which was its subduction zones. It turns out, if you go to a place like Mount St. Helens,
what you find are rocks like andesite forming, which is the volcanic equivalent of a gabbro
or of a rhyolite, but it's a combination of both. And these subduction zone volcanoes have
what we call intermediate compositions. In other words, if you take that rock that melts
from the mantle, which is largely rich in these basaltic-type compositions, and you
bring it up through the continental crust, you incorporate some of these granite-type
elements into it, and when it erupts at a place like Mount St. Helens, it has a composition
that's somewhere in between the basalt and the granite and the rhyolite. So, with just
these few rocks, these igneous rocks, you can already determine an enormous amount about
the history of the rock and how it formed. Now, despite the fact that volcanoes are dramatic
and produce a lot of land at Earth's surface, it actually turns out that most igneous rocks
cool underground, and the magma never makes it to the surface. First of all, for the ocean
sea floor, only the very top part of the ocean floor is made of basalt. Most of the ocean
crust is actually gabbro. It's cooled slow enough that you have these visible crystals
within continents. The tops of continents are often covered by a variety of rocks, often
sedimentary rocks, like I talked about in previous lectures, sandstone, shale, and limestone,
but the granite-type compositions only rarely erupted the surface as rhyolite. Most of the
time, granite forms deep underground, and this is actually very interesting. Suppose
you take a continental collision, and you have two pieces of continent that are smashing
together. As these continents collide, the rock finds itself squeezed in the middle,
and it doesn't have any place to go. So it does two things. Some of it goes up to form
mountains, and some of it goes down to form deep roots of mountains. I'll talk about this
later on when I talk about this whole process of mountain building, but it turns out that
mountains actually have very deep roots to them. Well, suppose you take a granite, or
let's say any variety of materials, we don't need to start with a granite, and you begin
to push this rock down deep into the earth. The temperature starts to go up. Well, what's
going to melt first? The first thing that's going to melt, we're doing the Bowen reaction
series in reverse here, is going to be the quartz, and then you're going to get minerals
like the biotite mica, and some of those feldspar is melting. Well, as soon as these materials
begin to melt, they rise up into the core of the mountain. But remember, our mountaintop
is now way above the surface. So long before that magma can reach the surface of the mountain,
it cools and hardens underneath. We call this a large volume of crystallizing granite,
a batholith. And in fact, if you look all up and down the Sierra Nevada mountains, Yosemite
is a good example. Yosemite Valley, that whole region, is all granite. It used to be far
beneath the surface, but erosion has removed the tops of the Sierra Nevada mountains, exposing
this granite. The same thing with the Appalachian Mountains in the eastern United States. If
you go to a place like the Presidential Mountains in New Hampshire, these mountains are granite.
Now they formed many miles beneath the surface, but the top is all long since been eroded
away. And what we see is that giant batholith, that giant volume of crystallized granite
that formed and cooled underground initially miles away from the surface. Now there are
actually other ways that these granite batholiths can form. And it's very interesting if you
go to a place like Yosemite or sometimes in the middle of continents, we have a situation
where if a hot spot comes up beneath the continent, it causes melting to occur at the bottom
part of the continental crust. And of course, the first materials to melt going through
that reverse bow and reaction series, the quartz, the felled spars, the biotites are
the materials that make a granite. So that material melts at the bottom, rises up, but
can cool and crystallize before it reaches the surface. And so it will again also make
a large underground batholith of granite. And I'll talk about that more in lecture 21
when I talk about hot spots and volcanoes that happen in the middle of plates.
Now these large volumes of rock can take other forms as well. I talked already about the
process of having a layer of magma forming in a horizontal sill. The Palisades, Cliffs
in New Jersey are one example. Another well-known one is the Salisbury crags, which are in Edinburgh,
Scotland. Again, this is a layer that began initially as liquid and then crystallized
out. Sometimes what you find underground are the ancient vertical pipes of volcanoes.
So for instance, right near the Salisbury crags in Edinburgh is Edinburgh's castle.
And that castle actually sits up high, but it's on top of what used to be rock that
crystallized within the pipe, within the conduit of a volcano. The rock is more resistant than
the surrounding rocks, which have been eroded away, leaving the top of that volcanic pipe
evident. Another famous one is Devil's Tower in Wyoming or Ship Rock in Arizona. In each
case, the volcanic rock was more resistant than the surrounding sediments and it remained
sticking up after the other rocks have eroded. Another very common form of intrusive igneous
rock is a dike. In this case, it's like a sill, but it's a sheet of rock that forms
vertically, often cutting across other sedimentary layers. Well, I hope I've given you a sense
here of why different igneous rocks have such different appearances. And you should really
take a field trip and go see for yourself. Now, you don't need to go far. You don't
have to go out and go to the Sierra Nevadas or the Appalachians. Rocks like granite are
used all the time for buildings, piles, countertops. You can take an urban geology field trip
if you want. Just be conscious of the rocks around you. In fact, we do that at our university.
We actually send the students on a geological lab around campus looking at the different
buildings and countertops. You could do the same thing. You know, next time you meet a
new tabletop or a new building column, just take a close look at it and try to do a little
bit of detective work. Can you see the individual minerals? Are they large or small? Are they
light colored or dark? You've already begun to recognize the history of rocks that may
have formed millions or billions of years ago.
