Welcome. In the previous lectures, I talked about the ways that rock melts and what happens
when that molten rock, magma, cools and crystallizes underground. But when most people think of
magma, what they really think about are volcanoes. And in this lecture, I'm going to begin to
talk about what happens when lava erupts at the surface. Now, I'm going to come back
to volcanoes several times during this course because volcanoes are just so important to
the whole process of geology, not only for the Earth's sake, but also for human's sake.
For instance, if you go back to the origins of so many cultures in regions where volcanoes
are nearby, these cultures have very often temperamental and destructive gods associated
with volcanoes. One of the best known is Hephaestus, the Greek god who became Vulcan in the Roman
mythology. This was a god who had a real chip on his shoulder. He wasn't as attractive
as his brother Ares. It was always in a bad mood, and the volcanoes showed the evidence
of that. Another well-known god is actually the goddess Pele, a woman who had been exiled
and killed by her sister. She was very violent and temperamental. And apparently she can
be bribed with gin, the times that I've been to the large island on Hawaii. If you go to
the volcano, you'll sometimes find bottles of gin lying around. I'm not sure if that
works or not. I'll come back in lecture 22 more to the topic of the dangers and hazards
of volcanoes, because it's really one of the most dramatic aspects of Earth's science.
But let me give you just one example to show you not only the destructiveness of a volcano,
but how it can affect human society and culture. Now if you ever take a trip to Greece, one
of the jewels off the coast in the islands off the coast of the mainland is Santorini.
It's a beautiful island. I see it all the time in calendars. It has stunning architecture,
these beautiful white buildings along the steep slopes of the island. However, the island
has a very curious shape. It's in the shape of a sea. Now it wasn't this way when the
island was first settled. Back many thousands of years ago, the island was a classic circular
shape with a large mountain, Mount Thara, in the middle. At this time, back in the Mediterranean
Bronze Age, this island, Santorini, was actually one of the best known Minoan communities
outside of Crete. And its major port city was actively trading with Greece and Egypt,
Cyprus and Syria. And all of this changed very dramatically about three and a half thousand
years ago, 1650 BCE, because that mountain, Mount Thara, was a volcano and it erupted.
When it exploded, 61 cubic kilometers of rock was ejected out of the volcano and the mountain
was entirely gone, leaving just a hole at the sea surface where the mountain had been.
This eruption was 50 times larger than Mount St. Helens. In fact, in the past 5,000 years
only one volcanic eruption, Mount Tambora in Indonesia, which happened in 1815, was
larger, and I'll talk more about that later on. Cities in Santorini were either obliterated
or buried under tens of meters of rock and ash. In fact, there was so much ash spewn
out from this volcano that the whole Mediterranean region was plunged into darkness as ash covered
the whole area and spread about. But that wasn't the worst of it. Because the explosion
happened at sea level, it actually created a huge tsunami. Now, we usually associate
tsunamis with earthquakes, but anything that disturbs the ocean sea floor can cause a tsunami.
And this huge tsunami spread throughout the entire Mediterranean region. Now, if you look
at a map of the location of Santorini, you can see it's not far from the north coast
of Crete. And in fact, people had been puzzled for a long time why the Minoan culture, which
had been doing so well, seemed to suddenly decline and really disappear. Well, many anthropologists
have thought that the tsunami from that eruption essentially wiped out all the shoreline cultures
of the Minoan culture on Crete and probably played a very large role in its demise. Now,
the story doesn't end there because 1300 years later, Plato wrote about this mythical land
called Atlantis. Now, he did this in some of his dialogues, the dialogues of Tenaeus
and Cridius. In these dialogues, these people are talking with Socrates, his former teacher.
And Plato describes in these particular dialogues an island called Atlantis, where there had
been this great and wonderful empire that ruled over the island and many other islands
as well. And he described a time when there were violent earthquakes and floods and in
a single horrible day and night, the entire island of Atlantis disappeared into the depths
of the sea. Now, it's hard to know for sure because the events of Santorini, again, were
1300 years before Plato even wrote this. But again, there's a very strong feeling among
many archaeologists that what Plato was describing was the destruction of this civilization and
that it had a cultural memory that stuck throughout the whole Greek culture for thousands
of years. The story doesn't even end there because at the same time, interestingly, across
the other side of the Mediterranean, the Israelites were fleeing Egypt. And some historians think
that the plagues of Egypt, the darkness, things falling from the sky were due to that volcanic
eruption. The darkness was because of the ash and the falling things from the sky were
the ash falling out from that volcano. Even more interesting, if you look at the story
of the Exodus of the Israelites out of Egypt, they cross the Sea of Reeds. Now that's sometimes
been misinterpreted as the Red Sea, but it was the Reeds Sea. It was a small area just
south of the Mediterranean where waters tended to be very shallow. In the story, the waters
pull away and disappear and then flood back catastrophically. Well, what physical event
involves water pulling back and disappearing and then flooding back catastrophically? That's
exactly what happens during a tsunami. Now, again, this is highly speculative that the
same volcanic eruption that destroyed Santorini and created the legend of Atlantis could also
have caused the stories that we read about in the Old Testament. But clearly, we see
just in this one example that things like volcanoes can occur on scales literally of
biblical proportions. Well, volcanoes don't just happen catastrophically. And volcanoes
are perfect examples also of the other end of that spectrum between catastrophism and
uniformitarianism that I've talked about before. Because for every Mount Therra blowing
apart catastrophically, there are many more Hawai'is where lava just calmly bubbles out
day after day, year after year. As I mentioned before, on eruptions on Hawaii, it's rare
that anyone dies because the lava just flows out so smoothly in the process creating new
land instead of destroying it. And so we see that volcanoes are not only deadly hazards,
but they also create the land that many of us live on. And even more than that, it turns
out they've actually created much of the water we drink and the air we breathe. Now, the
connection with new land is obvious. All of the ocean sea floor is created from basalt
coming out at mid-ocean ridges. So right away, we have a majority of the world's surface
covered with this volcanic rock. But on continents as well, we have many large areas that have
rock that have come about through volcanic eruptions. And in fact, if it weren't for
continuous volcanism, much of the surface of our continents would be gone. Our continents
would actually be much, much smaller than they currently are today. However, there's
a whole other side to this. Remember, way back at the start of the Earth, when I talked
about how our solar system formed, I said there was a period where our sun went through
this explosive phase, the teetory phase. And it was such a violent pressure wave that it
would have stripped the Earth of any atmosphere it had initially when the Earth first formed.
Since then, the atmosphere that we have has had to come about from other sources. And the
primary source of our atmosphere, the reason we have air here, is the constant degassing
of our planet from volcanoes, water vapor, nitrogen, carbon dioxide. These materials
have primarily come out of the surface of the Earth. Now, there are other sources as
well. We do pick up material from comets and other debris as we move through space. So
some of our atmospheres come about from those comets. And our atmosphere, to be sure, has
been tremendously altered by other geologic processes and by biology. The existence of
plants, for instance, created the free oxygen that we have in our atmosphere. And I'll
talk about that later on in the course. Not only our atmosphere, but together with that,
our oceans. Water that was within the Earth early on came out to the surface through this
continuous process of degassing and has kept water at the Earth's surface. Because as we'll
talk about later on, when you have a subduction zone, you actually pump a lot of water back
down into the Earth. And I talked earlier about how we may have so much water inside
the Earth, we may have five ocean fulls of water deep within the Earth. If it weren't
for volcanism, that process of subduction would keep bringing our ocean water down into the
Earth and the oceans would disappear. But volcanism makes sure that that water cycle
is complete and the water that goes down inside the Earth comes back up at the surface to
replace the water that's removed. Now, it's interesting, if you look at other planets,
and I'll talk a little bit more about this later on, we see active volcanism happening
in other places. But one of the most dramatic examples of volcanism happened on Mars. In
fact, the largest volcano in our solar system is Mount Olympus. It's the size of the state
of Arizona. And this volcano formed many billions of years ago. Now Mars has had a very different
history from Earth. It never had plate tectonics. It didn't have anything like the surface geology
that we have. But it did have a period early on a very active degassing when huge amounts
of gases and waters and carbon dioxide were ejected out of the interior of Mars. In fact,
the volcanoes that formed at that time would have created a carbon dioxide atmosphere about
50 times greater in pressure than our own current atmosphere. And some scientists think
actually created a global ocean, a water layer that averaged about 120 meters. However, Mars
is smaller than Earth. It has a much weaker gravity and much of that gas and water has
just been lost to space over time. Mars, because of its small size, is also much colder. And
it turns out that much of that water we think might be trapped and frozen within the crust
of Mars. Nonetheless, we learn a lot about our own planet's evolution by comparing it
to other planets. And I'll do more of that a little bit later on in the course. Now,
in volcanic eruptions, you have enormous amounts of material ejecting out of the Earth
often violently. And that happens in two major forms. It comes in the form of lava, which
is liquid rock that flows out of volcanic vents, actually flowing across the surface,
and tephra, which is material that's ejected into the air. And though it's usually ejected
as a liquid form, within the air, which is much colder than the interior of the Earth,
it very quickly solidifies and falls to the ground in a solid form. Now, for lava, this
flowing liquid rock, like the magma we talked about previously, but it's lost a lot of
its gases. And so it tends to be a lot stiffer. It tends to have a much higher viscosity.
But nonetheless, lava has a tremendous variety of textures. For instance, one of the most
common types of lava, if you ever go to Hawaii, is called Pohoihoi. If you ever see videos
of lava flowing on Hawaii, if you ever get to go there, it has a ropey texture, and it
flows very slowly. It's sort of like molasses flowing down a very gentle slope. These are
samples that I brought back from the big island. And you can see the top of this piece of Pohoihoi
actually has all of these ropey textures. It's where the surface begins to stack up
on itself and pile up. Now, interestingly, the texture varies tremendously as you look
within the rock. By the way, this is a toe of one of these arms of Pohoihoi crawling
across the ground. You turn them on their sides. You'll notice that the top half inch
or so of the Pohoihoi is very shiny. It's obsidian. It's volcanic glass that crystallized
nearly, I'm sorry, that actually didn't crystallize. It solidified nearly instantaneously when
that lava came in contact with the air. And if you go in the interior of the Pohoihoi,
you see it's very rough and blocky. And that's because this lava still contains within it
huge amounts of gas that was liquid from the pressure down on Earth. But as the lava got
to the surface, it began to expand and form these huge gas bubbles that actually froze
into the rock as it was hardening and solidifying.
One of the most spectacular things I've ever seen is actually the lava on Hawaii flowing
at night. If you ever get a chance to do that, it's spectacular. The lava during the day
is remarkable, but at night the whole area glows red. And to see a waterfall of this
liquid glowing red lava just flowing over the edge of a cliff is one of the most remarkable
sites that certainly that I've ever seen. Now, lava takes other forms as well. Also
on Hawaii, a common form is called A'a'a. And A'a'a, unlike the Pohoihoi, is very
rough and blocky. It looks like a rubble heat being bulldozed ahead. Just blocks keep
breaking off and crumbling down. Interestingly, A'a'a is the same composition as the Pohoihoi,
but it's lost more of its gases. You can see all the gases that were trapped within this
rock, they get lost over time and a Pohoihoi flow can actually turn into one of these A'a'a
flows. The story goes that A'a'a, the name comes from, that's the sound of a barefoot
Hawaiian walking on it. But again, I can't verify that at all.
Lava takes other forms at the surface. Sometimes it ejects in the form of tall fountains, literally
hundreds of feet high of lava thrown into the air. Sometimes this lava pulls into large
lakes and forms lava lakes. And sometimes the lava will leave those lakes in rivers that
will actually flow miles or tens of miles to the ocean. When the lava flows, it makes
a very unusual structure called a lava tube. Because again, the rock is so hot, it's about
11 or 1200 degrees Celsius. But when it meets the cool air, it forms a crust on top, but
the lava can still flow underground. And what you have often with a volcano on Hawaii
is a network of these lava tubes where the lava is flowing from the central vent all
the way out to the ocean, but you can't even see it at the surface because it's happening
underground. Instantly, when the lava supply shuts off, that tube is left hollow. And there
are sometimes tubes that are many miles long and up to 50 feet high or so that you can
then walk through. Interestingly, you don't even have to go to Hawaii to do this. You can
go to Idaho. I mentioned that there's a place called Craters of the Moon National Monument
in Idaho where volcanoes erupted only thousands of years ago. There are large lava tubes there
as well. You can actually walk into them and traverse underground through these former
rivers of flowing lava. Now, Tefra, I said, is material that's ejected
into the air. And when it begins to be thrown out of the volcano, it actually begins in
liquid form and then solidifies. The most common is ash. And ash is small little frozen
cinders of magma that's crystallized or just turned into glass as it's thrown out of the
top of the volcano. But Tefra can also take larger forms. Sometimes you get very large
blocks or bombs of this material that is thrown often sometimes as many as far as miles away
from the central volcano. Now, it's interesting. There are several places in our country where
you can go to see these layers of ash. In fact, there are many layers of this ash, these
layers that we call them tough, TuFF, that form in the southwest from volcanoes that
happened there within the past 100,000 years. And many of these were actually used by Native
Americans to form dwellings. For instance, many of the cliff dwellings, like bandolier,
are formed by carving whole rooms out of this very soft ash tuFF. And it's easier to...
I mean, it's still solid. It's still solid rock, but it's soft enough that you can carve
it. Though interestingly, if that ash falls when it's very hot, it can also entirely weld
together. And there are many places in my own state of Missouri where hot ash from a
billion years ago welded together to form what's now very hard tuFF, rhyolite. Now, that ash
is also very dangerous. And if it flows out of a volcano, it can actually end up catastrophically
causing what are called pyroclastic flows that can be very deadly. And I'll talk about that
later on in the course. Now, volcanoes are also very explosive at times. And that's due to two
factors that I talked about in the section on magma. I talked about how if they have a lot
of silica, they're very gummy and resistant to flowing. And so it takes a lot of pressure to
suddenly get that volcano to erupt. The other factor that I talked about was the presence
of water. Because if water is under pressure, no matter how hot it is, it may stay in a liquid
state. But when you take that pressure off, it will erupt and explode. Now, you probably have
experience with this already. If you've ever opened up a bottle of soda or seltzer that was
accidentally shaken. Because what happens when you shake a bottle of seltzer is that all those
little carbon dioxide molecules begin to come together to nucleate millions of small little
gas bubbles. But they stay in a liquid state because of the pressure. But if you open the top
of the volcano, what you get is a volcano. And you get those millions of gas bubbles expanding
out, erupting out. And this is exactly what happens in a volcano. We have a situation where
all of this gas, carbon dioxide, and water is trapped within a liquid state. You open the top
of the volcano and this stuff explodes. And that's why volcanoes with a lot of water within them
can be incredibly dangerous and explosive. Now, I talked about how the rock that flows out,
often from these explosions, has so much gas in it that what you get is really a crystallizing
of froth. And I can demonstrate straight that as well. Let me take an example of a volcanic rock
that's ejected out of a volcano. But this rock has an unusual property, unlike something like the
bahoyhoy, which if I put it in the water sinks right to the bottom. This rock, if I put it on top,
floats. Why does it float? This is pumice. And pumice is filled with millions of little gas bubbles
that came into the rock when it first ejected out of the top of the volcano. And this rock,
pumice is actually found, usually in the case of volcanic explosions, by scooping it off the
ocean surface because it floats. Now, volcanoes turn out to take very different appearances
based on their geography, based on where they're located. If you go to a place like Hawaii, you
see these shield volcanoes that are very broad, flat volcanoes. Now, they can be very high.
Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea are enormous. They're literally miles above the sea surface. And in
fact, if you look at the true width of the volcano, they are as wide as 100 kilometers
if you actually could remove the ocean sea surface. What happens is because the basalt has
such a low viscosity, it can flow easily across the surface. Now, it doesn't keep flowing underwater,
but once the lava gets to the edge of the island, you get these underwater avalanches that cause the
island to collapse and extend all the way out across the sea floor to a width of about 100
kilometers. So if you took the water away, Hawaii is about 10 kilometers high, but 100 kilometers
wide. And that's why we call them shield volcanoes because they have a very broad, flat shield appearance.
You can get very different types of volcanoes forming just out of ash. We call these cinder cones.
Cinder cones tend to be very small, maybe tens or hundreds of meters only. They can still have
small amounts of lava, but mostly the magma turns into ash as it ejects, and you get small,
very perfect cones of cinders. One of the most famous came up in the middle of a Mexican corn
field in 1943, Pericutin. Literally, it was in the middle of a field. A farmer had been using
all this area for corn, and a volcano just erupted, and after nine years, it just stopped and never
continued again. But what was left in the middle of this field was a 424 meter tall cinder cone.
Now, what we think of most often when we think of volcanoes, however, is the type of volcano that
you find over a subduction zone. And these are called stratovolcanoes. They're also called composite
cones. And these form when you have alternating layers, alternating events of lava and ash
ejected from the top of the volcano. What happens is the lava may flow out a wide distance, but
when the ash falls, it tends to make a narrower cone. But when the next event of lava flows,
it solidifies that cone shape. So instead of just building it out flat like Hawaii,
it builds it up more like a cone. So if you think of volcanoes like Mount Fujiyama in Japan,
they have this classic cone shape. And they're often tremendously revered in cultures. In fact,
if you go to Mount Fujiyama, it's considered to be very beautiful there. Painters like Hiroshige
have dedicated many of their artworks to it. It's a sacred mountain. People make pilgrimages to the
top of it. Often, it's these stratovolcanoes that are the homes of gods, like in the case of
Hephaestus and Vulcan. Now, what happens for these stratovolcanoes is you run through a
cycle. And I'll talk about this more when I talk about Mount St. Helens, where you have a lot of
small eruptions that happen for a small time that build up this cone until there's so much pressure
on top that it's hard for the magnet to come out. And at that point, you may get a huge blast that
can entirely destroy the mountain. So usually, you'll find a small crater at the top of these
stratovolcanoes. But occasionally, if you blow the whole volcano away and you have to start back
at the beginning again, you can develop a large caldera. And this is when that magma chamber
underneath drains and collapses, and the whole top of the whole volcanic area falls in. For
instance, there's a volcano that I'll talk more about, Toba in Sumatra. It's 100 kilometers long
and 30 kilometers wide. That's how large the caldera is. If you travel around the Ring of Fire,
all these volcanoes that occur around the Pacific, they're mostly stratovolcanoes. And they occur
because the Pacific ocean seafloor is subducting underneath the continents that rim the Pacific,
bringing water in. And that water causes melting, comes out, and causes these tremendously explosive
volcanic eruptions, these stratovolcanoes. Now, we get other types of eruptions as well. And one of
the most interesting that I'll talk more about when I talk about intraplate volcanoes is the
occurrence of flood basalts. Because it turns out that there are periods in Earth's history where
enormous volumes of basalt floods out the surface. On the order of thousands of square
kilometers of the Earth is covered by basalt. One of the best known is the Columbia River flood
basalts in Washington and Oregon. Here you have over a thousand feet thick of basaltic lava that
flowed out about 17 million years ago. Now, what's interesting with these flood basalts is they are
often associated with the arrival of a mantle hotspot plume at the surface. For instance,
that Columbia River flood basalt that erupted 17 million years ago was the first appearance of
the Yellowstone hotspot. And in the 17 million years since, lava has continued to come up
associated with that hotspot. There wasn't any lava in that region erupting before
that Columbia River flood basalt. And when it first came, it was voluminous. We see a similar
thing with the Deccan traps in India that happened 65 million years ago. And I'll talk more about
this a little bit later on. Now, I talked about volcanism occurring elsewhere in the solar system,
and this is really important. There are some aspects of Earth's geology that are quite unique to it,
but there are some that are quite common. Mars had this period three and a half billion years ago of
enormous eruption of lava. The same thing happened on our moon between three and three and a half
billion years ago. The dark areas on the moon, these are large flood basalts. We're not entirely
sure why it happened at this period, but enormous amounts of lava flooded out and filled in probably
very large impact basins with a smooth cover of this basaltic lava. Venus is continuously
resurfaced by volcanoes. In fact, we figure about every half a billion years the whole
surface of Venus is replaced. It doesn't happen once, it happens gradually. And we see these very
strange pancake dome shaped volcanoes on the surface of Venus. The appearance of the volcanism
is different, but the effect is very similar. The most volcanic place in the entire solar system
is actually one of the moons of Jupiter, Io. This moon is so close to Jupiter that tidal stresses
from Jupiter keep the whole interior of the moon hot, and Io is constantly erupting liquid basalt
and liquid sulfur as well, giving the moon actually a yellow appearance. Well, let me wrap up.
All the land of our entire solar system began this way early in the solar system,
in a dramatic volcanic way. Some of the objects in our solar system still have volcanism occurring
today. And interestingly for Earth, this whole process of volcanism was both bad and good for
life. Obviously, if you lived in the time of Santorini's explosion, this was not a good thing.
And it turns out later on, we'll see that actually the eruptions of volcanoes can cause climate
changes that can be really stressful for the entire environment and can actually
change the whole course of history. But volcanoes also provide a source of heat and provide a source
of food. Often the land around a volcano is very, very fertile and wonderful for agriculture.
And in fact, as we'll talk about later on, it turns out that the heat from volcanoes
may have provided the best place for life to get started early on. You had a source of heat,
a source of nutrients. And in fact, we may exist today because life began right around
some of these volcanoes. I'll talk more about this as well later on in the course.
