Welcome. In this lecture I want to begin to talk about earthquakes. Now earthquakes are
incredibly important for geology because they've given us tremendous amount of information
about how plate tectonics works, what actually happens at the boundaries between plates.
But of course earthquakes mean something else to a lot of people. They are a tremendous
source of fascination and interest because they can kill millions of people in an instant
unpredictably. Now to be correct earthquakes don't really compare to many other natural
disasters in terms of loss of life and damage. Floods and droughts often are much more destructive.
For instance back in 1917 the Spanish flu alone killed more than 20 million people.
Earthquakes to this date have never been as damaging and destructive but it's their
unpredictability and their instantaneous nature that makes them so tremendously feared. For
instance if you look at the causes of death in the United States, every year heart attack
and stroke kills about a million people, cancer kills a half million people and as you go
down the list of causes of death, lung disease, pneumonia, diabetes, car accidents, AIDS,
these are all in the tens of thousands. Well you have to go a long way down the list to
get to earthquakes. Earthquakes in the United States averaged over the last 200 years kill
about 9 or 10 people a year. Now to be fair if you look at the world as a whole earthquakes
kill between 10 and 20,000 people a year but it's still a long ways away from the death
of most other large causes. However it's the fact that earthquakes have the capability
of killing millions of people in an instant that makes them so feared. It's also just part
of human nature. We're fascinated by chance and there are really few things in geology
that are more unpredictable than earthquakes. Now unpredictable however doesn't mean random
and if you look at a map of where earthquakes occur around the globe you'll see a couple
things that are very interesting right off the bat. First of all the pattern of earthquakes
isn't random. In other words if I were to put up a map of earthquakes in a room and give
the people in the room each a handful of darts and had them throw them at the map they wouldn't
be able to recreate that pattern of earthquakes unless they were really really good shots
with the darts and the reason is that the earthquakes occur almost exclusively right
along the plate boundaries. Subduction zones, transform faults and mid ocean ridges these
boundaries between the plates are very well marked out by the locations of earthquakes.
Again we have about 200,000 earthquakes that are located every year and most of these occur
on plate boundaries. However there's something else very interesting about this map of earthquake
locations. It turns out that not all of the earthquakes occur on plate boundaries. There
are also a lot of earthquakes in the middle of plates and that's something that has a
lot of people everywhere worried because for instance if you looked at a map of earthquake
hazards in the United States it's not just the case that the hazards are high along the
San Andreas fault in California or the faults in the Pacific Northwest and Alaska. It turns
out that almost everywhere in our country has had earthquakes in the historic past. In
1909 there was a magnitude 6 right outside of Chicago. There have been large earthquakes
outside of New York and Philadelphia and Boston. Large ones near Memphis and Charleston. These
earthquakes happened just within the last few hundred years and they'll continue to happen
over time. So earthquakes pose a potential hazard everywhere and I'll talk more about
this later on in the course. Now the process of earthquakes is a direct result of two aspects
of the material behavior of rocks that we just discussed. First of all brittle rupture occurs
when rocks are stiff and when stresses are large and earth lithosphere is cold and stiff
and highly deformed by the large stresses the result from the interactions of the plates.
In other words the surface of our planet is like that chocolate bar out of the freezer.
It's stiff, it's cold and if you snap it and bend it it breaks in the form of an earthquake.
Now earthquakes because they happen everywhere have fascinated people for a long time and
I've actually been quite amused by many of the cultural stories of how earthquakes occur.
For instance there's a legend in Mongolia that the earth rests on the back of a frog
and every time the frog croaks that's an earthquake. Or in parts of Africa there's
a legend that the earth rests on one of the horns of a water buffalo and when the buffalo
gets tired and switches the earth to the other horn that's an earthquake. In ancient Aztec
legends the earth rested on top of a pillar and whenever a cosmic jaguar would come and
scratch that pillar it would shake the earth and cause earthquakes. Actually my favorite
story is from Japan and it involves a giant mythical catfish called a namazu and when
the namazu at the bottom of the sea gets restless and begins to flop around earthquakes occur
and people pray to the god Kashima to come and nail down the catfish and stop the earthquakes
from happening. Now interestingly this is a model of reality that actually worked at
least for them at the time. Remember I talked about how our models of reality change over
time well suppose you were in Japan 300 years ago and an earthquake started happening you
might get on your knees and pray to the god Kashima to nail down the giant catfish and
within 15 or 20 seconds the earthquake would stop. It worked. Later on in Europe for instance
in Europe in the time of the Spanish Inquisition there was a terrible earthquake that destroyed
Lisbon in 1755. Some of you may know this earthquake because it caused an enormous tsunami
that affected the whole region and in the story Candide by Voltaire it's that tsunami
that sinks Candide's ship which is filled with gold that he just got from El Dorado.
Well that earthquake happened to have occurred on all saint's day when everyone was in church.
The Spanish Inquisition was sure that this was because of the sins of the people and
came and nailed people to the cross and burned them at the stake and you know what the region
didn't have another large earthquake again so that was also a model of reality that worked.
For us now we have a slightly different perception of why earthquakes occur. We know that they
occur along two dimensional surfaces that we call faults deep within the earth and that
when that rock reaches its maximum strength and stresses exceed that strength the rock
snaps and the two sides of the rock slide across that fault. The point at which that
earthquake rupture begins we call the focus and the place on the surface of the earth
directly above that focus we call the epicenter. Now the lithosphere as I said has to be stressed
before you get an earthquake and that's equivalent to bending the pencil. So remember in previous
lecture I took a pencil and I bent it and I snapped it but when that pencil snaps there's
a it tears at one point and that tear begins to crack all the way through my pencil. The
same thing happens underground. The earthquake nucleates at a single point and actually tears
through the rock at a fast rate of about two kilometers a second. That's an enormous speed
of tearing. Now the faults for small earthquakes can be very tiny but the faults for large
earthquakes can be larger can be longer than a thousand kilometers. Once you have a large
earthquake occurring you don't just get a single earthquake you get a large set of
aftershocks for a huge earthquake you might get thousands or tens of thousands of aftershocks.
What happens is the initial earthquake has changed the whole state of stress underground
and it takes a lot of small aftershocks for everything to sort of even back out and return
back to normal. These aftershocks turn out to be sometimes more deadly than the main
shock because buildings that have already been stressed and cracked and broken from
the main shock can then be knocked down with a smaller aftershock that follows it. Now if
you go to different tectonic settings around the surface of the earth you will see very
different types of faults. For instance let me demonstrate again with clay. So what I've
done is I've taken a set of layers of clay and stacked them up again to represent my
surface of the earth. So you can think of these as a set of different layers of sedimentary
rock or other types of rock. What I've done is taken a knife and now cut down through
this rock to make a fault. So this is my fault and my earthquake is going to begin at some
point on the fall and then it's going to tear apart. But here's the important thing. The
type of earthquake that you get depends upon the direction that the rock slips across the
fault and it's different for different plate boundaries. If you go to a mid-Atlantic ridge
or a continental rift like in Africa what's happening to the plate there is that you're
actually taking the land and pulling it apart and during an earthquake as you pull them
apart one side is going to slide down on top of the other. We call that a normal fault.
Not because it's normal as unusual or common but the direction perpendicular to the surface
in mathematics is called the normal and so it's motion in the normal direction. Now the
opposite happens when land is compressed. So if I take my land let's say at a subduction
zone and I squeeze this or I have one piece of crust that is sliding down and sinking
beneath another then this is called a reverse fault sometimes also called a thrust fault.
So what happens here during one of these faults is that the rock actually slides down but
you'll notice in the process my land has compressed so I have squeezed my ground I've
squeezed my plate I've taken up less room. Now you'll notice this is similar to what
I showed in the previous lecture where I was reducing the width of land by folding it.
Well this is similar but in this case my rock is either too stiff or I'm stressing it too
quickly and instead of folding faults occur. Now there is a third type of fault and that's
called a transverse fault and what happens here is instead of having the fault either
go up or down I do it sideways. So in this case I have slid my fault across and if I
were to look at it from above I would now see that the ground would have slid to one
side or the other. Now in reality it's rare that faults actually occur as a perfect case
of either a normal reverse or transverse fault. Usually it occurs in some set of motion that
might involve a combination of all in this case reverse and strike slit. It all depends
upon the geologic setting but in all cases we move one side of rock over the other. Now
it turns out that earthquakes release an enormous amount of energy. Often many thousands or
tens of thousands of times larger than the explosion of a nuclear bomb but most of that
energy actually goes into cracking the ground and deformation near the earthquake. It turns
out that the seismic waves that you get from an earthquake are actually a very small amount
of the energy of the earthquake. One part in 20,000 usually. And let me go back to the
pencil to give you an example. If I take my pencil I bend it and I snap it. You hear
that sound. What happened? The sudden snap of the wood pushed the air which pushed the
next bit of air which pushed it all the way to your eardrum and then the sound pushed
your eardrum and you heard it. Well that snap is the same thing as the seismic waves of
an earthquake. The ground slips, it pushes the rock which pushes the next bit of rock
and it travels all the way through the earth and is recorded not by your ears because the
waves are actually too long. They're lower than the spectrum that we can hear in. They're
recorded on seismometers and the record of the earth's motion on one of these seismometers
is called a seismogram. Now people have tried to record earthquakes for literally thousands
of years. In fact the first record I know of goes back to 135 which is nearly 2000 years
ago and it was the royal Chinese astronomer Chang Heng and it was his job given to him
from the emperor to be able to determine from which direction the seismic waves came from
in the case of an earthquake. China gets hit with earthquakes often and terribly and the
emperor wanted to know in order to send relief what direction the earthquake waves came from.
Well what Chang Heng did was build a very large urn that was quite complex. It had a pendulum
on the inside and large dragons with claws and teeth that held these gold balls and when
the pendulum swung the teeth would open the gold ball would fall down into the wading
mouths of gold frogs all around the urn. Now obviously Chang Heng worked with a much larger
budget than the National Science Foundation usually gives us to do our research. But apparently
the story goes the first time there was a large earthquake it actually worked and he
lived a long and happy life. However I have to say there's no particular reason why it
should have worked. It turns out that the motion of seismic waves is much more complex.
People have worked on seismometers for years they tried using bowls of mercury or a pendulum
in sand in order to look at the shaking of the earth but it really wasn't until about
a hundred years ago that people developed the ways of having essentially a mass on a
spring and when the earth shook the mass would move separately from the rest of the earth
and this was a modern seismometer. Initially these seismometers used to be huge. They used
to have masses that were about two tons in order to have the sensitivity to record the
small vibrations of earthquakes. Nowadays with modern electronics they're about the
size of the bowling ball. I've actually put many of these across the country in order
to do experiments looking at the interior of the earth. These seismometers are incredibly
sensitive if you put one on the ground and walk up to within 50 feet of it you'll actually
record the depression of the ground from your weight. I will have to say though that one
hassle is they look very much like a bomb and within the last couple years it's been
sometimes difficult to get on an airplane with one of these seismometers and wires
and cables and cutting tools and actually a friend of mine had a seismometer blown up
in Australia because people found it in the ground and didn't know what it was. Now seismometers
when they record seismic waves record waves in a couple different manners. They record
waves that travel through the earth. These are called body waves and waves that travel
across the surface. These are called surface waves and these waves come in two primary
forms. They are P waves and S waves. Now the P wave is an example of a wave that's a compression
wave. It's just like sound. The rock pushes the next bit of rock which pushes the next
bit and it travels all the way through the earth. An S wave is very different. It involves
motion that is perpendicular to the direction of propagation. That's actually the way light
waves travel. Light waves are they're called transverse waves. But this is very interesting
because if I speak you hear one version of me but in the earth you hear two versions
of everything. A P wave and an S wave version. Now we can show this with a slinky. If I have
a slinky which is another common tool for teaching geophysics and I shake one end up
and down like this then I create an S wave. What's happening is at any point in the slinky
the metal is moving only up and down but my wave is propagating back and forth. Let me
do that again. So I shake my slinky up and down and the wave bounces back and forth.
This is different from a P wave where if I take my slinky and I compress a bit of it
and then let it go the wave bounces back and forth but at any point in the slinky the metal
itself is moving in the same direction that the wave is propagating. Now there's one very
interesting property here and that is it turns out that S waves don't go through liquids.
So in fact we've been able to use the difference between P and S waves to discover that the
outer core is made of liquid iron and not solid iron. Now these P and S waves begin as
an initial wave of energy going through the earth but because earth's interior so varied
these waves very quickly become broken up and they reflect off of some layers, they refract
across others and they diffract around other layers like the core. What I want to do is
show you a quick animation that I made some years back that shows how earthquakes actually
create waves that propagate all the way through the mantle. These animations in this case
have an earthquake at 600 kilometers down and I'm just showing S waves and what I've
done is create a grid of more than 100,000 synthetic seismograms and I'm going to take
time steps through the earth as these waves propagate. At the top I'll also show three
seismograms, what a seismogram at 30, 60 and 90 degrees would record. Now when you look
at these seismograms I've labeled the different kinds of S waves, you'll see names like SS,
SCS, these are just our own codes for describing which waves have bounced off the surface or
bounced off the core or traveled in a variety of different forms through the earth. As the
earthquake occurs down in the lower left you can see there's initially a single wave front
that propagates outward but very quickly that S wave reflects off of the core and comes
back towards the surface, part of it at the same time as reflecting off the surface and
heading back down to the core and very quickly these waves are bouncing back and forth within
the earth. Some of the energy is actually diffracting right along the base of the mantle much the way
energy would diffract around the corner of the building and very quickly what began as
a single simple wave front has now bounced back and forth through the earth and created
a whole variety of seismic waves. For this reason it turns out it's actually fairly difficult
to be able to interpret what's going on inside the earth from seismic waves but by looking
at many thousands and even hundreds of thousands of these seismograms we've been able to piece
out what the interior structure of the earth is using these methods of seismic tomography
that I previously talked about. Now seismic waves are used for other things as well and
very importantly they give us both the location and the magnitude of the earthquake. To determine
the location of an earthquake what we do is actually use the time it takes for seismic
waves to reach seismometers all around the world because in fact there are thousands
of seismometers in operation and many of these are connected in real time so that as an
earthquake is occurring anywhere around the globe we can actually see on our seismometers
what's happening to the earth in that region. This is really good because it means within
minutes after an earthquake we know how large an earthquake is, where it is and how dangerous
it might be and we can begin to prepare emergency relief. I get an email sent to me literally
within minutes after an earthquake and I can keep up with what's going on seismically
anywhere around the globe. Now these waves give us not only the location but also the
magnitude and that's really important. Now earthquakes are measured on a logarithmic scale.
In other words each unit that you go up from a 5 to a 6 or a 6 to a 7 represents a factor
of 10 increase in the size of the waves that come from that earthquake. However it's very
interesting the energy actually scales more rapidly so it turns out that when you go from
a 6 to a 7 the energy is actually more than 30 times larger and when you go from a 6 to
an 8 you actually increase the energy by a thousand times. Now this was work done largely
by Charles Richter and Ben Agutenberg. It's sometimes mistakenly called the Richter scale
and it turns out we don't actually use the Richter scale anymore. The Richter scale was
specifically used for earthquakes in California recorded within 500 kilometers of a very specific
type of seismometer. But nonetheless the work that Richter did in determining this magnitude
gives us a means of actually describing and measuring the energy of an earthquake and
we now use something called the moment magnitude that actually gives an accurate sense of how
much energy is released from the earthquake. Now using these moment magnitudes we've been
able to notice that the earthquakes occur in a fairly fractal distribution. What I mean
by that is there are fewer large earthquakes than there are smaller earthquakes. In fact
it turns out every year there's about one eight earthquake, about a dozen magnitude
sevens or larger, about 120 magnitude six earthquakes are larger and about 1200 magnitude
five earthquakes and larger. What's very interesting however is that it turns out that the one
largest earthquake that occurs within a year or even within a decade can release more energy
than all the rest of the earthquakes that occur. So if we look at the very largest of
earthquakes that have happened that we've ever recorded, actually the largest was an
earthquake in Chile in 1960 and that had a magnitude of 9.5. The earthquake that happened
in Alaska in 1964 had a magnitude of 9.4. The Sumatra earthquake which I'll talk about
later on in this course was the third largest earthquake that we've ever measured and it
was a 9.3. Each one of these earthquakes was much larger than all the rest of the earthquakes
that occurred that year and in the case of Sumatra larger than all the earthquakes that
have occurred in the decades leading up to it. But this is also a very interesting point
because it turns out that because earthquakes are happening all the time there's actually
a magnitude six earthquake on average every three days. Now of course most of the time
we don't hear about this because these earthquakes happen out somewhere in the middle of the
Pacific Ocean or deep down in the Tonga Trench. But when these earthquakes do happen as they
happen all the time they make the news often because of the catastrophes that they cause.
Now seismic waves carry more information than just the location and magnitude and some of
these end up being very important. One thing that we learn from earthquakes is their duration
and distribution of shaking. Some earthquakes it turns out happen very quickly. They're
done in a matter of seconds. Some earthquakes rumble along for minutes and it turns out that
if an earthquake ruptures into the sea floor on the scale of minutes it has the potential
of causing tremendous tsunamis. And I'll talk more about the hazards of tsunamis when
I talk about the Sumatra earthquake. A very interesting aspect of earthquakes that we
gain from seismic waves also has to do with the direction that the fault ruptures. It
turns out the damage that an area sustains from an earthquake is directly related to
how and in what direction that fault ruptures. For example, in 1964 Anchorage, Alaska was
badly damaged from that earthquake. But it easily could have been totally obliterated
given the size of that earthquake, that earthquake, a 9.4. But it turned out the earthquake began
to rupture just south of Anchorage and then tore in towards the Pacific Ocean. It ruptured
away from Anchorage and that energy got propagated and sent actually towards Hawaii causing a
tsunami that was felt there. But the damage to Alaska itself was much less than it could
have been. However, sometimes this doesn't happen to our benefit. In the case of the
Northridge, California earthquake in 1994, it happened on a thrust fault where part of
the ground was pushing together and rising up. And that propagation occurred from down
deep upward. That energy came and hit the Northridge community very hard, knocking down
a lot of apartment buildings and killing people in that particular area. Now, it's
often been said that earthquakes don't kill people, buildings kill people. And there is
a whole other side to dealing with earthquakes and that is what they do to buildings and
how we make structures that can withstand them. For instance, the same size earthquake
that might kill 40 people in Los Angeles could kill 4,000 people in a country like Turkey
or 40,000 people in a place like Armenia where the building structures are really not meant
to withstand the large shaking that we see during earthquakes. For instance, if you were
to have an earthquake that shook at the intensity of a 10, and there is another scale for measuring
earthquakes, it's called the intensity scale, different from the moment magnitude scale.
The intensity scale is not so much a measure of the earthquake, but a measure of the size
of shaking this felt at the surface. An intensity 10 earthquake would knock down very few modern
buildings that are built to be anti-seismic. It might knock down 20% of buildings made
of reinforced concrete. It might knock down 30% of wooden frame buildings, but it would
probably knock down 100% of adobe or weak masonry type buildings or even brick buildings.
As a result, the type of constructions that we build are incredibly important in how we
prevent the earthquake hazards from becoming large earthquake risks. Now, when seismic
waves leave an earthquake, they often travel all the way around the globe. And there's
an interesting aspect to seismology in that if you have a very large earthquake, these
waves will begin to circle the globe often for months, sometimes for years. The earth,
in that sense, rings like a bell. If you strike a bell, it rings and oscillates for a while.
If you have an earthquake, that's the same thing as striking the earth. It will ring
as well. And what happens is you have a fundamental note for a bell, a particular tone. Well,
for the earth, we have a fundamental note as well. Actually, that note turns out to
be an E, but 20 octaves below middle E. It corresponds to the surface of the earth going
up for 27 minutes and then coming down for 27 minutes. So that whole period for the earth's
oscillation, its lowest note corresponds to a 54 minutes in that cycle. Now, I've been
told that perhaps we shouldn't view earth as a ringing bell. Earth is so variable inside
that maybe it's better to describe earth as a dented trash can. But nonetheless, it
shakes and rings after it's struck by an earthquake. Well, let me wrap up our discussion. We'll
talk more about earthquakes in each of the different plate boundaries. These earthquakes
provide a tremendous means, as I mentioned, of understanding what's actually going on
by whether they're normal faults or thrust faults or transverse faults. They provide
severe hazards and risks that we have to try to figure out. And unfortunately, we have
yet to be able to predict them, but we actively are looking for ways of predicting earthquakes
and I'll talk about that struggle later on as well.
