Music
Welcome. In this lecture, I'm going to talk about the forces that move the plates.
This is also known as plate dynamics.
Because we know the what of plate motions very well, and I've talked about that already.
We have a good sense of the where and how fast the continents are moving about the surface of the Earth,
but really getting at the why is a lot more difficult.
And so what I'm going to do in this lecture is talk about the why, the reasons that plates actually move,
the forces that drive them.
And once we have that understanding, we can go in the next four lectures
and talk about the details of the what, where, and the when,
and actually get to the processes that go on at each of the plate boundaries.
Now, we know now that the mantle convects,
but of course this wasn't understood back at the time of Continental Drift.
Back when Alfred Wegner and Taylor and others were understanding that the continents moved,
but not understanding how they actually could plow through the solid rock of the ocean floor.
Now, there was a way out.
Back in the late 1920s, a Scottish geophysicist, Arthur Holmes,
actually came up with the idea of mantle convection,
the idea that the continents could be riding on what was like a conveyor belt within the mantle
that would move these continents about the surface of the Earth.
But it really didn't take until the 1960s that we got an understanding
of the exact forces that were driving the continents
and the plates within which they were embedded.
Now, we now know that mantle convection is responsible for plate tectonics,
and we know that the plate motions are really the top part of this whole mantle convection cell.
And we also have an understanding of how this layer of weak rock called the esthenosphere,
just beneath the plates, is also very important for the motions of the plates.
However, you can look at it as not just that mantle convection is driving plate tectonics,
but in a more direct force sense that the plates themselves and the forces acting on them
are actually controlling the patterns of convection.
As we've already talked about, the ocean seafloor, the oceanic lithosphere, is very cold and heavy.
And when it sinks, maybe it's what drives the pattern of mantle convection.
So let's start with a very simple question. Why do the plates move?
Well, the answer to that in one word is very easy. It's gravity.
Gravity drives almost all of the processes of geology on Earth's surface and its interior.
Remember, rocks fall downhill.
But that's really not a very satisfying answer.
It's sort of like asking why did someone fall off a cliff?
Well, gravity.
The answer may be a little bit more involved, perhaps someone pushed in.
So maybe we're looking for the details. What is it that's pushing our plates?
Well, it turns out there are a couple distinct forces that I'm going to look at here
that actually are responsible for moving the plates.
They go by the names of slab pull, slab resistance, ridge push, continental drag, and slab suction.
Now, it turns out, as I've already mentioned, that the sinking of the ocean seafloor at subduction zones
is really the dominant force in driving the plates.
And we call this slab pull, and it's entirely driven by gravity.
You see, when the rock forms at mid-ocean ridges, it's more than a thousand degrees Celsius.
It's recently cooled from magma that's come up from the isthenosphere.
So this rock is very, very hot.
But because it's hot, it's quite buoyant.
As the rock cools over time, as that rock moves away from the mid-ocean ridge,
it contracts, it gets denser and heavier, and eventually, when it sinks back into the mantle,
it's actually significantly heavier than the rock directly underneath it.
So in other words, we develop this instability over time on the ocean seafloor,
where the rock initially is buoyant, that's why it came up to the surface.
But over time, as it moves away from the ridges, it becomes heavier than the mantle beneath it,
because it's so much colder, and it would like to subduct, and eventually, it does.
Now the problem is, it's solid rock.
And to demonstrate this, I need to roll up my sleeves a little bit and actually get into this
in order to demonstrate what's going on.
You see, the ocean seafloor can't just slide right through the rock of the mantle.
It's solid. It doesn't have holes in it.
So it needs a mechanism to be able to get into the mantle, and it's the ocean trenches,
the subduction zones that provide that mechanism.
Let me demonstrate. This is a piece of metal sheeting.
It's quite heavy. It's metal. It's certainly heavier than water.
If I place it on top of the water, it doesn't sink.
Now there's a trick here. It's actually because of the surface tension of water that this isn't sinking.
But also, it's hard for this to sink, because there's no place in the middle of this sheet
for the water to rise up.
What I have to do is give it a mechanism for it to sink.
And the subduction zone is that means, because once I bend this and send it down at an angle,
it will take off and head all the way down.
And we know over time that that subducted ocean seafloor will actually sink all the way down
to the base of the mantle, in fact, and lie right on top of the core.
Now this is really important because it drives this whole process of mantle convection.
And the key, again, is that heat conducts so slowly through rock that these slabs,
these pieces of ocean lithosphere, stay rigid and stiff for hundreds of millions of years.
Now the angle that they go into the mantle is actually dependent upon a variety of factors.
It's quite interesting, and I'll talk quite a bit more about this later on in lecture 19.
Now this process of slab pull is very interesting, and it was actually discovered back in 1975
by a geophysicist by the name of Don Forsyth.
Professor Forsyth, I had the fortune of working with us.
I was an undergraduate doing research, and when he was a student,
he noticed some very fundamental observations about the motions of the continents.
He noticed that the plates that were subducting around their edges were moving the fastest.
In other words, if you look at the Philippine plate, the Pacific plate,
the Nazca, Cocos, Indian, Australian, Juan de Fuca, any of the plates that were subducting
around a large percentage of their circumference were the plates that were moving most quickly.
The ones that weren't subducting weren't moving very quickly,
and so very quickly the entire geophysical community had a good sense
that it was that pull of those sinking slabs that was really driving the fastest plate motions at the surface.
But I want to ask you a very interesting question.
What is the net force on that sinking ocean sea floor?
Well, it turns out it's zero.
Now that may seem very strange to you because I've just gone through a whole long explanation
about how there's this strong gravitational force called slab pull
that's pulling down on this sheet as it sinks into the mantle.
However, let's go back to Newton.
Remember Newton's law, F equals MA.
If there's a net force on an object, it's going to accelerate.
Are those ocean plates accelerating?
Are they speeding up as they go down into the earth?
No, they're going at a quite constant speed, between 5 and 15 centimeters a year,
but they go at that same rate year after year after millions of years after millions of years.
They keep going down at the same rate.
So that means there's got to be some other force that is opposing slab pull
in order to have the forces balance out to zero, and that force is called slab resistance.
Now remember, the mantle is solid rock after all.
So it's not like these slabs are really sheets of metal going through a tank of water.
They're going down through solid rock, and that rock provides a tremendous amount of frictional resistance.
And you have a sense of this in your own life.
It's like any falling object that undergoes air resistance as it falls.
In other words, if you were to jump out of an airplane at 35,000 feet,
or if you were to jump off the top of a very tall skyscraper,
you'd hit the ground at about the same speed.
Well, why is that?
Well, gravity says you should be accelerating at 9.8 meters per second every second.
So you should hit the ground with an incredibly high velocity if you were to jump out of a plane.
Well, it turns out you only reach a maximum speed of about 120 miles an hour,
about 54 meters per second as you fall through the atmosphere,
because the faster you go, the more the air resistance is on you as you fall.
So you fall out, you jump out of the plane, and you begin to speed up.
But as you are speeding up, the force of air resistance increases.
Now the force of gravity is the same at all times,
but you speed up until you reach that speed where the force of air resistance
exactly balances the force of gravity, and then you fall at the same speed all the way down.
Well, the exact same thing happens for our plates going through the mantle.
They fall at their terminal velocity as they free fall down through the mantle.
And the force of slab resistance countering the sinking slab exactly balances the force of slab pull.
Now, it's interesting, we have another mechanism to actually demonstrate this.
It turns out there are earthquakes that occur within the sinking lithosphere as it goes down.
And those earthquakes in the top part of the subducting lithosphere,
the top few hundred kilometers are normal faults.
And remember, normal faults occur when you stretch rock and pull it apart.
So as these slabs sink down into the mantle, the gravity is pulling them apart,
and they are actually stretching, and that stretching occurs through this normal faulting.
As you get below that, you get from 400 to 700 kilometers down,
the slab is becoming more resisted by the mantle.
Why is this? You're passing from the softer ascentosphere down into the stiffer mesosphere,
and here the focal mechanisms, these are the way the earthquakes rupture are reverse faults, or thrust faults.
And that means that the slab is meeting greater resistance as it goes down into the mantle.
And our earthquakes show exactly what we would have expected from laboratory and computer experiments.
Well, this is not the end of our picture.
It's not just a situation where we have slabs either being pulled by gravity or resisted by the mantle.
There's also a strong force called ridge push,
and this is a force that actually moves and pushes the plates away from the ridges as they form and cool over time.
Now, the reason this happens is that the ocean ascentosphere is actually elevated at the ridges.
It sits higher. So, in other words, the rock at the ascentosphere is buoyant, it's expanded, and it rises up higher,
and the sea floor, as you move away from the ridge, has a very particular curve.
It's a parabola. It's a parabolic drop-off with distance from the ridge.
Now, it turns out this particular shape was actually predicted based upon the laws that we know of how rocks cool and the rates at which they cool.
And indeed, when the ocean sea floor was discovered and mapped and the bathymetry was very carefully detailed,
we indeed saw this parabolic decrease in bathymetry away from the ridge.
Now, interesting, the first person who noticed this, or documented, that I know of at least, was Charles Darwin.
He noticed that coral atolls, islands topped with coral in the Pacific Ocean, seemed to be sinking,
and the coral was growing higher and higher over time.
He had no idea why this occurred, but he noticed that indeed the ocean sea floor sank over time.
Well, why is the ocean elevated? What's the exact force?
It's a principle that we know as isostasy, and it results from the fact that the esthenosphere underneath the lithosphere behaves like a fluid.
And if you were to suddenly pile up a whole bunch of rock in one place, it would push the crust down and that esthenosphere would flow out of the way.
If you were to lift that material back up, the esthenosphere would flow back up.
And indeed the whole surface of the earth is roughly at a level that the pressure underneath is balanced out.
Now, the best way to demonstrate this would be, for instance, with a block of ice.
What happens when I put a block of ice into water?
Well, you already have a sense of what's going to happen. The ice is going to float a little bit above the surface.
Why does this happen?
Well, it turns out that ice has a density that's about 9% less than water.
That means for the same volume, there's actually less mass within there.
So the pressure underneath the ice is going to be less than the pressure for the same volume of water.
So in other words, if I push this block of ice down into the water and then I let go, it's going to bounce right back up.
Why? Because the water underneath is going to flow back and forth until the pressure is exactly the same for the block of ice and the water underneath.
The same thing happens if I lift that block up and then let go.
Well, now there's too much mass here because there's water and the added ice.
And when I let go, it's going to drop down again until the pressure is balanced out everywhere.
There's nothing magical about it. The material behaves like a fluid and things will just flow until all the pressure is balanced everywhere.
Well, the same thing happens with the earth.
In fact, if you go to a mid-ocean ridge, the rock right at the middle is the most buoyant and there's more of it.
And for instance, if I were to put smaller ice cubes on either side, you'll notice they will drop a little bit lower than the ice cube in the middle.
That's sort of like what happens at the mid-ocean ridge because the ridge sits higher, it's hotter, it's more buoyant.
And as you move away and the rock cools, the elevation actually begins to drop away and get lower and lower.
The key is that the mantle behaves like a fluid over long time periods.
And so the pressure is just balanced everywhere.
Now, interestingly, the name ridge push is a little bit of a misnomer because it turns out that you're essentially surfing off of the esthenosphere.
The plates surf down and as they move away from the ridge, there's more and more of that ocean lithosphere backed up behind it.
So the ridge push force actually gets larger the farther you get away from the ridge and is smaller right at the ridge itself.
Now, back in 1975, when Don Forsythe was looking at the rates that the plates moved, he had another very important observation.
And that was that plates that contained continents within them moved the slowest, either not at all or up to just a couple centimeters a year.
And this is due to an important force called continental drag.
This is a force that resists plate motions.
And it's due to the fact that the continents are old and cold and they have very deep roots that extend down into the mantle quite a distance.
In fact, beneath the oldest parts of continents, the parts we call cratons, these deep roots can extend up to 400 kilometers,
which means they go all the way through the esthenosphere and actually come in contact with the stiffer mesosphere beneath them.
In other words, it's sort of like the keel of a boat in a shallow pond that's scraping the bottom of the pond and therefore having a hard time moving.
The continents sometimes are so thick and extend so deep that they pass right through the esthenosphere and drag along the mesosphere.
It's just like that boat in very shallow water.
Now, the continents can move if they're pulled hard by other processes like ridge push and slab pull, but it's very hard for them and they actually move quite slowly.
Interestingly, with the use of seismic waves, we can now tell the direction that the esthenosphere flows.
It turns out that when the rock of the mantle is flowing, the crystals line up in particular directions and that affects the speed of seismic waves and earthquakes as they travel through that rock in different directions.
It's a property we call anisotropy.
Well, it turns out using this principle of seismic anisotropy, we've been able to look at the flow of the esthenosphere directly beneath North America.
Now, North America is moving westward at about an inch a year and as it does, it's deep core of the continents.
This deep keel to the cratons is sort of sloshing through the esthenosphere, forcing the esthenosphere rock to flow around and behind it.
And we've actually been able to document that process as North America has to struggle and flow through the esthenosphere.
In some cases, this flow is so significant, it actually significantly affects the surface of the Earth.
A good example is that of India, which is moving northward into China at a fairly rapid rate, causing the Himalayan mountains and many of the earthquakes that happen in Asia.
Well, India is moving so quickly that it's actually created a depression in the surface of the Earth behind it, much like the wake of a boat.
If you've ever watched a high-speed boat move, as the boat moves, the water in front gets pushed up, but there's a depression in the water behind the boat.
That's because the water that gets pushed around from the side has to flow into the back and in the wake of the boat, the surface actually drops down.
Well, the same thing happens for the Earth.
It turns out that the surface of the oceans varied by about plus or minus 200 meters due to these sorts of variations in mass anomalies and density within the surface of the Earth.
And if you have a case like India, which is moving northward, pushing the esthenosphere forward and out of the way, as that esthenosphere rock slowly comes back and behind,
there's actually depression of the sea surface by a couple hundred meters.
By the way, we have a name for that. The name for the surface of the Earth we call the geoid.
It turns out not only is Earth not a sphere, it's not really even an oblate spheroid that's just flattened at the poles and stretched out at the equator.
It turns out that the surface of our planet is somewhat lumpy, depending on where there are hot and cold regions within the Earth.
And that affects the ocean sea floor itself, causing it to be up and down by hundreds of meters over distances of thousands of kilometers.
And where you have a esthenosphere having to flow to catch up with motions, we see the depression of the surface most notably.
Now, it turns out that the process of slab pull has a very important effect upon continents.
It creates a significant force called slab suction that happens.
So you have a slab sinking down into the Earth.
And as it goes down, gravity isn't pulling it in the direction that it's going, gravity is actually pulling it straight down.
And sometimes in the process, the ocean trench gets pulled towards the ocean.
And this is very strange because what it does is it pulls the continent in the opposite direction of plate motion.
So in other words, if you have a continent, you have an ocean sea floor crashing into it.
As it sinks down, it actually begins to sink straight down a little bit and nature abhors a vacuum and that pulls the edge of the continent towards it.
And in fact, can actually tear pieces of continent right off.
Again, let me demonstrate that back with my water tank.
Suppose I take a couple of blocks of wax in order to represent continents.
So I'm going to take simple blocks of paraffin and I'm going to put them in my tank here.
And I'm going to use this aluminum sheeting as my ocean sea floor again.
Now, let's say it's subducting beneath the edge of the continent here.
It's not moving entirely in the direction of its slant here.
It's also moving downward, pulled straight down by gravity.
And as it does so in the process, it will begin to move the edge of the continent and pull it right away from the rest of the continent.
This opening basin in between here, we call a back arc basin.
And if you go to a place like Japan, Japan actually used to be connected to China,
but the process of subduction beneath the edge of Japan has actually pulled it right away from the rest of the continent.
There is a ridge opening up behind Japan and we see this actively occurring in places like the Lao Basin behind the Tonga Subduction Zone.
So we have a situation where slab pull, because it goes straight down,
can also create this slab suction force that can open up back arc basins.
Turns out this force is probably very important in the breakup of supercontinents.
Now, I've talked already about how all the continents were together as Pangea,
a large supercontinent 200 million years ago.
And then I said that Pangea broke up after it initially formed, but I didn't talk about why it broke up.
And it turns out there are probably three major reasons why a supercontinent like Pangea would shatter and break into several different continents.
Now, first of all, if the edge of a supercontinent were attached to ocean sea floor,
and if that ocean sea floor began to subduct away,
it might create a force that would pull the continent away and actually open it up.
Another very important force could be the buildup of heat beneath the continent.
And I'll talk about this more when I talk about hotspots and mantle plumes.
Heat rising up underneath the continent might cause the whole continent to rise up
and eventually slide off gravitationally away from that raised elevation.
But there's a third force that's very important, and it's related to slab subduction.
You see, if you have a supercontinent, over time you will likely develop subduction all around its edges.
And when you do, you have a slab suction force all the way around that supercontinent, pulling the continent apart.
For instance, I mentioned that there's a Pharrellon plate, a piece of ancient Pacific ocean sea floor
that's directly beneath us in North America, that's sinking down.
It used to subduct beneath California and still subducts into a small piece beneath Oregon and Washington
as a small plate we call the Wanda Fouca plate.
Well, this Pharrellon plate is part of this whole process of subduction that existed all the way around Pangea.
And it is largely responsible for pulling North America and the subduction of the Nazca plate beneath South America as well,
pulling North and South America westward away from Europe and Africa.
Now, why would the supercontinents be surrounded by subduction?
Well, think about what goes on over time. Let's take a place like New Jersey, okay?
If you go off the coast of New Jersey, you have not a lot of geological action going on at the moment.
But what you do have is the gradual buildup of kilometer after kilometer of sediment.
This is former Appalachian mountains that's eroded off and dumped onto the edge of the continent.
Over time, this builds up into a layer as much as 10 kilometers thick
that's pushing down on the edge of the continent.
Now, off the coast of North America, you don't see it at the surface,
but if you do seismic surveys to investigate, you find out that the rock there is tremendously fractured and cracked.
Why? Because back when it rifted away from Africa, this was an active rift zone,
and there were all these normal faults as the two continents were being torn apart from each other.
Most of those faults are now buried over with sediment, but they're still in there,
and the edge of the continent, all along the eastern coast of the United States, is still very weak.
If you push down enough with enough sediment over time, you can destabilize the continent,
essentially cause it to break away and then begin to sink,
just like with that aluminum sheet that I finally tilted and tipped down into the mantle.
As soon as that subduction begins, the Atlantic Ocean is going to begin to close up,
and the Atlantic Ocean seafloor is going to begin to sink.
If you had a supercontinent, it would have been surrounded by a buildup of sediment all around its edges,
and that would eventually have caused subduction all the way around the coastline.
Now, it's interesting, there is a place we can actually go now to see these sorts of processes in action.
They are lava lakes.
If you go to a place like a Hawaiian lava lake, a classic example was the volcano Pu'u'o'o,
which for a while filled up in the crater with a whole chamber of liquid magma that pooled,
and it began to form crust on the top, instantly cooled by the colder air,
and that crust would eventually get too heavy for the liquid magma underneath,
and it would crack and break and sink down, just like a subduction zone.
You'd also see the crust moving apart, just like mid-ocean ridges,
and in fact, you would even see the ridge broken up into various pieces of spreading ridges and transform faults,
which I'll show you in the next lecture.
And this exact process is what goes on over long time scales with the convection in the mantle.
Again, we have the rock destabilized by its increased density, cracking, breaking,
sinking down into the mantle, but also pushed away from the ridges by the process of having ridge push,
essentially allowing that solid sheet of rock at the surface to slide down off of the mid-ocean ridge.
So the key here is that, yes, the mantle convects, and yes, the continents move,
but the whole details are actually much more complex than just that bowl of miso soup I talked about early on.
We have a process where slabs are both pulled and pushed by different forces.
We have certain forces like continental drag and slab resistance that try to stop that motion and keep it from happening.
And we have unusual forces like slab suction, where we actually can have the process of subduction
pulling continents in the opposite direction than the collision between the two plates.
Now that we have a better sense of the why of these plates,
in the next lectures we're going to go and look at what actually happens at these plate boundaries.
Now, in order to do that, we need to go to a part of the world that we can't normally get to.
In fact, where we need to use very clever tricks or very technologically advanced machines in order to reach,
and that's the ocean seafloor, because it turns out that it was the discoveries of the ocean seafloor,
not only the shape of it, but also the faults and cracks and the geologic processes occurring there
that actually gave us the final clues to plate tectonics,
that gave us the final evidence that indeed the whole surface of the earth was in continual motion.
We'll start that next lecture by actually looking at what the bottom of the seafloor looks like.
