Welcome. In this lecture, we're going to take a journey to the bottom of the ocean sea floor.
Now, in the third lecture of this course, we took a journey to the center of the earth.
Well, it turns out we didn't have to go so deep to visit a strange and mysterious world.
We only needed to go to the bottom of the sea.
Interestingly, there's also another Jules Verne story, 20,000 leagues under the sea,
that also visits a very strange world within our planet.
Now, I've complained in the past about how light doesn't travel through rock.
Well, light doesn't travel very well through water either.
And because of it, about 70% of earth's surface actually lies hidden from our view.
Now, as a kid, I was always fascinated by the expeditions of Jacques Cousteau
and other ocean explorers discovering strange life forms,
giant squid or phosphorescent jellyfish,
and bizarre fish of all shapes and colors and sizes.
Well, it turns out when we could finally explore the sea floor,
the actual geology of the bottom of the ocean, its shape was also bizarre.
In fact, it was much stranger than we ever imagined.
And most importantly, the unusual shapes we found at the bottom of the ocean,
the shape of the ocean sea floor turned out to be instrumental
in understanding the details of plate tectonics.
Now, because we can't get down to much of the ocean sea floor,
at least we couldn't for a long time,
we were finally able to map it out through a process called sonar,
sound navigation and ranging.
This is done by creating sound waves from a ship at the surface
that bounce down off of the sea floor and come back up.
And there have actually been a variety of techniques.
One of the most important has been side scan sonar
that actually is able to map to find detail the shapes of the ocean sea floor.
That's what's called the bathymetry of the ocean sea floor.
And in a sense, it's sort of like remote sensing.
It's like using a satellite to map out the details of the surface of Mars or Venus.
We've had to use remote sensing from ocean ships at the top of the ocean
in order to map out the surface of the ocean sea floor.
Now, interestingly, of course, science doesn't operate in a vacuum
and is often intimately involved with society in a variety of ways.
And as a result, scientific discoveries aren't always made for the sake of science alone.
For instance, look at atomic physics and the development of the nuclear bomb.
Well, similarly, the exploration of the ocean sea floor
actually started really in earnest during World War II and continued during the Cold War.
And the reason is submarines.
If you're a submarine in water and you want to find out where you are,
you need to use sonar to bounce off the sea floor to determine your location.
Again, you can't see through all that water.
Well, if you're a submarine and you're using sonar, you're giving your location away.
And as a result, the Navy developed an intense mapping program
in order to know exactly what the conditions were at any given location.
They mapped not only the bathymetry, the shape of the ocean sea floor,
but any anomalies in gravity and magnetism.
One of the most significant challenges for the Navy
was actually the existence of a channel called the SOFAR channel.
It's a channel of low sound velocities, not far beneath the surface.
And if sound gets into that layer, it will broadcast all around the ocean.
So any submarine that went through there, only with its engines on,
broadcasted all around the world its location.
This intense mapping program occurred because if a submarine didn't use sonar,
it had to make sure it didn't bump into some underwater sea mount.
And these are islands that actually rise up off the ocean sea floor,
but don't quite make it to the surface.
Turns out places like the Pacific Ocean are covered with these underwater sea mounts,
hidden from view at the surface.
In fact, actually my first job as a geophysicist,
as an undergraduate working with Don Forsythe at Brown University,
was involved with a Navy project helping the map out part of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.
In fact, former student working with me, who's now with the Navy,
actually uses sonar in order to track the locations of whales
when they pass through this SOFAR channel.
Now, the resulting maps of the ocean sea floor were of tremendous benefit to the U.S. submarines,
but they also provided valuable geologic information
and indeed gave us the real clues to the details of plate tectonics.
In fact, one Navy captain who later became an admiral, Harry Hess,
was so fascinated with this whole ocean mapping program
that after the war he went back to school
and became eventually a professor at Princeton University in geophysics.
He became one of the most significant discoverers of the details of plate tectonics.
Ocean bathymetry to these people involved with early mapping
was a total surprise for a wide variety of reasons.
Let me give you a very simple example to start off with.
Suppose you go swimming in a lake, okay?
You can't see the bottom of the lake floor,
but you can probably guess where the deepest places and the shallowest places are, right?
The deepest place of a lake is most likely to be somewhere near the middle,
and the shallowest places are likely to be near the edges.
Well, it turns out it's exactly the opposite for the ocean sea floor.
The very deepest places in the ocean, the ocean trenches,
are found at the edges of continents.
In fact, while the average ocean depth is about 2.3 miles, about 3.7 kilometers,
these ocean trenches extend down more than 10 kilometers in place.
The Mariana trench near the Philippines is actually 11 kilometers deep,
so significantly deeper than the average ocean depth.
This was a total surprise to the scientists who were mapping out the sea floor.
Likewise, if you go in a lake, you would expect the deepest part of the lake to be in the middle.
Well, when people went and mapped the ocean sea floor,
what they found in the middle of an ocean, like the Atlantic Ocean,
was a long range of mountains.
So in fact, there was a region of elevated bathymetry right in the middle
where people thought the oceans would be deepest.
Again, the mid-ocean ridges form this long, continuous chain of mountains that are all connected.
The mid-Atlantic ridge connects to the East Pacific rise and the Indian ridge,
and in all three principal oceans, these ridges represent spreading of plates on either side.
Now, the different ridges behave differently in the different oceans,
largely as a function of the rate that they are spreading.
The mid-Atlantic ridge represents a location of fairly slow plate spreading.
In other words, North America and South America are moving fairly slowly,
about an inch a year away from Europe and Africa.
And as a result, the ridge there tends to be quite narrow and tall
with a depressed rift valley that runs down the middle of it.
In the East Pacific rise, in the Pacific Ocean,
the spreading is more than double the rate in the Atlantic Ocean,
and you end up with a much broader spread-out ridge with actually no axial valley running down the middle of it.
I'll talk more about this in the next lecture when I talk about rifts and ridges.
Even stranger, however, was the existence of very long scars
extended for thousands of kilometers across the sea floor.
For instance, when you look at a map of the Atlantic Ocean sea floor,
the first thing that jumps out at you, of course, is the mid-Atlantic ridge running north-south,
the whole length of the ocean.
This is the spreading ridge separating this cause in the Atlantic Ocean
to increase in size as the plates on either side move apart from each other.
But you also notice perpendicular to the ridge,
these long scars that stretch for thousands of kilometers all the way across the ocean.
There are lots of them in all of the oceans,
and this was initially entirely puzzling to scientists because they look like earthquake faults.
If you saw one of these, essentially, their rifts, their offsets, their faults,
on the surface, on land, you would assume that there was an earthquake
that had caused that rock to separate,
and it turns out the mechanism that's formed these large scars is entirely different.
In fact, they have a special name, we call them fracture zones,
and it turns out that the fracturing occurred entirely at the mid-ocean ridge
and not away from the ridges at all.
Let me explain.
Remember in the last lecture, I talked about how the asthenosphere is warmer and hotter
than the ridge, so it sits up higher,
and that the ocean sea floor kind of surfs down off of those ridges,
making a parabolic shape, a parabolic curve as it moves away from the ridge.
Well, if you have two segments of the ridges that are offset from each other,
they're going to head down at different rates.
So in other words, let's say the ridge continues here and here,
and it's separated by a fault here.
I'm going to talk more about this in the next lecture.
As the material moves down away from this ridge,
by the time it gets to the location of this ridge,
it's already sunk down quite a bit,
and then the new rock is formed at this ridge,
and the moment they form, these two sides are connected to each other,
but forever through the rest of their history,
as they move down from the ridge in a way,
they are permanently offset in elevation,
and that scar can be seen for thousands of kilometers
heading all the way across the ocean sea floor.
The significance is these could only be explained by plate tectonics.
They're not faults, they're not rifting,
which again, puzzled scientists for a while.
They in fact turn out to be the result of the particular way
that ridges create new rock at the middle of these whole ridge systems,
sinking over time as they move away.
Now, the ocean sea floor has other strange features.
It's covered with volcanic islands and underwater islands called sea mounds,
and this is due to two different processes.
Turns out, some of these volcanic islands that you see scattered about the ocean sea floor
form right at mid-ocean ridges,
and some of them form entirely independently through a process related to hotspots.
Now, the hotspots are more obvious because they tend to form
lines we call them linear tracts of islands,
and the best example is the Hawaiian emperor chain.
If you start at the big island of Hawaii and you move backwards
across the ocean sea floor, moving westward,
you get to the older Hawaiian islands,
but Hawaii doesn't end there because it turns out there are lots of islands
that used to be volcanic, but they have now sunk beneath the surface of the ocean,
and they continue all the way across.
In fact, they continue all the way in towards the edge of the Pacific Ocean.
They take a bend and continue onward.
And what happened is you had a situation where the Pacific Ocean sea floor
is moving across a hotspot,
and as it moves across, the hotspot continues to puncture volcanic islands up onto the sea floor.
These islands for a while are huge.
They're up at the surface.
They can be really tall like the current island of Hawaii,
but erosion rapidly wears them away and makes them flat at the top,
and then over time, these will sink down away and disappear beneath the surface.
There are other such islands, the line islands, the Louisville sea mounts.
These are, we think, the result of the ocean sea floor
moving over these stationary hotspots within the mantle.
However, if you look across the ocean sea floor,
in particular in the Pacific Ocean,
it's just dotted with these underwater sea mounts all over,
and certainly not all of them are associated with hotspots.
In fact, when you look at the seismic tomography images,
you don't see any evidence of hotspot plumes beneath all these other islands.
Turns out that the volcanism occurs in a much more complex manner than we thought.
The magma doesn't just come right up at the ridge.
It sometimes comes out along the flanks of the mid-ocean ridges,
and these create isolated volcanoes that create single islands all on their own.
And of course, as the ocean sea floor continues to grow and move away from the ridge,
that isolated volcano remains on the sea floor forever
until it goes all the way into a subduction zone and gets subducted.
The result is that the ocean sea floor is dotted with all these little former volcanic islands
that all formed right when the ocean crust was young, right at the mid-ocean ridge.
Now, these flat-topped islands were very puzzling for a long time to scientists.
They were actually discovered by that Princeton professor, Harry Hess.
In fact, he called them geos, flat-topped islands.
And these geos had been observed by Charles Darwin, as I mentioned in the last lecture.
He noticed that the Galapagos Islands were covered with coral at the top of some of them
and were sinking, but he couldn't explain why.
Well, we understand now that because the Pacific Ocean sea floor sinks,
islands like Galapagos that initially sit at the surface get their tops flattened out through erosion.
And the coral continues to try to grow on top of that island.
So the island is sinking with time as the Pacific Ocean Plate moves away from the ridge.
The coral keeps growing on top, but there may be some events such as a rise in sea floor
or some sort of a disease that kills off the coral, and from that point onward, the coral is dead.
But if you drill down into these underwater seamounts, what you find is a thick layer of coral at the top
while that island was just beginning to sink beneath the surface,
and only beneath the coral do you actually get down into the volcanic rock itself
from when that island first formed.
Now, the ocean sea floor, it turns out, is not only hidden by water.
It's also hidden by sediments.
And in fact, it's quite deceptive because if you look across the ocean sea floor
for the older parts of the ocean, the sea floor looks very flat.
We call these the abyssal plains.
And if you image them with sonar, or if you actually visit down there in a submersible,
you see nothing but flat sediment for great distances.
Well, it turns out that this sediment actually conceals a very complex, chaotic structure of the ocean sea floor beneath.
Now, when you think about it, it makes entire sense.
The rock that forms right at the ridges is very, very young, and it has almost no sediment at all.
But as you move away, the rock gets older and older.
The edges of the Atlantic oceans are almost 200 million years old.
The rock right at the mid-Atlantic ridge is forming today.
So as the sea floor sits there for tens to hundreds of millions of years, it accumulates thick layers of sediment.
Now, when you're near the edges of continents, most of that sediment is sand that gets washed off from streams.
Sand and clay minerals that form mud, that material just blankets the edge of the continents.
But as you go further out into the deep sea, you still have sources of sediment.
A lot of it is wind-blown dust.
Interestingly, much of the sediment deposited in the middle of the Atlantic ocean is sand and dust blown off the Sahara Desert in Africa
that slowly falls upon the ocean sea floor and then drifts down through the oceans,
eventually forming layers of sediment on the bottom of the sea floor.
It doesn't happen rapidly, but again, the earth has time for the sediment to accumulate thick layers.
You also have organic debris. Ocean sea life, dyes, and the skeletons of these organisms fall down onto the ocean sea floor,
adding to this layer of sediment that builds up over time.
So the sediment layer is zero at the ridges and can be greater than 10 kilometers by the time you get to the edges of continents.
But interestingly, if you can remove that layer of sediment, you actually see the rifts and fractures and seamounts that formed near mid-ocean ridges.
And it turns out that when rock forms at the ridges, it gets tremendously faulted and fractured.
I'll explain this more in the next lecture, but the rock is often tilted and bent,
and this rock, the evidence of this fracturing from the mid-ocean ridge is retained throughout the history of the oceanic floor.
It's just covered by the sediments and hard for us to see.
Now, the ocean lithosphere is about 61% of Earth's surface.
Now, interestingly, about 9% of the oceans actually overlaid submerged continental margins.
So about 70% of the Earth is water, but 61% of it is actually ocean lithosphere.
And I've said several times now that the ocean sea floor gets to be as old as about 200 million years, but not older than that.
Well, how do we know this? How do we know the age of the ocean sea floor if it's so hard to get down there?
Well, it turns out that we have a wonderful trick called paleomagnetism.
Indeed, we can drill into the ocean sea floor, but that's not how we know the age of the sea floor everywhere.
Paleomagnetism is the record of Earth's magnetic field that's trapped and frozen within the oceanic crust.
And it happens for a variety of reasons.
Now, it turns out that the magnetic field is generated from flow of iron within the outer core.
I talked about this already, but the flow happens in these spirals that are much like a solenoid.
Now, you might have done an experiment in high school where you took a nail and wrapped a wire around the nail
and connected the two ends of that wire to a battery.
And when you did so, you created an electromagnet.
That nail would then be able to pick up paperclips because it would be magnetic.
Well, the similar process occurs within the Earth.
You have these spiraling gyres of liquid iron with these free electrons within them,
and they create a very similar magnetic field.
Now, interesting, both the solenoid and the magnetic field from the Earth look like the same field from a bar magnet,
but it turns out that that solenoid is actually a better example because it involves the spiraling flow of electrons.
But here's the key with the magnetic field.
It reverses direction, as I talked about already, but it reverses randomly.
Now, when the magnetic field reverses, it happens very fast.
It occurs only over about 1,000 years.
And what happens is the magnetic field powers down this field, we call it a dipolar field, with a north and south.
This dipolar magnetic field drops to about 10% of its normal strength and then powers back up again.
But when it powers back up, it seems to have a 50-50 chance of whether it comes back the same way, north and south,
or it comes back reversed, south and north.
Well, the randomness means that there is a unique pattern in time of these reversals.
And we've actually been able to go to places like Hawaii where the lava flows year after year,
and we've actually been able to date the rock and detail the history of these magnetic flips in the polarity of the magnetic field.
Well, this is important for life, it turns out, because as I talked earlier, when the magnetic field drops down,
our magnetosphere becomes very weak.
We get bombarded by more solar wind from the sun, and that's very damaging to living tissue.
There is actually some correlation between these magnetic field reversals and the extinction of organisms on Earth.
But from a geological point of view, what's significant is that the basalt and gabbro that are in the ocean floor
actually retain the magnetic field within them when they cool.
It's a fascinating process. If you take a rock that contains a lot of iron and magnesium,
as that rock cools below a certain point, it's called the Cary temperature,
it will actually freeze into the grains of the minerals the direction of the magnetic field.
And then once it's cooled and frozen, it will retain that record forever.
You can take that rock, you can move it around, and it will always have that slight signal from the magnetic field from the time that it cooled.
That means if you sail across the ocean sea floor, your magnetic field will either get stronger or weaker,
depending upon whether the magnetic field in the rock points in the same direction as the current magnetic field,
or points in the opposite direction and cancels part of it.
People mapping out the ocean sea floor with devices called magnetometers began to notice that there were these symmetric bands
of slight changes in the magnetic field strength that were parallel to the mid-ocean ridges.
And they happened on both sides. So as you moved away from the ridge, the rock, the magnetic field was as expected,
and then all of a sudden it dropped, and that corresponded to a time in the past when the magnetic field was reversed.
And as they moved away from the ridge, it came back to its normal strength again.
That was a time before when the magnetic field was back in the normal direction like it is now.
And as they went back on either side of the mid-ocean ridges, they found these parallel bands that corresponded to the different times
the magnetic field had reversed.
Now, they could compare this pattern to the pattern at volcanoes like Hawaii,
or they could drill down with the ocean drilling program and pull out rock from some of these magnetic bands and actually determine the ages.
And once they did that, they didn't need to drill everywhere else in the earth because anywhere that they saw that same pattern of magnetic reversals,
as they sailed across the ocean dragging their magnetometer behind the ship, they could entirely map out the ages.
And what we get now is a very detailed picture of the ages of the sea floor,
and we can see that that sea floor only goes back to about 180 million years.
Now, interestingly, the mapping of the ocean sea floor also gave us the speeds at which the plates had been moving,
because if you have a place like the East Pacific rise in the Pacific Ocean where the plates are moving apart quickly,
those bands are very widely spread out between reversals.
But if you go to the mid-Atlantic ridge where the spreading is occurring very slowly,
those bands go to normal and reversed very short distances apart from each other.
So this paleomagnetic signal not only gave us the directions that the plates were moving,
it gave us the speeds that they had been going back to about 180 million years ago.
Now, I often make the point that there's a large connection between what goes on deep within the earth and what goes on at the surface.
That we live on top of a very vibrant planet that's constantly changing
and interacting with the surface in a variety of ways.
And let me use this paleomagnetism to give you a very unusual and remarkable example of this.
The magnetic field currently reverses a couple times every million years.
It's not a lot, but it's actually a lot compared to what went on about 100 million years ago,
where the magnetic field began reversing only once every 10 million years or so.
In fact, it actually stopped reversing entirely for a period of about 35 million years.
From 110 million years to 85 million years ago, the magnetic field didn't even reverse once.
Now, you might look at that and say, well, perhaps our rock record isn't very good and we just don't see it.
Well, in fact, if you go back further in time, we see that the reversal is picked up again.
And in fact, if you go back 150, 180 million years ago, the magnetic field was flipping about as often as it does now.
So what went on 100 million years ago?
What was happening that caused the magnetic field to lock into a single position?
Well, what went on just before that was Pangea broke up.
And when Pangea broke up, you had a sudden rush of ocean sea floor sinking down into the mantle.
These are sheets of cold ocean lithosphere plunging down through the mantle and piling up on top of the core.
Well, it's sort of like taking a set of ice packs, giant ice packs, and slapping them on the sides of the core.
It tremendously ramped and revved up the geodynamo.
What happened was the heat began flowing out of the core into these colder regions of ocean plate.
And the heat flow out of the core increased tremendously.
This caused the whole process of convection in the liquid iron outer core to occur at a much faster rate.
It essentially locked the geodynamo into high gear.
It's like putting the pedal to the floor of the car and just revving the engine.
It couldn't ever shut down and reverse.
Now, eventually that ocean sea floor began to heat up and the rate of heat coming out of the core slowed down.
We went back into a normal phase of convection patterns within the core.
The reversals happened at a more regular rate.
But the story is not done there because at this point now we have a whole lot of really hot rock at the base of the mantle.
And this led to a large number of hotspot plumes.
And this hot rock rose up through the mantle and erupted at the surface in enormous outpourings of basaltic volcanism.
For instance, the decant traps are layers of basaltic lava that cover much of India.
And this happened about 65 million years ago and would have followed that period of the ancient ocean sea floor sinking to the bottom,
heating up from the core and rising up.
So we can see now this whole connection.
The plate tectonic cycle, the motions of the supercontinents and the plates,
affect the whole cycle of rock down through the mantle, through mantle convection.
And this affects the way the core geodynamo works, allowing the core dynamo to go into high or low gear at times.
This affects the way the magnetic field behaves.
This affects not only later on the occurrence of large hotspot plumes that cause volcanism to erupt violently at the surface,
but also cause changes in the magnetosphere and therefore changes in the amount of solar wind that reaches the surface and its effect, therefore, on the evolution of life.
The whole process of deep earth movements and surface processes like life are intimately connected with each other.
So light doesn't go through rock, it doesn't go through water either very well.
If you stand at the edge of an ocean shore and look out across the ocean over the waves to the distant horizon, you get no idea of the unusual structures that lie beneath.
I mean, the ocean really was this inner space of unexplored land.
Interestingly, with remote sensing techniques like sonar or magnetometers, we're now able to map out the sea floor.
If we could have done this a hundred years ago, back at the time when Wagner and others were understanding that the continents moved, we might have figured out plate tectonics,
but it really took being able to see the structures on the ocean sea floor, the locations of the ridges, the trenches, the transform faults that connect segments of ridges,
and the large scars of these fracture zones that extend all the way from side to side of an ocean.
All these features were really the final clues that allowed us to understand how the continents were moving.
In the following three lectures, I'm going to look at each of the three separate types of plate boundaries, ridges, transform faults, and subduction zones,
and we're going to talk about the details of how they work.
