Welcome.
If you told someone that you could take them to a place on earth where they could see a
continuous mountain chain of volcanoes almost 50,000 miles long, they might find it very
hard to believe you, but you'd be telling them the truth, though you'd need a special
kind of submarine to take them there.
In this lecture I'm going to talk about mid ocean ridges and the whole process of creating
new ocean seafloor, rifting apart continents, and really the start of the whole plate cycle.
Now the mid ocean ridges really are nearly continuous chains of volcanoes, though they
don't behave at all like volcanoes on land.
From a geological perspective, these are the factories of ocean crust.
This is where new rock is created.
There's also a personal interest to this, and that is when we finally could visit mid
ocean ridges way down deep beneath the ocean surface, in a sense it turned out to be like
a coming home party.
We found that maybe we had been there before, okay maybe I'm speaking a little metaphorically,
but it turns out this is where life on earth very likely first began.
Now oceans metaphorically behave like living organisms in a sense.
They have limited lifespans, they're born, they grow, they shrink, and they die.
And in the whole discussion between the cycle of time versus the arrow of time, viewing
the history of geology as a set of cyclical processes or catastrophic processes, oceans
clearly are part of the cyclical side.
They go through essentially a reincarnation.
They get reborn after oceans are gone.
They go through this repeating cycle of opening and closing.
Now this was first noticed back in the 1960s by the Canadian geophysicist J. Tuzo Wilson,
and in fact this cycle of openings, of the opening and closing of oceans is named in
his honor.
It's called the Wilson cycle.
And J. Tuzo Wilson thought that the whole cycle was about half a billion years, 500 million
years for an ocean to open, become mature, close up, and die again.
Now the beginning of the ocean life cycle begins on land.
It begins with rifting on continents.
The best example now is happening in the middle of Africa, the African rift valleys that run
down through Kenya and Tanzania.
These exist because Africa is in the process of splitting into two separate plates.
We call them the Somalian and Nubian plates.
Now the possible cause for the breaking up of a continent we've previously talked about.
Could be slab suction, the occurrence of subduction occurring around the edge of a continent causing
the slab suction force to pull the continent apart.
What happens in a case like Africa is actually more likely the existence of a high amount
of heat perhaps from a hot spot, lifting the entire continent up and causing it to crack
and break apart.
What happens initially with a continent is that the forces that pull the continental
crust apart cause it to both stretch and thin in a ductile manner and also fracture and
rift apart in a brittle manner.
Remember we talked about the different way the materials behave.
Well continental rock does both.
It both deforms in a ductile manner stretching and also cracks in a brittle manner.
For instance, if I go back to my clay and I think of this sheet of clay as a piece of
continental crust, if I apply forces that begin to pull them apart, over time you'll notice
that my crust actually begins to thin.
It actually becomes narrower and will actually lower in elevation and at some point you actually
exceed the strength and it begins to fracture and you get earthquakes occurring as the material
pulls apart.
Now there are other examples besides the African rift system.
We don't even have to leave North America.
If you look at New Mexico, the Rio Grande rift is another example of this act of rifting,
cracking and pulling apart the continent.
The Baikal rift in Russia, the Rhein-Groben in Germany, these continental rifts exist
throughout the lands and there are two possibilities.
The rifting can continue on into becoming an ocean or it can stop spreading and forever
preserved as a rift in the middle of a continent.
It turns out most continental rifting events actually stop spreading before they become
an ocean.
Good examples in North America are the Real Foot Rift, which is now the site of the Mississippi
River Valley.
The continent about a half a billion years ago got stretched there and the crust thinned
enough that it's a low point and the Mississippi River seeks out the lowest elevation and actually
flows down that ancient rift site.
Incidentally, I'll talk a little bit later on about predicting earthquakes.
When I talk about that, I'll talk about New Madrid where there were large earthquakes
in 1811 and 1812 that happened along this Real Foot Rift, this zone of ancient weakness
in our continental crust.
Even larger example is a structure called the Mid-Continent Rift.
It actually stretches from Oklahoma all the way up to northern Michigan.
This occurred very long time ago, about 1.2 billion years ago.
Again, North America almost split apart into two separate continents at that time, but
it failed before it got too far and North America remained a single continent.
Now, if the continental rifting does continue, it eventually becomes an ocean.
The best example of that nowadays is occurring right at the Red Sea, the separation of the
Arabian plate away from Africa.
If you went back 30 million years ago, Arabian Africa were together as one continent.
At that time, enough stretching and thinning began to occur that volcanic eruptions were
occurring at the surface.
Hot rock was rising up and lava was flowing at the surface.
It still wasn't an ocean yet.
It took quite a lot of time, took another 18 million years.
It wasn't until about 12 million years ago that the stretching occurred enough that
actual basaltic lava began to flow up and fill the crack in between.
At that point in time, ocean crust began to form and a sea was born.
Since 12 million years ago, the Red Sea has continued to grow as the Arabian peninsula
continues to move into Asia and pull apart away from Africa.
It's an interesting process where what starts as an active rift margin eventually becomes
a passive margin.
What do I mean?
I talked about how if you go off the coast of New Jersey, you find underground the evidence
of the rifting.
What happened was 200 million years ago, New Jersey was an active rift site.
It was a continental rift.
Africa was pulling away from the eastern United States.
The continent was stretching, thinning, cracking with volcanoes.
Lava began to come up.
Remember I talked about the palisades cliffs forming from lava coming up into the crust
at that point.
But the process continued, the opening continued, and eventually basaltic lava began to be added
to both sides of the plates and an ocean was born.
But all along the eastern United States, those scars still exist underground, large faults
that formed as it was rifting away from Africa.
Now, the next stage, as you expand an ocean like the Red Sea, even larger, the ocean
becomes mature and large like the Atlantic Ocean.
At this point, you have a large ocean that is still growing in size.
It has a mid-ocean ridge, in the case of the Atlantic, the mid-Atlantic ridge, but there's
no subduction occurring yet.
In other words, the Atlantic Ocean is still rapidly increasing in size, rapidly geologically.
The plates, again, are only spreading about an inch a year.
That the ocean over tens, or even 100 million years, will be much larger than it is today.
However, at some point, that process will stop and subduction will begin.
Now, I talked about one mechanism in the last lecture on how this happens, where you might
have sediment, for instance, the sediment that's accumulating along the eastern coast
of the United States, eventually pushing the edge of the Atlantic Ocean down and causing
that whole ocean sea floor to sink down into the earth.
That's one mechanism, but interestingly, there's a large debate in our community.
Some geologists think that the ocean sea floor, at that point, after 200 million years, is
just too thick and hard and stiff to be able to break and sink.
They think that it's newer ocean sea floor that has formed more recently at a mid-ocean
ridge that actually begins the subduction process.
It's hard to say, again, these processes happen much longer than human timescales, and we
don't really see that process occurring currently.
It's hard for us to know how subduction really begins, but undoubtedly, for all oceans, eventually
subduction does begin.
In that case, you end up with something like the Indian Ocean.
If you look at the Indian Ocean, it's staying about the same size now because there's new
ocean floor being created at the Indian Ridge, but there's also ocean floor that's sinking
and subducting beneath Indonesia, the same process that has created volcanoes like Krakatoa
and earthquakes like the giant Sumatra earthquake.
They occur because the Indian sea floor is sinking down, subducting beneath islands
like Sumatra and Java.
That's an ocean that has both spreading and subduction and is staying about the same size.
The next stage in the life cycle of an ocean can be seen with the Pacific Ocean.
In this case, you have active subduction occurring all around the sides of the ocean, and still
some spreading, the East Pacific rise is still creating new ocean sea floor in the Pacific,
the same with spreading of plates like Cocos and the Wanda Fuka plates, still growing as
they move away from the Pacific plate, but on both sides of the Pacific, we now have
ocean sea floor sinking, and the Pacific Ocean is closing up, and over time, it may in fact
collapse entirely.
Now, what happens at that point is an ocean will close very quickly.
The best example would be the Mediterranean Sea.
The Mediterranean is subducting beneath Europe.
That's what causes volcanoes in Italy and Greece like Mount Vesuvius, but there's no
spreading occurring anymore.
There's no new ocean sea floor being created in the Mediterranean, and Africa is rotating
up into Europe, and the Mediterranean will soon be gone.
Now, our process isn't entirely over yet, because once the ocean itself is gone, the
collision may continue, and you get mountain forming.
You get the whole process of mountain ranges, what we call oraginy occurring.
The best example today would be the Himalayas, where India is colliding into China.
There used to be a large sea there called the Tethys Sea, and that sea is entirely gone.
India moved into Asia, closing up that Tethys Sea, and in the process, creating the huge
mountain ranges that we see stretching all across southern Asia.
Many of the mountain ranges that we find in the interiors of continents, like the Appalachians
in North America, or the Urals between Europe and Asia, used to contain pieces of ocean
sea floor that are now gone, or either splintered and stuck on to the crust as part of those
mountain ranges.
Now as part of this whole cycle of oceans growing and closing up, the action, the geologic
activity is really focused at the ridges and rifts.
This is where the volcanoes are, and this is where the earthquakes are.
And the earthquakes primarily occur in the form of normal faults.
Remember when I defined earthquakes, I said that a normal fault occurs when you are pulling
land apart, and the two sides of the crust actually slide down off each other.
For the mid-ocean ridge, this faulting is very active, and you get lots of small blocks
that are constantly fracturing and rifting away from each other, often becoming tilted
and rotated.
The sea floor around mid-ocean ridges is very rough as a result.
It only gets smoothed over much later by the ocean sediments, and these rough blocks get
twisted and rotated, and often serve as conduits for volcanism to come out off the flanks of
the mid-ocean ridge to give increased volcanic activity, not just in the mid-ocean ridges.
When you get normal faults occurring on both sides, you get a process called agrobin, for
instance the African Rift Valley.
And what happens here is, let me go back to my piece of clay, if you have one normal fault
on one side and another normal fault on the other, and you take the land and you push
it apart in both directions, the middle block will drop down over time.
So in other words, you start with Africa as one continent.
You pull apart the two sides of the Somalian and the Nubian plates, and as those plates
move apart, the agrobin drops down.
In the process, you can end up with what we call fault scarps.
These are the visible faults on either side that can be very large.
In the case of the African Rift Valley, those scarps can be about a kilometer drop in elevation.
In other words, the elevation at the bottom of the African Rift Valley is about a kilometer
lower than the land on either side.
Again, that will continue, if that spreading continues over time, the floor will continue
to drop, it will eventually be below sea level, and you will eventually have an ocean.
If you look at the current ocean ridges in the place like the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, you
see something very unusual, and that is you don't end up with one long, continuous, single
spreading ridge.
You have lots of small segments of ocean ridge that are actually separated by large numbers
of transform faults.
This is a very unusual process, and what happens is the process of rifting occurs in the most
easy manner it can, the lowest energy state.
I'll talk a little bit more about how this happens in the next lecture, but basically
it's really hard to tear apart the ocean sea floor.
If you have a plate boundary that turns out to be occurring not perfectly perpendicular
to the direction of motion, we call that an oblique spreading zone.
Let's say your plates are moving apart in either direction, but your plate boundary
is actually slanted, so in other words, it's going like this at an angle instead of straight
across.
The ocean sea floor will not actually rupture in a long, continuous, slanted rift zone.
It will actually break up into a small, a set of smaller rifts that are each separated
by small transform faults.
The whole ocean sea floor is covered with this alternating set of ridges and transform
faults, ridges and transform faults, and that happens simply because it's the most easy
way for the ocean to break apart.
Now at mid-ocean ridges, we have new lava, we have new rock forming, which means there's
lava coming up to the surface and flowing on the ocean floor.
We also have lava rising up in between the cracks that are formed as the plates move
apart and crystallizing underground.
Back in lecture 10, I talked about how melting occurs initially very deep, 70 to 100 kilometers
beneath the surface, and this happens because as the plates move apart, it sucks rock up
from deep within the earth, and as that hot ascentosphere rock rises towards the surface,
it passes the melting point, remember called the solidus, of the rock and small bits of
melt begin.
Well that melt will percolate up over a broad region 50 to 100 kilometers down, but it ends
up converging towards the ridge itself and accumulates actually in very small cylindrical
magma chambers.
Now it's very hard to actually discover this of course, we can't get down, we can't get
down there to look at it, not only is it hard to get beneath several kilometers of ocean
water, but it's very hard to drill deep down into the ocean sea floor.
It turns out we discovered this by putting arrays of seismometers on the ocean sea floor.
Now it's very hard to have very delicate seismometers recording earthquakes that are thousands or
tens of thousands of kilometers away, but when your seismometers are under several miles
of water, it's even more challenging, but that's what ocean marine geophysicists do.
They take these seismometers and actually have them settle onto the ocean sea floor,
store information on site and then have a timed release so that these seismometers will
float back up to the surface and they can retrieve the information and figure out what's
happened during the time that those seismometers were on the sea floor.
Well using arrays of seismometers deployed around mid ocean ridges and looking at the
waves from earthquakes that have come up through the earth, from earthquakes on the other side
of the earth, they've been able to create high resolution tomographic images of the
mid ocean ridges.
And what they've found is that the magma chambers are actually very, very small.
In many cases, they're much less than a kilometer.
So it's quite remarkable, there's an enormous amount of crystallized rock in ocean crust
and all of this rock came from the mid ocean ridges, but at any given moment in time, there's
just a tiny bit of magma sitting in very small, long cylindrical magma chambers that are just
a kilometer or two beneath the surface.
Now another interesting discovery of these ocean bottom seismometer arrays is that though
the plates seem to grow roughly the same on either side of a ridge, they don't necessarily
do this on short time scales.
For instance, if you look at the East Pacific rise, it turns out that the Pacific plate,
which is moving away from the Nazca plate, the material, the new ocean rock is actually
adding on to the Pacific plate about twice as fast as it is adding to the Nazca plate.
In other words, the Pacific plate is growing at about 10 centimeters a year, but the Nazca
plate is only growing at about 5 centimeters per year.
Now this seems very puzzling to us because if we look at records going back over millions
of years, remember those paleomagnetic stripes that exist all across the ocean sea floor,
it seems as if the material is adding to both sides at about the same rate over time.
However, over short time scales on the order of maybe thousands to hundreds of thousands
of years, maybe it doesn't work quite so evenly and maybe there will come a time when more
material is added on to the Nazca plate as it moves away from the East Pacific rise.
What's remarkable to us though and very important is that anywhere you go in the oceans, the
structure of the ocean crust created at this factory of rock at the mid ocean ridges is
the same.
The structure of the ocean crust is incredibly uniform and this is totally different from
the continents.
Geologists for years had traveled all about the continents looking at rock and saw tremendous
varieties in the structures of land and the deformed layers and volcanoes and valleys.
We went to the oceans and we found that the ocean crust was fairly uniform anywhere you
went and that's because the process of spreading is really the same at ridges everywhere.
What happens right at the top is you have basaltic lava that squirts up onto the ocean
sea floor and it cools and crystallizes instantly in contact with the cold water.
As a result, it tends to form these unusual pillow shapes where you get a hard crust that
cools over this propagating squirt of magma and it continues to move out along the mid
ocean ridge creating stacks of these pillows on top of each other.
Pieces of the ocean sea floor get stuck into mountains when continents collide and these
regions of the ocean sea floor had been observed and no one could figure out why the lava took
these pillow shapes.
Now that we've been able to actually go to the mid ocean ridges, we can actually see
these pillows forming as lava is actively squirting out onto the ocean sea floor.
Beneath the layer of these pillow basalts, we see vertical sheeted dikes that are about
a kilometer high and this is rock that forms right at the contact between the two plates.
The plates move apart slightly and a whole sheet of magma rises up crystallizing on
either side but those sheets remain stuck within the ocean sea floor and you can go tens of
thousands of kilometers away from the ridge on either side and you see that layer of these
sheeted dikes still right beneath the surface.
Now beneath these layers of basalt, remember basalt is rock that cools very quickly so
it has very small almost microscopic and in most cases mineral grains, beneath that you
have magma that cools more slowly.
So we have actually a thick layer of gabbro, five to ten kilometers thick beneath the basalt
and what happens is you end up with this layer of basalt and gabbro that spreads all the
way across over time thickening on the top as sediments fall on top of it through the
ocean sea floor.
It's very interesting that the crust thickens only from the addition of sediment.
The igneous rock forms only at the ridge for the most part and as a result the ocean
sea floor has roughly the same thickness and structure pretty much anywhere you go around
the ocean floor.
Now incidentally this is very different from the ocean plate, the ocean lithosphere and
the lithosphere which contains the ocean crust at the top is mostly mantle rock that has
become very cold and stiff and what happens with time is the ocean lithosphere continually
thickens because what began as very hot and weakest hemisphere rock gradually cools and
stiffens into the lithosphere.
So the plate itself of the ocean sea floor gets thicker as you move away from the mid
ocean ridges but the crust of the ocean floor itself remains fairly constant except for
the addition of sediments.
Now if you go to a mid ocean ridge you see a tremendously active process of hydrothermal
circulation.
The hot rock heats up water that's within the rock, it causes it to become buoyant and
rise up and squirt out of chimneys up at the mid ocean ridge.
In the process that causes cold water to be sucked in where it then becomes heated up
and you have a very active, fast cycle of moving cold water in, cooling the rock off
and coming, having that water squirt out at the surface.
The water that comes out at the mid ocean ridges is incredibly hot, it can be as great
as 400 degrees Celsius.
Now you might listen to that and say, well wait a minute, I thought water boiled at 100
degrees Celsius.
Yes, it does at the surface but deep down inside the bottom of the ocean sea floor the
pressure from the overlying water doesn't allow that water to expand into a gas.
So it's 300 or 400 degrees Celsius but it's still in a liquid form and this hot water
is actually a very significant way that the earth cools off.
The earth remember is cooling off at a rate of 44.2 terawatts.
The whole planet cooling down over time but a huge portion of this actually occurs at
the mid ocean ridges as the water gets pulled in and then comes back out.
Now the water coming out at the mid ocean ridges does something very unusual and I'll
talk a lot more about this when I talk about natural resources but it turns out that when
the water is warming it begins to dissolve a lot of minerals and metals out of the rock
and when that hot water that's mineral rich hits the cold water of the ocean sea floor
those minerals instantly precipitate out of the hot water forming very large chimneys
around these hydrothermal vents.
These chimneys are called smokers and they can be many, many stories tall.
If you look at them they look like chimney stacks.
You have this mineral rich black water rushing out of these tall chimneys carrying rich
minerals and metals from the ocean crust and dumping them out onto the ocean sea floor.
Now it's taken very special machines in order to get down to the bottom of the sea floor
because when you're at a mid ocean ridge it's much like having a mile of rock stacked
on top of you and there are very few machines that we know of that can operate with a mile
of rock piled on top of them.
The most notable and the most famous was Alvin.
It was a submersible built by the U.S. Navy back in 1964.
In fact it's still being run by Woods Hole and it's made more than 4,200 dives down deep
into the ocean.
It can actually hold two people.
It can go down as far as about four and a half kilometers, about three miles beneath
the ocean surface.
It was Alvin that actually discovered these thermal vents, these chimneys, these what
are called smokers back in 1977.
New submersibles have been developed since then that can actually go to even deeper depths
and some of these in fact are now robotic so that people can operate them from ships
at the surface and robotic submersibles like Jason can go down even deeper onto the ocean
sea floor.
When we finally visited the ocean sea floor and visited these mid ocean ridges perhaps
the greatest surprise was that these regions were entirely thriving with life.
You have tremendous amount of heat, you have food from all these minerals.
What we found was a region filled with very strange life forms, very primitive single
celled organisms called thermophiles that didn't use photosynthesis but eat sulfur
or methane in order to carry out their metabolism.
Very primitive life forms and they form the basis of these large unique food chains with
crabs and fish and huge tube worms more than 30 feet long.
Totally unusual life forms not seen anywhere else like armor plated gastropods with shells
made of pyrite that protected them from poisonous sharp tooth snails not found anywhere else
on the surface of the earth.
It turns out this might be a lot more significant than we realize.
Early on life would have been nearly impossible on land.
With no oxygen in the atmosphere there would have been no ozone to protect life from the
harmful ultraviolet radiation so life really had to start in the water but photosynthesis
is very tricky and complex and didn't evolve until much later than the first beginnings
of life.
That first life single celled would have needed a source of energy and nutrients and that's
what supplied at mid ocean ridges.
So 4 billion years ago it's very likely that the first life on our planet actually began
around these deep ocean thermal vents.
As a result ridges turn out to be not only the birthplace of ocean rock but perhaps the
birthplace of the very life that exists now in tremendous variation all around the surface
of our planet.
