Welcome. Let me start off by reading two passages from John McPhee's book, Assembling California.
The under-road is northbound and so is disaster. One after the last, the slabs of the upper roadway are falling. Each weighs 600 tons. Some drivers leave their cars, run toward daylight, and are killed by other cars.
Some drivers decide that the very columns that are about to give way are possible locations of safety, like door jams. They pull over, hover by the columns, and are crushed.
A bank customer service's representative, whose 1968 Mustang has just come out of a repair shop, feels the jolting roadway, and decides that the shop has done a terrible job, that her power steering is about to fail, and that she had better get off this high speed road as fast as she can.
A ramp presents itself. She swerves onto it and off the freeway. She hears a huge sound. In her rearview mirror, she sees the upper roadway crash flat upon the lower.
As the immense slabs fall, people in cars below hold up their hands to try to stop them.
A man in one car guns his engine, keeps his foot to the floor, and races the slabs that are successfully falling behind him. His wife is yelling, get out of here, get out of here.
Miraculously, he gets out of here. Many race the slabs, but few escape.
Well, this sounds like some Hollywood action movie script, but it really happened. This is the damage and destruction of the Nimitz freeway that occurred during the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake along a segment of the San Andreas Fall.
Today's lecture is going to be on Transform Faults, and though Transform Faults are probably the least common form of plate boundary on most continents, it's the most familiar to people in America because the San Andreas Fault is a Transform Fault.
Now, let me review. Transform Faults occur when two sides of the fault slide past each other. In the last lecture, we talked about ridges where plates spread apart, and here they just slide past, and there are actually only a few major transforms on continents.
The Alpine Fault in New Zealand, the Anatolian Fault in Turkey, the Queen Charlotte Fault along the west coast of Canada, and the Dead Sea Fault that separates Israel and Jordan.
However, there are huge numbers of Transform Faults all over the ocean mid-ocean ridge system. They provide connections between the spreading ridge segments. We can't see them. They're not visible from the surface, but they show up clearly in all our sonar maps of the ocean seafloor.
Now, as I mentioned briefly in the last lecture, ocean transform faults occur because they require less energy than rifting. And there's nothing mysterious about this. Processes in nature always happen at their lowest energy states.
This is the same for chemistry and biology and physics. The easiest thing to happen is what happens first. Imagine a chain. If you pull that chain hard enough, it's always going to break along its weakest link.
Well, the same thing happens in geology. The system that happens with the lowest amount of energy, in other words, that happens easiest, is what's going to happen. And this happens with mid-ocean ridges and transforms simply because it takes a lot more energy to tear plates apart than it does to slide them.
Now, I can demonstrate this with an ordinary brick. Suppose this brick was supposed to represent the mid-ocean ridge. Let me create a ridge by pulling it apart. I can't do it. Why? Because it's really hard to break rock apart. It's hard to create a mid-ocean ridge.
However, suppose I take these two bricks and I want to create a transform fault. No problem. I can slide them past each other very easily. It's much easier to slide rock past each other than it is to break it apart, and that's why transforms happen relatively easily compared to mid-ocean ridges.
Another important part of why the whole mid-ocean ridge and transform system exists is that the boundaries between the plates aren't always nice and perpendicular, like they show up in a lot of the textbooks. They go every which direction? And this happens not only for transforms and ridges. It happens for subduction zones also.
For instance, if you go to Alaska, the Pacific Ocean seafloor is actually moving to the north-northwest beneath Alaska. So if here's Alaska and here's the Pacific Ocean seafloor, it's moving at an angle in towards the subduction zone.
Well, what happens there is actually the earthquakes happen in two different mechanisms. Sometimes the ocean seafloor plunges straight down, pulled down by gravity, but then sometimes they slide straight across like a transform fault. The motion that's not perpendicular, and we call that oblique, that oblique motion is taken up in two different mechanisms of slipping.
Well, the same thing happens with the ridges. The motions of the plates aren't always perpendicular to the directions of the plate boundaries, and because tearing the rocket ridges is hard, but sliding the rock along transform faults is easy, it ends up breaking up into the two different mechanisms.
Now, if you look at a map of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, you'll notice that the boundary between the North American plate and the European plate, the Eurasian plate, swerves all over the place. Now, the direction of motion between North America and Europe is always east-west, but the plate boundary seems to snake left and right as you go from the north pole down to the south pole.
And so, if this ridge system only consisted of spreading rifts, the rift would be very, very long and curved. That would involve a tremendous amount of tearing, and this is hard to do. It takes a lot of energy.
Over time, that rift system would automatically begin to break up into a set of perpendicular spreading centers, perpendicular to the direction that the plates are moving, separated by a set of transform faults.
And the reason this happens is it minimizes the total length of rifting, even if the total plate boundary is longer zigzagging across the ocean seafloor, because the transforms hardly count. They don't take a lot of energy, and the result is a minimization in the total energy required to tear those tectonic plates apart.
Now, let me try to demonstrate this. This is a fairly difficult concept, and I'm going to do this with some flatbread that actually comes from Afghanistan, or this didn't come from Afghanistan, but it's flatbread that is made in Afghanistan and traditional to that culture.
Now, suppose this were to represent two different plates on one side and the other side. Well, I need to put a plate boundary in here, so let me take a pen, and I'm going to draw a plate boundary going across my two plates here.
Now, this is a very oblique plate boundary, considering that the plates are going to be moving left and right across this table. Well, suppose I did it only with a single ridge system. Well, this is really hard, because now I have to tear apart my plate all the way along this plate boundary, and that's a whole lot of tearing.
Remember, just like tearing that brick, that took a lot of work for me to do. Let's take a second case where I'm going to take a pizza cutter and cut a set of lines, I've already done that to save time, that makes motion left and right much easier.
That sort of represents the transform faults. Well, now, if I have a plate boundary, so let me again draw my plate boundary cutting across the two plates here, how do I do this in a way that requires less energy? Well, I just need to tear them in a few places.
I still end up with the same plate boundary, it still goes from one corner to the next, but now I have a system where I have many fewer ridges, and as I open that up, I end up with sliding along these transforms and spreading at the ridges.
See, this is exactly what you see if you look at a map of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. You have small spreading centers opening up, separated by these long transform faults. The net plate boundary is a little bit longer, because I've got a whole set of zigzags instead of one diagonal hypotenuse here.
But these transforms don't require any work to slip, and I only need to tear in these perpendicular directions, and even if I started with an oblique rift, I would end up with this set of transforms and ridges as a result.
And there are literally thousands of these transform faults dotting the ocean floor all across the Mid-Ocean Ridge systems.
Now, the systems of rifts and ridges actually are slightly different in the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans. It turns out that speed actually matters a little bit.
In the Atlantic Ocean, the transforms tend to be locked in position for a long amount of time, and those fracture zones that we talked about when I talked about the ocean sea floor, those fracture zones extend far across the ocean, from one coast to the other.
In the Pacific, it's actually a very unusual situation. The transform faults can actually move location over time, up and down along the rift system. In fact, you end up with what are called propagating rifts, where the rift will actually begin to cut into pre-existing ocean sea floor, causing another rift adjacent to it to begin to die away.
In fact, sometimes those rifts go back and forth, we call those dueling propagators. The result is actually very confusing for people who study paleomagnetism, because instead of ending up with the nice, even bands of paleomagnetic anomalies across the sea floor that I talked about in the lecture on the ocean sea floor, the bands seem to bend and turn because these rifts go back and forth, up and down the ocean sea floor.
Now, on land, the San Andreas Fault, the most notable transform fault in America, like so many natural hazards, is bad for people. It's been disastrous for people in California, but actually good for geologists.
In that sense, seismologists, people who study earthquakes are a little bit like ambulance chasers. We wait for the next large earthquake to teach us something else about how the earth works. And the San Andreas earthquakes have been fantastic for providing continual lessons about earthquakes, the cycle of earthquakes, attempts at predicting earthquakes, and earthquake engineering, how to design buildings that don't fall down during earthquakes.
Now, the San Andreas, as I've previously mentioned, is the plate boundary between the North American plate and the Pacific plate, and it extends for about 1,300 kilometers north of the Cocos plate, which is just west of Mexico, all the way up to the bottom of the Juan de Fuca plate, which is just west of Mendocino, California.
Now, the orientation of the San Andreas Fault, its direction, is north-northwest, and that's the direction that the Pacific plate is sliding in relation to North America. Interestingly, however, that's not the only plate boundary between North America and Pacific, because if you look at the gulf of Baja, which is actually a spreading ridge, that's also boundary between the North American and Pacific plates.
Now, in Alaska, where the subduction of the Pacific plate is occurring beneath the Aleutian Islands, that's also the plate boundary between North America and Pacific. It turns out that the type of plate boundary you get is directly a result of the orientation of the boundary with relation to the direction that the plates are moving.
It turns out, if you were to look at a globe, the Pacific plate is actually sort of rotating to the north around North America, and in the south, that rotation causes the gulf of Baja to open up as a spreading center. Right along California, that motion is a transform fault.
It's not parallel to each other, but then, when you go to Alaska, where North America turns to the west, that creates a subduction zone. Only two plates, but you get all three different kinds of plate boundaries, spreading, transform, and subduction, occurring along different parts of the plate.
Now, as I mentioned back in lecture five, Los Angeles is on the Pacific plate and not on the North American plate, and it's moving northwest about 4.2 centimeters per year relative to the rest of North America, and as I said, it'll be a suburb of San Francisco in about 13 million years.
It means it will be that far up the coast in its motion. Now, the San Andreas has frequent earthquakes, and the biggest that's happened in recorded time happened back in 1906 along several hundreds of kilometers that actually went right past San Francisco.
It was a magnitude 7.9 earthquake. It was devastating. There was a maximum of four meters of slip. This is more than 12 feet of slip. Again, over several hundreds of kilometers, the shaking destroyed much of the city of San Francisco, and what was even worse, there were fires that resulted from the shaking,
knocking hearts over, causing gas lines to rupture, and these fires raged for three days, and the city was essentially leveled. However, from a geological point of view, it led to an understanding of what's known as the elastic rebound theory, and that's the idea that earthquakes along faults like the San Andreas occur in a cyclic manner.
In other words, they don't just happen once. They're going to return again, and the reason is you need to build up a certain amount of stress before that earthquake happens, and when the earthquake occurs, the stress drops back down to a very low level, and it has to build up again.
Let me use my bricks again. Suppose these two bricks are the San Andreas fault, and I'm beginning to stress them moving my arms, they slip. Well, I've now relieved the stress. I'm not going to get a big earthquake for a while. I've got to move those plates some more and build the stress up again before I get another large earthquake.
Now, the tricky part is, it's a cycle, but it's not a regular cycle. It's not predictable. It isn't like we can just say, oh, every 200 years there's going to be an earthquake. It could be 50 years, it could be 500 years. We know it's going to happen again, but we don't know when, and I'm going to talk about some of the challenges of predicting earthquakes a little bit later on in the course.
Now, most plate boundaries are not the simple lines that you see in textbooks, and that's certainly not the case for transform faults like the San Andreas. It turns out the San Andreas, the boundary between North America and Pacific, is not a single simple fault, but rather a whole system of faults that spread about 100 kilometers in width across California.
There are many parallel faults. In fact, if you go in the San Francisco area on the other side of the San Francisco Bay, you have the Hayward and Calaveras faults that also can get large earthquakes.
So in case you're wondering, San Francisco is not going to fall into the sea. It will get entirely ground up over time because it lies right in between the San Andreas, the Hayward and Calaveras faults, and that continual motion over time is going to destroy and obliterate all the geography.
At the same time, if you go to a single individual earthquake, the fault can sometimes rupture along a single line, just like it did in 1906. Actually separating fences along a single line, you could stand and say one foot's on North America and another foot is on the Pacific plate.
Sometimes you actually can identify those single fault boundaries, but if you go to a map of earthquakes, you can't find the San Andreas most often because if you look at the map, you see that earthquakes are all over California.
And this is because the behavior of the San Andreas whole fault system varies tremendously along its length. There's different rock that meets, different compositions, there are different structures, and as I'll talk about a little bit later on, the fault isn't always a straight line and sometimes it bends.
So sometimes a fault, a particular part of the San Andreas fault, can get very large earthquakes, larger than magnitude 7s, like beneath San Francisco. Sometimes you only get a magnitude 6 as the largest earthquake, like the Parkfield region of the San Andreas.
And some parts of the San Andreas don't even have earthquakes at all, that we call that a seismic slip, the fault just slips smoothly. So there's nothing simple about even a transform fault, even that can occur with tremendous complexity.
The buildup of a strain that occurs along the San Andreas fault suggests that there'll be a next big one there, but we don't know when. The chance of that San Francisco earthquake was actually increased by a smaller earthquake that happened in 1989 south of San Francisco in the Loma Prieta Hills.
That occurred on October 17th, and it happened right before the third game of the World Series between Oakland and San Francisco in Candlestick Park. I remember watching it on television that the earthquake happened just after 5pm.
I had the television on, ready to watch the World Series game, and all of a sudden people are screaming and the announcers are looking scared, and the waves from that earthquake had just arrived and passed Candlestick Park.
Many tragically died in the collapsed Nimitz Freeway, the passage that I read at the start of this lecture, which was a highway in Oakland.
And it turns out, as I will talk about a little bit later in the course, if you have any sorts of structures that are built on sediments, as that Nimitz Freeway was, you get a tremendous amount of destruction, much greater amount of shaking than occurs.
If your region is built on bedrock. A wonderful example of that occurred in the Marina District of San Francisco. The Marina District was actually built upon the rubble of the 1906 earthquake that was bulldozed out into the bay.
And at that time, this was used for housing for the World's Fair that was being held there. But much of the soil is very loose and unconsolidated sediments.
Well, there were two seismometers in the Marina District. One was on bedrock, one right nearby was on this loose sediment, and it turned out that the seismometer on the sediment recorded shaking that was ten times greater than the one that was on the bedrock.
And so clearly where you build the type of rock you build on turned out to be very important. Another example from that 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake was the Golden Gate Bridge, which is anchored in bedrock, was unharmed by the earthquake there.
But the bay bridge that crosses over from San Francisco to Oakland is anchored in sediments and it broke and collapsed.
In fact, the damage throughout the San Francisco area was exactly what would have been predicted by looking at maps of soil thickness.
Now, there are tremendous challenges that are presented by earthquakes in building structures to withstand earthquakes.
In 1971, in the San Fernando Valley Los Angeles earthquake, the Van Norman Dam with 80,000 people just beneath it totally collapsed and fell apart.
Fortunately for the people in Los Angeles, Los Angeles had been having a devastating drought at the time and there was almost no water in the dam.
But 80,000 people had to be evacuated until they could rebuild that dam.
Another problem that happens frequently with earthquakes in the Los Angeles region is the ability of freestanding structures like highways to withstand the shaking.
A classic example is Route I-5, the major artery highway in Los Angeles.
It was built to withstand enormously large earthquakes and in the San Fernando Valley earthquake of 1971, it collapsed.
It was rebuilt to even better standards and in the 1994 Northridge earthquake, it collapsed again.
It turns out it's just very hard to make freestanding structures that don't knock down when they are shaken.
And I'm going to talk more later on in the course about the forces involved with tearing down buildings during the shaking of an earthquake.
Now, fortunately for California, transform earthquakes never get very big.
And the reason is very simple. The energy of an earthquake is a function of three factors.
How stiff the rock is, how far you slip along the fault, and the area of the fault.
Well, the San Andreas fault is long. It's 1300 kilometers long, but it's very shallow.
It's only about 25 kilometers deep. It's like a very thin ribbon of fault that stretches along the length of California.
So it turns out if the entire San Andreas fault were to rupture all at once, you'd only get a magnitude earthquake of about 8.3.
Now, 8.3 sounds like a large earthquake, and indeed it is.
But it's only one-thirtieth of the size of the earthquake that happened in Sumatra in 2004.
In other words, if the entire San Andreas ruptured at the same time, which we don't know that it ever has, we have no indication of that,
that earthquake, you'd need 30 of them to equal that one earthquake in Sumatra, which was a subduction zone earthquake.
Now, there are some very interesting implications of having plate boundaries of transform faults that aren't straight.
Let me give you two examples. If you look at the San Andreas fault just northeast of Los Angeles, you notice that the San Andreas takes a bend.
And you notice that where it takes a bend, you also have the location of the San Gabriel mountains.
Now, this is not a coincidence. Let me use this clay to demonstrate this again.
If I have a transform fault with a straight fault, a straight boundary, it just slides past each other quite smoothly.
Now, suppose I take that fault and I put a bend in it.
Well, now I have a real problem because let's say this is North America and this is the Pacific Plate, and I begin to slide it up.
Okay, now I've got a problem. I can't push up the Pacific Plate here.
What happens? Well, that boundary right in between, the rocks got to go somewhere and so it goes up.
The San Gabriel mountains are being pushed up by the motion along the bend of the San Andreas fault.
Indeed, the whole region of Los Angeles is all cracked and broken like splintered cracking wood as a result of that bend in the San Andreas.
In fact, there are tremendous numbers of small thrust faults that are called blind faults.
We never see them. They don't reach the surface, but they are faults and they create hills.
So anywhere that you get hills in the Los Angeles region, Santa Monica, Hollywood, all these areas, they have earthquake faults underneath them.
In fact, there's one that runs right beneath downtown Los Angeles.
The Northridge earthquake in 1994 that was very destructive happened on one of these blind thrusts.
So it's very interesting if you look at the earthquakes that have happened in the Los Angeles region in the last 20, 30 years,
and there have been many of them. None of them have actually happened on the San Andreas.
All of them have happened on these other thrust faults that are a result of the bend in the San Andreas fault.
Now, just the opposite happens if you have a bend in the fault, but you pull it the other way.
What you end up is creating a basin and essentially dropping the bottom out of your fault.
This is what happened with the Salton Sea. It's a depression. The land drops down. Let me show you with a clay again.
Suppose you take your two plates across the transform fault, but now you slide them this way.
What happens is we end up with a basin in between, a hole, and one of the best examples of this is the Dead Sea between Jordan and Israel.
See, the Dead Sea lies upon a transform fault. It separates the Sinai Peninsula, which is now part of Africa, and the Arabian Plate.
Now, it's actually quite an interesting plate boundary. The plate boundary between Arabia and Africa used to be where the Gulf of Suez is now.
That was the extension of the Red Sea. So in other words, Sinai was once part of Arabia, but the plate boundary jumped, as it does sometimes.
And now the Sinai Peninsula is actually attached to Africa, and the motion between Africa and Arabia occurs along that Dead Sea transform.
Well, the Dead Sea transform takes a bend right where the Dead Sea is, and in the process, it's opening up the Dead Sea and the bottom of the Dead Sea is dropping out.
In fact, it's dropping so low that it is now, the shores of the Dead Sea are now the lowest point on dry land anywhere on Earth, 420 meters, 1,378 feet below sea level on land.
In fact, the Dead Sea itself is quite deep. It's 330 meters deep.
So the result is the bottom of the Dead Sea on land is more than a half a mile below sea level and continuing to drop.
Let me wrap up on a semi-whimsical note. It's a recent trend in geologic discovery, something I've talked about quite a bit during this course already, that life plays a tremendously important role in geology.
And this may even be true with earthquakes.
Let me start with a very interesting observation. Transform faults are even weaker than we would expect.
And we know that the rock slides easily, easier than at ridges and at subduction zones, but the San Andreas Fault is even weaker than expected.
In fact, in 2007, a program called the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth drilled down into the San Andreas Fault.
They actually pulled up rock from the fault kilometers beneath the surface and they found very soft rock ground up a rock called serpentinite that is rich in water.
And when I hear water, I think of life because we have found examples of bacteria that actually live down underground.
Well, a former colleague of mine, Everett Shock, once proposed that perhaps bacteria thrived along these earthquake faults.
After all, you had water, you had a lot of ground up rock for chemical reactions to occur.
If you were a deep earth lithophile bacterium, it'd be the ideal place to go.
Now, I was once asked by Popular Science Magazine what we could do to one day stop earthquakes.
And at first, I said nothing. They're too big. There's no way we could possibly stop large earthquakes.
But I remembered an incident in Colorado where wastewater was once pumped down into the ground and it created a lot of small earthquakes.
In other words, it lubricated the fault, so instead of having a large one, there were lots of small quakes.
Perhaps one day we could biogenetically engineer bacteria to thrive deep down along an earthquake fault.
I envisioned these slimy colonies of bacteria lubricating the fault, causing lots of small earthquakes, but no big ones.
And it turns out this would be really important for the deep subduction zone earthquakes, the ones that are really destructive,
the ones that I'm going to talk about in the next lecture when I talk about subduction zones.
