Welcome. In this lecture, I'm going to talk about the second half of collisional plate
boundaries, what happens when two continents collide to create mountains and metamorphism.
And I want to start off by showing you two rocks. Now, these rocks are both limestone,
but they have an interesting history through the rock cycle that I'll tell you about in
a moment. Now, if I split these rocks in half, what I can do is show you that on the inside
of both of these rocks lie fossils. The rock on my right contains an ammonite that actually
comes from the base of Mount Everest in the Himalayas. And the rock on my left is a trilobite
that comes from the very top of the Andes Mountains in South America. And the point I
want to make with these rocks is there must be incredible forces that are involved in
order to take ocean creatures that live at the lowest places on earth, at the bottom
of the ocean sea floor, and bring them up to the highest places on earth, the Himalayas
and the Andes Mountains. And indeed, that's what happens in the process of plate boundaries
where you have the collisions between continents. You have tremendous forces that incredibly
distort the whole surface of the planet, deforming rock over the scales of thousands
of kilometers. Let me start with a simple observation. Mountains usually occur in straight
lines, what we call linear mountain ranges. Now, at first, this might not seem very unusual,
but when you think about it, what is it that would cause mountains to not occur individually,
but to occur along long, linear features? Well, it turns out these linear mountain ranges
have two different causes, and they're both related to plate collisions. These are volcanic
and deformational means. Now, volcanic mountains we've already talked about. These are those
island arcs or continental arcs, places like the Cascades in the Pacific Northwest, which
form above subduction zones, in that case a situation where you have ocean-continent collisions
that cause volcanic rock to be created through the eruptions of volcanoes. What I want to
talk about in this lecture, however, is deformational mountains, like the Appalachians, that form
from the collisions between two continents. Now, of course, breaking up mountains into
two categories is a little bit dangerous, because I'll also show there are all sorts
of exceptions and special cases. Let me make another observation. Mountains
often occur at the edges of continents. In other words, if you go to St. Louis and Chicago
in the middle of North America, they don't have any mountains. The Appalachians, the
Cascades, the Sierra Nevadas, these mountains are all at the edges of North America. Remember,
it's sort of like with oceans, the deepest places in the oceans are not in the middle,
they're at the edges. The same thing happens with continents, and this is another clue
to the tectonic origin of these mountains. Now, continents have incredibly complex structures.
They're very variable, and this complication occurs because when continents collide, they
not only deform the existing rock of the continents, but they end up adding all sorts of other
materials into the subduction zone as well. And unlike oceans, the continents never get
destroyed, they never subduct, so over billions of years, they retain all of the dents from
these collisions. Again, I think of it as a demolition derby, where these continents
have been banging around into each other for four billion years, and they retain all the
scars and cracks and faults and fractures and folds from these multiple collisions with
each other. Now, mountain ranges are all very different from each other, so dependent upon
the what and how of how they form, and this is also very different from the oceans because
if you go to mid-ocean ridges, they all have a very similar structure. The mid-ocean ridges
have that same layering of basalt and gabbro and sediments on top, and you find it everywhere,
but every mountain range is incredibly different depending upon the local geology and the way
that that mountain range is formed. Now, in Lecture 17, I talked about how the formation
of these continental mountain ranges represent the final stage in the life cycle of an ocean,
when an ocean closes up and the two continents on either side of the ocean collide. Well,
during that collision, a whole lot of oceanic material that was in between can get stuck
in that collisional zone between the two continents. It often follows a very long period of subduction,
and that subduction often causes a very well-developed accretionary wedge, which I talked about in
the previous lecture. Now, these sediments have come off of the land. They are eroded
continental rock, and one of the toughest rocks that remains as a sediment is quartz,
and so the composition of the sediments in these accretionary wedges tends to be very
continent-like. Remember, we called that a seallic composition. Also, smashed into a
collisional zone making mountains can be rock of an intermediate composition, such as the
volcanic arcs, these stratovolcanoes, which have a combination of both basaltic and granitic
rocks, and combine into an intermediate composition like andesite or diorite. Now, you often get
back arc basins, which have a basaltic composition, like exists between Japan and China, and these
basaltic compositions are richer in magnesium and iron minerals, and they have what we call,
remember, a mafic composition. So, when you have one continent carried into a subduction
zone, it scrapes up all these different pieces of the whole subduction zone region and smashes
them onto the growing mountain. Imagine if a continent suddenly arrived into Japan, pushing
it back into China. You'd get the mafic basaltic rock of the back arc basin. You'd get the
intermediate compositions of the island arc, and you'd get the seallic accretionary wedges
all glued together in between Asia and the continent, making the new mountain. This happens
at active collisional zones, and it's the future for passive margins, like the east coast of
North America. This is New Jersey's future, but maybe far off in the distant future. Now,
the fragments of ocean crust that get added into the mountains have a particular name. We call
them ophiolites, and they had been discovered in the past long before plate tectonus was
understood, and they were very puzzling for geologists, because they couldn't imagine what
sort of a mechanism could create this layered rock of these pillow lavas and these sheeted
vertical dikes and the gabbroic rocks underneath. But these rocks have been discovered in subduction
zones, because as part of that collision, sometimes the ocean crust itself even gets
torn up and added into the mountain. Let me give you another interesting observation.
It turns out that mountains have very deep roots. Now, continents on average, the continental
crust has a thickness of about 40 kilometers, but that's because that averages in mountains
where you have thicker crusts. If you remove the effects of the mountains, you have a typical
continental crust of about 35 kilometers. Well, if you go to the Himalayas, the crust at the
Himalayas is more than 80 kilometers thick. In other words, it's double the average. Now,
this is very interesting, because it turns out the Himalayas are about nine kilometers
above sea level. They're very tall, and in fact, they're still growing. But this is more
than eight kilometers above the average continental elevation, and that means that the root of
the Himalayas is about 40 kilometers deeper than normal continental crust. By the way,
the boundary between the crust and the mantle has a name. It's called the moho. It was discovered
in 1909 by a Croatian seismologist named Andrea Mohovočić. People had a fairly hard time
pronouncing his name, and it being the 70s and all with mojo, they just called it the
moho, and the name has stuck ever since. So the moho beneath the Himalayas is about
40 kilometers deeper than usual. Well, why is the root of the Himalayas so deep? Well,
it turns out as the mountains are forming, the deep crustal roots develop simultaneously,
and this goes back to that principle of isostasy that I demonstrated earlier with the ice cubes
in the tank of water. And remember, Canada? I talked about how the esthenosphere beneath
Canada can flow over the scale of years and decades in millennia, and that Canada's rising
up after the ice from the ice ages has been removed, and the rock of the esthenosphere
is flowing back in. Well, the surface can go up and down the same way, just like Canada.
It happened anywhere around the world because the esthenosphere behaves like a fluid, and
mountains form over millions of years. So the surface of the earth is able to behave
like a fluid and is able to have that isostasy, that balance and pressure as you move laterally.
So in other words, if the mountain were to develop in an unbalanced way, if you were
to suddenly stick the Himalayas right up on top of India, you would just have over time
the whole crust drop down until it was balanced. Remember, just the way I took that cube of
ice and held it up when I let go, it found its position of equilibrium. Well, the same
thing happens with the deep roots of mountains. Now, there's another question, though. Some
of the rock goes up, some goes down. That makes sense. The continents collide, the rock
has to go somewhere, so it simultaneously goes up and down. But why does so much more
go down than go up? Why are the roots five times deeper than the height of the mountains
above them? Well, it turns out that the amount of rock that you add from the mountains has
to balance the amount of mass that you've subtracted underneath. You're saying, well,
wait a minute, you haven't subtracted rock underneath. You've added a deep root. Well,
I've added a continental root, but I've removed mass because I've taken the heavy mantle
rock there and I've replaced it with lighter continental rock. So the mountains represent
an addition of mass. The deep roots represent a reduction in mass. And because the mountains
are replacing air, it doesn't take a lot of mountain to add a lot of mass. But the roots
of the continent are replacing the mantle rock and the difference is not nearly as big.
In fact, it's five times less as the difference between the mountains and the air. So that's
why the roots need to be five times deeper to make up for the addition of those mountains
up on top. Now, all mountains, it turns out, have roots beneath them. Smaller mountains
simply have smaller roots. So the Himalayas, the depth down to the thickness of the continent
there is about 80 kilometers. In the case of the Andes, it's about 70 kilometers. For
the Alps in Europe, it's about 60 kilometers. And for the Rocky Mountains in North America,
it's about 50 kilometers. Now, when you have one of these mountain building events, remember
I call this an origin or an originic belt. One factor that you get is tremendous folding,
severe folding of the layers of the rock. Sometimes, for large mountains, these layers
can actually get overturned so they're upside down. The result is extreme shortening of
the rock. Now, that folding doesn't happen the same way for all rocks because different
rocks made of different compositions have very different strengths. And so sometimes
you end up with more layers, layers folding more than others. Sometimes certain layers
can actually have a taffy appearance, like they've been swirled and actually flowing.
Sometimes the rock, if it's stiff, tends to fracture and break more often than it folds.
Another interesting observation is, if you move away from a mountain range, you see the
folding get much gentler with distance. A wonderful example is in Pennsylvania. As you
go from the eastern side of Pennsylvania, where the Appalachian Mountains are, out towards
the western side, the folding, which is very, very tightly folded in the Appalachians, gets
much gentler and broader as you go west. Now, I have to be careful because it's really hard
for me to generalize about the conditions by which mountains form, because the situation
is so different in each case. You have to be careful that the Andes, for example, are
currently a perfect example of volcanic arc, continental volcanic arcs. You have the Nazca
plates sinking beneath South America, and you have all these volcanoes. So the mountains
are currently very, very close to each other, and they're very close to each other. So
the mountains are currently growing because of the volcanoes that exist there. However,
the Andes actually long precede that subduction. They initially formed from continent-continent
collisions that occurred much longer, further back in the past. Now, the Rocky Mountains,
turns out, have a totally different origin. They don't fit any of these patterns. The
Rocky Mountains actually formed quite recently, about 70 to 100 million years ago, during
an event called the Laramide Erogyny. And this occurred when North America actually
rode westward over the back end of the Pharrellon Plate, and in the process, it actually over
rode the ridge between the Pharrellon and the Pacific. Think about what's happening here.
We had a ridge between the Pacific Plate and the Pharrellon Plate, a mid-ocean ridge, and
then North America comes sailing in from the west, and eventually went right over that
ridge. Now, at this point, the Pharrellon Plate is entirely gone, and it's drifted off and
subducted down through the mantle. But what happened right beneath Western North America
is that hot, ascentosphere rock, which was right at the ridge, was now right beneath
North America. And that caused an elevation of the whole region. It caused the upper lift
of the Colorado Plateau, and it also caused the uplift of the Rocky Mountains. What happened
was the Pharrellon Plate subducted at a very shallow angle, and actually pushed up the
Western U.S. and lifted up the Rocky Mountains. So the Rocky Mountains weren't so much formed
by collision, as in, you know, the Himalayas currently, but actually more from upward forces
that lifted those mountains right up. And I'll talk more about this in lecture 27 when
I talk about how North America was assembled. Now, as part of the mountain-building process,
you get extreme pressures and temperatures inside the cores of these mountains. And
these processes, these conditions result in most of the metamorphic rock that we see
at the surface. You end up with rocks that are sheared, that are squeezed, that are compressed.
And the process of metamorphism occurs in many ways, and it's actually one of the more
complicated aspects of geology, because metamorphism depends upon not only the unique history of
the temperature and pressure changes, but it also depends upon the initial composition
of the rock that you started with. So remember when I gave the example of the crystallizing
snowflake, and I said how the pattern of the, the shape of the snowflake held in it the
history of its formation. Well, it's like that, but much more complicated, because in the case
of a metamorphic rock, you not only have the evidence of the temperature and pressure conditions,
but you actually have whatever rock it is that you started with. Now, one effect that's fairly
common in all metamorphic rocks is that any pore spaces, any small microscopic empty spaces
in the rock get squeezed and closed up. The rock gets tighter and denser. A very good example
would be what happens to sandstone when it gets metamorphosed. Sandstone is a fairly porous rock
that consists of lots of little sand grains all stuck together, and there's often some cement
in between the sand grains, but there's a lot of empty space. In fact, sandstone at the surface
is a wonderful rock for storing water. It's great for an aquifer, a layer of rock where you can
get a lot of water held in it. However, if you squeeze that rock deep in the core of a mountain,
all those pore spaces disappear, and all of the quartz grains actually deform until they are
totally interlocking, and that rock we call a quartzite. Another example of the squeezing
of a rock to remove all the pore spaces is found in limestone. Limestone is often a porous rock.
It often contains the fragments of shells and corals that are sort of smashed together,
but through metamorphism, that rock gets squeezed so tightly, all those pore spaces disappear,
and the rock becomes a marble. When you look at a marble, you can see there's no empty space
in there. The rock is all deformed. You can no longer see the original signature of the limestone
that formed it. Another important effect of the squeezing that occurs during metamorphism
is a directed shortening in a particular direction that can end up giving a rock a fairly layered
or banded appearance. For example, I talked early on in the course about how if you take a piece of mud
and squeeze it in the ocean, it will eventually become shale, which has a flat and flaky appearance.
Well, this has a name in metamorphism. This layering, this flaky appearance we call foliation.
We say that this shale has a foliated texture. And what happens is the clay minerals that make up the mud
are flat crystals, but in the mud, they're all jumbled in all different orientations.
However, if you squeeze down upon that mud, all the different flat clay crystals begin to
lie flat. They begin to flatten out, and that gives the rock a flat, flaky, foliated texture.
Now, with more shortening, with more pressure, pile more sediments up on top over time, and that
shale can eventually become even flatter and into a rock that we know as slate.
Slate is commonly used for roofs because it peels off so nicely into these flat layers
and is therefore very easy to work with to crack into tiles to put on roofs.
If you go even farther and you take this rock and squeeze it so hard so that the minerals begin to change,
now we're in a process where we've actually created an entirely new rock.
Remember my process of diffusion creep? Remember with the checkers, where my atoms flowed from regions of high pressure to low pressure.
My rock deformed one atom at a time. Well, with metamorphism, when those diffusing atoms move to a new location,
they come together and they form new minerals. Now, the reason this occurs is that the minerals at one pressure
and temperature, like at the surface, are no longer stable down deep.
And minerals that like those hotter temperatures or higher pressures will begin to form.
So this piece of slate over time will actually begin to change into an entirely new mineral.
And one example is it will go into a schist. Now, this is a mica schist that I found near my home in New Hampshire.
And if you look closely at this rock, it's very sparkly because it's filled with new grains of mica.
Now, the mica wasn't in this rock when it first formed. In fact, just by looking at this rock, I have no idea what this rock began as.
It's been entirely altered from its initial condition. The rock has been so changed that whatever minerals used to be there,
probably clay minerals from a shale and slate, have now created a whole set of mica crystals that have grown quite happily under the higher pressures
that initially existed in the core of the Appalachian Mountains when they were forming 350 million years ago.
There are lots of other minerals that really enjoy those high pressures. Biotite is another example.
Back in lecture 8, I showed you a rock that was a biotite schist. In that case, the black minerals there are flat crystals like the mica here.
Other examples are talc, tourmaline, garnet. These are all crystals that grow happily at the higher pressures that you find inside mounds.
Now, if you go to even higher pressures, you go to a situation where you develop a rock called a nice.
And here is where the rock begins to form alternating bands of light and dark minerals, mostly entirely newly formed out of whatever rock you started with.
Grannet and diorite often end up as a nice, and often they form bands that show the direction of their stretching.
Let me use this rock as an example. If you look at the end of the rock, what happens is you have a situation where you can see all the individual minerals
and they all look to be about the same size. But if you turn the rock on its side, you can see that that rock has bands that stretch all the way across.
This rock was stretched out in this direction and the crystals grew in that environment of continued stretching.
Now, extremely metamorphose rocks turn out to often have streaks of quartz in them.
The reason is, as you begin to heat a rock, remember the Bowen reaction series? The first mineral that melts will be a quartz.
And so as that rock is increasing in temperature, you sometimes get situations where liquid silica, melted quartz begins to develop and this can streak up through your rock,
causing the creation of these white veins that fill your metamorphic rock.
Now, the fact that you even see this rock means metamorphism must have stopped before that rock entirely melted.
Otherwise, there'd be no record. And that's a really important thing to remember.
The fact that you even see metamorphic rocks at the surface is only because the overlying of that rock has long since eroded away.
Because after all, if that process of metamorphism had continued, you'd might eventually entirely melt the rock and create magma, eventually to form new igneous rock.
And remember, you know of two different mechanisms that can bring rock from deep in the earth up to the surface.
There's the elastic response of the lithosphere and the viscous response of the esthenosphere.
Remember, the elastic response of the lithosphere is like sitting up from a spring mattress.
If you were to erode away a mountain, the elastic stiffness of that lithosphere is going to bounce right back up.
At the same time, remember sitting up from a water mattress or, as we used in our example previously, a molasses mattress.
In that case, if you sat up, it would take a long time for your mattress to flow up.
That's the slow response of the esthenosphere, the rock of the esthenosphere slowly flowing back into place.
Well, both of these mechanisms end up bringing mountains up as the top erodes away.
The most dramatic current example of a continent-continent collision is occurring right now at the Himalayan Mountains.
And it's a very unusual history. If you go back 150 million years ago, India was attached to Antarctica.
It was part of the supercontinent called Gondwana land, which had been around for a long time.
It consisted of Africa, Antarctica, Australia, South America, and India.
And India broke away from this as part of the whole breakup of Pangea.
We don't know the particular force that did it. It could have been subduction. It could have been slab suction.
But we know that India traveled rapidly across the Tethys Sea, eventually colliding into Asia, smashing together everything else in between.
In the process, it swept up an island arc, and it swept up a microcontinent fragment, and it swept up an accretionary wedge,
and all of this material got stuck in between India and Asia.
The Himalayan Mountains formed as a result of that collision, and it's had many consequences for not only the Asian continent, but the world.
The Himalayas began to grow about 60 million years ago.
And as I'll talk about later in lecture 39, this ended up having a huge effect on global climates when the rock began to erode and weather away.
Locally, however, the deformation that occurred there took a very strange form.
The deformation became so great it was too much for a single mountain, and India actually began to slide beneath Asia.
In the process, it essentially doubled the crust by sliding Indian crust right underneath Asian crust.
I can demonstrate that with a piece of clay.
Suppose this were to represent India colliding into Asia.
As the collision happened, it became too intense, and the plate actually began to slide in between.
What you ended up with over time was a situation where the crust beneath India, beneath the Himalayas, actually began to double and thicken.
But something else happened that's very unusual.
In the process, the yellow here represents the bottom part of the lithosphere, and that bottom part of the lithosphere, the mantle part, actually delaminated.
It peeled off, separated, and has begun to sink down into the mantle.
The two plates came together, the crusts added together, but Asia actually lost its bottom part of the lithosphere.
It tore off and sank.
What took its place was warm, ishenosphere rock flowing underneath, which actually helped to buoy and lift up the Himalayas.
Now, the collision of India with Asia has created one other very important aspect.
All of Southeast Asia has been pushed off to the east.
Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia, that whole region used to be farther to the northwest, but it's actually been squeezed out of the way.
It's a process we call watermelon seed tectonics.
In other words, if you take a watermelon seed between your two fingers and squeeze, it'll pop right out off the side.
That's exactly what Southeast Asia is doing in order to make way for India as it collides.
The collision of India has also created this rippling deformation that extends for thousands of kilometers up into China.
It's sort of like taking a shag carpet and pushing it from behind, and that carpet begins to buckle up over great distance.
Well, that arrival of India has not only created the Himalayas, but created many mountain ranges and folds and faults and earthquakes all across China way to the north.
Now, it turns out that the Himalayas have rapidly eroded from the effect of glaciation.
These sediments have been carried to the ocean by the Ganges River, and these sediments are one day going to be stuck back onto a continent in a future continent-continent collision.
Remember, the rock that is being eroded now at the surface of the Himalayas was once deep within the mountains.
Some of it was ocean sea floor, was scraped up during the collision and formed one of these accretionary wedges.
And this ocean sea floor contained fossils, just like the ones that I have here, now exposed at the summit of the Himalayas.
Now, had it not been captured, and this rock not been captured by my friend and is now following a fairly unusual path through the rock cycle, having been transported by airplane from Asia to America,
it would have been smashed up in a stream, tumbled, crumbled, and eventually carried back to the ocean to be made once again into another mountain far off in the future.
