Welcome. In this lecture, I'm going to talk about the human connection to earthquakes and volcanoes.
I've already talked quite a bit about the incredibly significant geologic implications of both of these geologic phenomena.
But in the next four lectures, I want to bring it home a little bit and talk about the implications of earthquakes and volcanoes for people.
Because, after all, I have a particular personal interest in humanity.
Now, both earthquakes and volcanoes deal with immense energies.
To give you an example, the Sumatra earthquake of 2004 released as much energy as 75,000 Hiroshima nuclear bombs.
And the largest of the volcanic explosions released as much energy as the entire nuclear arsenal of the world detonated simultaneously.
Not that humans don't deal with big energies. After all, the amount of energy we consume is about one-third of the entire flow of heat out of the Earth.
But the Earth is still bigger than us. It's still got an edge.
And I mentioned nuclear bombs here for a particular reason.
I'm going to come back to this at the end of this lecture.
It turns out that seismology in the study of earthquakes is intimately related to nuclear weapons.
Now, let me start with volcanoes. Volcanic eruptions locally present a tremendous hazard, both in terms of the ash that gets ejected out of the calderas,
out of the craters of the volcano, and the lava that pours down the slopes of volcanoes.
Now, lava flows can obliterate entire areas surrounding volcanoes.
In places like Hawaii and Iceland, destruction from slow lava flows are common. They're just part of daily life.
For instance, in Kilauea, the whole town of Kalapana was erased by slow, gentle, continuous flows of lava.
Ancient shrines to King Kamehameha were just slowly obliterated.
There was really no way to stop the lava.
It's not that people haven't tried. There have been many attempts to stop the flow of lava on Hawaii, but all of them have been unsuccessful.
Actually, I know of only one successful attempt to stop lava, and it was quite dramatic and remarkably successful.
And it took place in Iceland.
On the island of Jaime in 1973, which is just south of the mainland of Iceland, a volcano, Vespa Nair, started up in the backyard of the town.
Now, this eruption began as a long fissure eruption, a crack in the crust about one and a half kilometers long.
But the flow of lava became localized at a particular cone that had both ash and lava ejected out of it.
The cone rose about 350 feet above sea level, literally right in the back of the town.
Over time, the lava began to advance on the town, and 370 homes were eventually burned or buried in ash.
But the people wouldn't give up and wouldn't abandon their town.
And what they did was they tried to stop the lava by spraying water on it.
Long hoses carried seawater from the ocean, enormous ships with high-power spray jets sprayed the water out onto the advancing lava flow.
In fact, they even drove bulldozers with hoses right up onto the advancing front of the lava.
They used 30 kilometers of pipes, 43 pumps, and sprayed a total of 6 million cubic kilometers of water onto the lava.
But they succeeded. They stopped the lava.
In fact, they turned the flow into the harbor that actually ended up improving the harbor by cutting it off and isolating it a little bit more from the ocean waves.
Over time, they dug out the town, and in fact, the town even got the last word because not only was their harbor improved,
but the tremendous amount of underground heat from that volcanic eruption currently supplies all their energy through geothermal power.
Turns out, though, that the most dangerous hazard from volcanoes isn't the flow of lava, but it's a particular deadly feature called a pyroclastic flow.
And this is a combination of hot gas, ash, and rock that flows down the slope of a volcano at speeds that can reach 500 kilometers an hour.
Now, usually, gas and clouds are buoyant and they rise, especially when they're hot,
but if you mix enough ash in with the cloud, the cloud is actually heavier than air,
and it will flow down the side of a mountain, just searing and burning everything in its path.
Now, there are two common ways that this happens.
One is the collapse of one of these vertical columns of ash.
This was involved, for instance, with the destruction of Pompeii and Herculaneum when Mount Vesuvius erupted.
In other words, the volcano erupts this ash up into the atmosphere,
and it rises because that gas is tremendously hot, but as that gas begins to cool,
that column of ash can collapse and begin to fall back down and actually flow out
and all the way down the slope of the volcano and outward, sometimes for many, many kilometers.
Another form of pyroclastic flow happens when you get a lateral blast or explosion,
and the gas filled with hot ash can actually be forcefully ejected outward.
This happened in 1980 when Mount St. Helens erupted, and the lateral northward blast or that volcano
sent a pyroclastic flow heading great distances out across the land.
Now, Mount Vesuvius is really the classic example of the pyroclastic flow.
It happened in late August of the year 79, and we have a tremendous record of it
because the naturalists, Pliny the Younger, witnessed the eruption and wrote about it.
In fact, this sort of volcanic eruption is called the Plinyan eruption in his name.
The eruption happened in two phases.
First, there was the large ejection of ash up into the atmosphere.
The cloud of ash is now estimated to have reached about 32 kilometers high,
and in fact, ash fell as far away as Constantinople.
That ash fell down on the surrounding region and actually buried the city of Pompeii.
In fact, one-third of the people who died in Pompeii are thought to have died
from this initial fall of ash across the whole region.
However, what was most destructive about the volcano was the pyroclastic flow
that followed afterwards.
This killed the other two-thirds of people in Pompeii and ended up obliterating Herculaneum.
In fact, the ash remains from that pyroclastic flow in Herculaneum are 23 meters thick,
75 feet worth of ash that came down violently burning everything in its path.
Now, Vesuvius didn't just erupt once.
It's erupted about 40 times since then, the last being in 1944.
None of the eruptions have been nearly as large as that eruption in the year 79.
But again, Vesuvius and all of the volcanoes in the Mediterranean region
have the capacity of having these types of catastrophic eruptions.
One of the most famous pyroclastic flows destroyed the city of St. Pierre on the island of Martinique.
This happened in 1902 when Mount Pelé erupted.
The city there had about 30,000 residents and they all died, actually all except for two.
Ironically, one of the two survivors was actually a prisoner who was underground in a prison
and when he left the prisoner was rescued found that the entire city above had been entirely obliterated.
There was actually a ship in the harbor at the time that witnessed the eruption
even though the pyroclastic flow flowed across the water and burned away the sail and mast.
People survived and were able to tell the story of the eruption.
Now, geologists like to think that they understand how the earth works
and are exempt from the dangers of things like earthquakes and volcanoes.
But actually, one of the most tragic volcanic eruptions for the scientific community happened in 1991
when 43 scientists and journalists went up on Mount Unzin in Japan to examine an eruption that was happening.
A pyroclastic flow suddenly changed direction and ended up killing all of the scientists and journalists.
In fact, there was a volcanologist at the top of Mount St. Helens when it erupted
and his last words were essentially announcing the eruption of the volcano.
Interestingly, Mount Unzin is one of the most deadly volcanoes on Japan.
In fact, in 1792 its lava dome collapsed and actually created a large tsunami that killed about 15,000 Japanese.
Now, ash falls don't normally kill people, but they are a tremendous hazard.
For example, the ash can fall over enormous distances up to hundreds or thousands of kilometers away
and they can bury or collapse buildings.
The ash can infiltrate machinery like cars and render them inoperative.
Following the 1991 Pinatubo eruption, buildings at the nearby Clark Airways were crushed by meters of ash
that fell on the roofs of the Air Force buildings.
But the real deadly aspect of ash falls are what happens afterwards
because when ash mixes with water, it can create enormous deadly mud flows called lahars
and these can flow rapidly down slow and destroy villages.
For instance, lahars from the 1985 eruption of Nevada del Ruiz
buried a city of Amaro under about 8 meters of mud, killing all 21,000 people in the village.
Part of the reason that lahars are such significant hazards
becomes evident when you go to the top of many volcanoes.
For instance, go to Pacific Northwest and go to the top of Mount Rainier or Mount Baker or any of the tall volcanoes there.
What do you see almost all year round?
You see snow and when you have the hot ash coming out of the volcano mixing with the snow,
lahars form instantly and that hot ash falls tremendous distance,
that hot ash then flows tremendous distances away.
In fact, if you go throughout the whole Seattle region, Seattle and Tacoma,
these areas are built upon the ancient lahars, the mud flows from the previous eruptions of Rainier
and the next time Rainier erupts again, those mud flows are going to again cover much of the Seattle area.
Now, earthquakes pose a tremendously wide array of hazards.
Most of them are local to the region where they occur.
There is an important exception that I'm going to talk about later in the course when I talk about Sumatra
and that's tsunamis because when a tsunami occurs in one location, it can travel great distances across the oceans.
But for most of the hazards of earthquakes, they occur quite locally.
Now, I mentioned previously that earthquakes are not a big cause of death in the U.S.,
killing an average of 8 to 10 people a year over the past couple hundred years.
And that earthquakes globally kill 20 to 30,000 people a year.
However, that average is really meaningless because the number could be millions in an instant.
The amount of energy released by a large earthquake is so large, it only takes one big earthquake to destroy an entire city.
Fortunately, that hasn't really happened in the modern times.
But though the hazard of earthquakes remains the same over time, the risk of earthquakes is increasing.
And this is a really important aspect of the whole risks of natural hazards.
The earth is behaving in roughly the same manner.
Earthquakes and volcanoes will continue to occur, but the populations of cities are increasing rapidly.
And the same earthquake that happened in Los Angeles 200 years ago is going to have very different effect
than the earthquake that might happen in the future in the same location.
Some parts of the world just get frequently devastated by earthquakes.
And one of the worst, most hard hit countries is China.
For instance, there have been several earthquakes in the 20th century alone that have killed 100,000 or more people.
This occurred in 1976, in 1932, in 1927, in 1920.
This region is devastated by earthquakes.
And remember when I talked about India colliding into the Himalayas and I talked about that buckling rug?
Well, that impact of India hitting Asia propagates all the way across China.
And it's covered with faults that are deforming and actively moving as a result of the growth of the Himalayas from India's arrival into Asia.
Now, the greatest danger from earthquakes is actually the acceleration that happens when the waves come and horizontally shake buildings.
It's not so much the speed at which the buildings move, but it's the sudden change in direction.
In other words, you can drive down a highway at 60 miles an hour and everything's fine.
It's when you come to a stop suddenly that there's a problem.
Well, the same thing happens with the building.
It's not so much that it's moving, but it's the sudden change in motion forward and back.
And actually, it's easiest for me to demonstrate this with an actual seismogram.
So what I want to do is bring up for you on a laptop a set of seismograms that actually I can create in real time.
Now, it turns out that many laptops have accelerometers built into them.
It's designed to be able to close up the hard drive if you drop the laptop.
It's the exact same process as having accelerometers in your car that cause an airbag to be detonated upon impact.
Now, if you look at the seismograms on this laptop, you'll see that the seismograms are in three different forms.
There is one that's labeled z-axis, that's up.
There's one that's labeled y-axis, that's horizontal, front and back.
And there's one that's labeled x-axis, that's right and left.
Why do I need three seismograms?
Well, our universe has three dimensions and I need three of them to be able to describe motion in any particular direction.
Now, let me just tap the table here to show you that this indeed is working.
Now, you'll notice that the units for each of these are in G and the z-axis is at 1G.
What does that mean?
Well, G is a measure of gravity.
1G is the gravity at Earth's surface, 9.8 meters per second squared.
The x and y-axis are at 0G.
Why?
Because there's currently no acceleration sideways.
However, that will change if an earthquake comes.
And let me try to demonstrate that for you right now.
When you have an earthquake, you have a P wave arriving first, and then you have an S wave,
and then you have other reflected P and S waves.
Remember, those are the body waves, and then you have the larger surface waves,
which near an earthquake is what we call ground roll.
And I can demonstrate all of these here.
So here's a P wave up, and then an S wave, and then some other P and S waves,
and then I've got these large surface waves that shake my seismogram,
and I can do that by shaking the table.
So here it is on my seismogram here.
I have my first P wave, and in the case of an earthquake,
that's usually the first jolt that wakes people up.
If you ever see videos of people who are in an earthquake,
they suddenly look up in attention.
That's the arrival of that first P wave, but that's not what causes the damage.
Nor is it usually the S wave, but it's this large ground roll,
and these huge horizontal accelerations.
They can sometimes exceed half a G,
and that sort of acceleration is enough to tear down buildings quite dramatically much of the time.
Now, it turns out that it's not so much just the shaking that kills people,
but the buildings that they're in.
Remember I used the line earthquakes don't kill people, buildings kill people.
I mean, if you're standing in a field, what's the worst that would happen to you?
You'd fall over.
But if you're in a building and the building falls over and you're in it,
then that's a problem.
And there are really two parts to this.
There's good earthquake engineering,
but there also has to be enforcement of earthquake codes.
Let me give you an example.
You go to places in Eastern Europe, places like Armenia or the Middle East, Iran,
areas that have had traditionally large heavy concrete slabs for construction.
Moderate sized earthquakes have been catastrophic there
because these heavy buildings are not well reinforced
and they've just crumbled and collapsed onto people during earthquakes.
But let me look at the other side.
A nation like Turkey actually has quite good earthquake engineering codes,
but it doesn't have a legal enforcement system to keep those codes in place.
For instance, in 1999 there was a deadly earthquake that happened just east of Istanbul.
It was a magnitude 7.4 near the city of Izmit.
It killed 17,000 people.
And when people went to do relief after the destruction of the earthquake,
they found walls that were supposed to be built to high earthquake codes
that were empty and filled with empty olive oil cans.
In other words, they just used whatever cheat material they had
to stuff into the walls to produce them as cheaply as possible.
There was no legal system to penalize them for not building to the higher engineering codes.
Places like the United States and Japan have quite sophisticated earthquake engineering
that is enforced in areas of significant risk from earthquakes.
They have special construction that is anti-seismic construction.
Many of them are involving very new technologies such as foundations of buildings
that are actually able to slide during an earthquake.
Or even there's the development of fluids that the base of buildings can be put in
that have viscosities that can be electrically controlled in real time during the earthquake
to reduce, minimize the shaking of an earthquake.
Now, unfortunately the damage from an earthquake is not just a factor of what we do as engineers,
but it's also greatly affected by the particular geologic conditions.
I've already talked previously about how building on sedimentary layers
like in the Marina District of San Francisco is very dangerous
and has greater shaking than a place that might be built on bedrock.
And nowhere was that more demonstrated than in Mexico City in 1985.
There was an earthquake that was quite a distance from Mexico City,
but it turns out this huge, enormous metropolitan area is built upon an ancient lake.
It's a bowl-shaped sedimentary basin.
And when the waves from that earthquake came, the entire basin shook like a bowl of jello
and just destroyed enormous numbers of buildings.
The earthquake was much smaller than we would have expected to cause such damage,
but it was because of the type of geology that underlay Mexico City.
It also turns out that the size of the earthquake is important, but not on the way you might think.
It turns out that particular buildings of a particular size have resonant frequencies.
They shake at particular frequencies.
And if the earthquake happens to shake at just that right frequency,
it will knock it down very efficiently.
Actually, if an earthquake is larger, the larger earthquakes tend to have much longer periods of shaking.
The earthquake might be longer, but it might not have the right resonant frequency of the building.
And you could have a building that would be knocked down by a magnitude 6,
but not knocked down by a magnitude 7.
It's sort of like pushing a swing.
A swing has a particular period.
If you push the period at any random times, the swing is not going to move efficiently.
But if you push the swing at its resonant frequency, you can get the swing to go very high.
And that's what happens with earthquake waves shaking buildings.
Now, the shaking from an earthquake causes other hazards as well.
One of the most destructive has traditionally been landslides.
Now, landslides occur on their own.
They happen because erosion over time creates slopes that are too steep and become unstable.
But ironically, it's often an earthquake that knocks over the slope.
In other words, the erosion happens slowly and over time may build up a slope that's too steep to be stable.
But it's the occasional earthquake that may give it the shock it needs for that all to come down.
One of the best recent examples happened following the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in California.
There was a large landslide along the only road that connected San Jose to Santa Cruz.
And those two towns were cut off from each other for about a month.
Now, the shaking from earthquakes has an unusual phenomenon that happens in regions where the soil is wet.
And this is called liquefaction.
And this happens where the soil is actually saturated in water.
And it's stiff, but there's a lot of water in the soil.
And when the waves come through, the pressure from the waves pushes apart the sand grains from each other,
and for a moment they behave like quicksand.
This happened dramatically in Japan in 1964 in the city of Niigata.
You had these large apartment complexes that were quite tall.
And as the waves from the earthquake came through, for just a moment the whole soil behaved like quicksand.
These buildings didn't break. They sank down into the ground.
The waves passed, and all of a sudden an apartment that was on the third floor was now a garden apartment.
And there's nothing you can do about it. It's permanently stuck in the ground.
Sometimes the pressure becomes great enough from these waves that the sand will actually erupt out of the surface as geysers.
These are called sandblows or sandboils.
And they've actually been useful because we've used sandboils in the past
in order to determine when large earthquakes in particular regions have occurred going back far in the past.
Now, one of the worst hazards from earthquakes has actually been fires.
And I've talked about this a little bit already.
The San Francisco earthquake that burned for, where the city burned for three days.
The 1923 Kanto earthquake that caused 140,000 people in Tokyo to die instantly in firestorms.
The problem is twofold.
The shaking not only knocks over stoves and breaks gas pipes,
but it also breaks the water pipes that would be used to put out the fire.
So you create fires, but you remove the means to stop them.
Interestingly, even with better construction, this is still a hazard.
In 1994, in Northridge, California, the earthquake happened quite early in the morning while it was still dark.
And in fact, rescue helicopters used the locations of the outbreaks of fires from ruptured gas pipes
in order to identify those areas that were worse damaged and needed relief most quickly.
Now, oddly enough, as I mentioned at the start of this lecture,
earthquakes in seismology have a significant connection to the nuclear bomb.
And this is significant enough that I want to mention it here.
Seismology plays an important role in keeping peace internationally by monitoring nuclear testing.
Now, as I mentioned before, science doesn't operate in a vacuum.
We're entirely dependent upon and connected with humanity.
We're not only dependent upon it for our funding, but we're responsible for benefits that we can provide.
And in the case of earthquakes, it's a very interesting story.
Nuclear testing used to occur atmospherically until the radioactive fallout contaminated grass and milk
that affected both the United States and the Soviet Union in the late 1950s and 1960s.
Both countries agreed that irradiated milk wasn't a very good idea, so they moved nuclear testing underground.
Well, this was good and bad.
It helped with the emission of radioactive gas into the atmosphere,
but it was bad in that it led to a tremendous amount of paranoia
because, formally, the U.S. Air Force, using U-2 spy planes, had monitored all the Soviet nuclear tests.
And they were monitoring our tests.
But when everything moved underground, that suddenly stopped.
And this led to a time of intense paranoia, nearly catastrophic events like the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Well, what happened was both sides realized very quickly that a bomb makes waves.
And you can use seismology in order to monitor the nuclear tests.
And, ironically, because it had been the U.S. Air Force's job to use spy planes to monitor Soviet nuclear tests,
it was the U.S. Air Force that put in the first worldwide network of seismometers.
Now, these seismometers were primarily to be used for monitoring Soviet nuclear tests,
but the outcome was for the first time high-quality seismic data
that allowed us to begin to investigate the entire structure inside our planet.
So, so much of what we've learned from seismic tomography
and our understanding of mantle convection and how plate tectonics works
is actually due to the Cold War and the existence of the nuclear bomb.
Now, not to say there hasn't been a lot of monkey business going on in the areas of nuclear testing.
Countries have tried detonating bombs in large underground caverns to try to decouple the explosion from the ground.
They've even set off bombs right after earthquakes to try to hide them in the tail of the earthquake.
But with seismometers, they've been able to keep track of exactly what the other countries have been doing in the way of nuclear testing.
Back in 1976, the U.S. and the Soviet Union enacted a limited test ban treaty
that set the limit of nuclear tests to the equivalent of about 150 kilotons of TNT.
And the beauty of it was, from that point onward, we didn't have to trust the Soviet Union, they didn't have to trust us.
We could both see that the other was agreeing and following the limits of that treaty.
And I actually believe that the reason that we're still alive today and survive the Cold War
is because of seismometers and our ability to monitor nuclear tests.
That process continues onward, long past the end of the Cold War.
India and Pakistan set off a set of nuclear tests in the 1990s,
and seismology was able to tell the difference between bombs and earthquakes and identify these explosions.
For instance, if you look at a seismogram from a bomb and from an earthquake,
and let's say, suppose we look at an example from an earthquake and a bomb, both in India,
both from the same region and both of the same size,
you can clearly tell from looking at the seismograms the difference between the bomb and the earthquake.
Nowadays, global nuclear monitoring can detect a nuclear test of less than a kiloton anywhere around the world.
For instance, in the year 2006, North Korea set off a nuclear test.
This was recorded on seismometers around the world,
and we were able to come up with an accurate location
and determine that the size was probably just less than a kiloton.
Seismometry has also been used for other types of forensics
by monitoring the size and the amount of energy released from the Oklahoma City bombing,
the collapse of the World Trade Towers, and the catastrophic collapses of mines.
By looking at the seismic waves, we're actually able to figure out what happened,
and perhaps in the case of mine collapses, figure out what we can do
to prevent these sorts of collapses again in the future.
So monitoring of the Earth, of natural catastrophes like earthquakes and volcanoes,
and also sometimes catastrophic events like the Oklahoma City bombing and the World Trade Towers
is telling us a lot about how to make buildings,
how to build things that can withstand any sort of shaking or destruction.
And in the future, we probably won't be able to stop earthquakes,
but at least we can try to build better structures that can withstand them.
We have one other possibility, and that is perhaps we might in the future
even be able to learn how to predict when some of these events occur.
And in the next lecture, I'm going to try to explore the possibility of trying to predict
some of the natural catastrophes, the natural disasters such as earthquakes and volcanoes.
