Welcome. In this lecture, I want to talk about attempts to predict natural disasters. Now,
back in lecture 8, I talked about how we're all part of the earth. We're part of the rock cycle.
We're not separate from it. And back in a book called Lives of a Cell, biologist Louis Thomas spoke eloquently
about the earth as a single organism. He presented this metaphor of the earth as like a single cell with an atmosphere
that behaved like a cell membrane and organelles that were humans and other animals moving around inside of it.
If you look back throughout history, whole cultures of humans like Native Americans and African, Australian
and South American tribes are founded on the basic idea that we're one with the land and not disconnected from it.
But that doesn't mean that we're not sometimes very much at odds with it. After all, there are times when a person is at odds with himself.
And this is very much the case with natural disasters. As a geologist, I understand the geologic inevitability
and even necessity of destructive hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, earthquakes and volcanoes.
But it doesn't mean that I wouldn't like to do everything in my ability to stop them or at least try to predict them.
Now, in spite of my previous suggestions, like my fanciful idea to genetically engineer bacteria to lubricate underground faults
and maybe prevent earthquakes one day, no one has yet come up with any way to stop any of these natural hazards.
They always have and they always will occur. But what we can do is try to reduce the human risks associated with them.
We're trying to do this in two different ways. Build better systems, structures that can withstand them and try to predict when they'll occur.
Now, the first part is the realm of engineering, making buildings that won't fall down during an earthquake
or river levees that won't burst during a flood, making power systems that won't fail during ice storms
and importantly developing evacuation strategies to get people out of the way as fast as possible when things turn ugly.
It's vitally important but out of the realm of this course.
The other aspect is to use everything we've learned from science to try to give as much notice as possible before one of these disasters occurs.
Now, predicting natural disasters falls into three different categories which are either possible, improbable or impossible depending upon the type of disaster.
They are predicting the time and place of a geologic catastrophe. That's what we call a true prediction.
Or forecasting the likelihood of a disaster based upon how favorable the conditions are for it.
Or detecting and monitoring a disaster in real time as it's actually happening.
And what I'm going to do is look at a few different types of natural disasters and talk about what can be done in the way of prediction for each of these.
Now, without a doubt, the deadliest natural disasters involve the outbreaks of disease.
Smallpox and bubonic plague each killed about 300 million people.
Malaria has killed up to 250 million.
Tuberculosis up to 100 million.
The AIDS pandemic has killed about 25 million people in the last 25 years.
These have caused death over extended periods but sometimes the spread of disease happens incredibly rapidly.
For instance, in 1918, the Spanish flu is estimated to have killed between 50 and 100 million people.
I have to say, I can comprehend numbers like the billions of years over which the Earth formed or the millions of kilometers to other planets.
But I have a hard time comprehending the horror of these numbers, talking about the deaths of hundreds of millions of people.
Now there are two parts to an outbreak of a disease.
Versus the evolution of a deadly bacteria, bacterium or viruses that's entirely unpredictable.
It happens all the time and we never know when one of these strains is going to evolve into something deadly.
But the second aspect is the spread of that disease once it evolves.
And that depends upon human and environmental conditions and that is predictable to a degree.
For instance, factors like the population density and modes of transportation between the population is very important.
The particular region it occurs in, the time of year.
And even more importantly, the vector of the disease.
Is it transmitted through the air or water or by a mosquito?
And all of this provides perhaps some way of us addressing and predicting how that disease might spread and ways to prevent it.
Now this belongs a little more in a biology course than in an earth science course here.
So I'm going to move on and talk about some inorganic natural disasters, things that happen without the effect of life.
Some of the worst of these disasters are related to changes in weather, sudden changes.
For instance, flooding around the world has the capacity to kill millions of people at a time.
And one of the worst hit regions is China.
The Yellow River in China on several occasions has killed more than a million people due to severe flooding.
In 1931, up to 3.7 million people died from flooding on the Yellow River.
Back in 1887, between 1 and 2 million people were killed.
And going back as far as the year 1332, it's estimated that up to 7 million people died from flooding along that single river.
Another type of weather related disaster that's been catastrophic has been the occurrence of hurricanes and cyclones.
In Bangladesh in 1970, a cyclone there killed up to half a million people.
Back in 1839, a cyclone in India killed 300,000 people.
And as recently as 1975, a typhoon, Typhoon Nina in China, killed 229,000.
But that included not only the flooding from the typhoon itself, but also the catastrophic failure of a dam, the Banquo Dam.
And also the large numbers of people who died from epidemics that followed the flooding.
Now, in the Western Hemisphere, the deaths from these weather related events hasn't been nearly as severe, but it can still be catastrophic.
In the year 1780, in the Caribbean, the Great Hurricane there caused the deaths of 22,000 people.
Back in 1998, Hurricane Mitch, which hit Honduras and Nicaragua, killed a little more than 18,000 people.
Again, far from the millions that have been killed from flooding events in China.
To give some sense of scale, Hurricane Katrina in the year 2005, which was a tremendous catastrophe in America,
around which the whole country rallied, caused 1,836 deaths.
Again, orders of magnitude smaller than the number of people who died from weather related events in the Eastern Hemisphere.
Tornadoes carry a tremendous amount of terror, though they don't usually kill a lot of people.
They are sudden, they are quite dramatic, but they tend to be small.
The worst tornado ever recorded in the U.S. was the Tri-State tornado in 1925.
It went all the way from Missouri across Illinois and into Indiana, and that killed 695 people.
And there are other weather related catastrophes such as blizzards and heat waves.
All of these weather related disasters share a couple common features.
They are entirely unpredictable.
They are chaotic events.
There are just too many complex interactions between the land and the fluid motions of the oceans and the atmosphere
that all combine together to create the unique circumstances under which one of these disasters will occur.
Small events, one day in patterns of weather, can magnify over time into large effects the next.
I mean, look in your own life at the limited success of daily weather reports.
How much do you really trust the weather report on what the weather conditions are going to be for the next weekend?
Now, I'm currently in St. Louis, and we have a weather person there, Ben Abel, who actually does a quite excellent job
and is very well respected by the community, but it's interesting how he makes his predictions.
He looks at the predictions from three different climate forecasting models every day,
looks at the differences between them, and then frankly, he follows his hunch, and he does pretty well.
But he points out the fact that it's unlikely that we're ever going to be able to say that a particular hurricane
or particular blizzard or something will actually develop at a particular place and time.
The whole process of weather is just too chaotic.
Now, there are forms of natural catastrophes that we might be able to do a little better at.
For instance, if you look at landslides and avalanches, some of these can be deadly.
Back in 1999 in Venezuela, the Vargas mudslide killed up to 50,000 people.
Now, the actual occurrence of a landslide may be entirely unpredictable because they're often triggered by earthquakes,
as I previously said, and because the earthquakes aren't predictable, the landslides aren't either.
However, we can identify the conditions by which a large landslide might occur.
For instance, there are certain factors involved with landslides, a certain maximum slope that gets exceeded,
the presence of too much water.
There are certain conditions that will develop that might give us the possibility of identifying
when a possible landslide has the capability of occurring.
Now, volcanoes, I've talked about the power of their eruptions,
but their destructiveness is interestingly deceptive.
Locally, volcanoes are very catastrophic, but their death toll is often limited,
limited to a small region, at least compared to the number of deaths that occur from events like flooding.
However, as we've already seen in the very first lecture, volcanoes can have profound effects on climate.
To give you an example, Mount Tambora in Indonesia, when it erupted in 1815, it killed 71,000 people.
I mean, that's a lot of people, but over the year without a summer, as it was called,
the following year of tremendously cold temperatures, many more than that,
many more people than that died from devastating famines that stretched around the globe.
And I'm going to talk more about that when I talk about climate change later on.
Now, importantly, volcanoes are one of the few natural disasters that can be predicted,
and it's been a remarkable success in the area of Earth science,
because volcanoes involve several phenomena that can all be monitored that have to occur leading up to a large eruption.
For instance, in order for a volcano to erupt, magma's got to work its way from down on the Earth all the way up to the surface.
And as that magma comes up, it cracks its way through the ground,
and we can track it kilometer by kilometer on its way up by all the little earthquakes that happen,
as that magma cracks its way up through the rock.
As the magma rises up into a magma chamber, the sides of the volcano bulge out,
and we can actually measure that by measuring the tilt on the sides of the volcano.
As the magma gets close to the surface, the temperature increases,
and the amount of gas coming off of that magma increases, and those also can be tracked.
And several large eruptions have been successfully predicted.
For instance, in 1980, Mount St. Helens was predicted to the point that evacuations reduced the death toll in that area to about 57 people.
In June of 1991, Mount Pinatubo erupted. It's the largest volcanic eruption in the last 50 years,
and it erupted in the Philippines dramatically, destroying more than 100,000 houses.
The eruption had been predicted.
In fact, a full evacuation of the area had occurred on June 14, and the eruption hit the next day on June 15,
releasing 10 cubic kilometers of rock and ash into the atmosphere.
Only 281 people died from that.
Interestingly, Clark Air Base had been right near the volcano,
and the U.S. Air Force was not happy with the geologists who declared and announced the evacuation.
But two days later, after the eruption, they were very grateful that we had that capability to predict the eruption.
Now, there are other eruptions as well.
In 2000, in December of 2000, right outside of Mexico City, the Volcano Poco Capetal erupted.
It was the largest eruption there in 1,000 years.
Tens of thousands of people were evacuated, and within 48 hours after the evacuation,
the volcano erupted and no one was hurt.
So volcanoes remain our greatest success in the area of true predictions of a natural catastrophe.
Now, there are some concerns that the biggest problem is in the area of false alarms,
which does happen sometime.
For instance, volcanoes go through many small dome-building episodes before they have a major eruption.
A good example of this happened in 1982 near Mammoth Lakes, California,
and geologists saw the increase in these warning signs before a volcano,
and they caused the whole area to be evacuated.
Well, it was wintertime.
All the ski slopes were shut down.
The businesses were severely damaged.
In fact, there was so much public outrage that the geologists received death threats.
You know, they tried their best.
They just got it wrong.
Sometimes the Earth just doesn't cooperate.
Now, in the area of earthquakes, it has been, frankly, a dramatic failure.
Tremendous amount of effort and money has gone into attempts to predict earthquakes,
and so far, we just haven't figured it out.
To the point that we've really shifted our efforts away from trying to predict earthquakes
to trying to forecast the conditions that might be favorable for an earthquake
and also to developing real-time warning systems.
Now, why is it that earthquake predictions seem to be impossible?
Well, it looks as if there's just no pattern of what happens before an earthquake.
In other words, for some earthquakes, you may have an increase in seismic activity.
For some earthquakes, you may have normal seismic activity.
For some, the amount of seismic activity decreases.
There doesn't seem to be a pattern.
Now, there is still some hope.
There are some precursory phenomena that might actually be useful to us one day.
Up until now, there's actually been only one successful prediction of a large destructive earthquake,
and it was a wonderful success.
It happened in 1975 in Haicheng, China.
There had been a large number of earthquakes building up small earthquakes
that led the people in the city to be concerned.
They evacuated the city, and the next day a magnitude 7.3 earthquake occurred.
It's estimated that several hundreds of thousands of lives were probably saved.
The problem is that was tried the following year.
There were some precursory activity in another city.
They evacuated the city in the winter.
People were living in tents.
They were freezing, and there never was an earthquake.
Also that next year in 1976, an earthquake occurred near the city of Tangshan with no warning at all.
The official Chinese death toll is set at 255,000, a quarter of a million,
but it's estimated that perhaps more than a half million people actually died from that earthquake.
The worst earthquake I know of in China happened in 1556 near the Shanxi region,
and almost a million people, 830,000 people, died instantly from an earthquake.
Clearly, if we could predict earthquakes, it would be of tremendous benefit.
Interestingly, as a geophysicist, when I go to some event and I tell people I'm a geologist or a geophysicist,
enough people have come to me and said,
oh, my Aunt Bertha's parakeet flew out the window just before the San Francisco earthquake,
or my cousin's dog ran away and wouldn't come back.
There's been enough anecdotal evidence for animal behavior before an earthquake
for me to believe that there might be something to it.
But up until now, we just haven't figured out what it is they're sensing.
There was a large Chinese study into animal behavior before earthquakes,
and the result of their large study was that before an earthquake, chickens fly up into trees,
hogs lie quiet, ducks go out of the water, and dogs bark wildly.
I mean, when don't ducks go in and out of the water or dogs bark?
Frankly, until Rover can stand up and tell me what it is he's barking about,
we're just not going to have any sense of what it is that these animals are sensing before an earthquake.
But we haven't given up hope because there have been a couple of cases
where something unusual geologically has happened just before an earthquake.
For instance, I talked about the devastating Kobe earthquake of 1995,
which destroyed the world's third largest ocean port.
Well, a week before that earthquake, there was a large increase in radon gas coming out of the ground.
Maybe the ground was beginning to crack and that released this gas, which forms and it was trapped underground.
Before the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, there was a sudden change in water pressure and water well level.
And there's a place north of San Francisco called the Geyser, sort of like Old Faithful at Yellowstone,
where water erupts as a geyser over some regular period.
Well, the period between those eruptions changed just before the earthquake.
There have also been reports that the conductivity of electricity through the ground,
which is a function of how much the water pore spaces in the rock are connected,
that electrical conductivity might change before an earthquake.
We don't have any means yet of using these as predictive mechanisms,
but perhaps over time we'll be able to develop a particular strategy for each earthquake.
The problem is the repeat time between these earthquakes, the large ones, is often hundreds of years,
so we may need to wait several hundreds of years in order to figure out what the pattern for each particular earthquake is.
I have to tell you, it's very hard going to any sort of funding agency and say,
you know, please give me money to carry out this research, I'll give you an answer in a thousand years.
So, I'm not optimistic for the near future.
What we are trying to do is develop earthquake forecasts,
and these are long range risk assessments that are based upon the previous history of earthquakes in a particular region.
Now, of course, in places like North America, we haven't been around that long
in order to have a sense of how many earthquakes have happened over the last few thousands of years,
but we do have a technique called paleo-seismicity,
and this involves actually digging down into the ground around a seismic fault
and using carbon-14 dating of materials in the fault in order to figure out when earthquakes have happened in the past.
For instance, this was done for a segment of the San Andreas Fault near Pallet Creek,
and they found that since the year 670, about 10 large earthquakes have occurred.
So, this is about a 130 year cycle.
However, within that time period, the earthquakes seem to occur randomly.
In other words, over time, over thousands of years, the time between earthquakes,
remember this elastic rebound theory of building up stress and releasing it,
that seems to happen over about 130 years, but we can't use it as a means to predict an earthquake
because it's as likely to happen tomorrow as it is 200 years from now.
In 1985, the U.S. Geological Survey went so far as to actually make a prediction on an earthquake.
They predicted at a 95% probability that a magnitude 6 earthquake would occur at Parkfield, California,
along the San Andreas before the year 1993.
You see, previous earthquakes had happened all about a magnitude 6 right on that segment of the San Andreas,
with an average of about 22 years.
The last one had occurred in 1966, so add 22 years, you get 1988.
Well, the U.S. Geological Survey put out tons of instruments, seismometers,
all sorts of instruments measuring the deformation across the fault, and they waited.
And 1980 came, and 1990 and 2000, and finally, in the year 2004, the earthquake occurred.
Was it a success?
Well, it's hard to say because we had a situation where the right size earthquake occurred in the right place,
but it happened almost 20 years late.
So it really pointed out to us that though we understand that we have some sense of being able to forecast
when an earthquake can occur, actually picking the time that it will occur is still far off from us.
Another area of forecasting involves the seismic gap hypothesis.
In other words, if you look at a segment of a fault that hasn't had an earthquake in a long time,
a gap, it might be an area that's more likely to rupture.
The perfect example of this happened with the Loma Prieta earthquake.
If you look at a map of the San Andreas fault before the Loma Prieta earthquake,
a map that shows the locations of earthquakes within the San Andreas fault from the surface down 15 miles
from north of San Francisco down to the Parkfield area, you notice that there were a lot of earthquakes south of Loma Prieta,
but not many within the Loma Prieta gap.
Well, in 1989, the Loma Prieta earthquake and all the aftershocks nicely filled in that gap.
Now, if you look at this picture and you move to the south, you'll notice that there's a gap for Parkfield.
Well, that gap got filled in by the Parkfield earthquake that happened in 2005.
So look at the map now. Where's the next remaining gap? It's right beneath San Francisco,
and this has geologists considerably worried. However, here's the problem.
Several such predictions based on seismic gaps have been made in the past,
and it turns out that for many of them, they've actually been worse at predicting earthquakes
than simply throwing darts at a map. So in other words, we have two different models of how the earth works.
It could be the cases that the cases that places that earthquakes haven't occurred for a while
are places that are due for the next earthquake, or it could just be that places where earthquakes occur
are places where earthquakes are going to occur. There are two different models that say the opposite thing,
but they both seem to be right and wrong equally as often, and it really points out to us that
we still have a long way to go in understanding the mechanisms by which earthquakes even occur,
and before we understand that process, we're not going to be able to predict them.
Now, one important possibility for reducing the hazard of earthquakes comes with real-time seismic assessment.
In other words, this uses the time between the moment an earthquake occurs
and the arrival of those seismic waves at a major city, and this is really good for regions
where you have very high seismic risks, but also a good enough infrastructure
to be able to do something useful with that information. And there are really two things you want to do with that information.
You want to stop machines and you want to warn people. In other words, in Japan, they have high-speed trains
that can be shut off once a warning comes from an earthquake, and they go through frequent enough drills
that with the information that there might be an earthquake coming, people can evacuate buildings
in a fairly short amount of time. Japan has actually started to develop these high-speed,
these real-time systems of shutting off machines and alerting people with cell phones
to give them even 30 seconds of advanced time between when the earthquake occurs
and between when those waves actually reach a city. We know when the earthquake occurs,
we have seismometers around, the seismic waves travel quickly,
but if you have seismometers in the region, you can transmit that information using radio waves much faster.
You don't have a lot of time, but you might have enough time to do something useful.
Now, I'll talk later on when I talk about the Sumatra earthquake about the real-time assessment from tsunamis,
and that's actually very successful, and the reason is tsunamis travel fairly slowly.
Tsunami waves only go at about 500 miles an hour about the speed that airplanes travel.
That may sound fast to you, but a P wave travels at about 18,000 miles per hour,
so you get information from the P waves right away from an earthquake.
You can figure out if the earthquake is likely to have a large tsunami,
and you can broadcast that signal about the entire ocean area. That's what we do in the Pacific Ocean.
Information goes into a set of tsunami warning centers that figure out the likelihood of a tsunami
and then broadcast that signal about giving people plenty of time to evacuate shorelines before a possible tsunami might come.
Now, interestingly, I was actually once part of a discussion to determine if the city of St. Louis should install a real-time earthquake warning system.
The meeting had people from the mayor's office, church leaders, and people's concern was that back in 1811 and 1812,
there were three large earthquakes that were low-magnitude seven earthquakes, 7, 7.2 and 7.4, and very many aftershocks.
Paleos seismicity has suggested that going back thousands of years from these sand boils and sandblows
where seismic waves cause high pressure in the sand to eject out, we've actually been able to determine that these earthquakes do occur there
with a frequency of maybe 500 years or so. So, what's the risk of another earthquake occurring along the New Madrid fault area?
Well, first of all, you have to look at what the actual risks are. Back in 1811 and 1812, St. Louis was around at the time,
and the earthquakes did very moderate damage. They knocked some loose chimneys down in East St. Louis.
Unfortunately, over time, the stories of this earthquake have sort of increased, and the magnitudes have become greatly over exaggerated.
It became sort of anecdotally known that these were magnitude 8 earthquakes, and they certainly weren't.
And another thing that's important to take into consideration is what the current risk is, what the current seismic activity is.
Well, turns out the New Madrid fault area in the southeast corner of Missouri has had no magnitude 6 earthquake there in over a century,
and no magnitude 5 earthquake in more than 35 years. There continues to be small levels of earthquakes. I have felt some of them, but they're not very large.
So, what do we do with this information? Well, some people have actually tried to make predictions in the past.
Back in December 3rd of 1990, a man named Ivan Browning made a prediction that a large earthquake would occur there.
Well, turns out this man was not a seismologist. He had no background in seismology, and in fact all the seismologists in the country thought that this prediction was absurd.
He had based this prediction on tidal forces, and we've shown that there's no correlation between large earthquakes and tides.
But many media institutions behaved irresponsibly, and even though the seismologists said there was no risk here, they still went on and began to broadcast this as a huge catastrophe that was going to happen.
And the people in the region were uninformed. They didn't understand, they couldn't get the information and understand it to realize that there really wasn't a seismic risk there.
There was a large amount of panic. People sold their houses, businesses and schools shut down, and of course nothing happened.
Well, if you go to this region sometime in the future, it's likely that a large earthquake will occur.
So, when we had this meeting, what could you do? Well, you'd get about 25 seconds of warning between when that earthquake occurred in New Madrid and between when those waves would reach St. Louis.
Well, what could you do with 25 seconds? Well, you could certainly send the whole city into a panic. You couldn't do much else because the infrastructure of the city is too old, we couldn't shut the trains off or close gas valves.
And the city isn't wealthy enough to replace its entire infrastructure. That would mean taking money away from schools and other social programs and using that money to put in an earthquake warning system that probably will never be used for hundreds of years.
And then what happens if there's a false alarm? What happens if we have a false positive and people panic and die when there was no earthquake at all? In the end, we decided to do nothing.
And that's what a lot of regions have decided to do. It's only those areas that have a high enough risk that really warrant putting in this real-time, high-risk, this real-time monitoring system.
Now, there's one more form of natural disaster that I haven't talked yet about, and that's famine, which is a continual, steady killer at both large and small scales.
It's a very complex issue that combines human agriculture, politics, socioeconomics, and climate change. And before I can talk any further about the natural disaster of famine, I need to get into the causes of climate change, which I'll do at the end of this course.
It's too much for one lecture, and I need to bring in a little bit more of the geology that happens at the surface of the earth before I can talk about that natural hazard.
