Welcome. In this lecture, I want to talk about the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. Because I've talked several times now about volcanic eruptions and the importance of volcanic eruptions.
The important role that they play in terms of the whole geology of the surface of the earth.
But I want to give you a sense of what actually happened start to finish during one of these eruptions.
Now, there are many parts of the United States that are volcanically active. But the 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption really remains the most memorable for most Americans.
I mean, Hawaii is more active after all, Kilauea has been erupting nearly continuously since 1980. And Mount Katmai in Alaska had the largest eruption in the U.S. in the past century.
Back in 1912, it blasted about 35 cubic kilometers of tephra up into the atmosphere. However, almost nobody lives there.
Now, Yellowstone had the largest North American eruption in the past million years. And it's creating a lot of worries for the people who live in that area. But so far, there's nothing yet.
Now, though the 1980 eruption wasn't very large by the standards of most volcanoes, 2.8 cubic kilometers of tephra was ejected.
It was a very powerful explosion and the large ash plume that blew up over Mount St. Helens woke Americans to the hazards of volcanoes happening in their own backyard near large cities where millions of people live.
I still remember vividly the incredible images shown on television then of this massive cloud of ash towering tens of thousands of feet up above the mountain. It was tremendously impressive and really left an impact on many of us.
Now, the eruption of Mount St. Helens on May 18, 1980 didn't come without warnings. Starting about two months earlier, there were lots of small earthquakes.
It occurred because the magma actually began to crack its way up towards the surface and every time it pushed its way up, it created a small earthquake.
In fact, more than 10,000 small earthquakes were located before the main eruption and you could actually track the path of the magma moving up towards the surface.
Other things happened. There was an increase in steam eruptions at the top and the crater itself began to bulge outward.
Taken all together, these precursory events allowed for a large and very successful evacuation.
Now, what I want to do is actually sort of step you through the events that happened during this volcano.
Now, the activity leading up to May 18 was mostly very minor, small steam eruptions, some ash ejected, the bulge gradually developing, in particular along the north face of the volcano.
However, at 8.32 on Sunday morning, a magnitude 5.1 earthquake occurred a few kilometers beneath the surface.
This earthquake shook the mountain enough that it dislodged the entire north side of the volcano, which slid down the mountain.
This landslide was so large, in fact, it was the largest in recorded history, two and a half cubic kilometers of rock, mostly in a single block slid suddenly down the north side of the mountain.
In fact, the landslide itself traveled a distance of 22 kilometers from the volcano.
About 40 seconds after the earthquake, the decreased pressure on the volcano allowed for a northward lateral blast.
You see, the pressure had been building up inside the volcano, and the only thing holding it in, keeping it from erupting, was this growing bulge on the north side.
When that bulge slid down, it released the pressure and an incredibly powerful blast occurred to the north.
The blast itself went for about 26 kilometers, knocking down 200 foot pine trees like they were toothpicks.
About 50 seconds after that initial earthquake, the eruption occurred in a second manner.
A second block began to break free, exposing more magma and initiating a large eruption column.
This was hot gas and ash that went upward.
The lateral blast, at this point, was traveling about 300 miles an hour, the one that blew northward.
It ended up covering about 230 square miles.
Now, within minutes after the initial eruption, the tall column of ash extended up to about 80,000 feet in the atmosphere,
about 25 kilometers in height over the surface of the land there.
It reached that maximum height within only about 15 minutes after the start of the eruption.
Once the ash got brought up into the atmosphere, eastward winds blew about 520 million tons of ash,
dropping it all over the states of Washington and Oregon, Idaho and Montana.
In fact, it plunged Spokane into nearly total darkness in the middle of the day.
The ash ended up covering more than 20,000 square miles and, in fact, actually encircled the globe in about 15 days.
Significant amounts of ash were recorded as far away as Oklahoma.
The eruption lasted all day and actually reached its peak in the afternoon with enormous pyroclastic flows,
hot dense mixtures of gas and ash that rushed down the surfaces of the volcano
and ended up dumping enormous amounts of ash, meters of ash, for literally hundreds of square miles all around the volcano.
This ash mixed with snow and water, melting the snow to make huge lahars.
Remember volcanic mud flows, mixtures of hot ash and gas with snow, and these mud flows rushed down the surface.
A lot of them focused down the Toutle River, actually wiping away 27 bridges
and carrying away giant trees and massive logging trucks like they were small Tonka toys.
The total energy released by the eruption was on the order of about 350 megatons of TNT.
This is equivalent to about 27,000 Hiroshima nuclear bombs.
Now, fortunately, because of the advance warnings, only about 57 people died from the volcanic eruption.
One of these was a geologist by the name of David Johnston, a very famous death.
He was right near the summit at the time of the eruption and his last words recorded over the radio were,
Vancouver, Vancouver, this is it. For him it was.
The summit of the volcano, right where he was located, entirely disappeared.
In fact, was reduced in elevation by about 1,300 feet.
If you look at images of the volcano before and afterwards, before what you saw was a classic strata volcano shape.
This conical shape built up by many alternating periods of ash and lava flow.
In fact, some had called it the Fujiyama of the West.
Afterwards, what you saw was a giant scoop missing from the entire inside of the volcano.
Again, more than 1,000 feet of rock vertically had been entirely removed
and either blown northward or ejected up into the atmosphere.
Now, let's talk about the tectonic setting here.
Mount St. Helens and all the other volcanoes in that general part of the world, the Pacific Northwest,
exist because of the process of subduction.
The Wanda Fuka Plate, a small piece of the Pacific Plate, is sinking beneath North America.
Now, the Wanda Fuka is very small currently, but it was once part of an enormous huge plate,
an oceanic plate called the Farallon Plate.
Remember, I've talked about this. This is the plate that now exists directly beneath North America,
subducting down through the mantle towards the core mantle boundary.
Well, the Farallon Plate has almost entirely disappeared.
There are only two remnants of it, the Wanda Fuka Plate subducting beneath the Pacific Northwest
and the Cocos Plate, a piece of the Pacific Ocean seafloor that's sinking beneath Mexico.
During this process of subduction, they bring water down into the mantle.
The water causes the rock to melt.
You get magma forming and that magma rises up to the surface to form the volcanoes that we see
at places like Mount St. Helens.
Now, the subduction of the Wanda Fuka Plate extends from Northern California,
right at the top of the San Andreas Fault, all the way up the coast to southern British Columbia,
actually the bottom of another large transform fault, the Queen Charlotte Fault.
Interestingly, if you go to Northern California, central in Northern California,
you find a lot of volcanoes that used to be active but no longer have any volcanic activity,
places like Mono Craters near Mono Lake or Mammoth Lakes, which has a little bit of volcanism left.
These regions were active when a larger portion of the Farallon Plate, the Wanda Fuka Plate, was subducting.
But as pieces of the Wanda Fuka Plate have successively subducted,
that process of bringing water into the mantle, causing magma and having volcanoes form,
has gradually gotten shut off piece by piece.
The southernmost tip of the Wanda Fuka Plate is a small little microplate called the Gorda Microplate.
And when it's done subducting, volcanism in Northern California will be cut off
and subduction will only occur in Washington, Oregon and British Columbia.
Now if you look up and down the coasts of the Pacific Northwest, you see a large number of volcanoes
and all of these are active in the sense that they have the possibility of erupting at any time.
We call these volcanoes dormant. They're sleeping but they're not extinct.
The southernmost is Lassen Peak in California.
And as you move up the coast, places like Mount Shasta or Crater Lake or moving up the coast,
Mount Jefferson, Three Sisters, Mount Hood, Mount Adams, Mount St. Helens, Mount Rainier,
Glacier Peak and Mount Baker, all of these volcanoes are able to erupt at any time.
And large populations of people live at the base of many of these volcanoes.
Now they don't occur continuously. They erupt intermittently.
But a lot of them have occurred in recent historic times.
For instance, Mount Lassen in Northern California erupted back in 1915.
Mount Shasta erupted in 1786.
Mount Hood erupted in 1865.
Mount Adams erupted about a thousand years ago.
Mount Rainier as recent as 1894 and Mount Baker in the 1880s.
So you can see while they don't occur on a regular basis the way Kilowayas activity occurs,
just bubbling away year after year, they do occur often enough that there's a very good chance
another one will erupt in our lifetimes.
One of the largest eruptions that happened in recent times, geologically speaking,
is Crater Lake, also known as Mount Nizama.
About 5,700 BCE, there was a huge eruption that sent about 25 cubic kilometers of tephra up into the atmosphere.
This created the collapse of a large magma chamber that followed the eruption,
a 10 kilometer wide caldera that's actually America's deepest lake.
It's 590 meters deep. This is Crater Lake.
However, since that time, there's been a buildup of volcanic activity that's created a new island
in the middle of the lake called Wizard Island.
Over time, this volcano will begin to go through that cycle of building up the volcano again,
eventually leading to another large eruption sometime in the future.
Now, Mount St. Helens is a relatively young volcano.
It's only about 40,000 years old.
It's actually the most active volcano in the Cascades over the past 10,000 years.
The cone that blew out in 1980 started forming just about 2,200 years ago.
The volcano has gone through repeated periods of activity and inactivity,
sometime lasting decades, sometimes lasting millennia.
Interestingly, Native Americans actually lived in this area for more than 6,500 years,
but the activity became so great in the area of Mount St. Helens that they abandoned the area
about 3,500 years ago.
This followed a huge eruption that actually buried all their settlements with thick layers of pumice.
The Native Americans didn't even begin returning until about 2,000 years later
in a period of relative quiet.
However, another large eruption occurred in 1482.
In fact, this one was actually several times larger than the 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption.
The volcano went into a period of inactivity following that that lasted until about 1800,
and then the volcano ramped up again.
For the next 57 years, it went through several periods of activity,
having lots of small eruptions that were noted by many of the early settlers
who moved into the western part and began to explore this region.
The activity that led to the recent volcano started in earnest on March 20, 1980,
two months before the giant eruption.
Up until then, there had been a long extended period of quiet,
and then it took only two months for the pressure to build up inside the volcano,
leading to the massive eruption on May 18.
Following the large eruption in May, the volcano returned back to a long phase
of building up the summit again, and we don't know how long this next phase will last,
how long it will take for the volcano to build up enough pressure at the summit
to result in another huge eruption.
During the rest of 1980, there were five significant eruptions that followed,
some of them sending ash up as high as 15 kilometers into the atmosphere,
but none of them were explosive or dangerous.
The area had already been evacuated, and no people had moved back into the area.
Small amounts of lava came out of the summit and began that process of building up the new lava dome again.
In the decades that followed 1980, it's gone through many small episodes of activity,
both in terms of magma migration up in towards the dome and the extending out of the dome,
both bulging out from pressure inside and from lava coming out the surface.
We see this not only in terms of the magma at the surface, but also the episodes of seismic activity.
In other words, we can actually chart the magma as it's cracking its way up underground.
There was a very active period in the years 2004 and 2005.
In fact, many people thought that this might have been leading up to a large eruption.
This process actually started back in 1998,
where there was a huge amount of seismic activity down at a depth of about seven or eight kilometers beneath the surface.
That said to us that magma was down at that depth trying to move its way up.
Over the next seven years, you could chart the upward path of the earthquakes.
Again, these are tiny earthquakes.
They're not large tectonic earthquakes like you would see along the large plate boundary,
but they represent the movement of that magma pushed from down deep, cracking its way up towards the surface.
That magma began to work its way up.
In 2004 and 2005, the activity of earthquakes actually could be traced going right up to the surface of the caldera.
In fact, some of the earthquakes were actually occurring right up in the volcano itself,
suggesting that there was the magma being moved there.
During this period in 2005, significant additions to that lava dome were resulted.
The lava dome grew considerably.
Tilt meters were placed on the sides of the dome and actually measured that dome bulging outward.
There were significant fears of a large eruption,
but the activity calmed down again and went back into a period of dormancy.
It may be that this is just how volcanoes work.
They go through many periods of slowly building up material,
building the volcano up before there's eventually a large blast.
We can't predict at this point in time when it will be that Mount St. Helens will erupt,
again at the level that it did in 1980.
However, because we have some ability to predict volcanoes,
when that large eruption does occur, it will give us ample warning.
Now, it's interesting to look at what the effects of that volcano were in the surrounding area.
The enormous blast of 1980 essentially destroyed life in the entire area.
If you went to Mount St. Helens following the eruption, what you saw was something unearthly.
In fact, Jimmy Carter visited the disaster area following the eruption,
and he said, this area doesn't look like the moon.
It looks much worse than the surface of the moon.
Just gray ash everywhere, no sign of life.
But life returns remarkably quickly to these sorts of environments.
In fact, some species of life have even evolved to be able to settle into regions after a fire,
or in this case, after hot ashes destroyed everything else.
I saw, I got a sense of this when I visited Mount Lassen in the 1980s.
Now, Mount Lassen was the last volcano to erupt in the Pacific Northwest before Mount St. Helens.
It erupted in Northern California in 1915, and it went through the same process.
It covered the area with ash and with intermediate to composition volcanic rock, andesite.
And when I visited the area, I saw surprisingly a tremendous amount of growth, vegetation,
that had occurred in the area, but it was almost exclusively three different species.
Hemlock spruce trees, manzanita, which is an evergreen shrub, and lupin, which is a flower.
These three species are particularly well adapted to be able to move into an area following a large volcano
and begin to set roots into the volcanic rock, starting that process of breaking down the rock,
making soil, essentially paving the way, or in a sense unpaving the way,
for other plants to come later on and eventually settle the area.
Within centuries, this area will look no different than other areas not destroyed by the volcano,
but it actually takes a while to make soil.
However, one thing that is very helpful for life in that area is that the volcanic ash actually makes for tremendously fertile soil,
and the ash actually helps in allowing life to return quite quickly back to this area.
Now, all of the volcanoes in the Pacific Northwest pose quite significant threats,
but one particular threat is Mount Rainier.
Now, Mount Rainier is actually the tallest peak in the Cascade Range.
It has 26 glaciers located on.
It's actually the most heavily glaciated mountain in the lower 48 states,
and it presents the largest risk of lahars anywhere in the 48 states.
Turns out that much of Tacoma and even some of Seattle are actually built upon previous mudflow deposits from past eruptions.
About 5,000 years ago, there was a huge eruption in Mount Rainier
that actually caused the top 500 meters, the top half a kilometer of Mount Rainier,
to collapse suddenly in a large debris avalanche.
A large debris avalanche is a combination of water and rock and soil that all travels as a large avalanche, a tremendous distance.
Interestingly, these debris avalanches can travel quite quickly because they trap air underneath as they flow,
and it tends to buoy the avalanche.
It's almost like it's flowing on water, but it's actually trapped air that allows it to slide tremendous distances.
That debris avalanche from the eruption of Rainier traveled so far,
it actually entered the Puget Sound, which is 80 kilometers away.
Now, when this happens again, it's going to be devastating.
And I say when, and not if, because all of these volcanoes are still alive,
they are still capable of erupting, and they go through this cycle.
And these sorts of debris avalanches and lahars have happened repeatedly in the past and will happen repeatedly again.
We can't stop either of these.
These involve cubic kilometers of rock flowing down the sides of the mountains,
much larger than anything that we are capable of dealing with.
You may remember I talked about in Iceland how they were able to actually stop the flow of lava there.
Well, that was a fairly small amount of lava that was traveling very slowly,
and they were actually able to drive up onto the front of it with a bulldozer and spray it down.
If you have a debris avalanche or a lahar traveling at hundreds of kilometers an hour,
there's nothing that we can do to actually stop those.
Now, fortunately, we will have warnings when that happens.
We can predict volcanoes.
We'll see the evidence of the magma working its way to the surface.
We'll see the small earthquakes that occur.
We'll see the increase in temperature at the surface.
We'll see the change in gas compositions as that magma begins to degas,
and the gases work their way and crack their way up to the surface as well.
At some point, the cities of Seattle and Portland will likely be destroyed,
but the people will be evacuated and they'll live through this.
Cities can be rebuilt.
They frequently have been.
Look at what happened to San Francisco in the 1906 earthquake,
or Tokyo in the 1923 earthquake, and these will again in the future.
Now, in the next lecture, I'm going to present a case study of another particular geologic event,
the gigantic Sumatra earthquake of 2004 and the enormous tsunami that it caused.
However, these two stories are not unrelated.
It turns out that the plate boundaries in these two regions are very similar.
If you look at what's going on in the Pacific Northwest,
where the Mount St. Helens volcano occurred,
and if you look at Sumatra, where the giant earthquake of 2004 occurred,
you see a very similar process.
In both cases, these are collisional plate boundaries,
where a large piece of ocean sea floor is sliding underneath land.
And interestingly, in both cases, the actual process of subduction is very similar.
It's occurring at a very shallow angle.
In the case of volcanism and the case of earthquakes, it creates massive events.
Earthquakes and volcanoes are not separate events.
They're part of the same process of subduction, of plate collisions.
I've presented earthquakes and volcanoes separately in this course,
simply because it's hard to put everything into one lecture.
But earth doesn't make this distinction.
To the earth, it doesn't know the difference between earthquakes and volcanoes.
They're part of the same process of having ocean sea floor
and having that material slide down into the earth.
The same subduction that causes those volcanoes, as water is brought down into the mantle,
also causes large earthquakes, as the two sides of the plate boundary slip
and the stress builds up.
Now, has this actually happened beneath places like Seattle and Portland?
Well, unfortunately, the answer is yes.
And we didn't know this until quite recently.
Now, when Westerners, Europeans, settled into the Pacific Northwest of America,
they had heard Native American legends of a time of tremendous catastrophe,
of landslides and ground shaking and a tsunami of water flowing
and all sorts of tremendous geologic activity that they attributed to the fighting of the gods.
Now, the people who moved, the Westerners who moved into the Pacific Northwest,
thought this had to do with the volcanoes,
because the volcanoes up there were active at small levels.
What they didn't realize was what the Native Americans were actually referring to
was a massive earthquake.
In fact, we actually know the date now.
It was January 26th, 1700.
The magnitude of this earthquake was a magnitude nine or larger,
putting it on par with a Sumatra earthquake.
Now, there were no records locally, though there was quite a bit of geologic evidence.
It turns out that when you have a sudden large earthquake,
you cause a sudden uplift of some parts of the land and a sudden down going of other parts.
If you have, let's say, a forest that suddenly dropped down,
it can get flooded and become a lake killing off the trees.
Well, it turns out that just such an event occurred in 1700.
You could count the tree rings to determine the date of that.
But the way we actually know the day, January 26th, comes from a very unusual source,
tidal gauge records in Japan.
Because some scientists decided the best way to look for the evidence of previous large earthquakes
around the rim of the Pacific was to go and look at the evidence of tsunamis that happened.
Because when you have large earthquakes that rupture into the water around the rim of the Pacific,
they cause tsunamis that can travel all the way across the Pacific.
Well, the records in these Japanese ports were so accurate to the minute
that by looking at the time that the tsunamis were arriving,
the times that the tsunamis were arriving at different ports,
they could actually determine the direction from which those tsunamis came.
And on January 26th, 1700, an enormous tsunami washed across Japan.
And if you look at the times that it hit the Japanese ports, it points right back to Seattle.
So we know not only that this region is capable of having enormous earthquakes, we know that they happen.
Now, since then, paleos seismic research has gone on in this region
and has actually found evidence of some large earthquakes that going back thousands of years.
In fact, it seems like these massive earthquakes occur with a repeat time of about 500 years or so.
Interestingly, the last enormous earthquake beneath Seattle occurred 400 years before the 1700 earthquake.
And, well, it's been more than 300 years since that one.
And so we're getting into the zone of danger for that earthquake occurring again.
Now, people often want to know, how about California?
It actually is an interesting coincidence if you take the outline of the Sumatra earthquake fault,
which is very similar to the fault in the Pacific Northwest beneath Mount St. Helens.
And it overlays quite nicely with the state of California, but that turns out to be entirely a coincidence.
The reason why? It's a different kind of plate boundary.
It goes back to the fundamental process of how the earth works and how these boundaries between plates function.
The boundary at the San Andreas is a transform fault.
It's a very narrow, thin ribbon of fault.
The entire San Andreas ruptured at once.
As I said previously, it would only be a magnitude 8.3.
One-thirtieth the size of Sumatra or the type of earthquake that can occur in the Pacific Northwest.
When will the next earthquake happen?
When will the next volcano happen?
Again, we can't predict these.
But it is a big cause of worry for Seattle and Washington and those regions.
I've spent much of this lecture talking about the possible risks of places like Seattle from volcanoes,
and now it turns out we have earthquakes to worry about as well.
People used to think that Los Angeles was the most dangerous city in America,
but from a geophysical perspective, that honor probably goes to Seattle.
Why? Because it's over a subduction zone,
and subduction zones are the most dramatic geological places on the surface of the planet.
In the next lecture, I'm going to break down what happens during one of these mega-earthquakes at one of these subduction zones.
And I'll trace the rupture as a giant ocean slab gets pulled down into the earth from that force of slab pull.
And I'll also introduce a third catastrophic hazard of subduction zones, and that's a tsunami.
