Welcome.
In this lecture, I want to talk about the Sumatra 2004 earthquake.
I want to give you an example of what a large, massive subduction zone earthquake is like.
Now, the philosopher Will Durant once said,
Civilization exists by geologic consent subject to change without notice.
And this is nowhere better exemplified by the deadly earthquake and tsunami that occurred
in Sumatra in December of 2004.
Now, the Indonesian islands of Sumatra and Java are tropical paradises.
They have beautiful beaches, lush vegetation, rich diverse ecosystems.
However, the same tectonic processes that have created these islands are also capable
of destroying them.
In the last lecture, we talked in particular about volcanoes.
And in this lecture, I want to talk about earthquakes.
Now, the magnitude 9.3 earthquake that occurred on December 26, 2004 destroyed many parts
of Sumatra.
The tsunami it generated caused death in Mayhem all around the Indian Ocean.
Together, it killed probably more than 225,000 people, making it one of the largest natural
catastrophes to have occurred in a long time.
But the 2004 Sumatra earthquake was unusual for several reasons.
First, it was the largest earthquake that had happened since 1964.
But second, it triggered an unusually massive tsunami that was felt in oceans all around
the world.
And this turned out to be a result of the unusual very long duration of its rupture.
Turns out earthquakes usually rupture over a matter of seconds or tens of seconds.
This one lasted for more than five minutes.
And as a result, given the increase in the number and quality of seismometers around
the world, this turned out to be the best understood earthquake, the best case of examining
and identifying the whole process of rupture of any earthquake that had yet happened.
Now, the Sumatra earthquake began a ways from the surface, about 35 kilometers down.
This is about 20 miles beneath the surface.
But it actually occurred much further away down a very shallow fault.
In other words, the Indian Ocean was subducting beneath Sumatra at a shallow angle.
The rupture began about 35 kilometers beneath the surface.
And it tore outward from that initial point of rupture, primarily to the north and northwest
over the next five plus minutes.
The rupture occurred at a rate of about two to three kilometers a second.
So it tore incredibly quickly.
Now, we can actually identify now by modeling the seismic waves recorded at seismometers
around the world what happened during this process.
And I want to show you a picture that has several things going on at the same time.
Across the top is distance along the bottom part of the fault, where the major amount
of energy was released.
And going down the figure is the depth from the surface down beneath the top of the ocean
down to where the rupture occurred.
The different colors show the amount of rupture that occurred.
Blue is almost no slip and red goes as high as 20 meters, 2,000 centimeters.
So that's about 65 feet of slip along the fault.
And the numbers represent the time and seconds after the initial rupture.
Well, what happened right at the earthquake is initially 35 kilometers beneath the surface,
the ground began to slip.
So the Indian plate began to slide down underneath Sumatra.
And that tear began to spread outward.
Now, the slip was always downward, but the tear, where the rupture occurred, spread outward.
But a very interesting thing happened.
About 30 seconds after the earthquake, you'll notice the contour is all in the region of
blue.
That's no slip.
In other words, the earthquake almost stopped.
If it had stopped at that point, it would have been just one of hundreds of moderate
to large sized earthquakes that occur every year.
No one would ever have taken notice.
However, this fault hadn't ruptured in a long time and the stress state was ready to
go.
And 40, 50 seconds after the initial rupture, the earthquake began to ramp up again and
it began to tear more rapidly.
By about 60 seconds after the earthquake began, one minute later, you can see the contours
are in the green level.
So now the earth is slipping about 10 meters down.
Indian plate is slipping 10 meters underneath the ground by 90 seconds later, a minute and
half after the start of the earthquake.
You have a situation where the rupture is now tearing up into the sea floor, beginning
to create a tsunami.
At this point, the maximum amount of rupture about 20 meters is occurring.
And then as you go on, 120 seconds, two minutes, three minutes and onward, the earthquake continued
to tear northward, ripping into the ocean sea floor, generating a tsunami.
So for the first time, we can really get an accurate understanding of how the earthquake
occurred and how that rupture tore all the way across the fault underground.
Now when all was done, the earthquake had ruptured a distance of about 1,600 kilometers.
But because the energy was released so slowly and took so long to occur, it actually took
several weeks for seismologists to determine its true magnitude.
The reason this happens is when an earthquake occurs over much larger areas, the rupture
happens in a much longer period.
For a very small earthquake, you get a very quick snap, sometimes lasting only seconds.
But if you have a very long fault, it takes a long time for the earthquake to tear.
And as a result, the energy is released at very long periods that aren't detected by
most global seismometers.
So interestingly, even though we knew that earthquake had occurred minutes after, because
of the real-time monitoring of earthquakes, we didn't realize how big it was until quite
a bit later.
In fact, we didn't realize its size until we could actually measure its normal mode
oscillations that it registered for the whole planet.
Let me explain.
Any object that oscillates, oscillates in a set of modes, whether you're talking about
a piano string or a bell or a gong.
You have a fundamental note that rings with a whole set of overtones.
Those overtones are what physicists call the modes of the oscillating object.
This is the reason why a middle A on a piano sounds different than an A note on a gong.
Both of them have an A that oscillates at 440 hertz.
But they have different overtones, different modes that give the sound a different richness
where your ear can distinguish them.
For a large earthquake, the seismic waves that circle the earth for weeks or even months
or years after an earthquake cause the whole earth to begin to reverberate, just like a
gong.
Let me give you an example.
Suppose I actually take a gong and strike it.
What just happened there?
Well, I hit the gong at a single point, that's like the earthquake, and any bacteria on the
surface of this gong just experienced a shattering earthquake here.
But the gong is circular in shape.
The waves go to the end, they don't disappear, they come back again, and they reverberate
crossing each other multiple times.
And that causes the whole gong to begin to vibrate at particular notes.
When I hit it, there's a general sound of lots of oscillation occurring, but if you
listen afterwards, there's a very pure tone.
That tone is the fundamental note and some of the overtones.
Now it turns out earth oscillates just like that gong.
It has a fundamental note.
In fact, the note for the earth is an E, only it's 20 octaves below middle E on a piano.
It corresponds to the surface of the earth going up for 27 minutes and coming down for
27 minutes.
It has a period of 54 minutes.
Now we can't hear that low.
However, let me play something interesting for you.
Okay?
Let me play that one more time.
Listen carefully.
What I just played for you was the first four months of earth's oscillations following the
Sumatra earthquake, but sped up at a rate that we could hear it.
What you just heard wasn't a gong, though it sounds just like a gong.
If you take the earth and you could listen to it at the frequencies at which it vibrates,
it sounds like it's oscillating just like a bell or a gong.
Well, why is this important?
It turns out that being able to detect the modes of earth's oscillations has actually
given us our important information about what the inside of the earth is made of.
In fact, I've talked about how the inner core of the earth is actually made of solid iron.
Well, the way we know that is not from waves that we measure passing through it, but actually
from the oscillations of these modes.
We've been able to determine much of the details of the inner structure of our planet.
For the Sumatra earthquake, however, being able to measure the vibration of the modes
gave us the size of that earthquake, and we realized that it was a magnitude 9.3, essentially
the third largest earthquake that had ever been measured.
Equivalent to about 25,000 gigatons of TNT, or the total amount of energy consumed by
the entire U.S. in all manners in almost a thousand years.
Now the earthquake was large enough to trigger other earthquakes and volcanoes as well.
This actually happens quite commonly, where a large earthquake will change the whole stress
field over large distances and can cause other earthquakes nearby.
There were thousands of aftershocks of the Sumatra earthquake, many of them huge.
In fact, an aftershock that occurred in March of 2005 on the adjacent part of the same fault
boundary, the same place where the Indian Ocean is sinking beneath Sumatra, but just
to the south of the large December earthquake had an 8.7 earthquake.
It's an aftershock of the Sumatra, the 2004 earthquake, but it actually was the seventh
largest earthquake ever recorded.
The shaking also triggered volcanism at Mount Talang in Sumatra and also at Tobovolcano.
And it turned out, in fact, as the seismic waves from the Sumatra earthquake passed Alaska,
it actually caused small pulses of volcanism at Mount Rangel.
In other words, the displacements were large enough, even many thousands or tens of thousands
of kilometers away that it could actually trigger small volcanic activity.
In fact, it's even predicted that the sudden slip of the Indian Ocean beneath Sumatra
actually changed Earth's moment of inertia and because of the conservation of angular
momentum would have shortened the length of the day by about 2.7 microseconds.
In other words, theoretically, it's actually too small for us to measure, our days are
a tiny bit shorter because of that single earthquake.
Now the tectonic setting I've talked about already, it's the same process that brought
India into Asia.
It's the Indian Ocean's subducting beneath part of Eurasia, actually beneath a fragment
of Eurasia called the Burma microplate.
The island arc volcanism has created these massive curved islands of Sumatra and Java.
In fact, the entire island of Sumatra is essentially 100 million years worth of island
arc volcanism but the slip of this plate creates these large earthquakes and they happen continuously
century after century.
Now the earthquakes in oceanic regions have an added hazard.
They are capable of creating enormous tsunamis if they are big and shallow and long in duration
and what happens is tsunamis result from anything that disturbs the ocean sea floor.
This can be earthquakes, volcanoes or even underwater landslides.
Remember previously I talked about the legend of Atlantis perhaps being tied to the eruption
of Mount Thera and the destruction of Santorini and parts of Crete.
That was a tsunami that resulted from the disruption of the ocean sea floor.
Until here we have a sudden earthquake slip and it lifts the ocean sea floor up and it's
different from a seismic wave of an earthquake.
This is a gravity wave.
You simply lift a massive amount of water up and it flows away.
Now an interesting process occurs, well I say interesting it's deadly if you live on
the shore nearby.
In the deep ocean when the water is very deep the tsunami tends to be very, very wide.
The one wavelength of the tsunami can be a thousand kilometers wide and it's not very
high it may only be inches.
So if you're a boat out in the ocean for the tsunami you didn't even notice that a tsunami
passed.
However as the tsunami approaches shore the wave slows down, the water narrows and remember
a wave is nothing but traveling energy and energy has to be conserved.
So if the wave gets shorter in width and the water gets lower how do you conserve the
energy?
You make the wave higher.
So the wave that's not noticeable in the ocean can be huge, tens of meters high when
it reaches the shore and when it actually breaks upon the shore you get a run up that
can carry that tsunami in some cases kilometers up the shoreline destroying, wiping away everything
in its path.
Now tsunamis don't happen often but when they are they can be catastrophic.
One of the best known occurred off the coast of Lisbon in 1755 from the large earthquake
that occurred there.
If you're familiar with Voltaire's book Candide you know that many bad things happen to Candide
but one of them was after he had discovered all this gold in Eldorado he had it in a boat
off the coast of Lisbon and the tsunami from the earthquake wiped out the harbor and sank
his ship with all the gold in it.
Interestingly the last tsunami that had happened in the area of the Indian Ocean was not from
an earthquake but was from a volcano.
The eruption of Krakatoa in 1883 created a massive tsunami that washed throughout the
Indian Ocean.
In fact it was probably larger than the tsunami from the Sumatra earthquake.
Tsunamis weren't as high but it still killed more than 36,000 people living nearby in Java.
The other thing that can cause large tsunamis I mentioned is underwater landslides.
We call these turbidity flows and it's a very interesting process where sediment that's
eroded off the land builds up off shore until it becomes unstable.
The slope becomes too steep and that sediment can rush down the slopes of the land even
though it can be very shallow only a few degrees and dip.
These flows can occur catastrophically and can cover hundreds of thousands of square
kilometers in a matter of minutes.
Some of the most catastrophic events in the Atlantic Ocean have happened by this mechanism.
For instance in the Norwegian Sea about 6,100 BCE an enormous underwater slide is called
the Sturrega Slide.
It's thought to have caused a mega tsunami that would have washed throughout the Atlantic.
We see geologic evidence going back in time of perhaps even larger ones around islands
like the Cape Verde and Canary Islands.
In fact, it's thought that one particular enormous underwater landslide along the shore
along the just offshore of La Palma Island in the Canary Islands could possibly have
created a tsunami that would have been more than 100 feet high when it reached the coast
of North America.
Again imagine today one of these massive tsunamis more than 100 feet high washing across Manhattan.
It's not beyond the range of possibility.
If you look at other places around the Atlantic Ocean, for instance, if you look along the
Puerto Rico Trench we see from underwater sonar imaging these long tongues of sediment
that have slipped down in catastrophic events.
The danger is enough that following the Sumatra earthquake the US government has actually begun
the process of putting in a tsunami warning system in the Atlantic.
Again probably not for a large earthquake but perhaps from one of these large underwater
landslides.
Now the 2004 tsunami hit Sumatra the hardest right where it occurred but it also caused
deaths in many other areas and that's because tsunamis can spread out over enormous distances.
The tsunami ended up being strongest heading directly westward.
Why?
Because it was primarily a north-south line of rupture.
The earthquake ruptured fairly quickly creating a line of displacement of the ocean water
and that water washed westward.
More than 50,000 people died in Sri Lanka and India to the west.
Now right near Sumatra the devastation was enormous.
For instance if you look at places like Banda Eche along the Sumatran coast before and after
you can see not only are roads and houses gone but the land itself at times is entirely
missing.
It's been just simply removed.
The enormous strength of that water came out and tore out the entire region.
If you go westward and southward however you can see that the waves propagate in quite
a complex manner.
What's quite dangerous in the case of a tsunami is even if you were let's say on the west
side of Sri Lanka protected by the island from Sumatra you still could have been destroyed
from the tsunami.
Why?
Because the tsunami waves don't act like particles of energy heading out in straight lines.
Their waves and waves can diffract right around the corners of islands and peninsulas.
So the Sumatra tsunami headed across the Indian Ocean and wrapped right around the island
of Sri Lanka causing tremendous devastation even on the back side or on the west side
of India.
The tsunami wave just traveled right up the Indian coast.
Interestingly the waves from tsunamis turn out to be very strongly focused by ocean
the thymetry.
In other words the depth of the ocean seawater.
So the waves don't just spread out evenly in all directions.
They tend to focus their energy along regions where the seafloor is a little bit shallower.
Interestingly enough if you look at a map of where that tsunami energy traveled about
the entire oceans and they really did go everywhere.
They reach the west coast of North America about 24 hours after the initial earthquake.
You find that these waves were focused often along the shallowest parts of the ocean seafloor.
One of the shallowest parts they're the mid ocean ridges.
So it turns out that the east coast of Africa, Somalia, got hit badly by the Sumatra Tsunami.
Why?
Because that wave got channeled by some of the shallow regions of the Indian Ocean spreading
ridge.
Some of that energy also propagated right down the spreading ridge between Africa and Antarctica
and in fact was felt strongly in places in Brazil like Rio de Janeiro.
The damage was tremendous in nearby Thailand as well.
That was one of the places that was worst hit by the tsunami.
Now if we go back to some of the previous large earthquakes we see this process repeatedly
happening.
For instance, the largest earthquake we've ever measured in recent times was the 1960
Chile earthquake.
That earthquake also caused a huge tsunami that spread out.
It's the same kind of an earthquake.
It's a subduction zone earthquake where the ocean seafloor is sinking shallowly underneath
South America just like the case of the subduction of the Juan de Fuca plate beneath North America
or the Indian plate beneath Sumatra.
In this case as well when the tsunami spread out it got focused by the particular shape
of the Pacific seafloor.
Because you have places like Tahiti, French Polynesia, these islands elevated in the middle
of the Pacific it actually caused the seismic waves to bend right around and get focused
behind.
What's on the globe behind the French Polynesia from Chile, Japan.
And ironically even though Japan is on the opposite side of the Pacific Ocean from Chile
it got damaged quite badly from that earthquake.
I still remember striking images of villages like Onagawa, Japan being devastated by waves
washing across them, destroying houses from an earthquake that happened all the way across
the Pacific.
During that 1960 Chile earthquake one of the worst places hit was Hilo Harbor in Hawaii.
And we also learned a particularly deadly lesson about tsunamis.
Turns out that when tsunamis spread across the ocean seafloor they have a particular
characteristic that's especially deadly, they disperse.
And in seismology what that means is they break up into separate waves.
Now there's one rupture that creates an initial wave front but as that wave front travels
across the seafloor it begins to break up into a series of waves.
What does that mean?
It means the first wave that reaches the shore in a distant area is not the last one
and is usually not the largest.
In the case of Hilo the tsunami from the Chile 1960 earthquake arrived just after midnight.
It was only about four feet high.
And then the water pulled back.
And then about a half hour later the next wave came in, about ten feet high.
And we're still not done.
The water pulled back again and about twenty five minutes after that the largest wave more
than fourteen feet high washed into the harrow, destroying bridges, washing away buildings.
And so it turns out that you know this is incredibly dangerous because after the large
wave hits many people rush out to try to rescue others who might be stranded or trapped.
And then they in turn are subject to even worse catastrophe from a larger wave that
might follow later.
Now in the case of the Sumatra earthquake perhaps the greatest tragedy at a human level
is that this could have been prevented if we had had a tsunami warning system in place.
Seismic waves, as I mentioned previously, travel much faster than tsunamis.
A P wave through the mantle travels at eighteen thousand miles an hour, a tsunami only travels
at about five hundred miles an hour.
So there's plenty of time to issue a warning and evacuate shorelines.
Seismologists around the world knew within fifteen minutes that an enormous and potentially
deadly earthquake had happened along the coast of Sumatra.
But there was nothing for these scientists to do with that information.
There was no infrastructure set up within the Indian Ocean.
What's a seismologist going to do?
Pick up a phone book for Sri Lanka and start dialing numbers.
It's quite possible to put in one of these warning systems.
In fact one exists in the Pacific Ocean.
It involves several aspects.
It involves seismometers all the way around the Pacific that can record the exact time
and location and depth of the earthquake.
But it also involves pressure sensors called darts that are mechanisms that are put on
the bottom of the seafloor that can actually detect the increase in pressure when a tsunami
passes on top of them.
They're connected by a cable to a floating buoy.
And so when that higher pressure is recorded telling them that a tsunami has occurred,
that information is brought up to the buoy, broadcast out by satellite, by radio to satellites.
That information is transferred directly to tsunami warning centers and a warning can
be broadcast throughout the oceanic region allowing shorelines to be evacuated.
This sort of a situation should have been put in the Indian Ocean given its past history
of large earthquakes.
It's now being installed and hopefully will be fully working by the time the next large
earthquake or volcano occurs there.
So in the past two lectures I've given you a sense of the kind of dramatic geologic events
that have occurred at convergent plate boundaries at subduction zones.
Now if you've experienced any of these catastrophes yourself first hand, it really might make
your whole world you lean towards catastrophism.
The idea that the whole world and all of life changes suddenly as the result of a single
geologic event.
However, if you take a longer view, you realize that for the earth this is really just business
as usual, century after millennium, after millions of years, these massive catastrophic
volcanoes, earthquakes and tsunamis have continuously occurred.
Long before there were people, whatever was around, mammoths, dinosaurs and whatever creatures
lived were either killed or terrified by them.
But they're just the process of plate motions, it's just how the earth works.
To us, in our very short lifespans, we see these as incredibly catastrophic events.
But if you take the long view, if you look over hundreds of thousands or millions or
hundreds of thousands of millions of years, they are happening continuously, one after
the other.
And they are just the way that the plates move about and in particular the way they collide
at subduction zones, the most active geologic places on the planet.
Now in the next two lectures, I'm going to take that long view, I'm going to look at
the long history of plate motions and interactions, first for the whole global pattern of plate
motions and then for North America in particular and try to give you a sense of how we actually
end up with the outlines of the continents that we see today.
How did North America actually look like the continent exists today?
It happened primarily through a long history of collisions with other continents and each
of those collisions would have involved countless, enormous earthquakes and volcanoes that are
just part of the whole process of creating continents and making them into the land that
we see today.
