Music
Welcome.
In this lecture, I want to talk about the history of plate motions.
I'm getting ready to make a shift in the course,
moving from the interior processes of the Earth to the surface geology that we see.
And I need to step back first and take stock of where we've come.
I've talked a lot about all the different forces and processes that have made the land,
created the continents.
And I'm going to start talking about the forces that shape it.
But first, I need to take two lectures to combine what we've learned so far
and see what it is that we've ended up with.
What are the specific continents that will be shaped by rain and streams and ice and wind?
The agents of geology that are going to shape them and mold them into something new.
Here, I'm going to talk about global plate motions, creating the continents.
And in the next lecture, I'm going to specifically talk about the history of North America
and how it was formed.
After all, humans just like to know where they've been and where they're going.
Now, James Hutton, the father of modern geology, the founder of uniformitarianism,
said that Earth geology presented no vestige of a beginning, no prospect of an end,
and nowhere is that more applicable than in the continuous motions of the plates.
Remember, we're dealing with enormously long periods of time.
Remember the analogy by John McPhee that I talked about?
If your arm represented the history of the Earth with the Earth beginning at the shoulder
and your finger at the end, one wipe of an emery board would erase all of human history.
We're dealing with an incredible amount of time,
and the plates have gone through tremendous amounts of interactions and motions.
The steady, consistent motions of the plates have gone into making our continents what we see them today.
Now, we can measure currently the motions of the plates in two ways,
either using GPS systems, this is the global positioning satellites,
more than 24 satellites that move around Earth's surface at about 20,000 kilometers above the surface.
Working together, they can tell you small motions between regions relative to this network of satellites.
We also use a system called VLBI, very long baseline interferometry,
and this actually uses radio waves from pulsars out in space
and looks at how those pulsars are recorded, again at a network across the surface of the Earth.
But how do we go back in time?
Well, I already talked about the existence of these paleo-magnetic stripes on the ocean sea floor,
and they've given us a record of the motions of the continents going back almost to 200 million years.
And actually, I just have to say as an aside,
it's actually been very important that these two different techniques have given us the same values.
In other words, if you look at the motions of the plates over the past five million years or so,
taken from paleo-magnetic stripes,
and you compare them to the current motions of the plates that we get from GPS and VLBI,
you get almost the exact same values.
In other words, the continents move steadily.
They don't happen in fits and starts.
Earthquakes slide, but if you look at the interiors of plates,
those same steady motions that happen over decades also happen over many millions of years.
Okay, I have to ask an interesting question at this point before we go any further.
What are we going to measure all these motions relative to?
Remember Einstein?
Everything's all motions are relative.
You need a reference frame to measure your velocities and distances in.
For instance, right now at this very moment, you are stationary wherever you are watching this.
But you're also moving around Earth's axis at about a thousand kilometers an hour.
And you're also moving around the Sun with the rest of the Earth at about 30 kilometers a second.
That's about 100,000 kilometers an hour.
And you're also moving around the center of the Milky Way with the rest of the solar system
at about 220 kilometers a second.
That's about 800,000 kilometers per hour.
And the Milky Way is also moving relative to surrounding galaxies at about 550 kilometers a second.
That's about 2 million kilometers per hour.
And the whole universe is expanding near the speed of light.
So how fast are you moving?
With respect to what, you need to define a frame of reference.
And we need to do the same thing for plate tectonics.
We need to pick a reference frame.
But here's the problem.
We can't go down into the mantle and stick a pole there and measure the plate motions relative to it.
So we take two general approaches.
We use relative plate velocities and absolute plate velocities.
Now, the relative plate velocities are simply the motions between any two plates.
So for instance, the North American plate is moving away from Eurasia at about an inch a year.
We don't care what the rest of the world or the mantle is doing.
That's a relative plate velocity.
However, if we want to get a sense of what North America is doing relative to the interior of the Earth,
that's an absolute plate velocity, and that's harder to do.
For absolute plate velocities, we have essentially two options.
The traditional way has always been using a hotspot reference frame.
And here, this assumes that the hotspot volcanoes that we see at the surface are fixed with respect to the mantle in each other.
Remember, hotspots were not fixed with respect to each other, so this is a little bit of a problem.
But they're close.
Hotspots, as we see in volcanoes like Hawaii and Iceland, seem to be moving with respect to each other on the order of millimeters a year,
whereas the plates move with respect to each other on the order of centimeters a year.
So to an order of magnitude, they're pretty good.
But you have to find the average of hotspot locations.
In order to do that, you have to figure out which hotspots you're going to use.
And to do that, you have to figure out what's a hotspot.
Remember, we had a whole big debate as to which of the volcanoes at Earth's surface were hotspots or not.
So maybe we need another method.
The other method is called the no-net rotation reference frame.
And it's a little bit simpler.
It says all the motions at the surface taken together are going to be mysteriously moving in a particular direction with respect to the inside of the mantle.
So if you take the average of all the plates, that average should represent whatever's going on in the mantle.
Fortunately, these two methods give us about the same answer.
And so we're able to get a pretty good sense of where the plates are moving currently with respect to the inside of the Earth.
OK, that's fine. But here's another problem.
Our oceans only go back to about 200 million years.
So we can get detailed plate motions currently and going back to 200 million years.
But to go beyond that, we have to find another method.
And that other method is called continental paleomagnetism.
Now, it uses the same principle that allowed us to determine the ages of the ocean seafloor.
The fact that when rock cools after it forms, it freezes in the magnetic field.
But here what we're going to do is determine the latitude at which a continental rock forms using the inclination of the magnetic field lines.
Let me explain.
Earth magnetic field is primarily dominated by a dipolar field.
Remember the field that looks like it's created from a bar magnet or a solenoid with a north and a south magnetic pole.
Our magnetic field is fairly symmetric about Earth's axis.
But the magnetic field lines change their tilt at different places on the surface of the Earth.
And that tilt is known as the inclination.
For instance, currently if you go to the equator, the inclination of the magnetic field lines is about zero.
They're horizontal. They're parallel to the surface.
As you move towards the north pole, however, the inclination increases until you get to the magnetic north pole and they're vertical.
It's at 90 degrees.
So if you have an igneous rock that forms somewhere on land, as it cools below a certain point,
and remember that point was called the carry point, it freezes in the direction of the magnetic field into that rock and it gives you a paleo latitude.
It tells you from the tilt of the magnetic field lines frozen in the rock what the latitude of that rock was when it formed.
Why just a latitude? Why not a longitude?
Well, remember Earth's magnetic field, this dipolar field is primarily entirely symmetric around Earth's axis.
So you can move different areas, different regions in longitude and you still have the same inclination.
You can't tell from the rock what longitude it formed at.
But here's the good thing about it.
Once the rock forms and hardens and freezes in the magnetic field, as those plates move about, they've retained the magnetic field within them.
And by taking that direction of the magnetic field and rotating it back so that the lines of the magnetic field within the rock line up with the magnetic field that exists today,
you can determine how far the rock has moved in latitude and how much it has rotated.
Now, once you find the age of the rock, you then have some record of its motion from when it formed to where it is today.
If you do this for lots of rocks, you then have a record of ancient plate motions.
Now, you have to be careful. It's not quite as simple as that because metamorphism can reset the magnetic field if the temperature of the rock increases above that carry point.
This is dangerous because the rock can remain solid and not melt, but it can now have a magnetic field that is formed at the time that that metamorphic event occurred.
So, you're not dating the age of the rock, you're dating the age of the metamorphic event.
So, where we get around that is to just take lots of measurements all over the place and hopefully things average out.
Or what you do is you take the oldest dates in the region and those are going to be the dates at which the rock formed and was not metamorphosed by some later event.
Okay, now we have another problem. How do you find the age of the rock?
Well, the easy answer we already talked about in the lecture on geologic time.
You use radiometric dating, the decay of radioactive elements. However, in reality, to actually do this is quite hard.
Let me give you an example. We know that uranium will decay to lead and this happens in two different ways because we have two different isotopes of uranium.
We have that are quite common. Uranium 238 and uranium 235. Uranium 238 will decay into a particular isotope of lead called uranium 206 or called lead 206.
And again, the 206 there is the sum of all the neutrons and protons in the nucleus.
That decay process has a half-life of about four and a half billion years.
Well, that's really convenient because our planet is four and a half billion years old.
So since the start of the earth, about half of the uranium has decayed into lead, so you have a lot of both around.
So if you can find a rock with the uranium and lead, there's enough to measure.
The other isotope of uranium, uranium 235, decays into lead 207 and that has a half-life of about 700 million years.
It decays much more quickly, but still there's plenty of uranium 235 left around.
And when you use both of these processes together, it actually gives you a much more accurate age.
However, there is a problem. We have to find the uranium and the lead.
Well, how do you do this? Well, you need to find a particular mineral that will hold the uranium within its mineral structure, which is not very common,
and that won't let the lead escape over time, so it's got to be something hard.
And it turns out the best crystal is zircon. Zircon's very hard, it's actually harder than quartz,
and it will hold uranium and lead in it for billions of years.
Well, how do we get a zircon crystal? Zircon's quite rare.
Well, I've seen two colleagues of mine, Bob Tucker and Dwight Bradley, go through this process.
These two geologists try to figure out the ages of tectonic events such as when the Appalachian Mountains formed in New England,
and they do this by taking granite boulder from New Hampshire and isolating a few zircon crystals.
They take the boulders and they put them in a jaw crusher that grinds the rock up into gravel-sized pieces.
Then they take the gravel and they run it through a roller mill that crushes the rock into sand-sized particles.
Then they go through a set of processes to try to isolate the zircon.
They put it across a particular table, a shaking table called a wilfully table, that separates rocks generally by density.
Zircon is fairly dense, it has a density of 4.65 grams per centimeter cubed,
so you throw away rocks that are much more dense or much less dense.
Then you take that sand and you bring it across a magnetic table that pulls out minerals
that might be rich in iron and magnesium.
Then to isolate just the zircon crystals, you put the zircon in two different liquids, one after the other,
one that has a density just less than zircon and then the other that has a density just more than zircon.
And what's left after this whole process is a small number of zircon crystals that you've isolated from a large block of granite.
But you're not done yet because then you have to find zircons that might not be contaminated.
This involves looking at the zircons with a microscope and picking the best ones out with a pair of tiny tweezers.
Then because the edges of the zircon crystals can be contaminated, you have to grind those down and abrade them.
And then you take your final zircons and you want to count the individual lead in uranium atoms.
Well, how do you do that? You dissolve the zircons in hydrochloric acid and shoot the whole thing through a mass spectrometer.
It's a device that actually uses the differences in weight of lead and uranium atoms in order to individually count the uranium and lead atoms and get an age.
It's actually quite a complicated process.
It takes about a month, in fact, to turn a boulder of granite into uranium and lead atoms that can give us the age of the rock.
But if you combine the rock age from this with the paleomagnetic information about the location, along with other geologic evidence such as the development of mountains and basins
or the occurrence of rifting or volcanism, you can actually begin to piece back the history of plates.
It's a very long process, but it's given us information about where our plates have gone.
Now, perhaps the biggest problem here is simply as you go back in time, there are fewer and fewer rocks.
And so the images, the maps that we make of the locations of the continents get progressively more uncertain as we go back in time.
We can go back to now about 750 million years in terms of determining the locations of the plates.
Now, apparent evidence is that our rocks have been at Earth's surface for more than four billion years.
Actually, crystals have been found that are even older.
There are individual zircon crystals that have ages that go back to 4.4 billion years.
In other words, rocks were already surviving back then.
But there are just so few of these rocks, it's very hard to identify what's happened to them.
Starting about four billion years though, we know that the continental crust of material began to accumulate into large bodies at Earth's surface.
And those initial bodies of continental crust, we call cratons.
They're also known as shields.
They are the oldest part of Earth's surface.
Some of these cratons still remain today embedded in the cores of our modern continents.
Continents that have grown in size around those cratons over time.
Now, there's a very common misconception, especially among students, looking at the history of plate motions.
Turns out, Pangea was not the only supercontinent.
It's only the most recent supercontinent.
The earliest supercontinent that we know of was called Valbara.
And it existed at least 3.3 billion years ago, maybe as far back as 3.6 billion years.
It contained within it the Capval craton of South Africa and the Pilbara craton of Western Australia,
perhaps even the very old superior craton of Canada.
That broke up and the continental fragments came back again to form another supercontinent called Kenorland.
That existed between about 2.7 and 2.5 billion years ago.
And when this supercontinent broke up, it created the cratons, the continents Laurentia,
which contains the Canadian and Greenland cratons, Baltica, which contains the core of Scandinavia and Northwest Russia,
and Australia and the Kalahari, the Capval and Zimbabwe cratons.
A more massive supercontinent actually existed between 1.8 and 1.3 billion years ago.
And this was known as Columbia. It's also known as Nuna or Hudsonia.
And many of the world's major mountain belts, orogenic belts, date from this time.
The sutures that attach these old cratons often have a date between 1.8 and 1.3 billion years ago.
At this point, interestingly, India was actually adjacent to Western North America.
And in fact, Australia was next to Western Canada.
During this time, there were extensive amounts of volcanism all around what's North America.
In fact, much of the central and southern parts of what's now the United States
was created by the extensive volcanism that dates to this period.
Going back to about a billion years ago, from about 1 billion years to 800 million years,
there was a large supercontinent called Rodinia.
During this time, the west coast of South America was against eastern North America.
In other words, you could have walked from New York to Patagonia if New York had existed, which it didn't.
Australia and Antarctica were against the western side of what's now the U.S.
In fact, a piece of what would eventually become China actually was adjacent to Western Canada.
Rodinia broke up starting at about 800 million years ago, but it actually never fully broke up.
A large group of continents known as Dundwana stayed fairly intact.
This consisted of Africa, South America, Australia, India, and Antarctica.
Its pieces came together to form the short-lived supercontinent known as Panodia, and then eventually as Pangea.
Now, what I want to do is show you a set of maps, and these maps are really our best guesses
of what the surface distribution of continents looked like going back in the past.
Now, interestingly, the details of the lands are all blank because most of the surface geology
is formed by processes that I haven't talked about yet, erosional processes like wind and rain and glaciers.
So the surfaces have changed so much over time, we have no sense of what they look like.
And the oceans in these images are left blank because we don't have any ocean seafloor that goes back to 750 million years.
The first ocean seafloor that we find today still in existence began after 200 million years ago.
But during these images, you'll start to see lines in the ocean appear, and those are the paleomagnetic seafloor stripes.
First, the very oldest, and then more and more will become evident as I go through time.
Now, if you go back to a map of 750 million years, the first thing you notice is the continents don't look anything like they are due today,
but we can actually isolate and identify some. The continents shown in yellow in the middle of a group of continents is North America.
Now, the Hudson Bay and the Great Lakes are shown drawn on there just to give you a sense of perspective.
Of course, those features didn't exist back then, but it allows you to identify North America as we move through the history of plate motions.
This is at the point where Rodinia is just beginning to break up.
And again, notice South America is adjacent to the coast of what will become Eastern North America,
and we have Australia and Antarctica and a piece of China adjacent to the western coast of North America.
As we go forward in time, we can see that part of Gondola actually began to break apart a little bit,
and the continents began to shift about as you get towards 650 million years and then 600 million years.
You'll notice that the continents come back together again, and this was that short-lived supercontinent known as Panodia.
So most of the continents existed. Note that they are almost exclusively in the southern hemisphere at this point.
There's very little land that's actually in the northern hemisphere.
So we were in a situation where the land was spread apart across the southern hemisphere with nothing but ocean in the northern part.
As we go forward to 550 million years, we begin to see the continents start to break apart.
Small fragments of what will become Siberia and China are now isolated within the middle of the large ocean.
North America is drifting apart, and by 450 million years is colliding with South America again to begin to create the mountains that exist along the east coast of North America.
By 400 million years ago, we begin to see the continents begin to converge again.
Still, we see no evidence of Asia as a continent. The little pieces of Siberia and China, different parts of China, exist as isolated continental fragments surrounded by ocean.
But by 350 million years ago, most of the continents have come together to begin to form Panodia.
Panodia has a very characteristic sea shape, like the letter C, with a small sea, the tethys sea, isolated inside the sea, and surrounding Panodia is a giant ocean called Panthalassa.
That ocean we still see today as the Pacific Ocean, but it's shrinking.
Notice at this point we have all the land on one side of the earth surrounded all around it on the other sides by a giant ocean.
We would have had a very lopsided planet in terms of its rotation. Starting at about 200 million years, we see the continents of Panodia begin to break apart.
At this point, China and Asia have just begun to be assembled and already North America is starting to split away from South America and Africa.
That's really the start of the breakup of Panodia. You also notice it's after 200 million years, so some of the sea floor paleomagnetic stripes are now beginning to appear.
The Atlantic Ocean is growing, Panodia is breaking apart, and now we also see Gondwan finally breaking apart.
We see South America and Africa splitting, and they are breaking away from Antarctica, Australia and India.
India is going to now move very quickly from being attached with Antarctica to colliding into Asia.
By 70 million years, you can see it's still a ways away from Asia, but it's beginning to arrive collapsing up microcontinent fragments, isolated island arcs and smashing them all into Asia.
Madagascar, which had been part of India, now decided to stay with Africa and has long since separated from India.
India is now actively colliding in, creating the Himalayas. Africa is rotating up into Eurasia, closing up the Mediterranean Sea, and the Atlantic Ocean is steadily growing at the expense of the Pacific Ocean.
This creates for us the continents that we see today, and perhaps the most important lesson from this is that there's nothing special about the outlines of our continents or the locations of these continents.
They are simply a snapshot of how our Earth exists today. It's never looked like this before, and it's never going to look like this again.
The continents will continue to move, they will continue to bump into each other, they will change not only their shapes, but their locations.
Now, I mentioned at the beginning of this lecture that humans like to know where they've been and where they're going. So, where are we going? What's going to happen next?
Well, this question is really hard to answer. All we have is the evidence of what the plates have done in the past and the direction that they're going now.
Well, that's pretty good, but essentially all we're going to do is do as well as meteorological forecasters do.
How well do you trust the forecast of what the weather is going to be over the weekend? Well, I'll give you a sense of where I think the plates are going to go, but you have to view my prediction the same way you would view a weather report.
There are so many uncertainties in the chaotic flow of the mantle, we just can't be sure.
Now, we know that the Atlantic Ocean is going to open for a while and the Pacific Ocean is going to close up.
In other words, North America and South America are swinging westward, closing up the Pacific, but we don't know if they'll ever actually collide with Asia,
or whether the Atlantic Ocean is going to develop subduction in the near future and close up again like it has in the past.
We see the African plate swiveling into Eurasia and the Mediterranean is not going to last long, and soon you'll have one large land mass extending from the African plate all the way through Europe and across Asia.
However, we also know that the AFAR hotspot underneath Africa is in the process of breaking the African plate into three separate plates, the Arabian, the African, and the Nubian, and the Somalian plates.
And so Africa is splitting up at the same time it's beginning to collide with Eurasia. So which is going to win out? We don't know.
Now, India is continuing to collide in with Asia, and so the Himalayas are still actively growing, but that process has got to stop at some point.
And when it does, the massive Himalayas will rapidly erode down to become the Appalachians of the future, evidence of tremendous mountains, but not much anymore due to erosion.
However, we're not done in that part of the world because Australia is rapidly moving northward and it's beginning to collapse up Southeast Asia.
The same part of Asia that got squeezed out of the way when India hit is now going to get hit again by Australia as it's going to collapse that whole part of the world and you'll eventually be able to walk directly from Australia into China.
That will be part of one massive supercontinent. Where it goes from there, we still don't have any sense. It's a long ways off in the future, and the best we can do is take our current motions and project them a little ways in the future.
But I can assure you that whatever we see in the future isn't going to look anything like what we've seen in the past or what we see today.
In the next lecture, I'm going to take this story and I'm going to focus in specifically on North America.
And I have to tell you this is going to be a very different kind of a US history lecture than what you might get in another course.
