Welcome. In this lecture, I want to talk about the water cycle. Now, plate tectonics gave
us continents, and it shaped and altered them from all the different plate interactions.
But plate tectonics actually has very little to do with what the surfaces of our continents
look like. That's really the role of water, the water cycle, and behind it the power of
the sun. This is a really important theme of the entire course and the history of our
experiment. Our surface is a battlefield between two powerful heat engines, the interior heat
engine of radioactivity and the flow of heat out of the earth, and the exterior heat engine,
the light from the sun driving the rock cycle and water cycle at the surface. Now, it's
interesting, the surface runs deep here, turns out water extends throughout the earth and
plays important roles not just right at the surface. And water is involved with several
important themes that are going to run throughout the rest of this course. One is the remarkable
properties of water. It's not a coincidence that geology and biology are both dependent
so heavily upon water. Another important theme is just the incredible amount of energy that
is supplied by the sun to power the water cycle and in return in the process the incredible
intricate interconnection between the water cycle and the rock cycle. The processes of
erosion, transportation, and deposition of rock all have water as their foundation. Now,
there are three ways to look at the water cycle, also known as the hydrologic cycle.
These are the reservoirs in which water is stored, the residence times for water in the
different reservoirs and the pathways between them. When I say reservoirs, I'm not talking
about human reservoirs. I mean the different systems in which water exists, oceans, glaciers,
groundwater, lakes, streams, the atmosphere, and the biosphere. And by residence time,
I mean how much time on average does any particular molecule of H2O of water spend within one
of these reservoirs before it follows a pathway out of that reservoir into another? Now, as
you probably know, the ocean is really the foundation for our whole system of water at
Earth's surface. 97.2% of the water at Earth's surface resides within the ocean and you have
a process within the water cycle of evaporation at the surface of the ocean carrying water
vapor onto land where it precipitates out as rain or snow and then it runs across the
land as glaciers or as streams or under the surface of the land as groundwater eventually
flowing back into the ocean again. That's the cycle. Now, it's interesting that though
all of these different reservoirs play important roles, the amount of water that actually exists
with them is incredibly variable and quite surprising. Let me try to use this fish tank
as an example. If this tank of water represents the ocean, 97.2% of the water in the water
cycle, how much actually exists in the other reservoirs? Well, let me try to give you a
practical sense. Glaciers are 2.1%. Most of the water that isn't in ocean, so glaciers
2.1% of the total amount of water that exists in the water cycle. If your ocean is this
fish tank, that corresponds to about 3 cups of ice. That's our glaciers. Most of the water
left over turns out to actually be not on the surface of the land, but in the ground.
That's our groundwater, 0.65% of the total or 2 thirds of 1% of the total water. So that
turns out in the case of the fish tank to be about a cup. So here we have the groundwater,
1 cup's worth. It turns out that the amount of water that exists in the lakes is only
0.017% of the total water cycle. This turns out to be about 1 teaspoons worth. So this
water here, 1 teaspoon represents all the water that exists in all the lakes across the
surface of the land. Now, the amount in the streams turns out to be even less. It's 0.001%
of the total water. And if this is our ocean, that corresponds to about an eighth of a teaspoon
of water. So it's the smallest measurement that I can make here with these spoons. It's
a tiny amount trickling down across the surface of the land. That's the streams. And the atmosphere
through which all of the water has to flow before it rains down upon the land is equal
to 0.001%. There's one more important reservoir, and that's the biosphere. And the biosphere
is such an insignificant amount of water that I can't even represent it. You wouldn't even
be able to see it. And yet, of course, the ironic thing is the biosphere which contains
humans is one of the most active geologic agents.
Now, water is remarkable for a variety of different reasons. First of all, the water
molecule H2O is not symmetrical. It's got an electrically polar structure. In other words,
the two hydrogen atoms hang off the oxygen atom at an angle. So there is a polar, there's
a positive and a negative polar side to the molecule. And this turns out to be very important
because the water ends up able to dissolve other materials. So if you look at the composition
of water, it's not just water. It's H2O with all sorts of other stuff in it. And this is
called a solution. It's water with all sorts of other minerals dissolved within it. And
this is the foundation for geochemistry, and it's also the foundation for biochemistry,
for all of life. For instance, taste your tears or blood. What do they taste like? They're
salty. That salt water is just like the salt water of the ocean. And that salt water forms
the foundation of all of the biochemistry on the surface of our planet. Now, water is
interesting for other reasons as well. It happens to have a very high heat capacity.
What do I mean by this? It takes a lot of energy in order to raise the temperature of
water, even a small amount. And the result is water provides a tremendous amount of thermal
stability to environments. You probably have a sense of this. Where would you expect temperatures
to vary most over the course of a year, somewhere on the inside of a continent or somewhere
along the ocean? Well, it turns out, of course, that the temperature varies much more inside
a continent because you're far from the thermally insulating effects of the ocean. I looked
up some numbers to give you an example. Fargo, North Dakota, in the middle of January, has
a monthly mean temperature of 6.8 degrees. It's pretty cold. But in July, it has a monthly
mean and annual mean temperature of 70.6 degrees. That's a difference of 64 degrees.
But if you go to Hilo, Hawaii, the mean temperature in January is 71.4 degrees. And the mean temperature
in July is 75.9 degrees. That's a difference of only four and a half degrees. Why? Because
Hawaii is in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, and the ocean just doesn't change temperature
very quickly. You need a lot of energy to change the temperature of water, even a small
amount. And even more importantly, you need a tremendous amount of energy to get it to
change its phase. In other words, you need 100 calories to raise 1 gram of water from
zero degrees to 100 degrees Celsius at standard pressure. That's the definition of a calorie.
However, you need almost the same amount, 80 calories, in order to melt 1 gram of water
from zero degrees frozen to zero degrees melted. And it turns out once you get water to the
boiling point, it takes 540 calories to boil off that water. In other words, it takes more
than five times as much energy to boil water as it does to bring water to heat it from
zero degrees, the freezing point, all the way up to the boiling point. No wonder it
takes so long to boil water. It takes a tremendous amount of energy, but in the process it provides
a tremendous amount of environmental stability. Water has another unusual characteristic in
that it expands when it freezes. It's one of the few materials that we know of that
does this. Now, this is often very confusing for students because we've just gone through
the whole process of volcanoes and melting rock. And rock, like most materials, when
you go from a solid to a liquid, when you melt it, it expands. But water just does just
the opposite. When water goes from a liquid to a solid, it expands just the opposite of
what happens with rock. Now, this turns out to be very fortunate for life in streams and
lakes because when water freezes, it becomes more buoyant by about 9 percent and it floats
to the top, forming a layer of ice on top of lakes that insulates the whole rest of
the lake underneath, allowing life to continue under the surface during the cold of winter.
For geology, this has a vitally important role because when that water gets inside rock
and soil and freezes during the winter or at cold temperatures during the night, it expands.
In that process of expansion, we call frost wedging and it is one of the most powerful
agents of erosion and one of the largest reasons that mountains get torn down so quickly.
Now, the start of the hydrologic cycle really begins with evaporation because if you don't
have rain, you don't have any water on land and you need to get water up into the atmosphere
first. And that happens because electromagnetic radiation from the sun, primarily in the form
of visible light and ultraviolet radiation, hits the surface of the water. Now, remember
I talked about the liquid phase of water as being sort of wishy-washy atoms. They keep
forming weak bonds with other molecules and then transferring those weak bonds continuously
but still staying loosely bonded. Well, when they absorb ultraviolet radiation from the
sun, they get enough energy to break those bonds and that then isolates an individual
molecule which flies off the surface. Now, doesn't happen often. You need a lot of energy.
Remember that high heat of vaporization of boiling requires 540 calories per gram. That's
good otherwise the oceans would just be boiling away. But the oceans lose a small amount but
that's enough to keep supplying water up into our atmosphere. The liquid turns into
a gas and it occurs one atom at a time. Now, the sun also drives the thermal convection
in our atmosphere and that's important because otherwise the water vapor wouldn't go anywhere.
And what happens is the heat from the sun drives the convection that carries that water
vapor over land. Now, evaporation therefore happens most rapidly at the equator because
you have more direct sunlight. And even though there's not very much water in the atmosphere
at any given point, remember it was that one single drop, you have all the water of the
water cycle having to flow through it and it does this because it has a very fast residence
time. Water spends less than a day on average in the atmosphere before it precipitates back
out again. In other words, each day the equivalent of a layer of water just two and a half centimeters
thick evaporates into the atmosphere and precipitates out. But that amount of water over time is
enough to power the entire hydrologic cycle. Now, I'll talk later on in lecture 30 about
the unusual patterns of atmospheric circulation. Once you get that water into the atmosphere,
the sun drives a whole set of cycles moving that water about. And there are other factors
as well. The rotation of the earth causes spiraling cyclonic patterns of atmospheric flow. The
exact shapes and distributions of the continents and the oceans play a very important role
and indeed the patterns of ocean currents also greatly affect that atmospheric flow.
The result is, however, that water eventually gets carried over continents and the water
very quickly condenses and precipitates. Condensation is a process where the water vapor
begins to form very tiny water drops, usually nucleating around something like a dust or
salt. These water drops become larger until they become too heavy and they fall out as
precipitation. Now, evaporation is highest at the equator and so is precipitation. For
instance, picture yourself in the tropics or a movie that takes place in a tropical
jungle. What do you picture? It's probably raining in your picture because it just rains
a lot here. There's a huge amount of evaporation and a huge amount of precipitation. And it
actually turns out that most of the rain, most of the water that comes up evaporates
up at the equators, falls right back into the oceans, about 90%. Only 10% of precipitation
actually happens to occur on land. And of that water that falls on land, in fact, most
of it, 75%, gets returned right back into the atmosphere. And it happens through two different
mechanisms, either through evaporation from the land or through transpiration, which is
the process where water gets absorbed into the roots of the plant, carried through the
plant and then transpired out of the leaves of the plant. So, of the precipitation that
happens on land that's not re-evaporated, it turns out very little actually goes into
streams and glaciers. Most of that water, 90%, goes into the groundwater. And the rest,
only 2.5% of all the precipitation on land goes into streams and glaciers. But they do
a tremendous amount of work on the land with that small amount of water that they're supplied
with. And this is one of these important themes that I talked about at the beginning of the
lecture that I'll come back to. There's just an enormous amount of energy in the whole
hydrologic and atmospheric systems. Wind turbines, hydroelectric dams that we install, tap only
the tiniest amount of this energy. Compared to the global human use of energy, the sun
provides a nearly unlimited amount of energy. And I'll talk later on in lecture 45 about
solar power, hydroelectric, wind, biomass, the different ways that we can actually tap
into this incredible source of energy from the sun. Now, we can actually compute the amount
of work water does on land in terms of the amount of energy it actually expends. Turns
out about 400,000 cubic kilometers of water evaporates into the atmosphere each year.
This is a cube of water about 75 kilometers on a side. This is a tremendous amount of
work that sunlight has to do in order to provide the gravitational potential energy to lift
this water up off of the ocean seafloor and lift it into the atmosphere. Imagine lifting
a cube of water 75 kilometers on a side. That's 50 miles on a side. Now, once that water's
on land, which has a mean elevation of about 875 meters, a little bit less than a kilometer,
that water flows down and converts the gravitational potential energy into the kinetic energy of
flowing rivers and then eventually into the energy of work, the friction, the work that
that water does shaping the earth's surface. It turns out that amount of energy is equivalent
to two and a half times 10 to the 20 joules per year. Now, a joule, that's our standard
unit of energy. And to give you some comparison, one joule is the amount of energy it would
take to raise something small, let's say a plum, one meter up into the air. So two and
a half times 10 to the 20 joules per year is the same as 250 billion billion joules
or 250 billion billion plums all lifted one meter up into the air. It's the equivalent
of a one kilometer high waterfall with about 50 Mississippi rivers flowing over it. Now,
if we move through our systems, let's talk about glaciers for a moment. It turns out
that glaciers have a volume of, as I said, just 2.1% of the total. But that's 80% of
all the fresh water, the water that's not salty, not salty sea water. And most of the
glaciers are currently located on Greenland and Antarctica. But it turns out that the
reservoir of glacial ice fluctuates most of all the different systems. During warm times,
there are no glaciers at all. There's no ice stored up on land. During cold times, there's
a tremendous amount. And what this does is it drives the sea levels up and down, which
turns out to be incredibly important for geology. I mean, if the glaciers melted entirely
now, global sea level would rise about 70 meters. That's about 230 feet. Well, that
doesn't sound like a lot, but that would put the mouth of the Mississippi River near Illinois.
I mean, thank goodness my university in St. Louis is at 450 feet. We'll be pretty close
to being beachfront property. During recent ice ages, when there was so much ice on land,
global sea level was about 120 meters lower. Just 20,000 years ago, the sea level was almost
400 feet lower than it is today. Now, the system of groundwater has most of the water
that's fresh water that's not in the glaciers. It's only two thirds of 1% of the total,
but it's most of the water that's in a liquid form on land. And the groundwater is actually
contained within the tiniest pore spaces of rock and soil. A very, very small amount of
this is in the soil itself, right near the surface. And it's usually either percolating
down to the larger groundwater table or it's absorbed by plants. Most of the groundwater
actually exists within the rock of the crust itself, either absorbed within the minerals
or existing along the boundaries between the mineral grains. The residence time for
water in the ground is much longer than for the atmosphere or streams. It can be months
if it's in the soil, but it can be hundreds to thousands of years if it gets down into
the rock of the crust. Lakes in comparison have such a tiny amount
of water, 0.017% of the total water. But it's interesting, it's half distributed between
freshwater lakes and half as saline basins, salty basins. The freshwater lakes will eventually
drain back to the ocean and the saline basins don't. They lose their water either to the
ground or back to the atmosphere through evaporation. Let me give you an example of saline basins.
I've talked about that already. Remember when I talked about how the dead sea in Israel
formed by the pulling apart of a basin along the dead sea transform fall? Well, the water
that flows into the dead sea never flows back to the ocean. It just evaporates, making the
dead sea become incredibly salty. The Caspian Sea is actually the largest saline basin.
Utah's Great Salt Lake is another good example. And the reason that the basins get so salty
is that, now remember, water isn't just water. It's H2O, it's hydrogen and oxygen with a
lot of other stuff dissolved in it. And the water contains these dissolved salts and rocks.
When they flow into a basin like the dead sea, the salts accumulate because they don't evaporate.
Evaporation only brings the water up, leaving the salts behind. And over time, the salts
begin to accumulate higher and higher. Let me give you an example. The Mississippi River
carries about a half billion tons of rock to the ocean every year. About 300 million
tons of this is in the form of solid sediment, but about 200 million tons is actually dissolved
rock that exists as separate positive and negative ions in solution within the water.
You can't see it in the water, but the atoms are all in there. When streams go into a closed
basin, the water evaporates as fast or faster than it enters and the salts accumulate. Normal
ocean water contains about 3.5% salt as a percent of its total weight, mostly in the
form of sodium chloride, table salt, but also salts of magnesium, sulfur, calcium and potassium.
Well, a place like the dead sea has the water there is 31% salt. It's 9 times saltier than
the ocean. In fact, the only place that we know of saltier is Lake Assal in Djibouti.
Now, water can't get indefinitely salty. The reason is that the dissolved minerals will
begin to precipitate out at some point. In other words, they actually will begin to form
crystals of new rocks that occur when the water leaves that solution. You've seen that
in daily life. If you leave water in a bowl for too long and that water evaporates out,
it leaves a white powdery residue. Where does that residue come from? Well, the water that
comes out of your tap isn't just water. It has all sorts of minerals dissolved in it,
some from the ground, some from your pipes. You can't see it when it's dissolved in water,
remove the water and that we call it a precipitate. The powdery material that's left over begins
to form. Well, if you have this occurring over geologic time in a basin, you can accumulate
a tremendous amount of salt. Interesting, if you take an airplane and you fly across
the western United States, places like Nevada and Wyoming, across the basin and range, you
see something very interesting. You see whole sets of alternating mountain ridges. Remember
there are these ranges of mountains from when the continent got pulled apart. But inside
the basins, you often see white. That white is salt that forms at the bottom of these
basins from rainfall. There's not a lot of rain in these regions. The temperature is
quite high. The rain that falls on the mountains dissolves salts out of the hills, washes them
to the bottom of the basin, and then when the water evaporates off, it leaves that salt
behind. These are called plias, and they can be quite large and develop large salt flats
that can span quite large regions. Now, one of the largest regions of salt in North America
is the Great Salt Lake of Utah. This is a huge closed basin that doesn't drain to the
ocean, and salt has accumulated to very thick levels there. But interestingly, this didn't
occur from a gradual process, just the continual cycle of rain washing salts out of the mountains.
Within the state of Utah, back at the time of the end of the last ice age, Utah was
covered with water. There were enormous inland seas there that were the result of that huge
runoff of water from the melting of the glaciers. As those lakes evaporated away because they
don't drain to the ocean, the salt accumulated thick layers, the Bonneville Salt Flats, the
Great Salt Lake, and you get these thick layers of remarkably flat salt extending for miles.
In fact, these salt flats are so flat that they're actually used for testing rocket-powered
cars. In other words, they're the best place on earth where you can go for mile after
mile on an area that's incredibly perfectly flat.
There's one last reservoir that I haven't talked much about, and that's the deep earth.
Now, we know almost nothing about this. Either how much water is in the reservoir of the
deep earth or what its resonance time is. But we do know that not all subducted water
comes back up at subduction zones. Some of it is trapped in the ocean crust and gets
sent way down deep into the mantle. Now, this is actually work that I've done with my research
group at Washington University using a special type of seismic tomography that looks at the
rate at which seismic energy gets damped out that gets muffled as it moves through the
earth. This process called seismic attenuation is very sensitive to temperature, but it's
also very sensitive to the amount of water that exists in the ground. And what we found
is actually a huge region all above the Pacific Ring of Fire subduction zone. A region from
about 700 kilometers down to about 1400 kilometers that sits right on top of those subducted
ocean plates. And this region has incredibly high attenuation, meaning the seismic waves
from earthquakes lose their energy to friction very rapidly as they go through this whole
ring sitting right on top of the old ancient subducted sea floor. And we've gone through
a whole set of possibilities, and it's most likely due to water actually being pumped
back down into the lower mantle. Now, even if that region contains only one tenth of
one percent of the rock as water, it would still have as much water as the Arctic sea.
And in fact, there's a region of the earth called the transition zone that's from about
410 to about 660 kilometers down, that geochemists have now figured out can hold as much as two
percent of their mass as water. In other words, there could be five ocean folds of water down
in the upper mantle. It's quite possible that this water in the mantle brought down by subduction
is what causes supercontinents to eventually split when that material rises back up. In
other words, some of those hot spots that break apart supercontinents might actually
be wet spots. It might be water brought down continuously by subduction, making the rock
melt more easily and coming back up at the surface. It's possible that the very reason
we have mantle convection and plate tectonics in the first place is because of having so
much water in the mantle. See, we haven't really left earth's interior yet. Even the
water is the key agent of surface geology. It also plays an important role for the deep
earth as well. But you knew that already because water, after all, was responsible for lowering
the melting point of rock and allowing volcanoes to occur at subduction zones, creating much
of the land that's created our continents. Oh, and water is important for one more thing
as well. Of course, your body is two-thirds water, and our entire biosphere is based on
water as well. But I'll be talking about that more later on. In the next lecture, I want
to focus on the single largest reservoir of the hydrologic system, and that's the ocean.
