Welcome. In this lecture I want to talk about the world's oceans. Now Earth is unique in
our solar system for having liquid water at the surface. This water controls almost all
of Earth's surface geology and it moves in really complicated ways between the different
reservoirs in the hydrologic system. Most of Earth's water is in salt water that resides
in the oceans and this water circulates around the globe in a complex system of ocean currents
that end up providing the foundation for global climates.
Let me give you an example. Back in 1769 the American Colonial Deputy Postmaster General was
hearing complaints about mail delivery. It turned out that mail going from England to the colonies
was taking two weeks longer than mail from the colonies to go to England. The deputy postmaster
made several voyages himself to test this out and made in fact a whole series of sea water
temperature experiments. That year he published the first map of the Gulf Stream. You know this
person. This was Ben Franklin. Ben had been interested in ocean currents for a while it had
turned out. In fact he even coined the term the Gulf Stream. The Gulf Stream had been noted for a
long time by all sorts of sea going voyages. In fact the earliest dated records go back to the
voyages of Ponce de Lyon in 1513. The Gulf Stream was not only important for shipping it ended up
being responsible for bringing warm water to the coast of Europe. You see if you look at a map
England is at the same latitude as southern Alaska and the Gulf Stream is a part of a very
complex set of ocean currents that carry water all throughout the oceans but the Gulf Stream in
particular brings warm water from equatorial regions up the eastern coast of North America across
the Atlantic and over to the western coast of Europe keeping that region warm. Now oceans
make the form the foundation of the water cycle and as I said previously they contain 97.2% of
the surface water on the earth. The water enters the oceans through a complex variety of pathways
either precipitation or streams or glaciers or even entering the sea through the groundwater
channels but water leaves the ocean only by evaporation. As a result the mean resonance time
of water in the oceans turns out to be quite a while it's about 3,000 years. Now near the surface
of the ocean particularly in a region where streams have recently flowed into the ocean the
resonance time may be less than a day and for water that extends deep down into some of the
deepest ocean currents water can stay in the ocean for millions of years but it cycles through at
a rate that's much slower than that of the atmosphere. A very important part of ocean water is its
salinity as I mentioned previously the water in the ocean is about 3.5% salt it's mostly in the
form of sodium chloride. Why are the oceans so salty? Well it turns out that salts come into the
ocean from a variety of different channels. I've already talked about one of them and that is
that salts get washed across the land from rain that dissolves the salts in the rocks carries them
into streams and the streams wash into the oceans but that's only one method. It turns out that
volcanoes when they eject and material tephra up into the atmosphere bring a lot of salt into
the atmosphere that gets distributed around the globe. Most of that falls into the oceans because
the oceans are most of the surface of the land. You also get a significant amount of salts dissolving
directly out of ocean crust at mid ocean thermal vents. Remember those smoking chimneys of black
water coming out of mid ocean ridges they contain all sorts of dissolved minerals that get brought
essentially filtered out of the ocean crust and pumped into the ocean itself. Now evaporation
for at the surface of the oceans as I previously also mentioned only involves water and it leaves
the salts behind as a result over time the oceans became rapidly quite salty. For example if you
take a cubic foot of seawater it actually contains 2.2 pounds of salt dissolved in it. However if you
take a cubic foot of typical lake water it only contains about a sixth of an ounce of salt considerably
less. In fact if you took all the salt that is currently dissolved in the oceans and spread it out
over the globe as a single layer it would make a layer about 500 feet thick. But here's an
interesting question why isn't the ocean saltier? After all streams have been dissolving salts out
of the land for billions of years. Why isn't the sea as salty as a place like the Dead Sea which
is more than 30% salt? Well turns out salt gets removed out of the ocean at a rate that's the
same as the rate that salt gets brought into the oceans. First of all salt gets deposited on the sea
floor within sediments. Many of the clay minerals that are forming on the bottom of the ocean sea
floor actually bind to the salts and they become part of the minerals. That material reaches
subduction zones and either goes down into a subduction zone out of the ocean or gets plastered
on to these growing accretionary wedges of sediments that grow at subduction zones. Another
source occurs at shorelines. It turns out that the waves create ocean spray that puts salt back
on land. If you've ever been near the ocean and smell the air you can smell the salt in the air.
That salt is actually going back on land. Another very important mechanism occurs when salt gets
trapped in basins that are left to evaporate and the salt actually forms layers that precipitate
out on the bottom of the sea floor. For instance a place like the Red Sea currently is an ocean
that if the sea level were to drop too low would actually get stranded as a separate lake because
it's so hot in the Middle Eastern region there that water at times in the past has evaporated off
causing all the salt to precipitate out and then get buried in other sediments. Over time when the
ocean comes back again you now have removed a whole layer of salt. The Gulf of Mexico contains
numerous layers of salt that formed when North America rifted away from Africa at the time that
Pangea broke open. There are many layers of salt there that formed as that gulf was repeatedly
dried and then reflooded as sea level went up and down. As a result with this whole set of
processes that bring salt into the ocean and remove it the ocean salinity has remained roughly
constant for billions of years. Now this is fairly unusual because frankly there's not a lot that I've
talked about in this course that's remained constant for billions of years except for one thing the
rate at which the tectonic plates have moved has remained roughly constant over the last several
billions of years and it's the plate tectonic processes that drive so many of the processes that
affect the salinity of oceans and so the oceans have reached that equilibrium that equilibrium level
that's a function of the rate at which geology occurs driven by the motions of the plates.
Now ocean water circulates between all the oceans in a set of connected deep water convection currents.
The major part of this convection cycle like a big conveyor belt involves warm water moving across
the Atlantic Ocean from the south to the north dropping down to the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean
and sinking back towards the south along the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean seafloor. That water
continues to cycle around Antarctica constantly moving from west to east. Some of that water splits
off and comes into the Indian Ocean from below rising up to the surface to form a warm surface
flow that cycles then back into the Atlantic Ocean. Another part of it branches out into the
Pacific Ocean going northward along the bottom of the Pacific Ocean seafloor rising up in the
northern hemisphere and then flowing again back westward to join up with the water from the
Indian Ocean as it flows back into the Atlantic Ocean. Water is constantly moving along this
whole convection cell over about a thousand year cycle. In other words a parcel of water might on
average take a thousand years to move all throughout this conveyor belt. Currents of course are much
more complex in this simple picture and there are lots of small eddies and gyres throughout the
system and they're all controlled by slight changes in temperature which changes largely as a function
of latitude, of salinity of how salty the water is, of the particular outlines of the continents
and it turns out also earth's rotation. Now convection in any system is driven by density. We
saw that with mantle convection the whole process by which the plates are moving. However with the
oceans unlike mantle convection the density of ocean water is controlled not just by temperature but
also by composition in the form of how much salt is dissolved in it because the more salt you have
dissolved in seawater the heavier it is. Fresh water that comes from rain streams or glacier runoff
as a result tends to be more buoyant and will float on top of the ocean seafloor unless it is
very very cold which might possibly make it come heavier than salt water. The temperature for water
throughout most of the oceans particularly down deep is fairly close to the freezing point close
to zero degrees. However as you get near the surface that water warms and can be as high as 20 degrees.
The salinity of water also changes significantly. Down deep it's about three and a half percent
but as you move towards the surface where the sunlight is evaporating water off leaving salts
behind the salinity can become more than 3.7 percent making it noticeably denser. There are some really
interesting results of this. For instance if you take a vacation and you go to Gibraltar and you
sit there and you relax on a veranda and look out at the beautiful scenery there you'll notice that
at the mouth of the Mediterranean the current is always flowing eastward into the Mediterranean.
How is this possible? The Mediterranean isn't overflowing and there are also streams and rivers
like the Nile and Danube that are constantly flowing into the Mediterranean. So where does all
this water go? Well the trick is at the same time it's flowing out of the Mediterranean underneath
at the bottom of the ocean floor past Gibraltar. Why is this? Well it's very warm in the region of
the Mediterranean there are high rates of evaporation that makes the water in the Mediterranean become
very salty. The high salinity makes it dense it sinks to the bottom and then comes back out the
Mediterranean on the bottom. This is an example of a convection cell that's driven by composition
and not temperature. Now the shapes of the continents also play a very important role. The oceans
after all are only connected in a couple places in the southern hemisphere around the continent of
Antarctica and across the very shallow Bering Strait. So you have these huge oceans these
enormous reservoirs of water that are barely connected. Now interestingly if you go back
in geologic past in fact the recent geologic past this was not at all the case. North and South
America just a few million years ago were not connected and not too long geologically Africa
and Eurasia were separated by the ancient Tethys Sea. At this time there was an equatorial current
that ran all the way around the globe. The whole climate system would have been totally different
at that time. Life would have evolved in very different ways. Currently however our whole climate
system involves a very complicated pattern of moving water in between the oceans through these
small points where they're connected. Here's another very interesting observation about the
patterns of ocean flow. Ocean currents tend to turn clockwise in the northern hemisphere and
counterclockwise in the southern hemisphere. Why is this? Turns out it's a direct function of the
fact that the earth is spherical and that it's rotating and it's a result of an effect called
the Coriolis effect. Let me demonstrate with a globe. Suppose you're at the equator. As I
talked previously you're not just standing still at the equator you are moving around
earth's axis quite rapidly. In fact you're moving more than a thousand miles an hour around earth's
axis. What happens if you're standing at the north pole though? How fast are you moving?
Well you're doing this over 24 hours right? You're not moving very fast at all. So what happens
if you take air that's at the equator and you move it northwards? Well it's moving very rapidly
and then it comes up north and it goes to a place where the land isn't moving very quickly
and as a result it finds itself still moving faster and so the effect is as air moves northward
it always veers off to the right in the northern hemisphere. In the southern hemisphere
it's just the opposite. The air will always veer off towards the left but always still
towards the east. Now this may not seem like it's an important effect but it's actually very large
for all moving objects. In fact there's a very famous story that involves the British navy during
World War I. The story goes when the British navy went down to the Falkland Islands in the southern
hemisphere to fight the German ships they forgot to adjust their cannons for the fact that they
were in the southern hemisphere and that the Coriolis effect caused everything to veer to the
left instead of the right. The story goes that more than a thousand missiles were fired off and
missed their targets and fell into the ocean. The Coriolis effect is large enough in fact
that a baseball home run that's hit 300 feet either in a north south or south direction
will be deflected about one inch. It may not sound like a lot but it could make the difference
between a fair or foul ball. For ocean currents it turns out to be a really big deal. Now by the way
the same process for the flow of liquid water in the ocean also holds for the liquid iron in the
outer core and it turns out this is the reason that we have a magnetic field. As the thermal
convection in the outer core occurs you have earth's rotation which causes a Coriolis effect
that causes that liquid iron to flow in spiraling gyres and it's those spiraling gyres of flowing
liquid iron that create the magnetic field. So look at the ocean though look at the Gulf Street.
We have a situation where water is not only flowing up along the east coast of North America
but it then turns to the right and forms a circular pattern that we call the subtropical gyre.
The Gulf Stream becomes the Azores current that heads east which becomes the Canary current
which heads south which becomes the North Equatorial current which turns west again. The water flows
generally in a clockwise direction caused by this Coriolis effect. If you go to the south
Atlantic it's just the opposite. The water is flowing in the subtropical gyre there in a counter
clockwise direction. However the Gulf Stream is not just flowing affected by the Coriolis pattern
it's also driven by the large-scale convection pattern driven by the density of the water
and in fact the main return path for the Gulf Stream waters is from the North Atlantic to the
South Atlantic traveling along the bottom of the ocean. However remember this because I'm going to
come back later on in the course this is very important it is possible to shut down that convection
cell and when it happens it has dire effects for Europe because it means warm water would no longer
be brought towards Western Europe. Now the currents are not at all constant they're always
changing direction on time scales from days to months to years to centuries and beyond.
Some of these are very well known and identified patterns and the most famous of these is El Nino.
What happens is El Nino involves an equatorial current of the Pacific Ocean that changes its
direction and actually reverses during a time that we call El Nino. For instance the normal pattern
is to have an equatorial current in the Pacific moving water westward. This involves cold air
traveling across North America cold water off the coast of South America and warm water in the
western Pacific. However you know these are the normal conditions during a time of El Nino this
entirely reverses and it affects not only the water temperatures but the atmospheric patterns
as well. Here we have very strong water currents hot warm water heading eastward bathing the west
coast of South America in this warm water. It also changes the whole pattern of air flow throughout
the region. Australia ends up suffering through extremely dry periods and tremendous droughts.
We also get warmer and moisture air crossing North America during the winter as a result of
these El Nino patterns. Most significantly however is that El Nino causes a tremendous decrease in
the ability for the fish to be caught off the coast of South America. Why is this? During the
normal conditions you have a water current that flows northward along the coast of South America.
Well because it's flowing up along the coast we end up with a pattern of flow that actually brings
water up from underneath carrying nutrients up along the shoreline to feed the schools of fish
there and allow for a rich ecosystem. However during El Nino conditions just the opposite happens.
The winds blow southward. Here we have flow that of course veers off to the left as it always does
in the southern hemisphere. That flow pushes water down the shelf of the continent drives
nutrients down deep the water ends up being devoid of nutrients and can't support a biosphere there
and the fish population dies off dramatically. Now mapping out the exact motions of all these
ocean currents has been a tremendously difficult task. In the past oceanographers have had to rely
upon all sorts of fortuitous events such as shipping tanker spills. In other words you know we
move so much material between continents on these giant ocean tankers and sometimes they go through
tremendous storms that end up knocking these tanker containers into the ocean. For example one of
these spills in 1990 put more than 80,000 Nike sneakers into the Pacific Ocean. These washed
off of a large tanker ship and ended up scattered all along the western United States coast.
Well this turned out to be wonderful for oceanography because the people put out notices
asking for beachcombers and media to return the sneakers if they found them and more than
2,000 sneakers were returned and identified on the date they were found and where they were found.
It turns out the sneakers also have identification codes on them and they were able to track the
motion and the timing of this flow from the middle of the Pacific Ocean all the way to the Pacific
Northwest coast and then moving up and down the coast. These spills happened repeatedly in 1992
more than 28,000 plastic tub toys washed into the ocean and these spills for a while were the best
means for oceanographers to identify the patterns of ocean convection. Turns out we don't need to
rely upon these shipping disasters anymore. There's now a quite enormous and complex system of floating
buoys and satellite surveillance that's actually used to chart the ocean currents. For instance,
let me show you an animation of motions in the Pacific Ocean. This particular animation shows
sea surface temperatures in color and air motions which cause shallow ocean currents shown with the
small arrows. You'll notice that over fairly short time periods these directions flow tremendously.
It's a very chaotic process and pattern that we never would have been able to predict previously
without actually being able to monitor. The oceans in addition to having a complex system
of ocean flow also support a fairly complex biosphere and it's supported by a balance of two
things, sunlight and the supply of nutrients. Now it turns out that the oceans have almost
four billion tons of biomass. This sounds like a lot but it's actually very small. It's only one
fifth of one percent of Earth's total global biomass which is about 1,850 billion tons.
The basis for the ocean biomass is single-celled photosynthesizing phytoplankton and this provides
the food for other animals like shrimp and small fish and all the way up through the food chain.
These organisms float shallowly near the ocean surface, absorb sunlight and grow
creating organisms that when they die fall to the bottom of the ocean sea floor providing much of
the calcium carbonate and silica that's important for the formation of sedimentary rocks.
In the oceans the transfer of energy from one trophic level, one level of the food chain to the
next is actually very inefficient. For instance for every 500,000 units of energy received at a
portion of the ocean sea surface only about 10,000 units of that energy gets converted into phytoplankton
these single-celled organisms. About 1,000 units of that biomass then gets converted into larger
organisms the zooplankton, the single-celled animals that feed off of the phytoplankton.
Of that biomass only about a hundred units become small fish that essentially the next
trophic level up. Only about 10 units of that energy becomes biomass in the form of large
predatory fish like tuna and only one unit of that energy would become the highest trophic level
which would be humans going into human biomass. So you see there's an inefficiency it takes
500,000 units of energy to create one unit of biomass within a human eating ocean fish.
Turns out the ocean biosystem is also very fragile fish populations around the world are
dropping precipitously and this is happening through a combination of overfishing a fairly
fragile delicate biosystem and the existence of continued pollution killing off certain
fundamental basic levels of the ocean trophic system. Most ocean life occurs
actually very close to the water surface. As I mentioned previously light doesn't travel
through ocean water very efficiently by the time you get just about a hundred meters beneath the
surface it's quite dark. As a result the phytoplankton and zoooplankton and all the fish that feed on
them are quite near the surface. Now life also exists on the ocean seafloor we call this benthic
life essentially feeding off the skeletons and carcasses that drop from the surface and trickle
down across the oceans accumulating on the bottom of the seafloor. This life exists in total darkness
and is only supplied by the material that comes to it from above tidal areas near shores are often
very rich in diverse ecosystems that's because you've got sunlight and you have a lot of land
derived sediments nutrients that come from streams. It's interesting however unlike on land equatorial
regions of the oceans are mostly barren and almost a totally devoid of marine life. This is very
counterintuitive why would this be? Well it turns out that equatorial regions have a very strong
thermocline. The thermocline is a is the temperature as a function of depth and it turns out that the
top layer in equatorial regions is very very warm this makes the water very buoyant and resistant
to sinking. As a result it isolates the top layer of the water preventing mixing of waters between
the surface and deep layers. You have lots of sunlight but you have no way of bringing nutrients
from down in the water up to the surface so there's nothing for the phytoplankton to feed on.
Ironically life is actually more thriving at the poles because though you have less sunlight
there's less of a thermocline so nutrients from streams and other circulation patterns can constantly
cycle to the surface feeding phytoplankton driving the whole food chain. Now we're quite sure that
life began in the oceans as I already mentioned in the section on mid ocean ridges. We also have
another clue that the biosphere began in oceans. The cells of our bodies are like many oceans.
They're filled with salt water that's really not too dissimilar in composition from seawater.
It might even be said that human beings are part of the ocean's attempt at land exploration.
I mentioned earlier that even though there's a tiny amount of water in the atmosphere it's
responsible for an enormous amount of geologic work done on land as it falls as rain. Ironically
the same can now be said about the biosphere. There's even a smaller amount of water in the
biosphere but it includes us and we're now doing all sorts of things. Leves, dams, paving the surface,
global warming that's melting the glaciers, all sorts of geologic activity that's significantly
altering the whole rest of the water cycle. In the next lecture I'm going to focus a bit more
on water in the atmosphere. I'm going to talk about where our weather comes from and the effects that
it has on land.
