Welcome. In this lecture, I want to talk about Earth's atmosphere. Now, if you follow baseball,
you may have noticed that there seem to be a lot more home runs that are hit at the stadium
for the Colorado Rockies than in other places. Sluggers seem to statistically do much better
there and pitchers seem to have a much worse time. Well, there's no mystery here. This is
the mile high city of Denver. The air is thin. You're quite a ways above sea level and there's
just less air to get in the way of the ball when it travels. In fact, a baseball that's
hit in Florida that goes 400 feet will travel 420 feet there in Denver. If you've ever struggled
breathing as you've tried to reach the top of the mountain while hiking, you've discovered the
exact same thing. The air of our atmosphere is concentrated mostly near Earth's surface,
and it thins quite rapidly as you approach space. Now, at sea level, the pressure of the air on
top of you is one bar or one atmosphere. It may not seem like a lot to you because we can't see
the air, but that's actually a tremendous amount of pressure. After all, you have tens to hundreds
of kilometers of air stacked on top of you. To increase your pressure one more atmosphere,
you'd actually need to go more than 30 feet beneath the surface of the water. By the time you go up
to a height of about five and a half kilometers, however, that's three and a half miles above the
surface, your air pressure actually is half of that at sea level. In other words, half of the air
lies below you and half above at that point. That's why you have to breathe about twice as much
to get the same amount of oxygen. The air is half as thin up there. Now, even though our atmosphere
thins out very quickly with height, it still extends for a tremendous distance up into space. In fact,
by volume, it's actually the largest layer of the Earth, and it's incredibly important for geology
and for biology for several reasons. The obvious reason is we can't live without it. We need air
to breathe as do all plants and animals on land. But even more importantly for the Earth, the atmosphere
is what carries water on to land, and it's therefore entirely responsible for the shaping of our
surface of our planet over time. Now, interestingly also from a human perspective, it's the atmosphere
and the water within it that gives us our weather, storms and all of the weather patterns that play
such an important role in our lives. Now, the composition of the atmosphere is quite unusual.
Not so much for what's in it, but for what isn't. Let me explain. Our atmosphere is mostly nitrogen.
It's actually 78.1% nitrogen and 20.9% oxygen, and everything else is less than 1% of that
most of its argon, a tiny bit is carbon dioxide, and varying amounts of water vapor essentially fill in
the rest. All the other gases are much, much less abundant. So why is this? What happened to the
gases we would expect, the hydrogen and helium? And why isn't there more carbon dioxide? Well,
it's actually a very interesting set of problems. It's actually the result of primarily the size of
the Earth's gravitational field and of the way our carbon cycle works. Now, I've talked quite a bit
about hydrogen and helium. We know that the most abundant gases in the solar system, that's what
came out of the Big Bang, that's what our sun is made of, that's what existed throughout the solar
system when it formed, but Earth is not large enough to hold onto them. Turns out if any object moving
at the surface of a planet leaves the planet upward with an escape velocity, with a velocity that's
greater than its escape velocity, it'll fly off out into space. It'll leave forever. Well,
turns out that the escape velocity for Earth's surface is quite high. It's 11 kilometers per
second, but that's actually less than the kinetic speeds of gases like hydrogen and helium at the
temperature of Earth's surface. In other words, any free helium or hydrogen that's on the surface of
our planet very quickly flies right out into space. We're just not big enough as a planet to hold
on to it. Now, you go to the outer parts of the solar system, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
These planets, they've got some heft to them, and they are able to hold on to that hydrogen and
helium and keep it as part of their atmosphere. However, the normal speeds of molecules of gases
like nitrogen, oxygen, argon, and carbon dioxide are much slower than Earth's escape velocity,
and we get to hold on to them. Interesting, they actually have to be quite a bit less. In fact,
the mean gas velocity has to be about one-sixth of a planet's escape velocity for that planet to
hold that gas in its atmosphere for incredibly long periods of time, like the four-and-a-half
billion years that Earth has been around. Now, here's the other problem that I talked about concerning
carbon dioxide. Earth is certainly able to hold on to carbon dioxide. That's not a problem. So,
where is it? Well, it turned out carbon dioxide played a much more dominant role early on in Earth's
history. Look at the sister planets on either side of Earth, Mars and Venus. They both have
atmospheres that are about 95% carbon dioxide, and Earth had that same kind of atmosphere early
on. However, the carbon dioxide gets actively, steadily removed from our atmosphere through a
very active set of processes that involve the oceans and the biomass. The oceans act like a giant
sponge. They soak up that carbon dioxide and contain it within, and the biomass does as well,
because any photosynthesizing organism, whether it's on land or in the ocean, consumes that carbon
dioxide and uses it and sequesters it away out of the atmosphere. Where does that carbon dioxide go?
Well, it goes into the oceans onto the seafloor and eventually gets buried away as sedimentary rocks,
like limestone. So, the carbon dioxide didn't disappear from the planet. It just got removed
from the atmosphere and put into other reservoirs. I'm going to talk a lot more about that when I
talk about the whole carbon cycle in lecture 40. Now, water plays a vital role in our atmosphere
in a variety of ways, and it is a small percentage of our atmosphere, but a very important one.
Air usually contains between 0% for very dry air and at most about 4% water vapor in very
humid conditions. But nonetheless, that small amount of water vapor is absolutely vital in
controlling the process of precipitation and therefore in our weather. I mean, just look at clouds.
Clouds are water vapor that's begun to condense and form the beginnings of what will be rain.
I mean, clouds look substantial, but they're mostly water vapor with just tiny little ice
and water droplets forming. You know what a cloud is if you've ever been through fog.
Fog is just a cloud that's down at the ground level. Now, what happens in the process
is you have a small amount of water vapor that normally exists within our atmosphere.
We can't see it, but it's continuously present. It's such a small amount, though, if you were
to take all the water of Earth's atmosphere and were to take it out, it would form a global layer
just two centimeters thick. But nonetheless, it plays a vital role. Now, our atmosphere has layers
like the other parts of the Earth as well. And we can actually categorize the atmosphere based
by the on the composition and properties of these layers. The first layer right above the surface
of the Earth is the troposphere. It extends from the surface up to a height of about 10 kilometers.
That's just slightly above Mount Everest, which is 8.85 kilometers. The troposphere contains
almost all of the atmosphere's air, even though it's the narrowest layer. And it contains all
of the water vapor. And therefore, it contains the world's weather. Now, the greenhouse gases
that keep our planet warm are also located in the troposphere. This is not only water vapor,
but carbon dioxide and small amounts of methane. And as I'll talk more in lecture 40,
this creates an active greenhouse effect that keeps our planet insulated.
As you go up through the atmosphere, the temperatures gradually decrease from the
temperatures at the surface that we see varying between 0 and 60 degrees Fahrenheit
to temperatures that are quite cold at the top of the troposphere. In fact, they go down to
temperatures of about minus 60 degrees Celsius. Now, that's the boundary between this troposphere
and the stratosphere. And the stratosphere goes from 10 kilometers up to almost 50 kilometers.
If you've ridden in airplanes on long flights, they usually cruise at a height of about 35,000
feet. This is 10.3 kilometers right at that boundary between the troposphere and the stratosphere.
And in fact, some large planes will actually show on the back of the seat in front of you
the temperature. And I can verify this. I've seen the temperature is right about minus 60 degrees
Celsius. The stratosphere is most important because it contains the atmosphere's ozone.
The ozone is largely concentrated at a height of about 25 kilometers. And it's vital because
it absorbs ultraviolet radiation. As a result, that soaking up of the radiation from the sun
actually causes the temperature to increase as you move across the stratosphere, back up to a
temperature of about 0 degrees Celsius at the top, almost 50 kilometers above the surface. But
the air is so thin, you'd actually freeze to death in an instant if you were there. The few
atoms that are there are quite energetic, but the air is so thin by the time you get to that point,
it would almost feel like a vacuum. On top of that of the stratosphere is the mesosphere. And the
mesosphere extends up to a height of about 80 kilometers. Here, we're in a region of tremendously
thin atmosphere, but there's still enough air there that it actually is where our meteors occur.
A meteor is a streak of light that occurs when a small meteoroid from space comes in and
hits the Earth's surface. Even though the air is almost vacuum up there, there's enough material
that as these meteoroids streak through the atmosphere, the friction causes tremendous
heat that actually causes those meteoroids to burn up and often explode. By the way,
you've heard the term mesosphere before. Yes, that's right, Earth's mantle also has a mesosphere.
It's the layer just beneath the asthenosphere. Unfortunately, scientists in different disciplines
don't always communicate so well and sometimes use the same terms for different objects.
On top of the mesosphere is the thermosphere, and that extends from 80 kilometers out into space
and doesn't really have a top boundary. Here, the individual atom temperatures again increase with
altitude, as in the stratosphere, but there are so few gas molecules that it really does feel like
being a vacuum. One interesting phenomenon occurs in the thermosphere, that's where the
northern lights and the southern lights occur. These auroras are mostly located in the thermosphere
as the ionized particles from the Sun get pulled down along the magnetic field lines
towards the north and south magnetic poles. Now, let me talk a moment more about the ozone
layer because it's tremendously important. The ozone blocks out a lot of the ultraviolet radiation
from the Sun by absorbing it. It turns out that high frequency radiation like ultraviolet,
x-rays, and gamma rays is much more harmful to living tissue than low frequency radiation is,
things like infrared, microwaves, and radio waves. This energy not only can cause sunburn if you're
out too long in it, but it can cause cells to die or become cancerous. What the ozone layer does
is the same thing that you do when you put sunblock on. You keep that ultraviolet radiation
from being soaked up into your skin, into your living tissue. What happens is a very interesting
process. The radiation gets absorbed twice by the oxygen. First of all, oxygen usually occurs
as a molecule of two oxygen atoms together, oxygen gas. That oxygen molecule can absorb
ultraviolet radiation that will split it apart. It'll break the bonds, and now you have two free
oxygen ions flying about. Well, those free ions will bond with other molecules, and when they come
across another oxygen molecule, they'll bond with it to make a molecule of three oxygen atoms,
and that's what ozone is. The ozone again absorbs more ultraviolet radiation, which causes it to
break apart again into a molecule of oxygen gas, O2, and a single ion of oxygen, and we're back to
the beginning again. In that process, the oxygen is continually absorbing ultraviolet radiation
and preventing it from passing through this layer and reaching the surface. So it's really
important for life, which is why people have been really concerned about the ozone hole that's been
developing over Antarctica. What turns out, over the South Pole, during the period from
about August to December, every year, the ozone hole thins a little bit, and during the 1980s,
that thinning became more and more significant every year. In fact, the size of the hole grew
so large that it began to reach South America. This obviously poses tremendous health hazards
for life in the Southern Hemisphere. The culprit turned out to be a set of aerosols,
chemicals like chlorofluorocarbons, that we were using in our spray cans. These acted as catalysts
that broke down the ozone and prevented it from forming. Now, I have to say that the ozone hole
is an example of real success at the whole international community coming together to tackle
a problem and come up with a resolution. As soon as people realized this was going on,
a movement began to try to ban chlorofluorocarbons that's largely occurred worldwide. Now,
the ozone hole hasn't stopped, but its growth has halted, and many people are very hopeful
that over time it will actually begin shrinking. Now, the condensation of water vapor into the
clouds that I talked about before and the production of precipitation forms the basis
of our whole weather system. And here's the key to it. Warm air holds a lot more water vapor
than cold air. That means if you take warm moist air and you cool it, you create rain.
First, you get tiny droplets that begin to grow over time. This condensation process continues
where the vapor converts into a liquid and eventually these rain drops are too large and
they fall down. The process of condensation is interesting because it's actually enhanced if
you have small particles in the atmosphere like dust or salt that can serve as a nucleation point
for the the raindrop to begin to grow on. That's how seeding clouds to make rain works. You put
small amounts of dust in there of different chemicals and they serve as points for the rain
drops to begin to grow on. You've also seen this if you've looked up in the sky and seen the contrail
of a plane. Again, it's the exhaust material from that plane that's providing the nucleation points
for the condensation to make those clouds. Now, warm air cools when it rises and so one of the
best places to find clouds and therefore rain is any situation where you have warm air rising.
One of the best examples is when air has to flow up over a mountain. That's called orographic
lifting. You have moist air that let's say it just came off of an ocean and it hits a coastal
mountain range. As it goes up over the mountain, it cools. The air is no longer able to hold that
water in it in a vapor form. It condenses out first to clouds and then as rain and then as that air
continues over the mountain range, it's lost its moisture. For instance, look at the east side of
the Sierra Nevadas in California, which are quite green compared to the west side, which is the Mojave
Desert. The air loses all its moisture going up the mountains on the west side. When it comes down
on the east, there's no moisture left in it. Another significant way that you get rain forming
is when you have two air masses of different temperatures colliding. So let's say you have
a cold air mass and a warm air mass that come together. Well, the warm air is going to be
more buoyant. It's lighter than the cold air and it's going to slide up over the cold air mass
and as it goes up, it cools and any moisture that's in that air is going to precipitate out
and form rain. Let me give you an interesting example of lifting. Suppose you take your kids to
Disney World, okay? If you go, everyone's going to tell you to bring rain gear because it's going
to rain every day in the afternoon and then it's going to stop after a couple hours and you don't
believe them, but you go there and that's exactly what it does. Well, why is that? Well, it turns
out Florida exists between ocean water on both sides. But remember how I talked about the fact
that water changes its temperature much less quickly than rock does. So during the heat of the day,
the land warms up tremendously and becomes much warmer than the surrounding ocean water.
That causes an air circulation, convection pattern that pulls air up over Florida and pulls the
moist air from both the Gulf of Mexico and from the Atlantic Ocean over Florida. Pulling that moist
air up and as it rises, the rain precipitates right back out on the spot right on Florida.
As the afternoon moves on, however, the land cools off and that circulation pattern stops,
the air stops rising and the rain stops and you can still take your kids to go see the fireworks
at night. Now, you don't also only have to go up to get condensation. You can also get rain
and clouds forming when the temperature drops. For instance, a good example of that is the way
the temperature cools at night. Have you ever walked out in the morning to your car and seen
a layer of dew or frost all over your car? Where did this come from? What happened? Well,
the evening before, the air was warm enough to hold that water vapor within the atmosphere,
within the air. But as the temperature dropped overnight, the humidity increased
till it reached the carrying capacity of the air. At that point, the water vapor began to
precipitate out as dew on the car, if it's warm enough, or crystallizing out as ice as frost,
if it's cold. By the way, humidity is just the ratio of the amount of water vapor in the air
with respect to the amount that the air can hold. But for the same amount of water vapor,
the humidity will increase if the temperature drops because the amount that the air can hold
begins to decrease. Now, the circulation of air within the atmosphere is governed by very similar
constraints as water within the ocean. Where sunlight falls, solar radiation is a function of
latitude. Where the continents are, the whole distribution of land masses, the way that the
ocean circulation patterns move, and the Coriolis effect due to Earth's rotation. Now, on a regional
basis, the heating and cooling of the land and water creates high and low pressure regions,
and this moves air from one region to another. Air always flows from high pressure regions to
low pressure regions, and these regions change locations regularly, and especially on a seasonal
basis. For example, for North America, what's very important in the wintertime is a very high
pressure system that develops over Canada. This makes the Midwest get very cold because it sends
cold, dry air southward from Canada down across North America. Interestingly, just the opposite
happens in the summer. Here, the large regional high pressure system is often over the southern
part of the North Atlantic Ocean, called the Bermuda High, and this pushes warm, moist air
into the Midwest up across the Gulf of Mexico. So, the Midwest sort of gets the worst of both
worlds. It gets the really cold, dry air from Canada in the wintertime and the really hot,
humid air up from the Gulf of Mexico in the summertime. One of the most interesting aspects
of climate and weather is storm systems, and storms occur when air masses collide. What usually
happens is that the warm air masses that are buoyant get pushed up and slide over cold air masses.
In the process, as I mentioned before, the air rises, cools, and you get precipitation,
but this process happens very differently depending on whether you have a warm front
arriving in your neighborhood or a cold front. In fact, you can usually tell from the way the
weather changes whether it's a warm front or a cold front arriving. When a warm front comes
into an area, the warm front arrives slowly because that air has to slide up and over the existing
colder air where you are. There's a whole sequence of clouds that happen as that air moves up.
First, you get very high cirrus clouds above you, and then slightly lower cirrostratus clouds,
and then altostratus clouds, and then nimbostratus clouds, and over time a gentle gradual rain
usually begins and that rain can last for several days. Just the opposite happens when a cold front
comes. Here, the cold front arrives fast and slides right underneath the warm air. The storm
usually comes as a quick front with large chemolinimbus clouds coming in right behind the front.
There's often very heavy rain, but it doesn't last very long, and very quickly you're into a cooler
and drier period. Now, storms like hurricanes and cyclones end up being some of the most
destructive and deadly natural disasters in the world, as I already talked about in lecture 23,
and there are many parts of the world that are very much at risk from these catastrophic weather
systems. There are several factors that play important roles. The geography, in other words,
the shape of the land with respect to the surrounding ocean bodies, the whole patterns of
atmospheric circulation, and the locations of nearby rivers that might be flooding. And of
course, the most important factor for human risk is the large populations that might exist in that
region. One of the areas that gets continuously hit by large storms and is at highest risk is the
region around Bangladesh. You have all the factors leading here to climate disaster. You have huge
populations and very high population densities. You have land that's very shallow and easily
flooded right at sea level, and you have large monsoon rains that can cause the rivers there,
the Ganges and the Brahmaputra to overflow their banks. By the way, monsoons are climates that involve
big alternating systems over the course of a year, a period of great warmth and dry air
followed by a period of much cooler and moisture rains. Incidentally, if you go back in time to the
large supercontinents, these continents probably had primarily monsoon climates, because it turns
out very large continents are usually dominated by monsoon climates. So,
Panjshia would have had the ultimate monsoon climate. For instance, with Bangladesh, back in 1991,
flooding from a cyclone there killed more than 138 people, and going back to 1970, a cyclone there
killed nearly half a million people. Now, as I mentioned previously when I talked about predicting
natural disasters, we've been fortunate in the western hemisphere and we haven't had any of these
truly catastrophic storms, but nonetheless, when hurricanes do hit, they can be devastating.
And the classic example is the Hurricane Katrina, which hit the Gulf Coast of the United States in
August of 2005. Hurricane Katrina killed 1,836 people, but it did $80 billion worth of damage,
which made it the costliest single natural disaster in U.S. history. At its peak, it was a
category five hurricane. The winds reached sustained speeds of more than 280 kilometers per hour.
That's more than 175 miles an hour. The sea surge overwhelmed the existing ocean levee system,
flooding many cities along the coast, like New Orleans. The storm didn't end when it hit the
coast. It actually went all the way across the U.S. up into Canada. In fact, there was more than
five inches of rain dumped in Canada. There was flooding all across the U.S. from New Orleans
all the way up into Canada. More than 62 tornadoes spun off from the the storm front as it moved
across. However, the fact that less than 2,000 people died is really a tribute to the ability
of our whole weather tracking system to be able to monitor the storm as it progresses, because
it began as a category one storm when it moved over Florida just as it went into the Gulf.
They could determine how it developed, watch it in real time as it cranked up into a category
five hurricane, predict the point at which it would reach the coast, not only the location,
but the time, and be able to evacuate people. Now, unfortunately, you can't do anything about the
damage to the buildings because it's a lot easier to evacuate people than it is buildings.
So an enormous amount of damage was done, but hundreds of thousands, maybe even millions of
lives were saved with the ability to be able to predict the arrival of the hurricane and evacuate
those people. What has people concerned, however, is that this is not a one-time deal, especially in
regions like New Orleans. The situation is actually going to get worse in the future for
three important reasons. First of all, the sea level is continuing to rise and will only get higher
in elevation, which is made worse by the fact that the land in areas like Louisiana is actually
sinking. It's sinking because we are actively pumping water and petroleum out of the ground
underneath, making the whole surface drop to below sea level in places. And third, in the
factor that we don't understand yet, it may be the case that warming climates cause more active
storms in the Gulf. It's something we don't know yet, but there is an inkling that this might be
a possibility. So the potential for storms further in the future in areas like New Orleans
are quite possible that there'll be even worse damage in the future. Now, for the evolution
of Earth and the shaping of the land, storms are responsible for also some of the most rapid
geology. For instance, Hurricane Katrina reworked the whole coastal ecosystem. It moved barrier
islands around. It shifted sands. Storms are tremendous agents of rapid change, causing landslides,
mud flows, the rapid removal of soil, and just a whole lot of rock that gets washed into the ocean.
In the next lecture, I want to explore a slightly more gradual process, but equally powerful. I'm
going to talk about the process of weathering, about how the whole sun-driven water cycle rapidly
breaks down the rock that we so patiently created over years of volcanism and mountain building.
