Music
Welcome. In this lecture, I want to talk about a really important part of the whole process of eroding Earth's surface.
A process called mass wasting, which is the removal of rock by the force of gravity.
Now, over the next several lectures, I'm going to talk about many aspects of Earth's surface geology,
involving water, streams, glaciers, groundwater, and more.
And all of them are intimately related to gravity and mass wasting, the pull of rock and water down.
It's all part of that process of rocks falling downhill.
Now, gravity affects everything.
In fact, a common complaint from people is that gravity has a fairly deleterious effect on people's bodies over time.
Well, it turns out that holds true even for ones that are made of rock, like the old man in the mountain in New Hampshire.
Now, as a child, my family used to drive up to New Hampshire each summer,
and it was always a really exciting moment for me to be able to drive up past the old man,
not only because it was so cool to see this face of a man on the side of the mountain,
but it also meant I was driving back up into the incredible mountains
that were really the foundation of my own fascination with geology and the Earth.
So it's with some sadness that I now take my own kids up the same valley
but can only show them the place that the old man used to be.
Because despite many attempts at giving the state symbol a facelift in a sense,
the process of mass wasting or mass movements, as it's sometimes called,
eventually tore away the granite blocks that made up the face of the old man.
Now, that feature, the old man of the mountain, formed initially in location there
in Franconia, not in New Hampshire about 10,000 years ago at the end of the last Ice Age.
And the rock formation is about 40 feet high and about 25 feet wide,
and it sat 1,200 feet above Profile Lake, was initially discovered back in 1805
and in fact was the subject of a short story in 1850 by Nathaniel Hawthorne called The Great Stone Face.
He described it as a work of nature in her mood of majestic playfulness.
However, by as early as 1906, people were already noticing that the face was deteriorating.
It was falling down, subject to the inevitable process of wearing away
and eroding rock off the sides of mountains.
For much of the 20th century, they used spikes and cables to try to hold the face down,
and finally on May 3rd, 2003, the whole thing collapsed and fell down into the lake.
There was some talk of using plastic for a facelift,
but they eventually gave up the idea and just had to admit the fact that
it's just the way of things, things fall down.
Now, remember I talked about the whole spectrum between catastrophic and gradual processes in geology.
Well, it turns out that mass wasting occurs along that whole spectrum,
but unlike the case of earthquakes or volcanoes, which when they happen often happen dramatically
and suddenly, turns out that some of the slowest and most gradual processes of mass wasting
can be as destructive and more costly, if not deadly, than the catastrophic ones.
But I'll get to that a little bit further in the course.
First, let me describe how mass wasting works.
Mass wasting occurs when rock or soil, mud, ice, trees, vegetation, roads, houses,
and anything else moves downhill.
And as a result, this process occurs over the whole range of speeds from fast to slow.
We usually think of the processes that occur fast as being, they're the most well known,
for instance, landslides, rockfalls, avalanches, debris flows, cases where rock falls catastrophically downhill.
But mass wasting also occurs at slower, more intermediate speeds at a process called slumping,
and also occurs at very, very slow and imperceptible speeds.
And these are the processes of creep and land subsidence.
But again, they're all driven by gravity and they all involve rock moving downhill.
Now, I spent a lot of time in the first part of this course talking about how rock ends up high initially.
Volcanoes put the rock up at the tops of volcanoes through lava and ash that are ejected out of volcanoes.
When continents collide, you get mountains pushed upward and rock goes up often many, many miles above the surface level.
But none of these stay there very long and the process of mass wasting removes that rock or soil in often very unusual ways.
Now, in each case of mass wasting, with the exception of land subsidence,
the movement downhill occurs because the slope of the land becomes too steep.
Now, the slope at any given location has a limited angle that's as steep as that slope can get and still be stable.
In geology, we call that the angle of repose.
And what happens is if the material gets more steeply distributed, that slope can no longer hold and eventually that rock is going to move downhill.
Now, the cause of that motion happens for several reasons and in several ways.
You can add material to the top of a slope or you can cut away the bottom of the slope.
In both of those instances, you change the slope, you increase the slope of your land.
But you can also change the conditions often by changing the amount of vegetation that's on land or changing the amount of water in the soil.
So that the existing slope, even though it hasn't changed its angle, is no longer stable.
In that case, the slope remains the same, but the angle of repose changes because the conditions of the rock or soil are now different and less stable.
Now, adding material to the top of a cliff or a slope is a very common way of causing mass wasting.
This is especially common in mountainous regions where you have a lot of active erosion and the erosion is often fastest at the top of the mountains.
Why is that?
Remember, I talked about how large changes in temperature drive the whole process of weathering, both mechanically and chemically.
Mechanically through ice that forms from freezing water and prize open the rock and chemically from reactions that occur within the rock itself as the rock gets dissolved away.
Large changes in temperature also cause an expansion and contraction of the rock that causes it to break and you often get large sheets of rock falling off a process called exfoliation.
In fact, if you've ever gone to Yosemite Valley and seen places like a half dome, it looks almost like an onion that's been peeling off in layers.
These are large sheets that have cracked due to changes in temperature and the release and pressure at the top of the mountain.
This active erosion causes rock to fall and it may cause the slope below to become steeper and steeper and then eventually collapses as a mass fall.
Or you can get a rock fall from above that will trigger landslides farther down the mountain.
Now interesting, this buildup of material at the top of a ridge turns out to be very important for underwater avalanches, what we call turbidity flows.
This occurs offshore where sediment from a river may continue to build up in the edge of the continental shelf and then eventually catastrophically flow down the continental slope, the steeper region.
I'll talk about this later on in the course. Sometimes these can occur remarkably rapidly and with a tremendous consequence.
Removing rock from the bottom is usually the result of a stream that cuts down making the slope too steep.
As I'll talk about later, when I talk about streams, as a stream flows it sometimes erodes rock more quickly than it deposits it.
This causes the banks to drop down.
If you have a slope leading down towards the stream and you begin to drop the stream down, you begin to increase your slope and at some point the rock at the top will just slide right back down into the water.
Another mechanism would be the process of having a glacier.
In places like Yosemite you'll see hanging walls where the glacier has carved out a valley and the valley up above now drops suddenly at a waterfall like a bridal veil in Yosemite.
That creates a tremendous instability, the slope there is too steep, that rock will eventually slide down.
And humans also do quite a job by producing road cuts that can destabilize the sides of mountains.
Now, I mentioned that conditions can also change. This occurs primarily in two different ways.
If you remove vegetation, you destabilize the slope.
Why is this? Because plants hold that ground in place with their roots.
The roots extend into the soil and rock and actually serve as a tremendous means of preventing erosion.
Now that's ironic because I've already talked about plants as a means of increasing weathering.
So the very existence of the plants will cause the rock to decay into soil allowing erosion to happen more quickly.
But at any given point in time the presence of vegetation is holding that soil on.
If you have a forest fire, if you have overgrazing, if you deforest the region by cutting timber down,
then you remove that structure, that vegetation holding the slope and it collapses.
The other process interestingly has to do with water.
Although here we have a very interesting situation because it turns out that if you have either too much or too little water,
you destabilize your slope and change in climates.
Droughts or floods are one of the biggest reasons for mass flows, mass wasting.
Let me demonstrate this with sand and water.
Now, you've probably been to the beach and made sandcastles and you probably have a good sense of how much water is needed
in order to make a decent sandcastle.
Well, it turns out if you have too much or too little, it just doesn't work.
The sand doesn't hold together.
Why? Because there's surface tension within the water that holds the sand grains together.
So what I've done is I've taken sand and I've poured it into three separate cups.
And what I'm going to try to do is see which case will give you the best sandcastles.
If I have straight sand with no water, then you have a sense of what's going to happen already.
As soon as I take the cup off the sand just pours right out.
There's no cohesion at all to this.
Well, let's take the case where we put a little bit of water in.
As the water percolates down into the sand, it fills in the pore spaces and in the process it holds those sand grains together,
making it into an object that acts with a single sense of cohesion.
So if I pull that off, I get a nice sandcastle.
Well, what happens if I put too much water in? Shouldn't it still be fine?
Well, what happens in this case is as the water goes in, it actually begins to push the sand grains apart.
In other words, I create quicksand in a sense.
It's similar to that process with earthquakes where the waves from an earthquake created a process called liquefaction,
where the sand grains were all pulled apart.
Now, I don't know if I can get this wet enough in here in this cup, but I'll try to demonstrate that if I have it too wet.
You see, it just doesn't hold together as well.
What happens on the side of a mountain is, let's say you have a period of either tremendous drought.
The water leaves the rock, the side can destabilize.
Or if you get a period of flooding, too much rain, it pushes those sand grains apart.
Really, if you want to maintain a high angle of repose, though, you need the middle amount, the middle path.
You need just the right amount. It's sort of like Goldilocks again.
Now, with landslides, we have process where the rock moves very quickly downhill, usually along a very well-defined plane.
And the tumbling and motion occurs in a very chaotic manner.
Now, landslide is an overused word, and it's sort of a general term to include lots of different processes of mass wasting.
Rockfall, where you have usually a steep slope and large chunks of rock literally falling through the air off a cliff.
Or a rock slide where large pieces of rock will tumble down the side of a mountain or hill.
Or an earth flow, also called a debris flow, where rock and soil together and trees and anything else tumble down together and slide down.
Or you can even have an avalanche where you have a lot of ice mixed in with the rock moving all together.
But all of these processes are quite destructive and cause about three and a half billion dollars worth of damage in the United States every single year.
Now, as I mentioned previously when I talked about Mount St. Helens, the largest ever recorded landslide happened during that volcanic eruption,
when an earthquake triggered the landslide that involved about 2.8 cubic kilometers of rock suddenly rushing to the north off the side of Mount St. Helens.
Most avalanches are much smaller, but they occur in a lot of regions and are capable of doing a tremendous amount of damage.
Now, a debris flow, as I said, is the name for a flow that involves mixture of rock, dirt and soil.
And the thing that's remarkable about this is they look incredibly fluid like as they flow, almost like a liquid.
And the reason is debris flows often will trap air underneath the debris flow, which cushions the rock and soil as it moves and it actually slides straight across the surface.
And as a result, can go for tens of kilometers outward with that air buoying up the rock as it flows.
They don't usually go that fast, 200 meters per hour to maybe 10 or 20 kilometers an hour, but they still can travel huge distances.
Some of the most destructive and deadly forms of mass wasting are when you mix water with mud or ash and make a mud flow.
This involves either heavy rains, such as white follow a hurricane.
When Hurricane Mitch hit the Central America, Nicaragua, El Salvador countries there, there were devastating mud flows that followed as all that rain got dumped in the hills and washing out.
And we've seen two forms of these deadly types of mud flows, both from earthquakes and volcanoes.
In the case of a volcano, when ash mixed with water, you get a lahar, a volcanic mud flow, often even made more deadly by the fact that the material can be tremendously hot.
And when you have the shaking of an earthquake, as I mentioned, you get this liquefaction where the ground behaves like quick sand and can then flow and loses all its integrity.
Now, certain parts of the world are more susceptible to the dangers of debris flow than others.
Regions that are steeper, obviously, are going to have a greater hazard, but regions that have a lot of people pose an added risk.
A classic example is the San Gabriel Mountain region in Los Angeles.
Here, you have a very steep region that is ultimately subject to droughts or forest fires or flooding.
And you have a lot of people who live up in these regions.
As a result, there are often enormous debris flows that actually wash entire houses away or will flow in their back door, flow right through the house and out their front door and down the hill.
Los Angeles continues to build catch basins to try to collect some of this debris as it flows.
But these catch basins keep filling up from the mud and soil that gets washed into them and they have to be continuously dredged and reopened up in order to make way for further debris flows.
Now, mass wasting, I said, doesn't just happen quickly. It can also happen at intermediate speeds.
And one of the most interesting forms is that of a slump.
A slump happens when a whole cohesive block of soil or rock slides downhill as a single unit.
You see this a lot at the base of streams where the stream is cut down and a whole block of the shore of the bank washes suddenly into the stream,
eventually carried away and widening out the stream valley.
This happens a lot along roads as well, where you may build a road by making a road cut through a mountain and often after a period of rain,
whole sides of the mountain may slide right into the road.
One of the most interesting stories I've ever heard was a story by John McPhee in called Los Angeles Against the Mountains,
where he talked about a man who had gone on vacation and had left his sprinkler on on his property,
which is sort of an inappropriate thing to do in a drought prone region like Los Angeles.
However, when he got back from vacation, he found that the water had soaked into the land around his property and not only his house,
but his whole lot had slid downhill, in fact, had washed right across the street onto the other side.
Now, landslides and debris flows are dramatic, but actually as much damage occurs in the U.S. from the processes of creep and subsidence.
Creep is a process of the ground moving slowly down a little bit, either by alternate freezing and thawing or wetting and drying.
Have you ever seen along the side of a bank, of a river or a cliff, trees that sort of stick out sideways and then bend up?
Or have you ever seen fences and poles that are tilted downward? This is because the whole slope is slowly moving down.
What happens is usually you get water in the ground, let's say, during the winter, and when it freezes, the whole ground expands out,
and then when it thaws during the day, gravity pulls it straight down.
It freezes, expands out, thaws and goes down, and the ground zig-zags its way down day after day.
You can't see it happening, but over decades or centuries, you can move whole walls, roads and buildings downhill.
Very costly, though it's actually hard to assess the dollar value.
Now, as I mentioned in the lecture on natural disasters, slides and slumps are often triggered by earthquakes, and especially the largest deadliest ones.
For example, an earthquake in China in 1920 in the Ningxia region killed about 100,000 people.
It created 675 separate landslides and actually formed more than 40 lakes when these landslides filled in streams.
In Tajikistan in 1949, a magnitude 7.5 earthquake killed between 12 and 20,000 people.
33 different villages were wiped away and destroyed by the rock slide that became a large debris avalanche as it spread outward.
In 1970, a very destructive earthquake, a magnitude 7.7, created debris flows that reached speeds of up to 280 kilometers per hour,
and is estimated to have killed about 18,000 people.
Now, interestingly, one form of avalanche and debris flow that I talked about that you can't see are these turbidity flows that occur when sediment builds up offshore.
These regions involve sometimes enormous areas of sediment sliding down off the continental slope.
A set of slides off the coast of Norway called the Sturrega Slides happened a little more than 8,000 years ago,
and this involved about 290 kilometers of the coastal shelf of Norway.
The volume of rock was unbelievable. It was about 3,500 cubic kilometers and actually created a devastating tsunami for Scotland.
There are actually concerns presently that development of gas fields in that area may potentially trigger future slides.
One of the best known that happened in North America happened off the coast of Newfoundland in 1929 called the Grand Banks Landslide.
It was triggered by an earthquake, a magnitude 7.2, that involved a volume of about 200 cubic kilometers of rock sliding down the Newfoundland coast.
We actually documented that process very well because it snapped 12 telegraph cables between America and Europe,
and we could actually see as those cables went one after the other how that underwater turbidity flow washed down the slope.
Interestingly, that was the last big tsunami to hit this region.
There was a tsunami that was about 20 feet high that hit along the coast of Newfoundland.
It actually killed 29 people and left about 10,000 homeless.
Actually, it was made worse by a blizzard at the time.
Now, there's a tremendous amount of geologic significance of the whole process of mass wasting.
The whole process of loss of rock is really the foundation for how the surface of our land gets shaped.
It happens in two principal ways, down cutting and headward erosion.
What happens as that stream can cut down a valley and mention that it erodes the base eventually making the slope steeper, unstable,
and you have all sorts of landslides and slumps as that material washes into the stream and eventually gets carried away by the stream.
Over time, this process can widen out a valley to the point that you can start with a flat plateau
and end up with an enormous canyon like the Grand Canyon through that continued process of down cutting.
As that stream works its way down, keeping that same angle of repose so the farther down the stream goes, the farther out that valley goes,
keeping the same angle at all times on either side.
At the same time, you have a process of headward erosion where as you drop down the stream, you also wear back at the stream at its headwaters.
This creates essentially a V that cuts back up into the land and so you have a stream not only cutting down but also extending into the land and along all the tributaries.
So in a case like the Grand Canyon, you not only have the stream cutting in the direction that it's flowing but in all the valleys you begin to cut upwards.
Over time, what may have begun as a single flat plateau will now have none of the initial rock from the surface left and we call that a badlands topography.
The whole thing is incredibly weathered into a set of ridges and valleys.
Now, a special case of headward erosion occurs when you have a soft layer of rock that lies underneath a harder layer.
In this case, you develop usually a waterfall because the water has a harder time eroding away the stiffer cap rock.
But you can also have an undermining of the rock from the erosion of the weaker rock underneath and this creates a large waterfall that moves back in time.
The classic example of this are the Niagara Falls where these falls that we currently see existing right at the boundary between the U.S. and Canada are actually moving back at about 3 feet a year.
An enormous amount of water flows over Niagara Falls. It's about 100,000 cubic meters every second but it flows over a fairly stiff cap of rock.
It's a type of rock called dolastone. It's an altered limestone and underneath that dolastone is a weaker rock shale.
And as the water flows off Niagara, it wears away at the shale which undermines the top dolastone rock and begins to cut that valley back.
So if you look at Niagara from above, you can see there's a broad cliff called the Niagara Escarpment that extends over quite a large geographic region.
And cutting its way up along the river is the Niagara Falls, moving back a few feet every year.
Now, the whole process of rocks falling downhill happens in ways that aren't always visible from the surface.
One of the most destructive is the process of land subsidence. It's a huge problem in many parts of the world.
In fact, it affects about 45 states in the United States covering an area of about 17,000 square miles.
In fact, the average annual damage is considered to be about $125 million.
What happens is we are actively pumping fluids out of the ground, both water and oil.
Well, that water takes up volume. As you remove that material, the whole elevation drops, sometimes by up to tens of meters over a century.
This is a huge problem for regions that are at sea level because over time they become below sea level.
For instance, New Orleans is the classic example.
In New Orleans, storm water has to be pumped up into the Mississippi River.
Why? Because 49% of New Orleans is actually below sea level.
In fact, the mean elevation of the city of New Orleans is 1 to 2 feet below sea level and dropping all the time,
because water and petroleum is pumped out from underground.
Some parts of New Orleans now are 10 feet below sea level.
You can see why this region is such a potential hazard where hurricanes like Katrina can cause so much damage.
If the water overflows the levees, it floods a region that's already below sea level.
Now, in lecture 35, I'm going to talk about caves and the whole process of water moving underground.
There's an interesting effect of collapse and drop-up of mass wasting that occurs when you develop a large cave network that begins to collapse.
When the surface of the rock falls down, we get something called a sinkhole.
There have been cases where whole buildings have been actually swallowed by a sinkhole that suddenly develops.
It's very dangerous in a lot of urban areas because when they were first settled, they were filled in and the land was leveled.
You can't see where those sinkholes are anymore.
For instance, the city of St. Louis where I live is a region that had a lot of sinkholes,
but early on those sinkholes were levelled in and flattened in order to make buildings.
Well, we have no record now of where many of those sinkholes are and a new one could develop at any point anywhere along the surface.
Over tremendous amounts of time, underground water flow, underground cave systems develop a very eroded, mature topography called a karst topography.
If you've ever seen some of these dramatic photographs from China and Thailand of these large towers of rock, they're called karst towers,
and they are all the remains of a land that used to be much higher but has now entirely eroded away.
It happens usually in regions with tremendous amounts of rain and enormous amounts of erosion.
The caves have worn away the ground underneath, the surfaces collapsed down and eroded away,
and all you have are those few standing towers left.
Now, mass wasting is just part of the whole story of the erosion of the surface.
Gravity also causes the flow of water and ice downhill,
and these work together with mass wasting simultaneously to essentially move mountains created from tectonics into the ocean.
And in the next lecture, I'm going to focus on the role that streams play in driving mass wasting and in shaping the land.
