Welcome. In this lecture I want to talk about streams. Streams are really the focal point
of land-based geology. There are highways, not only for people but for rock. Streams
are intersections of the rock cycle and the water cycle, and they do everything. They
erode, they transport, they deposit, lots of rock all the time. Streams have personality.
They're usually mellow, in fact sometimes meandering, but sometimes lose their tempers,
driving it up to here and flooding dramatically. And streams, in most countries, are also big
business. In fact, did you know what the world's largest engineering project is? No, it's
no longer the pyramids. By many standards, the Mississippi River Levy System, maintained
by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, is the single largest engineering project in the
world. The continuous daily battle to keep that mighty river in its present course and
prevent it from finding a new one. That includes efforts to keep places like New Orleans from
flooding. Now, remember my sandcastles from the last lecture. Take a land full of sandcastles
and drizzle water all over them and continue that for millions of years. This is what happens
to the land of continents when rain falls on it. Huge interconnected stream systems
have evolved. So, if a drop of rain falls most anywhere on Earth's surface, a network
of streams can carry that back to the ocean. Now remember, previously I talked about how
much work was done along that path from a falling raindrop to the ocean, an enormous
amount of energy that went into shaping the surface of the land. Well, streams are just
continuous conveyor belts carrying that sediment to lakes or oceans. And evaporation and precipitation
is really just the return part of that whole large conveyor belt. Now, the amount of sediment
that's carried by a stream is called the sediment load. And streams carry the load in a lot of
different ways. For very large rocks and boulders, they're too heavy to be actually
supported and held by the water. And so, they are rolled along the bottom of the stream.
That's called the traction load. For sand-sized particles, they go through an unusual process
where they actually bounce along the stream floor. They're hydraulically lifted by the
water, but they're too heavy to float within the water and they sink back down onto the
floor again for a while. That's called the saltation load. That process of jumping, leaping
is called saltation. And there's a suspended load, which is comprised of material that
is light enough to actually be held by the water. It's usually very fine particles of
clay and silt. And it's what gives the water often a very muddy appearance. For instance,
I once hiked along the base of the Colorado River to the junction of the Colorado and
Little Colorado Rivers. Now, the water coming down the Colorado had gone through the Hoover
Dam and most of its sediment had been separated out from the water. However, the Little Colorado
hadn't gone through any such dam and it was very, very brown and muddy. In fact, it was
striking to see the contrast of the Little Colorado River flowing into the Colorado,
this brown streak of water, the color of what the whole Colorado should have been and was
before the dam went in. In addition, there's also the dissolved load, which is what I talked
about previously with weathering. These are ions of different minerals that are actually
in solution within the water itself. Dissolved rock that can be up to a couple percent of
the weight of the water, carried within the water, even if you can't see it. Now, how
much rock a stream carries is dependent upon a variety of factors. The primary ones are
how big the stream is and how fast it's going and how fast a stream moves is a largely result
of the slope of the land and the volume of the water. In general, the steeper the slope
is, the faster the water flows. But you can't use this as a rule. For instance, picture
a mountain stream. The slope of the mountain might be very steep, but the water doesn't
actually go very fast because it may trickle down bouncing from rock to rock. And you can
go to the lower Mississippi, which is incredibly flat. In fact, it's so flat that it drops
an elevation less than a foot for every kilometer that it flows, but it still moves tremendously
fast because it has a huge volume of water. In addition, the largest size of rock that
a stream can carry turns out to be very dependent upon its speed. I mentioned this previously.
Particles of clay and silt can be held by most any stream, but in order to carry sand
or gravel or larger cobbles, you need enormous amounts of water, huge volumes in the case
of very large boulders. Now, streams are always both eroding and depositing sediment. It's
sort of like a yin and yang of streams. They're constantly lifting rock and dropping it back
out and carrying that rock along. The stream has a particular carrying capacity. That's
that equilibrium point between erosion and deposition. In fact, the stream will quickly
reach that carrying capacity by either picking up sediment or dropping out sediment until
it reaches that equilibrium. Even if a stream is neither eroding nor depositing material
at any location, it's still always transporting it. So you may look at a stream and there's
no rock depositing or no erosion occurring. It's always carrying rock, dropping out sediment
on the floor, picking it up back again. However, if the stream changes speeds or changes its
volume, if conditions change, then the carrying capacity of that stream is changed. It's essentially
knocked out of equilibrium and it will either erode or deposit in order to get back into
equilibrium. So if the streams suddenly were to slow down, the sediment is no longer able
to be held to the same degree and it drops out and the stream goes into a mode of deposition.
If that stream suddenly speeds up, it will pick up sediment. It will erode the rock away
from its bank and carry more and more material until it reaches that equilibrium point again.
Point is that the stream is constantly in balance between erosion and deposition. Now,
the biggest single factor affecting the carrying capacity of a stream is the volume of water.
That's often affected by the amount of rain or precipitation in the previous days or weeks
or even months before. If you go into a period of extended drought, you will drive your stream
into a mode of deposition. You'll begin to drop the rock out. Not as much water, not
traveling as fast, can't carry the bigger cobbles and gravel and it deposits the rock
out. If you have a situation where you have had a lot of rain and you go into a mode of
extended flooding, you end up with extensive erosion. So periods of floods are often periods
where the majority of the rock actually is washed downstream, either moved all the way
to the ocean or at least moved some distance downstream until the next large flood.
The change in this carrying capacity along the course of a stream creates a stream profile.
Turns out streams, of course, often follow very variable paths as they work their way
from areas of high elevation like mountains to the ocean. But if you could straighten
out a stream and just lay it out on a straight line, you would see a characteristic shape
that resembles a parabola. It's fairly flat coming away from the ocean and as you get
into the mountainous region, it increases its slope. It becomes steeper quite quickly.
As that stream moves its way across the land, often changing its direction, it will work
to maintain that profile. In other words, over the course of a stream's path, the total
amount of sediment will be either eroded or deposited in order to maintain that particular
shape of the stream profile. Now, the total amount of sediment along the stream tends
to increase. This occurs primarily because other streams join in with it and the volume
of a stream increases. These other streams are called tributaries. However, streams tend
to be much more erosional at their headwaters and they tend to be much more depositional
towards their mouths. And that makes total sense, right? Mountains get moved to the oceans
and not the other way around. You erode away primarily in the top part of a stream where
the slopes are steeper. You deposit where the stream levels out and becomes more flat.
When the stream actually reaches its end, which is either in an ocean or a lake, the
speed suddenly drops dramatically. And as the water velocity decreases, the amount of sediment
it can carry within it suddenly drops. And that sediment gets deposited in place at the
mouth of the stream. We call this region a delta. It's usually a broad expanse of sediment
that is deposited because of the sudden drop in velocity of the water, but therefore a
drop in the carrying capacity of the stream. Now, the stream works very hard to maintain
that profile and it does it in a couple different ways. First of all, it will change its slope
to keep that parabolic shape. I mean, it's not doing this intentionally, of course. It
just happens naturally because let's say you have a situation where the change in elevation
results from new rock being exposed. A change in slope will change the speed of the water
and the change in the speed of the water will change that carrying capacity. So erosion
or deposition will occur to smooth out that profile again. For instance, let's say the
water were to suddenly go over a cliff. The speed of the water accelerates. If that happens
and it's going faster, it goes into a mode of erosion. It will wear away the rock at
that waterfall. Over time, the waterfall will be obliterated and you return again to that
parabolic shape. If the water were to suddenly level out, let's say flowing into a lake,
the water will slow, the sediment will be deposited again, and you'll return again to
your stream profile. As a result, lakes turn out to be very short lived. Now, lakes form
through all sorts of different reasons. Tectonic reasons from faulting, erosional features,
depositional, glacial, even man-made lakes, but deposition will always eventually fill
them in because the water velocity drops, the sediment drops out, and eventually you return
simply to a flat stream profile again. This turns out to be a huge problem with human-made
dams. Now, dams are in general very beneficial for a variety of reasons, but they're also
quite controversial. Dams are put in primarily either to store water for dry periods or to
provide power. In many parts of the world, you may get extended months of a lot of rain
followed by extended periods, months of dry climate. You want to store that water for
those dry periods so you build a dam. Hydroelectric power is a wonderful source of clean energy.
It doesn't burn any sort of fossil fuel. It doesn't create carbon dioxide as a byproduct.
However, dams have problems in that if water sits in a dam for a while, it begins to evaporate
quite quickly. And in fact, you actually have a net loss of water because if the water sits
there and you increase its surface area, evaporation happens by water at the surface being excited
by the electromagnetic radiation from the sun, breaking the weak bonds between the water
molecules and having them fly off as water vapor. Wider area for the surface means more
loss of liquid water into water vapor. Standing water also has other problems. Mosquitoes
will begin to increase their populations. In fact, there has been a documentation of
an increase in outbreaks of diseases like malaria carried by mosquitoes in places where
dams were put in. Dams, frankly, are also very expensive to maintain because they accumulate
sediment. When I went down into the Grand Canyon and I saw that Colorado River, the
water was unusually clear because so much of the sediment had been accumulated behind
the Hoover Dam. Over time, you've got to dredge that dam to remove the sediment or
the dam will fill up. Below the dam, the water that comes out doesn't have sediment in it.
It's well below its carrying capacity, so it's going to begin to pick up rock, and that
process can actually undermine a dam, tearing away rock at the base of the dam in order
to reach its carrying capacity, and over time that can actually cause the failure of
a dam. Now, I've talked quite a bit previously about the Grand Canyon. Well, it turns out
a major part of the reason that the Grand Canyon even exists is because of this process
of a stream trying to maintain its profile. Yes, the Colorado Plateau was tectonically
uplifted, but that occurred many tens of millions of years ago. The whole region was
broadly brought up. The Grand Canyon, it turns out, is less than 5 million years old, and
the reason is at that time the Colorado River changed its course. It found a shorter path
to the ocean. It drained into the recently opened Gulf of Baja. That shortening of the
stream length made the river cut down in order to go back to a parabolic stream profile.
In order to maintain that stream profile shape, the stream actually cut down through the canyon.
So, yes, the canyon had been uplifted, or I'm sorry, the whole plateau had been uplifted,
but the stream cut down over a fairly short period of time. 5 million years is remarkably
short for something as dramatic as the mile deep canyon that the Grand Canyon is.
Now, stream systems develop over broad geographic regions in order to carry the water from that
whole region out into the ocean. These regions are called drainage basins, and they're largely
controlled by topography. Now, streams, you may have noticed, often have what we call
a fractal distribution. They look like a tree with a main trunk that branches out into lots
of smaller branches that then branch out into even smaller branches. They develop so that
rain that falls anywhere within that drainage basin can eventually get into some tributary
and work its way into larger tributaries and eventually out into the mainstream and into
the ocean. The very largest drainage basins empty enormous areas and carry huge amounts
of sediment. The largest ones are the Ganges in India, the Huanghe, formerly the Yangtze
River in China, the Amazon River in South America, the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, and
the Mississippi Rivers. The divisions between these drainage basins we call divides, and
the most significant ones geographically are continental divides. They separate basins
that actually drain to different oceans. Some of these are quite large and obvious. The
Rocky Mountains that run down the middle of North America represent a continental divide.
Water that falls to the west of that divide will eventually end up in the Pacific Ocean.
Water that falls on the east side will usually make its way eventually into the Mississippi
River and into the Gulf of Mexico part of the Atlantic Ocean. However, remember I gave
the example of a very unimpressive divide, Ridge Avenue in Chicago, where rain that falls
to the east of Ridge Avenue goes into the Great Lakes out the St. Lawrence Seaway and
into the North Atlantic, whereas rain that falls on the west side of the road works its
way eventually into the Illinois River and then the Mississippi River and then in the
Gulf of Mexico. When that water makes it eventually to the ocean, it's carrying so much sediment
that it actually clogs the whole base of the stream, and in fact the stream will break
apart into a wide set of distributaries. You often end up with a large delta that spans
a broad region. The areas around deltas have traditionally been very highly populated because
the soil there is tremendously rich and fertile. You've brought down all this sediment from
the surrounding continent and dumped it right there. What happens in the case of many deltas
is during a time of flood, the river banks overflow and sediment is deposited in a layer
all across the region. The waters recede and for the whole next year you have a more enriched
soil for agriculture. Deltas take a lot of different shapes. The reason that they're
called delta, the Greek letter delta, is actually based on the Nile River, and it goes back
to the time when the Greeks occupied Egypt. The Nile delta forms a D-shape because currents
in the Mediterranean are active enough to rework and remove the sediment around. If
you have lots of sediment and you don't have strong ocean currents, the deltas can take
a very different shape. The classic example of that is the bird foot delta of the Mississippi.
Here you have an enormous amount of sediment coming out, 500 million tons every year, but
you don't have very strong currents in the Gulf of Mexico and the sediment simply gets
deposited and left wherever it gets put. When that clogs up, the mouth of the Mississippi
jumps to another region and deposits sand there. When that clogs up, it goes and dumps
in another region, and over time you get these little extensions, these feet of the delta
that extend further and further out into the Gulf.
What happens along the course of a stream is you develop what's called a flood plain.
Now it's interesting, if you were to look at the course of a stream over a period of
year or a couple of years, it doesn't look like the stream is moving its shape much, but
if you could look at a stream over decades or centuries, you would see that stream move
all about its flood plain. Now a flood plain is usually bounded on the sides by valley
walls or bluffs, but inside it's fairly flat and over time that stream can actually cover
and occupy any place within the flood plain. This happens through an unusual process called
meandering. Now it's interesting, a stream over time will not take the shortest path
from up high down low, and it happens through an interesting process. Let's say you have
a stream that's moving straight, and it begins to just bend a little bit. It hits a rock
that knocks it outward. Well, as that stream flows, the flow of the water is going to hit
the bank on the outside harder. It's going to wear that rock away. The water is going
to be traveling more slowly on the inside of that bend, so it'll deposit there. That's
going to move that bend over and over. Over large periods of time, the stream will actually
follow out into a meander and back. That will occur until a large flood that causes the
stream to cut straight across that meander, cutting off the meander into what we call
an oxbow lake. If you fly across the country and look down at any region that has a large
river, you'll see lots of these little crescent-shaped lakes near the river. Every one of these
is a former meander that has since been cut off by the flow of the lake. Over time, though,
those meanders will cover all parts of the flood plain. I think of it as, if you ever
have an air hose that suddenly loses its head and just sort of whips about, that's what
the stream would look like in geologic time, trapped within the boundaries, however, of
its stream valley. Now, when streams flood and water overflows the bank, an interesting
process occurs. Water carrying sediment goes out over the banks and slows. As soon as it
slows, the sediment drops out. And so the stream will naturally build up levees on either
side of the stream. Overall, over the long-time course of a stream, those streams will continually
widen the valley. They'll erode away the bluffs. At the same time, they will continually deposit
on the flood plain, raising up the valley. So again, a stream within a flood plain is
a balance of erosion and deposition. Now, the process of flooding represents the far end
of that catastrophe continuity spectrum that I've talked about several times in the class.
And it turns out flooding is incredibly important geologically, because during a flood, both
the stream volume and its carrying capacity can increase by more than 100 times. This
is when the largest boulders are moved, and this is when the largest volume of rock is
moved. The worst recent flood in the United States happened in 1993 along the Mississippi
River. Many regions of the central part of the country were flooded for more than half
the year, and the Mississippi broke through levees up and down its northern part. In fact,
the river came within two feet of topping the levees in downtown St. Louis, which were
52 feet high, 52 feet in elevation above normal levels. The flood did $15 billion worth of
damage, and the flow was so great, about 30,000 cubic meters a second that it would have filled
up the Cardinals baseball stadium, Bush Stadium, in about a minute. It once drove across the
connection between the Missouri and the Mississippi floodplain just before that road was shut down,
as the rivers were rising. At that point, there's normally several miles of separation
between the Missouri and Mississippi rivers. However, the stream was coming up, and as
I drove across the road, the water was overlapping onto the road and was almost covering the
entire extent across. The next day, the road was entirely flooded over, and the whole region
for miles and width became a single river, essentially joining the Missouri and the Mississippi
rivers into a single large floodplain. Floods, historically, are one of the worst causes
of natural disaster outside of disease, though unfortunately the two are often related. Flooding
along the Huanke River in 1931 is reported to have killed upwards of 3.7 million people,
and is the worst geological natural disaster of the past century.
Humans have a very interesting relationship with streams, in particular the whole process
of developing cities of urbanization tremendously impacts the water cycle. Urbanization actually
increases the damage from flooding, and the reason is quite simple. Normally, about 10%
of rain water, the water that is not quickly evaporated or transpired from plant leaves,
goes into streams, and the rest goes into the ground. Most of rain water that doesn't
get returned right back to the atmosphere goes into the ground, but this is obviously
not the case in cities. With paving, with sewers, about 90% of the rain water on average
will be washed into sewer systems and out into streams. Well, this does two things.
It exacerbates the process of flooding, because you take the water all across the land, and
you flush it right back into the stream, causing it often to exceed its levees and break levees
that it might not have done otherwise. Also, it causes these levees to break catastrophically
when they do break. In addition, the sewers in general increase
the amount of runoff off the land, and decrease the amount of water that goes back into the
ground, and this is bad, especially for areas that rely upon groundwater. I mean, it's a
double whammy. In regions that have a lot of urbanization, you have high populations,
and they often draw heavily upon groundwater. But the very existence of the city means you
have less water going back into the ground to recharge the groundwater underneath, and
you have more water flowing out into the stream and out into the ocean.
Now, streams are so important for transportation, both for people and for materials, and in particular,
for resources that are trucked up and down the stream, that a tremendous amount of work
goes into maintaining them. The Mississippi River levees, maintained by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, involves a complicated process of floodgates that control the levels
of the river, and dredging and building levees in order to keep that river available for shipping
up and down. Also, a large percentage of the country's
oil refineries are along the base of the Mississippi in the Gulf region, and it's really important
to keep access to this whole system. Well, following Hurricane Katrina, the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers was actually given an additional $15 billion to help bolster the
flood protection for New Orleans and help keep this whole region of the Mississippi River
functioning. A big problem is the Mississippi River is many feet above street level in New
Orleans, and stormwater actually has to be pumped up into it. However, the Mississippi
keeps extending outward into the Gulf, and the danger is, parallel to the Mississippi,
to the west, is a distributary called the Atchafalaya River. It's actually a shorter
route to the sea. Now, engineers noticed back in the 1950s that more and more of the Mississippi
water began to flow into the Atchafalaya. In fact, it began to be about 30% of the total
water flowing out, and they predicted that eventually the Mississippi would actually
jump there, and the whole New Orleans and southern Mississippi region would be left
dry. Well, at that point, Congress instructed the Army Corps of Engineers to maintain that
70%, 30% balance of water. That's when the Old River control structure, as it's called,
was developed, a massive set of floodgates. Well, the Mississippi Delta has jumped around
over history continuously, dumping sediment in one region and then another, one day a
large flood will probably break through the Mississippi levees in Louisiana. The river
at that point may jump to the Atchafalaya for good, leaving the Mississippi high and
dry, literally. In other words, once you lose a giant river like that, it's gone, and you
can't get it back. I've now talked about water in the atmosphere, in the oceans, and
in this lecture across the land. And in the next lecture, I want to talk about the flow
of water through a very different part of the hydrologic cycle, a place that we can't
see, the flow of groundwater beneath the surface.
