If you ever fly over Oklahoma, Nebraska, you will hardly recognize them as the same places
as the Dust Bowl that they were in the 1920s and 1930s.
This is especially true if you ever read The Grapes of Wrath or saw the classic movie version
of it.
How did this remarkable transformation occur?
How is it that what was once a desert is now rich and green and produces a huge percentage
of our country's crops?
The answer actually has nothing to do with what currently lies overhead, clouds or rain
or weather, the things I talked about in the lecture on the atmosphere.
The answer is underground.
The Ogallala Aquifer, a huge underground reservoir of water, lies from Texas to South Dakota,
providing a tremendous amount of water, and water pulled out of this underground reservoir
has entirely rejuvenated the land there.
In this lecture, I want to talk about groundwater.
Groundwater has more than a hundred times the amount of freshwater than in streams and
lakes combined, and we are hugely dependent upon it for our agriculture.
However, groundwater is an incredibly delicate resource.
It's hard to get out of the ground, it's slow to recharge to refill, and it's easily contaminated.
Now, despite misconceptions, groundwater does not exist as huge, large underground rivers
or lakes.
It's water that exists in tiny, poor spaces that are actually within rocks and soil.
Now, I've already shown you that solid rock isn't immovable, that it still flows, that
was the whole foundation for mantle convection.
Well, it turns out that solid rock isn't even solid.
Even igneous rock contains small amounts of water within it.
The water exists actually within the rock, within small, poor spaces or along the boundaries
between mineral grains, and that water can flow through the rock, even rock that we think
to be or would view as being entirely solid.
Now, more water exists in rocks that have a high porosity, and porosity is a measure
of how much of that rock is actually empty space.
Rocks like sandstone and shale or eroded limestone, primarily sedimentary rocks, tend to have
very high porosities.
They hold a lot of water within them.
Why?
They form often from clasts, from particles, from bits of sediment, from previous rocks,
and when those clasts got stuck together, there are often spaces in between them.
When those spaces get filled with cement, but often they remain as empty space, good
places to store water.
Igneous and metamorphic rocks, which often form directly out of a magma, crystallized
from a magma, or in the case of metamorphic rocks, are squeezed and compressed so the poor
spaces are removed, these rocks often have very low porosities.
But even they can have non-zero porosities, especially when they're fractured, because
the cracks that can develop in a rock can provide avenues for water to travel through.
Now, the water flows through rocks more easily if they have a high permeability, and the
permeability is the measure of how easy it is for water to move through that rock.
High permeability occurs when the pores within a rock are well connected, and they develop
channels for that water to flow.
Sandstone and limestone tend to have high permeabilities as well.
The water can flow through them easily.
And again, the igneous and metamorphic rocks usually have quite low permeabilities.
However, there's a little bit of a surprise here, because the rock shale, which often
is hugely porous, in other words, as much as 30% of a shale may actually be empty space.
It has a very low permeability.
Why is this?
Because the pores are so small that they don't make it easy at all for the water to flow
through.
I can demonstrate that with two different types of sand.
Now, interestingly, we discovered this here in the lecture hall when we were trying to
do the demonstration on making sand castles, and we used this sand here, which is very
fine, and it just didn't work because the water didn't sink down into it.
Let me demonstrate.
Here's sand that's fairly coarse, and if I pour water into it, you can see the water
just soaks right into it very quickly.
However, if I take the sand next to it and pour water into it, that water sits on top
of the sand.
Why is that happening?
Well, it turns out that the porosity of both of these sands is about the same.
There are lots of little sand grains attached together, and the absolute size of them doesn't
matter, but in this sand, the sand is so fine that there aren't good channels.
It takes a long time for that water to sink in.
Now, if I were to let this sit here overnight, the water will eventually percolate down through
it, but it has a very low permeability, so it's going to take a long time.
Well, for human use, we want rocks with both a high porosity and a high permeability, and
we have a special name for those rocks.
We call them aquifers.
They are good for human use because a lot of water can reside within them, and it can
move through them quickly.
So if we pull that water out, more water is going to flow in to take its place.
And sandstone made from compacted sand is often the best aquifer, preferred if you're
drilling a well and you want to pull water up from underground.
Now, there are also layers of rock that prevent the flow of water, and those are called aquitards.
Here it would be a rock, often a shale, where water is just not able to cross it very easily.
Again, over geologic time, the water will still flow through it, but over the scale
of human usage, it just doesn't allow the water to flow through efficiently enough to
allow it to be used as an aquifer.
Now, an important thing to remember with groundwater is that the source of all the water is from
above.
It's rain water that seeps into the ground and percolates downward from the force of
gravity.
So, the aquifers get their water initially from above, and the rain water that goes
into it can take either a short amount of time or enormously long periods of time.
Now, most of the water that falls into the ground actually gets immediately evaporated
or absorbed by plants and transpired out of their leaves, but once water gets down below
that surface layer, it can penetrate very, very deeply, and eventually saturates way
down deep throughout the crust.
Now, interestingly, with that surface layer, over time, the water flowing through the top
of the rock makes soil.
We talked about that in the lecture on weathering, and so over time, more and more water flowing
through that rock will actually increase the permeability until you get a situation like
we had in tropical regions where the top layer, the layer of soil is so thick that any water
that flows into it just flushes right down through maybe tens or even hundreds of meters
of soil.
Aquifers are important for human use because they can supply water for very extended periods
of time, in particular, during periods of drought.
However, an aquifer will run dry if it's not recharged regularly by rainwater or some
source of precipitation, and this creates a problem because it turns out that many North
American and Eurasian aquifers are actually filled with water that's the melted runoff
from the last ice age.
Back 10,000 years ago, there was an enormous amount of water that was washing across the
continents from the kilometers thick of ice that were rapidly melting.
Well, it turns out those aquifers won't be fully recharged until the next big ice age
occurs and melts again, so we have to view this water underground as a limited natural
resource.
Yes, it will be eventually recharged, but not during the time of our lifetimes.
Now, the United States actually grows a fairly significant amount of its food from aquifers
like the Ogallala, but here's the concern.
We're withdrawing water faster than these aquifers are being recharged.
Now, I don't want to scare you.
In the case of the Ogallala, for example, there's still plenty of water left.
In fact, in the year 2005, there were 3.6 thousand cubic kilometers of water underground
there.
However, since the 1950s, this is a 9% decrease.
Now, that means even at the rate that we're currently pulling it out, there'll be a lot
of water left for a long amount of time.
But you can see that this is not sustainable over centuries.
The problem is our population is increasing.
The good thing is our agricultural techniques are getting much better and we're using much
smarter methods of taking the water and distributing them to the crops without them being lost
to evaporation.
It's just important for us to be aware that this is a limited resource and we have to
be very careful with it.
There are large parts of the world and our country as well that are developing a real
water stress where the increasing population is taking more and more of the water leaving
less behind.
The parts of the Southwestern US are in particular stress, areas like Phoenix and Albuquerque,
where we have booming populations but also ongoing drought and the result is a very heavy
draw on groundwater that won't be replaced for a long amount of time.
Now, the water underground has a very interesting mode of behavior.
It actually has a surface.
We call it the water table because it turns out the top layer of the ground is not always
saturated.
We call it the aerated zone, meaning it has air within it.
Now sometimes there's water in it when it rains and that rain percolates down through
the aerated zone but at the bottom of that is a zone of rock that's entirely saturated
meaning all the poor spaces are filled with water and the top of that saturated zone is
what we call the water table.
Now it's interesting, the water table roughly parallels the topography at the surface of
the land.
Where you have high elevation, the water table is increased.
Where you have valleys, the water table drops.
However, unlike surface topography, the water table goes up and down largely as a result
of how much precipitation is percolating down into it.
So if you have a period of extensive rains, you will actually raise up that water table.
This has very interesting implications for wells because you may have a well getting
your water that's working quite nicely and then you go into a period of drought and that
well may suddenly run dry because the water table has just dropped below the bottom of
your well.
Not necessarily mean, it doesn't necessarily mean you're done forever.
If there's a wet period, you may see water come back out again when that water table
rises up.
Sometimes you can actually see the water table at the surface.
Very often streams represent the intersection of the water table and the surface topography
where you get a valley dropping down and water constantly at the bottom that often controls
and the location of the water table.
Interestingly, with wells, the location of the water table is also tremendously dependent
upon local geology.
I actually have a cousin in Vermont who built a house once there and he had to drill down
about 20 feet to reach the water table.
Well, a house was put in across the street from him and they had to drill down about
150 feet to reach water.
There's no way to know until the wells are actually drilled.
My cousin just got lucky.
Now, springs are an interesting situation where water flows naturally out of the ground
and you don't have to drill for it and springs often form the beginnings of streams.
Springs form in a couple different ways.
The major way is where the water table intersects the surface and this can happen not only for
a stream but anywhere along the side of a hill or any region at all.
Sometimes that water table is not actually connected to the overall broad water table
but can be what we call a perched water table, water resting on top of a resistant layer
and aquatard and that water can flow across the top of the aquatard and come out of the
side of the hill.
Flows can also come out forced by hydraulic pressure.
Did you ever wonder why there are such things as a desert oasis?
Like do you ever watch a movie and the people ride camels across this sea of sand and all
of a sudden there are palm trees in the middle of the desert?
How did it get there?
Where does that come from?
Well, that's often the case of an artesian well where you have water that flows into
a layer of rock at high elevation and as that rock dips down across a desert, the water
gets pushed down across.
If you have something that breaks that layer such as a fault, the water will actually be
forced out by hydraulic pressure, the pressure of the water backed up throughout the layer
for the Sahara Desert.
Mountains like the Atlas Mountains cause this hydraulic pressure to develop at large distance
across the desert and that water can come up in the middle of the desert, water that
came in in the mountains, in the Atlas Mountains.
Now underground large air or water field passages often exist and we call these caves.
Primarily caves develop in limestone because limestone dissolves so easily.
Caves are remarkable situations which contain some of the most beautiful geologic formations.
Interestingly, caves don't form the way we see them.
Caves actually form beneath the water table at a time when the water, the whole level
of the water table is above a whole particular region.
Remember water is naturally acidic containing carbonic acid and underground it contains
other acids as well like tannic acids from dissolved leaves.
Well that material can dissolve away the calcium carbonate of limestone very quickly, carrying
it underground to the ocean and what's left behind are empty spaces, caves.
When the water table drops, these caves are left dry.
Now many caves that we find today formed following the end of the ice age because as the water
was flowing from the melting ice sheets, the water tables underground in the northern hemisphere
and in the southern hemisphere as well were at a higher level and this repeated cycle
of having ice ages washing large amounts of water into the ground has repeatedly caused
many caves to open up.
When caves are air filled, they often get filled with quite spectacular geologic structures
that we call speleothams.
You may know them as stalactites and stalagmites which when they come together can form columns.
The general name for rock that flows out of a cave is called flowstone and what happens
is as you have water percolating through the ground dissolving away minerals that water
is very saturated in material like calcium carbonate.
When it drips into a dry cave, the water evaporates leaving those minerals to begin to crystallize
to precipitate out of the water.
They can either hang from the top as a stalactite or grow from the bottom as a stalagmite but
over time you can fill the cave with all sorts of unusual structures.
The different colors often come from either the tannic acids from leaves or materials
minerals from different rocks that have been dissolved.
There are many tens of thousands of identified caves in the U.S. alone.
Some states have more than 5,000 mapped caves like Florida, Tennessee or Missouri.
The largest connected cave system we know of so far are mammoth caves in Kentucky where
actually 579 kilometers of passages have been mapped so far.
This is an incredible challenge because you are mapping structures in three dimensions
with no light and with no access to GPS.
In other words, you have no way of knowing where you are.
One of the most spectacular caves in the United States is Lechegia Cave in New Mexico.
It's one of the deepest caves in the U.S. that extends down over 1600 feet.
Interestingly, Lechegia and its neighbor, Carlsbad Cavern, formed from a very different
mechanism than the downward percolation of acidic water.
They actually form from rising sulfuric acid fumes which exist there as a geologic layer
from its previous tectonic history.
The world's largest single cave chamber yet discovered is in Borneo.
A Sarawak chamber is 600 by 400 meters in width and 80 meters high.
In other words, you could hold several baseball stadiums within this one single chamber.
Now, it won't last long.
Gravity will cause this to collapse eventually.
Caves also turn out to be very interesting biologically.
There are whole ecosystems that have evolved underground that don't directly rely upon
photosynthesis for the basis of their food chain.
Now I say don't directly rely because in many cases there's actually a lot of interaction
between the surface and underground for life.
But the life that exists in there has gone in different directions because of the lack
of light.
So blind and albino fish or salamanders have evolved because there's just no evolutionary
selection for color or for seeing.
In other words, these species have lost the ability to see or to generate colors due to
genetic drift over time.
However, unlike the mid-ocean ridge environments that I talked about, these areas do rely upon
photosynthesis indirectly because of creatures like bats that go in and out of the caves.
Places like Carlsbad Cavern, which I just mentioned, has 16 different species of bats
that go in and out each night when they're not hibernating.
The population in the past used to be on the order of millions, though actually in the
case of Carlsbad it's much smaller now.
But the cave life often relies on bat guano as the base of the food chain, a very different
food chain than the photosynthesis-based food chain at the surface.
Water is a very unusual situation in terms of human interaction with pollution.
Groundwater pollution is a very severe problem for a number of reasons.
First of all, water often flows very slowly through the ground.
And so once an aquifer is polluted, it can sometimes take thousands of years before those
pollutants can either flow out or before the ground will naturally clean itself.
Different pollutants will contaminate different parts of the groundwater and it's sometimes
hard to predict.
Heavy metals such as from industry, which tend to be heavy, will often sink to the bottom
of an aquifer.
But hydrocarbons like gasoline will sit on top of the aquifer and therefore will stay
there for tremendously long periods of time.
This is actually a huge problem in a lot of urban areas where the land underneath is
contaminated from, let's say, old gasoline station spills.
Back in the past we weren't as careful about these sorts of contaminants and once they
get into the ground sometimes they can stay there for long periods of time.
If the land requires the buyer to clean up that situation, then that land may remain
unsold and unusable for indefinite periods of time and a lot of old parts of cities suffer
from this problem.
Now the overuse of groundwater can also create some unusual contamination problems.
You can actually pull in pollutants into a region from over pumping of the water.
In other words, as you remove water from your well, if there is a case of polluted water
beneath a landfill or some other region, you can draw that water towards you.
This is a big problem in the Great Valley in California where towns are pulling in nitrogen
fertilizer into their drinking systems.
In other words, the nitrogen is used as a fertilizer across the agricultural regions,
but as the towns pull up their own water for drinking, they pull that nitrogen in and their
drinking systems are becoming polluted.
Near coastlines in regions like Long Island or Florida where you're near the ocean, increased
pumping of water can actually pull salt water into your well and you can eventually contaminate
your well with salt water through, again, creating a lowering of the pressure beneath
your well, pulling that salt water in.
Turns out that karst regions, the regions that I talked about in the previous lectures
are regions where there's tremendous amount of erosion in a limestone rich area where
you get these sinkholes.
Karst regions are especially susceptible to groundwater pollution.
The reason is the flow is so fast.
The ground is very interconnected and there have been many cases where people have dumped
their garbage into a sinkhole and actually have had those pollutants come out into their
drinking water a good distance away the very next day.
There's a particular problem with groundwater pollution and that is we can't see it to clean
it up.
We often can't tell how bad the situation is until it's too late, until the aquifer
is polluted.
One way to monitor the pollution is to put lots of drills down.
Unfortunately, this fractures the ground and creates a much faster dispersal of the contaminant
so it's not a great way to deal with it.
It's also very hard to get the contaminants out once they're in there.
You can pump them out, you can flush water in, in one region and pulling out it in the
other, but this is often a very hard thing to do.
Unfortunately, it turns out that many pollutants are naturally removed from the ground over
time by the ground itself.
They either bind to clay minerals and get stored as part of the clay or they get consumed
by bacteria which either exist or evolve to feed on the contaminants.
Speaking of bacteria underground, I need to tell you about one interesting discovery that
people made when they began to drill down into continental rock.
It turns out if you go down even several kilometers in regions and pull out rock that's a long
distance from the surface, you can find life within it.
Single-celled organisms called lithophiles, creatures that live within the rock exist
in places as deep as three kilometers or more and in water as hot as 75 degrees Celsius.
How do they do this?
Well, there's water, there's carbon dioxide dissolved in the water that supplies their
carbon.
They reproduce incredibly slowly because there's just not a lot of room for their offspring,
but they're alive and it turns out that anywhere that we found that liquid water exists, life
also exists in one form or the other.
Speaking of life, water turns out to be crucial for life on other planets besides Earth.
A large part of the whole NASA program of space exploration involves looking for other
planets or other situations where life might exist and the basis for that is water, not
only in terms of where life might have evolved separately from the Earth but also as a place
for the potential human colonization.
In other words, it's going to be really hard for us to go to some other planet if there
isn't water there already.
Now, we've had a lot of interest in Mars.
Mars doesn't have any water at the surface, but it may have water underground and an important
goal of future missions is actually look at the groundwater situation beneath the surface
of Mars because frankly if there is water there, we'll probably live there at some point.
Now the moon used to be the site of a lot of interest for future colonization, but it
turns out the moon just doesn't seem to have any water.
Interestingly, one of the most obvious signs of this comes from moonquakes.
If you look at a picture of seismic waves on the Earth and the moon, you can see why.
The earthquakes that we have all the time on our own planet, the waves actually get
damped out very quickly.
If you look at a seismogram over the period of an hour, you can see that within minutes
most of the energy of the earthquake is gone.
However, if you look at a seismogram from a moonquake and we had these with the Apollo
missions, for instance in this picture you can see a moonquake from the Apollo 12 mission.
A single moonquake will cause the crust to reverberate for hours.
You can see in this case that the crust keeps shaking and vibrating.
Why?
Because there's no water within the ground on the moon.
There's nothing there to damp it out.
It turns out that the surface tension of water between the grains of the Earth really helped
to damp out seismic vibrations.
On the moon, the crust just keeps reverberating because there's no water there.
Frankly, if we can get to other planets and put seismometers on them as well by looking
simply at how the ground shakes from a quake, we can find out if there's water in the ground
there as well.
Well, I've now talked about the role of liquid water in the atmosphere, oceans on land, and
beneath the land.
And I actually have one more important environment to talk about, and that's shorelines.
It turns out that even though shorelines take up a very small percentage of Earth's surface,
they're responsible for an enormous amount of geologic change, and we'll talk about that
in the next lecture.
