Welcome. In this lecture, I want to talk about ocean shorelines. Now, there are some geologic
processes that occur very slowly. For instance, we just finished talking about groundwater
systems where things actually change very slowly across enormous areas, whole continents.
Well, ocean shorelines are just the opposite. Shoreline areas, beaches occupy a tiny percentage
of the world's surface, but they create a huge percentage of surface rocks. In a sense,
they're sort of like mid-ocean ridges of the land. The mid-ocean ridges, after all, occupy
a very small percentage of the surface of the earth. They're like a seam of a baseball
stretching around the planet, but they're factories where all the ocean seafloor rock
is made. Well, shorelines are like that for the continents because it's at the shorelines
that almost all of the platform sedimentary rocks are formed. Remember, the sandstone and
shale and limestone that we find draping large portions of the continents, they form primarily
in narrow regions at ocean shorelines. Now, the whole system of a shoreline is dominated
by the presence of ocean waves, which are very powerful agents of erosion. They're constantly
shaping and reshaping the continental coasts. However, waves also play a very important role
in transportation in moving those sediments up and down the coastlines and also in deposition
in placing sediments in one new location brought from another. And that occurs in particularly
when water slows down and loses its carrying capacity, dropping sediment out. Now, wave
action wants to straighten out coastlines, but it never succeeds because the sea level
is constantly changing. And I'm going to come back to this a few times during this lecture.
Shorelines represent this constant struggle between these two major forces affecting coastlines.
Wave action, which wants to straighten the coastlines out, and sea level changes, which
always resets the coastline with a new shape, a new contour. Now, however, there's a tremendous
importance of an ocean shoreline system from a geological perspective, and that's due
to the creation of sedimentary rock. As I just said, they represent factories that create
most of the rock that we see on the surface. But there are other factors involved. The
shoreline processes aren't the whole story. And let me give you a clear example of why
this might be the case. Let me show you this decoral limestone. You may remember this back
from lecture number two. This is a limestone that formed near my home in St. Louis. It's
from the Ordovician period, and it forms from the compaction of organic material, largely
clams and shells and corals. However, St. Louis is very far from the ocean, but this
is a marine limestone formed near a shoreline environment. So how did it form? Well, obviously
the shoreline must have passed over St. Louis at this point in time. But here's the interesting
question. How? How did that happen? Because you may also remember I said that if all the
ice melted, in other words, Antarctic and Greenland and all the glaciers that we find
in mountains, the sea level would rise about 70 meters. That's about 230 feet. But St.
Louis is 450 feet above sea level. So how did this rock form? Well, this is a very important
point, and I'm going to return to this question later on in the lecture. Now, a huge key to
the whole dynamics of the ocean shoreline geology is the presence of these ocean waves
that are responsible for the erosion and deposition of rock. Now, ocean waves, like any kind of
wave, represent a transmission of energy from one place to another. That's all the way this.
It's energy in motion. In the case of ocean waves, the source is the wind, from air blowing
across the surface of the ocean, and ultimately the source of the energy that drives the air
circulation comes from the sun. So the sun is responsible for the wind and therefore
for ocean waves. And the air, the air circulation across the surface gets considerably stronger
during storms. So the largest, most powerful ocean waves, the ones that do the most geologic
work, come from storms located somewhere else. And in that sense, waves actually travel and
carry energy enormous distances. It's quite common for a storm to happen on one side of
the ocean and then have those ocean waves travel, losing very little energy in the process
across the deep ocean, bringing them in towards the coastline. Out on the deep sea, the waves
don't change the water. The water, it just goes in a rolling motion as the wave comes
back and returns right back to its location. The reason here is that waves in the deep
water don't affect the deep part of the ocean much. They have a fairly limited depth. But
as those waves approach the shoreline, the waves will slow because the wave itself will
actually begin to drag upon the bottom as it shallows. Remember when I talked about
tsunamis? I said how tsunamis are huge out at sea, and then as they come to shore, they
get narrower in width. But energy had to be conserved, so if the wave got narrower in
width, it had to get larger, greater in height. The same thing happens with regular ocean
waves. As those waves approach the shore, the energy of each wave stays the same, but
because it slows down and the width between waves gets smaller, the height increases.
Waves will crest and break when the base moves too slowly at the bottom for the top of the
wave and the top of the wave will actually turn over and crash as a wave. In that process
of the wave crashing over, the energy of the waves that began as a storm somewhere across
the ocean is now transferred to the shore through the power of that impact.
If you ever stood by the ocean when there have been large waves, you can feel the impact
of that crashing throughout the whole inside of your body, and that repeated pounding of
the water over and over on the side of the land effectively and very efficiently shatters
and smashes rock over fairly short amounts of time and very efficiently over geologic
time. Interestingly, the energy is so great from these waves, they actually set the entire
continent reverberating. Let me give you an example. I have a seismometer in the basement
of my building at work, and even when there are no earthquakes occurring, if I look at
the seismometer, it's constantly recording seismic energy. It's this background noise
I can't get rid of it. It's constantly present in my seismograms. It actually reminds me
a lot of the cosmic microwave background energy that Penzius and Wilson couldn't get rid of
in their radio telescope when they first discovered the microwave background from the Big Bang.
In the case of my seismometer, these waves have a period of oscillation of about six
seconds, so it corresponds to all of St. Louis sort of going this way for three seconds and
then coming back again for three seconds. The whole land is shaking this way. It turns
out this is from ocean waves because the shaking on my seismometer actually gets worse following
storms in the Atlantic or the Pacific Ocean. In other words, what I'm seeing is the resonant
frequency of North America. If you took a gong and put it on its side and repeatedly tapped
it on the side, soon you'd get the whole gong vibrating at whatever note the gong has.
Well, for North America, that note corresponds to a period of six seconds going to the side
for three seconds and back again. The continents all around the globe are constantly reverberating
from the impacts of these waves. Now, when ocean waves approach the coastline, usually
they're not perpendicular to the coast, but they undergo an interesting process called
refraction, where as the waves slow, they will actually begin to bend towards the shore,
towards the perpendicular into the shore. As they slow down, they bend and they bring
waves more directly into the shore. I actually remember the first time I noticed this. I
was an undergraduate and I took a bus to the coastline at Newport, Rhode Island. I went
there with my college girlfriend and we got off the bus in downtown Newport and had to
walk to the beach. It was a long walk and as we crested over a ridge, we could see the
whole shoreline spread out across. It was just a beautiful sight, the cliffs there. I remember
I looked at the waves and said, wow, Margaret said, wow, and I said, look at that perfect
example of the Huygens-Frenel wave refraction principle. And she hit me. But anyway, this
angled direction of arriving waves creates these long shore currents that end up moving
sediment up and down the coastline and are tremendously important because otherwise sediment
would just sit wherever it got deposited by streams. But the long shore currents end up
distributing sediment throughout the ocean shoreline environments. Ocean waves also undergo
another interesting wave property. They diffract around islands or spits or any bit of land
that sticks out. And as a result, the waves can reach areas that are not in the direct
line of sight. Remember during the 2004 Sumatra Tsunami, I talked about Sri Lanka getting
hit by the Tsunami. It wasn't just the east side of Sri Lanka facing Sumatra. The backside
of Sri Lanka got destroyed as well. Why? Because the waves just diffracted. They just bent right
around Sri Lanka. The same thing happens with all ocean environments as the waves come in.
Now the waves are incredibly powerful agents of erosion that are constantly working and
reworking the coastlines. And the result is to try to strain out the coastline over time.
Here's the interesting part. Suppose you have a jetty or a promontory of rock that sticks
away from the shoreline. Well as the waves come in and as they reach the shore, they're
going to slow down which is going to cause those waves to bend towards the promontory.
The result is any part of the land that sticks out gets hit from all sides by those waves
and very rapidly eroded, wearing it back until the shoreline is straight again. Sometimes
this process forms what we call wave cut terraces. And this is because the waves are primarily
occurring along right near the surface and they will actually cut right across the rock
and erode a cliff back leaving a terrace of rock just beneath the ocean surface. Interestingly
if the sea level changes over time or if there is an uplift of the region such as what happens
commonly with earthquakes, then you get these terraces forming. For instance if you go to
places along the west coast of the United States, California or the Pacific Northwest,
you'll often see places with multiple terraces. It almost looks like the landscape has been
intentionally leveled horizontally because they're remarkably flat. Well each of those
terraces represents a period in time where the shoreline sat, that land sat right at
the shoreline and the waves cut back into the land. If the land was uplifted suddenly,
which happens in the case of a subduction zone earthquake, then suddenly that terrace is
now lifted up. And there are cases where you see five, seven or ten different terraces.
Now the erosion along coastlines occurs slowly maybe by human rates but incredibly quickly
geologically. Actually they can be fast by human standards as well. For instance most
coastlines that have cliffs or bluffs along them erode at a rate of on the average about
half a meter a year. That's a lot of expensive California beachfront property that's disappearing
rapidly and sometimes if you have slumping or landslides occurring that erosion occurs
at rates of 30 meters a year. We're talking a hundred feet a year. That's a whole lot
of rock that's removed remarkably quickly. Now communities can try to slow this process
down and they often do by building jetties of rock. In this case you would have an extension
of rock that heads out away from the shore to try to reduce the power of those waves
as they come in. And they sort of work. But here's the problem. If you stick a jetty out
away from the shore it's going to slow the water as it approaches the jetty. The water
is always carrying sediment in it at its carrying capacity just like with streams. The water
slows and it deposits the sediment. So yes you trap sediment in behind those jetties.
But as that water goes around the jetty and diffracts around because again waves are going
to diffract right around any object the water is now devoid of its sediment. It's below
its carrying capacity and that water is going to pick up sediment until it reaches its carrying
capacity. The result you can actually erode the shoreline faster in front of the jetty
by that water now picking up new sediment in front of it. One of the most common and
successful ways that shoreline communities deal with erosion is simply to keep dumping
a lot of extra sand along the shoreline. It's a very expensive thing to do but it keeps
the sand there, keeps it being removed very quickly and is often better than building
jetties of rock. Now if you go to a shoreline environment the beach is almost exclusively
made of quartz sand and that's not a mystery to us anymore. When we talked about minerals
we talked about quartz being one of the hardest minerals. It had a hardness of seven and it's
also a very common mineral and in a rock like granite it's surrounded by other minerals
that weather quickly. The felled spars in a granite decay to become clay minerals and
what's left over the quartz minerals end up as beach sand. However if you go off the
coast of the shoreline then you get to an environment that may have living organisms
like corals and those will eventually become limestones and farther out you get into mud
and that mud will eventually become shale. Processes we've already talked about but I'll
come back to again in a minute. Now the sediment at a shoreline primarily comes from streams
washing that rock off the surface of the land. Again it's the process of streams that I talked
about where you can have a huge wide drainage basin but most of that water comes out at
a single location, channels into one major trunk of the stream that drops that sediment
right at the shore so it's a point source of sediment. However waves will then take
that sediment and because of long shore currents will move it up and down the coast. But again
as we've already seen that doesn't always happen. The Mississippi River where the river
flows into a fairly quiet environment in the Gulf of Mexico just drops the sediment right
there in a fairly complex bird foot delta. However in coasts like the east coast of North
America or most continents you have that drift bringing material up and down. And it's interesting
the way the sediment actually moves. The sediment moves in a zigzag motion because what happens
is if you have a shoreline and the wave comes in at an angle. Now I said it gets bent towards
the perpendicular but it never gets totally bent all the way. It still has some angle
to it. It will wash that sediment up in the direction that the wave came. But when the
wave falls back gravity will pull it straight down and then it will wash back up at an angle.
It'll come back down again and over time that sediment zigzags its way all the way down the
shore. You've probably experienced this if you've gone swimming in the ocean where you
go out and you're swimming in the waves and you look and all of a sudden your towel is
a ways down the beach. What's happened? Well you're part of the sediment now being washed
in a zigzag motion all the way down in the direction of that long shore drift. Over time
this sediment can be extended out into huge long extensions of sand that we call spits
or barrier islands. For instance that funny curved arm of Kate Codd didn't that the rock
did initially form that way. That's the direction of the current. Remember you've got the gulf
stream moving up to the north and it carries the water all up to the north along the east
coast of North America bringing that sand up bringing it all the way up extending up
northwards a very long arm. These things can sometimes go for hundreds or even thousands
of kilometers. Now an interesting process also occurs and that is that over time bays
and inlets will get filled in with sediment and again it's the same principle here applying
in a different way. When water moves slowly the sediment gets deposited out. So if you
have a bay or an inlet as the water enters that inlet it slows down and it deposits out
the sediment eventually filling in the bay. Another way this happens is sometimes you
may have a bay and long shore drift may carry a barrier island or sandy spit right across
the mouth of the bay and eventually fill it in that way. Also in warm climates like for
instance along the coast of Florida it's very common to have swampy areas, mangrove type
swamps that will choke the bay with organic sediment very quickly. Again filling in that
area replacing the water with solid material. So you can now see how the combination of
the erosional mechanisms of waves wearing away those promontories and the depositional
characters of wave action, depositing sediment where water slows over time will make shore
lines straight and if waves had their way the shorelines along continents would be remarkably
straight lines heading up and down the coast. But of course the shorelines don't look like
that. So what's happening? Well it turns out any time you change the sea level either in
absolute sense or in a relative sense you reset the clock and you create a whole new
shoreline and the shoreline becomes jagged again. Why? Because look at the surface of
the land. You've got these V-shaped valleys formed from stream erosion, you have hills,
you have inlets, you have ridges and all of these features on land become a new jagged
coast if the sea level goes up. The V-shaped valleys become inlets, the ridges become promontories
and the shoreline processes of wave action goes back to work again. If the sea level
falls the shoreline will also become jagged because undersea canyons that have developed
from turbidity flows, which by the way are often the remnants of ancient stream valleys
when that land was above the sea level, those undersea canyons will now become inlets if
the sea level were to suddenly drop. The sea level has risen about 120 meters since the
last ice age, that's almost 400 feet and it'll rise another 70 meters, another 230 feet if
the remaining ice melts and because continents are quite flat that means shorelines moved
thousands of kilometers back and forth. For example, Memphis, Tennessee is only at 87
meters above sea level, so when those ice sheets on Antarctica and Greenland melt, Memphis,
Tennessee is going to be very close to being beachfront property. Why does the sea level
change? It changes both globally and regionally and for the global mechanisms there are two
ways and one of them is obvious, we've talked about it already, climate change. If times
are cold then you've got a lot of water sitting up on top of land as ice. The more you grow
ice sheets on top like during the ice ages, the more your sea levels drop, but there's
another mechanism and it's fairly unusual. We have to go back to the first half of our
course for this, it turns out that if plate motions speed up your sea levels will rise.
Why is this? Remember when I talked about isostasy and mid-ocean ridges, I said when
the rock first forms it's very hot and if it's hot it's going to be more buoyant, so
ridges are closer to the surface of the water. As the rock cools and moves away from the
ridge it drops down along this nice parabolic curve. Well, if the rock is forming and moving
much more quickly then it's not going to drop as slowly. If plate motions are occurring
quickly over a long period of time the whole ocean sea floor on average is going to sit
at a higher level. Where is that water going to go? It's going to get pushed up onto land
and that's one of the major reasons that this rock in St. Louis and much of the United States
has been covered with oceans especially during that period of about 500 to 300 million years
ago. It's a combination of factors. Climates were warm so the water, the ice had melted,
the sea level was already high from climate and plate motions were fast. Conditions were
both fast and hot and that's what flooded our continent. Now, turns out there are also
regional effects that are very important. High levels of deposited sediment can actually
move a shoreline significantly seaward. For instance, I once visited the city of Troy
in Turkey. Remember the whole Trojan War? Well, Troy used to be right near the coast.
It's nowhere near the coast now. Why? Because a lot of sediment has been deposited in that
region from streams and the coastline has been pushed outward. I already mentioned earthquake
faulting in a region can suddenly raise or lower land levels making those marine terraces
lifted up above the sea level. Rifting will often have the opposite effect. If you have
a region and you stretch it and you rift it like in the Red Sea currently, you'll thin
the crust and you'll actually drop the shoreline forming sedimentary basins that extend onto
land. Now, most sedimentary rocks are made at or near shorelines. But because shorelines
can move thousands of kilometers back and forth, that sedimentary rock gets deposited
all across the continents. At any given point in time, you have sand and limestone and organic
material reefs and mud forming. But you continuously keep adding more sediment on top and as that
sediment is put on top, you end up compacting the rock. As the shoreline moves across, you
keep depositing those sequences of sandstone and limestone and shale. You have hot fluids
underground as the rock gets deeper and heats up that produces the cementation that holds
the rock together and voila, you have rock over time. Given tens or hundreds of millions
of years, this is what makes the layers like in the Grand Canyon or the St. Louis Limestone.
The shorelines in that sense are sort of like a paint roller that you keep rolling back and
forth over the land, painting the continents with successive layers of sandstone and shale
and limestone. Only with the process of erosion, this paint keeps washing back into the ocean
and that creates these unconformities on the land, these periods in the rock record where
we have missing time, where erosion has removed the rock. But these unconformities always
get covered again with new layers of rock and you can understand why geologists like
Hutton and Liel looked at the earth from this uniformitarian perspective, constant layers
laid upon more layers as these shorelines go back and forth over hundreds of millions
of years. Now, there's one last thing I want to talk about that's an important factor for
shorelines. Shorelines have one other very important influence, so interestingly, it's
not from anything found on earth and these are tides, the changing of the earth's shape
due to the gravitational fields of the moon and the sun. Now, tides end up affecting the
whole earth, not just ocean water, but I'm going to talk more about that in lecture 47.
But what's important is that the moon's gravitational field acts differently on parts of the earth
that are closer to the moon than further from the moon and the result is to stretch our
whole planet out, to give it essentially two pulp bulges, one that's facing the moon and
one that's on the opposite side of the earth from the moon. This happens with rock of the
earth itself, the whole planet gets stretched, but in particular it happens with the water
which flows a lot more easily than the rock. But here's the problem, the earth keeps rotating
so the bulge has to keep shifting to keep up and keep the same side facing the moon
as the earth keeps rotating. Now, this effect doesn't just occur from the moon's gravitational
force, it also works from the sun as well. However, interestingly, the effect of tides
is only about half as large for the sun as for the moon. This might seem strange at first
because the moon is so much smaller than the sun, its gravitational pull on us is so much
weaker. However, the moon is so much closer to us than the sun and so the difference between
the front and the back of the earth, that difference is more significant for the moon
than it is for the sun. However, the fact that there's both tidal effects from the sun
and the moon is actually very important because when the earth and the moon and the sun all
line up, either with the moon between the earth and the sun or the moon on the other
side, the sun, the earth and the moon, the tidal effects of the sun and moon add up and
we get large tides that we call spring tides. When the moon is located at a 90 degree angle
relative to the sun and the earth, so you would have sun, earth and moon, these are
called neap tides and there the effects of the sun and the moon cancel out and the tides
are weaker. The important thing is these ocean tides cause the water to go up and down many
meters at the shoreline and it happens twice a day, both for the front and the back of
the earth. Sometimes this effect can be huge. If you go to the Bay of Fundy in Labrador,
Canada, the particular geometry of the bay there causes the water at a spring tide to
go up and down by as much as 17 meters, that's 50 feet. These intertidal areas turn out to
be very unusual environments because life has to survive both within water and exposed
in air. So many marine animals have evolved to close up like mussels and barnacles and
anemones and wait the time in between the water being returned and flooding over to
them again. I want to talk in the next lecture about one last type of water environment.
It's sort of a special case because it isn't liquid water, it's ice and the process of
glaciation. Glaciers turn out to be not only a vital part of the shaping of the service
of the land, but they're also going to lead us into a very important direction for the
course. They're going to lead us into a discussion of climate and climate change.
Thank you very much.
