Welcome.
In this lecture, I want to talk about glaciers.
Glaciers form the last of the water-based environments that I'm going to talk about,
where rock is eroded, transported, and deposited to make new sedimentary rock.
I've talked about these different environments separately, streams, groundwater, shorelines,
etc.
But it's really only for convenience in the format of these 30-minute lectures.
It's important to remember that all these processes are actually always occurring together.
Simultaneously, they're constantly interconnected.
Glaciers, however, are going to take this course off into a new direction, and that's
climate, because you need cold weather to make a whole lot of ice.
Now I once hiked around Switzerland, and I trekked up to Grindelwald, which is a small
village near the base of Mount Eiger.
And you know, I still have a hard time comprehending it.
I mean, I have lots of pictures that I took, but they just don't do it justice.
It was, and it still is, hard for me to comprehend standing in front of a vertical two-mile-high
wall of rock.
It's just hard for me to comprehend how tall that really was.
What happened was several episodes of glaciation had come in and had carved out that whole
valley, and had cut straight down into the rock, forming this towering vertical wall.
Now, you don't have to go to Switzerland to see this.
If you've ever visited Yosemite National Park, then you've wondered at the vertical
granite cliff of El Capitan, three-fifths of a mile high, or marveled at the shape of
half dome, which looks like a giant knife came and neatly carved away half of it.
And in a sense, that's exactly what happened.
Only the knife was made of ice.
Now, glaciers can be remarkably efficient agents of erosion, tearing away mountains faster
than any other geologic process I've talked about so far.
Removed rock has to go someplace, of course, and glaciers also provide an equally important
mechanism for the transportation and deposition of sediment.
Now, glaciers occur in two general categories, continental glaciation and alpine glaciation.
Because to get ice, you need cold, and to get cold, you can do one of two things.
You can go north in the northern hemisphere, or south towards the south pole in the southern
hemisphere, or you can go up.
You can go up into mountainous regions.
Continental glaciers, which currently consist almost exclusively of Antarctica and Greenland,
contain most of the world's ice.
But alpine glaciers and mountains are responsible for reshaping land surfaces all around the
globe, and not just near the poles.
If you look at the balance of ice, almost all of glacial ice is contained within Antarctica,
a smaller amount in Greenland and even smaller amount in alpine regions.
For instance, if the Antarctic ice sheet were to melt, sea level would rise up about 61 meters.
If Greenland were to melt, the sea level would go up an additional 7 meters.
And if all the world's mountain alpine glaciers were to melt, the sea level would go up less
than an additional meter.
That's how much of the ice is stored within Antarctica.
Glaciers are continuously moving rivers of frozen water, and using the term river is
really not a bad description, because the ice of a glacier actually flows downhill in
a fluid manner.
Glaciers have two different regions.
They accumulate ice upstream in what we call a zone of accumulation, and they lose ice
downstream in a zone of ablation, or zone of loss.
The division between these is identified and called the fern line.
Now, the accumulation of ice in a glacier occurs really only through one way, through
falling snow.
And as you know from making a snowball, snow is initially quite loose.
In fact, it can be more than 70% air.
But as more snow gets piled on top of the upper part of a glacier, the ice, the snow
begins to compact, and that air gets squeezed out.
And gradually over time, the snow turns into ice.
That ice will begin to flow down, and as it flows down, it begins to warm, simply because
temperatures are warmer at lower altitudes.
Or in the case of large ice sheets moving hundreds or thousands of kilometers, the temperatures
increase at lower latitudes.
The loss, the ablation of ice from a glacier, however, can happen in several different ways.
Most of the ice is lost through melting.
This happens at the end of a glacier at the bottom, but it also happens along the base
of a glacier, right underneath the glacier.
Incidentally, that actually helps lubricate the glacier and help it flow more easily at
times.
Ice can also be lost through a process called sublimation, and here it goes, the water goes
directly from a solid phase to a gas phase, skipping the phase of liquid ice.
In other words, the ice turns directly into water vapor.
This happens from sunlight hitting the surface of the ice, giving that those water molecules
bonded tightly together as ice enough energy to jump right into water vapor.
And very importantly, if the glacier enters into any sort of water environment, a lake,
the ocean, any inlet or bay, then you get a process called calving, where large chunks
of the ice break off and float away to form icebergs.
In the case of Antarctica, some of these sheets of ice breaking off can be as large as states
in the United States.
They can be enormous, vast areas, huge sheets that will float and drift away from the continent.
Glaciers move in two different ways, and it depends upon the slope, the size of the glacier,
and also the altitude, the elevation of the glacier.
Glaciers move by ductile flow, as I've already talked about, actually ice flowing downhill.
We shouldn't have a problem with this now, because we saw this with Earth's mantle in
convection, right?
Rock flows over geologic time.
Well, ice is solid, but it also flows, and in fact, it flows a lot more easily than rock
does.
You can actually see this over time, geologists sometimes will put long poles down into the
middle of a glacier and watch over time as that pole bends and warps as the glacier flows.
Just like a stream, it turns out that the flow of a glacier is fastest in the middle
and slower along its sides.
But, and this turns out to be really important for erosion, glaciers also move by basal slide
sliding.
And as I mentioned, this is helped by the presence of water that often is found along
the base of the glacier.
So in other words, the ice isn't just flowing along the bottom, it's actually sliding across
the bottom, and as it slides along, it tears the rock off the bottom, and that's what makes
glaciers so important for shaping the whole surface of the land.
Now glaciers move slowly by our standards, usually centimeters to meters a day.
If you're standing by most glaciers, you don't see them move, but interestingly, you can
actually hear them because as the ice is flowing and moving, it cracks tremendously, and you
often hear very loud creaks and groans as that ice flows.
However, there are cases where glaciers can surge a hundred times faster than these rates,
especially when they're reaching the ocean and flowing into the ocean, and in this case,
you can very definitely see the ice flow.
Now, just like with a stream, the speed of a glacier changes with its slope.
The flow of the glacier will speed up when it goes down over a ledge.
In this case, the ice, which isn't as fluid as water, will crack and open up to form crevasses.
If you see crevasses in a glacier, it's a sign that that glacier is increasing its speed.
Usually it's going downhill over some ridge or ledge.
As the glacier slows again, those crevasses will close up.
Now, the style of flow for glaciers varies greatly between Contano and Alpine glaciers.
Alpine glaciers are dominated by the presence of very narrow valleys that are carved out
by streams of ice, and in fact, if you look at an aerial view of an Alpine glacier, you
see a structure that's sort of reminiscent of the tree-like fractal structures of streams.
You often have many smaller ice streams up in all the different valleys that will often
converge and come together to form one large major ice stream.
With continental glaciers on Antarctica and Greenland, flow, however, generally goes out
in all directions from the regions of highest elevation, and they tend to form narrow channels
only when the flow goes through mountain ranges.
However, this is not as unusual as you would think, because think about what's happening
in a place like Greenland or Antarctica.
You're taking the crust and you're stacking kilometers of ice on top, largely in the middle
less at the edges.
The result is that the middle of Greenland and Antarctica are actually pushed down.
In fact, if you could suddenly instantly remove all the ice, you'd find that the surface
of these continents in many places is below sea level.
Remember I talked about how Canada is rising up, is actually coming up, lifting up at about
a millimeter a year.
Well, you put all the ice on top of Antarctica, it pushes the continent down, pushes the
Ascentosphere out of the way.
That means that the edges of the continents tend to be at a higher elevation, and there
often are mountain ranges at the edge of Antarctica in Greenland, and sometimes the ice has to
flow out of the channels in between these mountains.
Now, there's a common misconception about glaciers.
Turns out the glacier is always flowing downhill, ice is always moving.
Sometimes people look at a glacier where the front may be stationary over time, or if
climates are warming, the front actually may be receding going uphill, in which case you're
losing ice faster than you're adding it, but the ice is always continuously flowing downhill.
As the ice flows, it erodes the surface, and it does this in two primary ways, through
a process called ice plucking and through abrasion.
It's kind of similar to what happens on the bottom of a stream.
Ice plucking involves the ice moving and actually getting into the cracks in the rock and prying
rock off and lifting it up and making it become part of the base of the glacier.
It's sort of like water flowing along the bottom of a stream by hydraulic action lifting
up cobbles.
However, once that rock gets embedded within the glacier, it becomes a whole additional
agent of erosion, and now you've got rock embedded in the glacier dragging across the
surface of the ground underneath, tearing off more and more rock, accelerating the rate
of erosion.
It's sort of like putting diamond chips into a drill bit to make it be able to drill faster
and harder.
At high elevations, this process of erosion occurs year round.
There's ice found all year round in places like Mount Kilimanjaro in Africa and in the
Andes in South America.
These are right at the equator, and yet they have ice year round because they're high enough
in elevation.
When the ice erodes, they create very distinctive glacial valleys.
Actually you can always tell when a valley has been shaped by a glacier as opposed to
a stream because the glaciers make U-shaped valleys curved out as opposed to streams which
make V-shaped valleys.
Why does this happen?
Well with the stream, all the erosion, or most of the erosion, the removal of rock is
occurring in the stream at the bottom.
And as the stream cuts down, it destabilizes the slope, which makes the angle of the land
on either side exceed its angle of repose.
You get slumping and landslides, rockfalls, debris flows, carrying material into the stream
and out, and the stream over time widens its V-shaped valley.
With a glacier, you have ice in contact with the valley at all locations, and it just grinds
right out that valley in this classic U-shape.
At the top of one of these glacial valleys, you'll often find a head wall that's part
of a bowl shape, a structure, we call that a circ.
In fact, if you've gone skiing in places like the western U.S., you often are skiing
in these circs, these bowls at the top of the glacial valleys.
The bottom of the valley floor, you'll often find boulders that are larger than houses
that have fallen off the sides of the valley, and sometimes the valley floor, these boulders
actually clog up a stream and you'll get a lake called a glacial tarn.
As these glacial valleys work their way up a mountain on all sides, sometimes all that's
left of a mountain at the end is a small peak of rock with circs on all sides.
We call that structure a horn, and the classic example of that is the Matterhorn in Switzerland.
Now, alpine glaciers contain large amounts of rock within them that have been torn off,
and as they carry that rock through the glacier downward, you can actually see it.
In fact, in many cases, if you look at ice streams from alpine glaciers, you can see
black lines extending throughout the glaciers, and if you notice, all these black lines head
back to a place where two ice streams come together.
What happens is as they're eroding, they're tearing rock off the side walls, and when
you bring two streams together, you now have a line of that eroded rock embedded within
the glacier itself.
Also, you can often identify the location of the fern line because above the fern line
where snow is still accumulating, the glacier is white, but below the fern line where you're
beginning to lose that glacier through melting or sublimation, the rock that has fallen down
on top of the glacier now begins to be exposed, and the glacier often will get darker the
further down you go in elevation.
These flowing ice streams can sometimes cut each other off, and the result, once the ice
is gone, are these hanging valleys where one valley comes out and drops suddenly into another
glacier valley.
These sometimes can make very dramatic waterfalls.
I previously mentioned that the classic example is found in Yosemite, a bridal falls.
Over time, if these glacial valleys are at sea level and they get flooded, because as
I've previously mentioned, the global sea level has gone up nearly 400 feet since the
end of the last ice age, these become fjords.
So throughout Scandinavia, the fjords that extend up, these arms of the ocean that extend
up into the land, are glacial valleys that form through ice streams flowing out, and
they're now flooded by the ocean.
Continental glaciers remove vast volumes of rock from the continent.
In fact, it turns out the U.S. is made of largely foreign soil.
Each portions of our country are actually covered with thick blankets of Canadian rock, scraped
off during the last ice ages.
The continent just tore these Canadian rocks and mountains away, carried them down across
to the border, and dumped them in North America.
Continental glaciers remove rock and soil through the same mechanisms as alpine glaciers,
through this process of abrasion and ice plucking, only it does it on an enormous scale.
Where mountains and hills aren't totally removed by these continental glaciers, they
often are left as small, stretched out hills, low, elongated, sort of whale-back shaped
hills that we call drumlands, that end up pointing in the direction that the ice flowed.
When you go across New York State or the Dakotas, you find large numbers of these drumlands
pointing north-south remnants from the last ice age.
Erosion from continental glaciers usually happens in a gradual manner, but can sometimes
be catastrophic, especially when an ice age is ending.
Let me explain.
When geologists went and visited the northern plains of the United States, they found something
very puzzling.
Stream beds have a very distinctive appearance from the bottom of the stream.
You often get ripples forming from the process of saltation, just like with a sand dune.
You've often walked probably across a bottom of a pond or stream and felt these ripples
on the bottom.
Stream ripples are usually centimeters to meters apart, depending upon the speed and
volume of the stream.
The northern plains region showed evidence of former water erosion.
Only the ripples were ridges that were 100 meters apart.
These ripples were as large as had football fields worth of length in between them.
And it's hard to imagine where such enormous volumes of water could have come from, but
it turns out these occurred from the sudden bursting of enormous glacial lakes that formed
as the climate warmed, the ice began to melt, but was dammed up by ice.
Occasionally, these dams would break, and lakes the size of the Great Lakes would rush
out and drain across the surface, going hundreds of kilometers in the matter of days or weeks.
One of the best known regions is found in eastern Washington state called the Channeled
Scablands, and this shows evidence of an unbelievably huge amount of water rushing across this region,
just tearing the surface away, again forming ripples 100 meters apart.
I once had a first-hand experience of this when I visited the St. Croix River, which
forms the boundary between Minnesota and Wisconsin.
I went canoeing there, and now there's such a small amount of water trickling down the
stream that, frankly, you can canoe just as easily upstream as you can downstream.
However, if you look around you there, you see evidence of an enormous amount of water
in the past, very huge steep cliffs on either side, and near the stream there are huge potholes
that are sometimes 40 feet deep.
Some holes in the ground perfectly round, and often at the bottom of these potholes
you'll see a boulder the size of a small bus that's perfectly rounded.
These potholes formed when the Glacial Lake Duluth, drained in about a week, was one of
these dammed-up glacial lakes at the end of the last ice age, and the water burst out,
carved the steep cliffs on either side, and in the process the water flowed so quickly
that the created rocks that wherever there was an eddy, the giant boulder would drill
down making potholes that were sometimes 40 feet deep.
Now, all this rock, torn off of lands, carried by water, has to go someplace, and it gets
transported and deposited not only by the glaciers, but also by water and wind.
Now, in the case of an alpine glacier, most of the rock that gets torn off the mountains
gets dumped right at the end of the glacier, and that's called a terminal moraine.
And you can always identify glacial sediment because it's totally unsorted.
You've got giant boulders and gravel and sand and dirt and tiny powdered rock all jumbled
together and dumped in one place.
If the glacier stays put for a long time, in other words, if the end of the glacier doesn't
change, you built up a huge terminal moraine there, but if the climate is changing and
the end of the glacier is moving its location, then the sediment can be spread out over fairly
large distances.
There's often a huge amount of sediment dumped right at the base of the glacier, and it overwhelms
the carrying capacity of streams.
In other words, the ice is melting to form water, but there's too much sediment, and
the streams are totally sediment choked for great distances away from the glacier.
You can often identify this from a particular type of stream called a braided stream.
If you ever look at these from an aerial photograph or from an airplane, you can see the water
winds back and forth across a huge expanse of sediment.
Because continental ice sheets are so huge, the deposition of sediment occurs on a huge
grand scale, and the terminal moraines where the sediment gets dumped can be enormous.
They can extend for hundreds to thousands of kilometers.
In fact, Long Island, New York, Cape Cod, Massachusetts, and all the islands in between
Martha's Vineyard, Block Island, all of these are all part of the same single terminal moraine
from the ice sheet that ended about 21,000 years ago.
So in other words, Long Island, that whole island, is nothing but glacial debris dumped
there at the front of the glacier.
Now interestingly, it's off the coast of the land now.
Why is that the case?
Well remember, back when it formed, that wasn't the edge of the continent.
Sea levels were much lower, and that was on land.
And so that represented the intersection of the glacier with the sea, and it extends all
the way from New York up past Boston.
It's all the same moraine, though Red Sox and Yankee fans might be reluctant to admit
it.
Now, when the glaciers do reach the water, they often create enormous blocks of ice that
float away, icebergs.
And these obviously have been significant hazards for ships long before the Titanic
sank.
Interestingly from a geologic perspective, these icebergs still carry a lot of rock
within them, and that rock as a result can float large distances across the ocean, and
can get deposited across the ocean sea floor out in the middle of the deep ocean.
And it's very interesting because if you find Canadian rock out in the middle of the Atlantic,
in a layer there, you know that that must have occurred during a period of glaciation.
And we can actually go back in time and find episodes of huge amount of glaciation by looking
at the locations of sediments, sediments taken off the centers of continents and dropped
not as mud the way normal sediment forms in the middle of the ocean, but as large blocks
carried from icebergs.
And I'll talk later on in the course about how there was a period in our history about
800 to 600 million years ago where the Earth almost froze over, in fact, may have become
entirely frozen.
And these glacial sediments are scattered throughout the oceans.
Now, there are other interesting features of the whole process of the deposition and
of sediment torn off from glaciers.
One interesting result is the formation of thousands and thousands of lakes across continents.
It's an interesting process.
If you go to the edge of a continental glacier, as the ice is breaking up, it will begin to
fall in front of the glacier and the ice sheet begins to recede, leaving these large
blocks of ice that are slowly melting.
Dumped around them is all the sediment of the outwash plain.
Well, the sediment settles, it forms land, the ice melts and forms a depression.
We call that a kettle that forms where once the ice is gone and the sediment has deposited
all around it.
Minnesota is known as the land of 10,000 lakes.
And if you look at a map of Minnesota, that's not an exaggeration.
The whole surface of the state is covered with lots of tiny little lakes.
These all represented, or most of them, pieces of ice that had glacial sediment deposited
around them.
Of course, as I mentioned previously, sedimentation will fill in lakes, so over time these lakes
will get filled, and in fact, many already have.
There's another interesting result of the process of glaciation.
It's the creation of pulverized rock, what we call rock flour, rock that's entirely ground
up into very fine dust by the continued motion of the glacier.
Well, when the glacier leaves and the water dries up, this rock flour can get blown hundreds
to thousands of kilometers as dust.
And interestingly, much of the Midwestern United States is covered by thick layers of
this.
It's called less.
And across Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, it makes for tremendously fertile soils.
Now, you might never have realized that the thick soils of Illinois, the thousands of
lakes of Minnesota, and the very existence of Long Island and Cape Cod as glacial terminal
moraines are all the result of the ice from the last ice sage.
In fact, in some parts of the country, Route 70, stretching across the whole country, represents
the southernmost extent of the most recent glaciers.
Chicago at that time was buried under more than a kilometer of ice.
But we're left with a very obvious question.
Why did it end?
Where did all this ice go?
What brought about the end of the ice age?
Why is it that Greenland is the only remaining part of massive ice sheets that until very
recently covered huge portions of North America and Eurasia?
Well, in the next lecture, I'm going to begin to unravel this very complicated story of climate
change.
And I'm going to talk about the huge effects that it has had not only in the service of
the land, but on the very course of human history itself.
