Welcome.
In this lecture, I want to talk about long-term climate change.
Now, I've sometimes wondered what it would be like to ride in a spaceship, hurtling
through the frozen vacuum of outer space in a tin can separated from instant death by
a thin insulating wall.
And then I remember, oh yeah, I am.
Spaceship Earth has just such a protective thin insulating wall.
The atmosphere.
Okay, it's not as thin as that of a spaceship, but it's equally as insulating.
And that insulation comes from the greenhouse effect.
Of the atmosphere, like on a smaller planetary body, like our own moon, the temperature would
be that of the emptiness of space, minus 270 degrees Celsius, minus 450 degrees Fahrenheit.
It's the greenhouse gases in our atmosphere, which are water vapor, carbon dioxide, and
methane that make our planet livable.
Now, people sometimes talk about the greenhouse effect in a disparaging way.
This is very mistaken.
It's one very important reason that we are alive.
Of course, you can't have too much of a good thing, and a runaway greenhouse effect would
not be very good.
As a result, global climates over Earth's history track very closely with changes in
the greenhouse gases.
And it's the changes in climate and the greenhouse effect that occur over very long time periods
that I want to talk about in this lecture.
Now, in the last lecture, I talked about the Milankovitch cycles, the cycles of changing
Earth's orbital parameters, and how these changed climate patterns on Earth over timescales
of hundreds to thousands, tens to hundreds of thousands of years.
But what drives climate change over tens to hundreds of millions of years?
Well, the answer, interestingly, is plate tectonics.
In a very direct way, mantle convection and plate tectonics, the processes from the first
half of this course, which maybe you thought we were done with, through interactions with
the process of weathering and with the carbon cycle, and therefore with the greenhouse effect,
end up shaping the evolution of life on our planet.
For instance, a hundred million years ago, the time of the dinosaurs, there were very
high global temperatures.
The continents were flooded.
There was no ice at the ice caps.
It was a very hot climate.
And accordingly, the amount of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere was more than double the
levels that it is today.
If you go back farther in time, you see even greater climate changes.
Global climates have changed enormous amounts over tens to hundreds of millions of years,
and the carbon dioxide has varied correspondingly.
We even see times when the entire ocean surfaces were frozen over, and there was much less
carbon dioxide at that time.
If you look over all the different time scales, from short time scales to the very longest
time scales, we see a very strong correlation between Earth's global temperature and the
amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
For instance, let's look at changes in temperature and carbon dioxide over the past 450,000 years.
These are the oscillations I talked about in the last lecture, the patterns of ice ages
and interglacials.
Well, there are two curves here.
One is temperature, one is carbon dioxide, and you can see that the pattern of interglacials
and long ice ages shows up very clearly in both of these curves.
Extend this to the smaller cycles or the larger cycles.
This period exists as only a small blip in, and again the pattern, the connection between
temperature and carbon dioxide is very strong.
Well, to figure this out, we need to examine first how the greenhouse effect works, and
then we have to look in order to figure that out how the whole carbon cycle works.
We need to see why the levels of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere change.
Now, the presence of water vapor, carbon dioxide, ozone and methane in our troposphere form
our greenhouse effect.
They trap heat near Earth's surface.
They keep the land warm enough to be able to support liquid water and therefore warm
enough for us, so they are absolutely requisite for the existence of life as we know it on
the Earth.
Well, what happens?
Sometimes radiation, as it reaches Earth's surface, is peaked in the visible range and
actually bleeds over strongly into the ultraviolet range.
By the way, this is why your eyes have evolved to see radiation at frequencies corresponding
to what we call visible light.
I mean, the only difference between visible light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation
like radio waves, x-rays, microwaves, etc., is simply the wavelength of that radiation.
We've got a whole lot of visible light coming from the sun.
It's what our eyes have evolved to be able to see with.
But here's the interesting point.
As that radiation from the sun hits the surface of the Earth, it starts going through a very
complicated series of reflections, absorptions and re-emissions.
Well, first of all, as the sunlight reaches the Earth, some part of it never gets to the
surface.
About 30% gets directly reflected back out into space.
About 20% of that is absorbed by the atmosphere and then re-radiated right back out into space
again.
Well, when that sunlight and ultraviolet radiation hits the atoms of Earth's surface, very interesting
process occurs.
The atoms absorb the radiation energy.
I've talked about this previously.
What happens is the electrons actually jump to a higher level of activity.
This is called a quantum leap.
That energy gets momentarily stored within the atom as a higher level of energy.
But it's not stable and it doesn't stay there.
And that electron will drop back down to its ground level, re-emitting that energy in the
form of new electromagnetic radiation.
But here's the trick.
The radiation that gets emitted by Earth's surface is not the radiation that it received.
The energy is the same, but it takes a different form.
And the reason is the energy that gets re-radiated is determined by its temperature.
So the sunlight comes in, it hits Earth's surface largely as visible and ultraviolet
radiation, fairly high frequency energy, absorbed by the Earth's surface, and re-emitted
at infrared wavelengths.
Why is this?
It's quite simple.
Earth's surface is a lot colder than the Sun's.
The Sun's surface is about 6,000 degrees Celsius.
The Earth's surface is on average about 14 degrees Celsius.
I mean, if you were heated up to 6,000 degrees, you would be emitting visible and ultraviolet
radiation as well.
But the Earth takes that energy and re-emits it at infrared, which has a longer wavelength
and it's a lower form of energy.
But here's where a greenhouse effect works.
The greenhouse gases, mostly water vapor and carbon dioxide and methane, preferentially
absorb infrared and not visible and ultraviolet.
So when the sunlight came directly from the Sun, it just passed right through these greenhouse
gases and hit the surface of the Earth.
When the Earth re-emitted it as infrared, the atmosphere now absorbs that energy because
it's at a frequency that corresponds to the atomic structures of these molecules.
Now once the atmosphere absorbs that radiation, some of it heads off into space and is lost,
but some of it then gets re-emitted and goes back towards the surface.
Reabsorbed by the Earth's surface, re-emitted, reabsorbed by the atmosphere, and that infrared
energy begins a series of bounces back and forth between the surface and the troposphere,
warming the atmosphere and the surface of the planet and making it livable.
Here's an important aspect though.
For each of these systems, the space, the atmosphere and Earth's surface, the energy
balances to zero.
There's an equilibrium.
There's no net increase in energy.
I mean, a vast amount of energy from the Sun is reaching our planet's surface, but it
doesn't dramatically increase in temperature.
Why?
Because the same amount of energy that it receives leaves again, and the same holds
true for the atmosphere.
However, this equilibrium is not a coincidence.
How does this equilibrium happen?
It's very simple.
The temperature of Earth's surface changes to make this happen.
Remember, I just said that hotter objects radiate more energy.
Well, the mean temperature of Earth's surface is 14 degrees Celsius currently, but that
number changes significantly over geologic time.
If there's more sunlight or more greenhouse gases, the temperature of Earth's surface
will begin to increase, and that means it's going to re-radiate more energy back out
because it's hotter.
It will then maintain that equilibrium again.
In the process, the temperature of the atmosphere and of the surface may change, but they will
always change accordingly so that the balance comes back into zero, the same amount that
goes in as the amount that goes out.
Now, this process of having a greenhouse occurs primarily, as I said, because of the
existence of water vapor and carbon dioxide, and there are other materials that are important
as well.
Now, water vapor is actually much less plentiful than carbon dioxide.
Even though its composition occupies a smaller volume of Earth's atmosphere, it's still
twice as important as carbon dioxide as a greenhouse gas.
It's just how the molecule works, how efficiently it absorbs infrared radiation.
Ozone also turns out to be quite important, but the process operates differently because
ozone is primarily located much higher up 25 kilometers above the surface in the stratosphere,
not in the lower troposphere.
Methane turns out to be an enormously efficient greenhouse gas, 21 times more efficient at
absorbing infrared radiation than carbon dioxide is, but it's usually not significant because
there's just very little of it in the atmosphere.
However, because of our appetite for hamburgers and an increase in ranching and cattle, there
is a significant increase in methane, and this is having an important effect, an important
influence on the whole greenhouse effect.
Now, we have to be careful with climate because several factors can lead to what we call a
runaway greenhouse scenario.
In other words, you can have certain factors that will cause the whole process to occur
more rapidly.
For instance, increasing temperature actually increases the greenhouse effect, which increases
the temperature through a set of positive feedbacks.
For instance, let's say climate's warm.
Well, the amount of surface ice is reduced.
In other words, the ice cap shrink, the ice sea at the north pole is reduced.
This decreases the planet's reflectance, a quantity we call the albedo.
More sunlight is now absorbed by the surface and then re-emitted in the infrared range
to be absorbed by the atmosphere again, which makes the atmosphere warmer, which melts more
ice, which causes more energy to go into infrared, and you can see this positive feedback cycle
beginning.
Here's another very important factor.
If you have warmer air, it actually holds greater amounts of greenhouse gases.
Remember back in my discussion of weather, I said that when air was warmer, it held
more water vapor in it, and then when you cooled the air, you cooled the atmosphere,
it caused that water to condense and precipitate back out.
Well, if you make the atmosphere warmer, it can hold more water vapor in it, and water
vapor is a very efficient greenhouse gas, which then absorbs more infrared radiation,
which makes the surface warmer, which causes more water vapor to form and be absorbed in
the atmosphere.
Again, you can run into this cycle of positive feedbacks, making a climate go very warm very
quickly.
Incidentally, the times in Earth's past where we've seen the temperature increase very
quickly over very short time periods, such as the start of these interglacial periods,
is probably some form at a smaller scale of a runaway greenhouse effect.
Now, I should say the term greenhouse effect is a little bit of a misnomer.
Turns out, greenhouses don't actually stay warm because of the greenhouse effect.
What happens more efficiently is simply having an enclosed space with glass windows keeps
the ground and the air that gets warm from the ground and the sun from escaping back
out.
Nonetheless, we're stuck with that term greenhouse effect, and it is very important in our atmosphere.
Well, so far, I still haven't explained why plate tectonics would be responsible for climate
change over very long time scales.
In order to do this, I have to explain one more thing.
I have to talk about the carbon cycle.
The carbon cycle is a set of interlocking processes that move carbon in between several
different reservoirs, which are the atmosphere, the ocean, the biosphere, and soil.
Now, as with the water cycle, which we talked about earlier, the carbon cycle has two parts.
It has a shallow surface part and a deep earth part.
Let me talk about the shallow part first.
Earth's atmosphere would likely be mostly carbon dioxide if it weren't for a couple
of factors.
Now, if you look at Mars and Venus, our neighbor planets, they have atmospheres that are 95%
carbon dioxide, and earth's atmosphere was probably 95% carbon dioxide as well early
on in its history.
We have oceans, and we have vegetation, and these processes, these existence of these
reservoirs, pulls the carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere, and that has had a dramatic
change on the whole history of our planet.
Most surface carbon actually exists as dissolved carbon dioxide in the oceans.
We have 40,000 gigatons of carbon, that's 40,000 billion tons of carbon.
Compare that to the amount of carbon that's in soils, which is 1,600 gigatons of carbon.
The amount in the atmosphere, which is 750 gigatons of carbon, or the amount that's in
all of vegetation, which is only 600 gigatons of carbon.
The oceans at 40,000 gigatons, dwarfs all of these.
In the oceans, the carbon isn't just in the form of dissolved carbon dioxide in the water.
It also exists in marine life.
It also exists in organic sediments on the ocean sea floor, and the pathways between
these different carbon reservoirs turn out to be very complex, but again, they are essentially
in an equilibrium.
Every year, about 120 gigatons, billion tons of carbon, is moved back and forth between
the atmosphere and the whole vegetation soil system.
About 90 gigatons of carbon cycles between the atmosphere and the ocean.
They're constantly moving back and forth, largely in the form of carbon dioxide.
And here's the interesting point.
How much are we adding?
Well, we're adding through burning of fossil fuels, and also interestingly through the
production of cement, which is important, we add about 7 gigatons of carbon to the atmosphere
every year.
Now, this is small in comparison to the other numbers, however, because we're starting
with a system that's in equilibrium, that's enough to upset that equilibrium.
Now, some of the carbon dioxide, the carbon that we've been adding, is being absorbed
by vegetation.
The forests that exist around the world are getting much stronger and healthier, because
they're breathing more easily, there's more carbon dioxide.
And the rest, however, is just going into the atmosphere, raising global temperatures
through an increase in greenhouse gases.
Interestingly with the vegetation, it's not clear how long the forests can actually continue
to absorb that part of the carbon we're releasing, and at some point that buffer may fill up,
and temperatures may rise more rapidly, given the same amount of carbon that's being added
each year.
However, over geologic time, we have the deep earth interacting with that carbon cycle as
well, and it does this by both adding and subtracting carbon from it.
Now, carbon from the deep earth gets added into the atmospheres, primarily as carbon
dioxide emitted from volcanoes.
If you have a period of extended volcanism, you get a global increase in temperature.
You add a lot of carbon dioxide up into the atmosphere.
Carbon gets added into the oceans, largely through the erosion of limestone and other
carbonate-based sedimentary rocks.
However, that carbon usually ends up leading to increased rates of solution of carbonates
out of the ocean, and then onto the sea floor.
And so it's not going into an increased level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
Carbon gets removed from the oceans in several ways, through sedimentation, through the production
of these calcium carbonate rocks like limestones, through the compaction of this material at
accretionary wedges during subduction, or through the actual subduction of the sediments
themselves down into the mantle when the ocean sea floor subducts beneath the continent.
Carbon also gets removed from the atmosphere through weathering during dissolution, and
this is the direction that we need to go in at this point.
When carbon dioxide combines with water, it naturally forms carbonic acid.
I talked about this already when I talked about weathering.
This was the foundation of the whole process of chemical weathering, of dissolving rocks.
The carbonic acid combines with rocks, it dissolves out those rocks, and the carbon goes
into bicarbonate molecules that are washed through streams and down into the oceans.
These oceans take those bicarbonate molecules, they combine with materials like calcium to
make reservoirs of limestone, and as a result, the layers of limestone that exist not only
underground, but across the surface of continents as platform sediments represent an incredibly
vast reservoir of carbon.
In fact, there may be more than a thousand times as much carbon locked away in rocks
like limestone than in the whole rest of the surface carbon cycle combined.
This material, this carbon, was once dissolved in the ocean, and it's now sequestered away
out of the carbon cycle.
That's why we don't have 95% carbon dioxide in our atmosphere.
Our carbon dioxide, our carbon has all been locked away in limestone.
Now you can begin to understand how plate tectonics will affect global climates.
What I'm going to do is give several examples using a figure of global temperature change
over the past 540 million years since the start of the Cambrian.
For temperature as a proxy, this figure uses oxygen-18 isotopes.
Remember how this worked?
High amounts of oxygen-18, the isotope oxygen-18, corresponds to cold times, because ice is
mostly O16, and you remove the water with O16 out of the oceans, and within the oceans,
the relative amounts of O18, what we call delta O18, the change in O18, increases.
That's what gets locked away in the marine shells.
Now the question, why doesn't this curve go back farther than the Cambrian?
Well, it turns out that O18, as I mentioned previously, is taken from ocean shells, and
before the Cambrian, there were no shells.
There were no hard-bodied fossils of any sort.
And so we can't use the O18 record to go back beyond 540 million years.
Well, if we look back, what do we see?
During about 150 to 80 million years ago, it was a period where the climate was steadily
warming.
What was going on in terms of tectonics?
Well, that was a period of increased hotspot volcanism.
Remember, I talked about this back in lecture 16.
You had hotspot activity, which was triggered by the increased amount of subduction that
followed the breakup of Pangaea.
All these slabs sank down into the earth, pushed hot rock aside at the base of the manhole,
came up as hotspots, and erupted at the surface as several large outporns of lava.
Or that was also connected to the lack in magnetic field reversals that we saw in the
ocean seafloor.
This period of intense volcanism could have put enough carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
to essentially start one of these positive feedback loops of global warming.
If you go back beyond that, several times during the past 500 million years, we've had
periods where global climates have cooled considerably.
Enormous amounts, very large changes in temperature.
And interestingly, each of these corresponds to a period of continental collisions and
mountain building.
What happens?
As the mountains rise up, as we previously talked about, weathering increases.
Weathering hates mountains, mechanically, chemically.
These the mountains get torn away quickly.
So carbonic acid dissolves away the mountain rocks, more mountains, more weathering.
The process sucks the carbon dioxide right out of the atmosphere.
The carbon goes into bicarbonate ions, they go into rivers, they go into the ocean, they
get consumed by marine animals, they go into the shells of the animals, or are chemically
deposited on the bottom of the seafloor, and they become carbonate rocks like limestone.
In other words, making mountains removes carbon from the atmosphere and puts it onto
the seafloor.
So if you look back 480 million years ago, there's a period of cooling that we see in
this figure.
Well, what happened then?
Remember my lecture on the formation of North America?
That was the time of the enormous tachanica rodgini, when the whole tachanic mountain
system along the eastern North America was forming 350 million years ago.
This corresponds to an important episode of the formation of Pangaea.
One part of that was the formation of the Allegheny and the Wachita Mountains, again
more mountain building along the east coast of North America.
And 280 million years ago, there's another period of global cooling, that's when the
enormous Appalachian Mountains were formed.
The Himalayas of their day, a massive giant plateau of rocks, enormous weathering would
have carried up, would have pulled the carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere and washed it
into the oceans.
Most recently, if you look at this figure, you see that cooling has been quite dramatic
over the past 80 million years.
Now remember, I said 100 million years ago, when the dinosaurs were ruling the earth,
we had really high temperatures, a lot of carbon dioxide, warm weather.
Well, what happened 80 to 60 million years ago?
That was the beginning of the Himalayas.
India and the Indian Plate began to crash into Asia, sweeping up various island arcs and microcontinent
fragments, smashing them all into Asia and forming the enormous plateau that we see there
today.
The increased growth in mountains, which has continued today, has meant the increased removal
of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and an increased cooling of our whole planet.
So not only is India responsible for all the big earthquakes that keep hitting China and
the destruction of large earthquakes and tsunamis like what happened in Sumatra in 2004, India
is now also to blame for all the ice ages we've been having for the past millions of
years.
It weren't for the collision of India into Asia and the formation of the Himalayas.
Our global climate would probably never have cooled to the point that it's having the large
ice ages that it now has on a regular cyclical basis driven by the Milankovitch cycles.
Now we don't have a good record of the change in temperature before about 540 million years.
As I said, we just don't have any fossils from back then, but there is geologic evidence
for several periods of extreme glaciation between about 800 and 600 million years ago.
I talked about this previously.
This was a phenomenon called snowball earth where we see glacial sediments that were embedded
within icebergs covering the oceans, covering the ocean floor long distances away from the
locations where these glaciers were entering into the ocean.
It seems that several times during this period of 800 to 600 million years ago, the climate
swung severely between very, very hot periods, runaway greenhouses, and periods so cold that
possibly the entire ocean surfaces were frozen over.
Now this obviously would have been very hard on life, and it's probably not a coincidence
that multicellular life didn't get started until after this time, but interestingly it
may be actually because of the lack of multicellular life, because of the lack of worms and other
creatures that live in ocean sediments that these large changes in climate even occurred.
Why is this?
All worms in ocean sediments keep the gases and other sediments all churned up.
They help prevent methane and carbon dioxide from getting locked away.
Perhaps without worms, the level of the atmosphere greenhouse gases could run down and drop precipitously.
It could drop so much that the oceans actually froze.
This occurred until some sort of catastrophic event, maybe a volcanic event, might have triggered
the release of enough methane from ocean sediments to kick the climate back into a runaway greenhouse,
causing global warming, melting more methane, causing a more release of greenhouse gases,
and sending the climate careening all the way to the other spectrum of being enormously
hot with all the ice melted.
Now once worms evolved, this no longer happened.
The greenhouse gases were kept in circulation.
Ironically, though it seems like humans are currently working very hard to become the
planet's most significant agent of geologic change, which I'll talk about more later on
in the course, we actually have a long ways to go before we attain the same honor in the
Climate Change Hall of Fame as the worm.
Well, plate tectonics drives long scale climate change, largely by changing weathering rates.
Milankovitch cycles drive intermediate scale climate change by slightly changing the amount
and distribution of sunlight.
And in the next lecture, I will start to look at short term climate change.
All those interesting short spikes in the temperature charts we saw, very rapid changes
in temperature.
And when we do, things will really start to get interesting.
