Welcome.
In this lecture, I want to talk about the history of climate change and human history.
It turns out that the human migrations of peoples, the establishment of civilizations,
the history of our wars, and even the development of countries themselves would all have been
totally different, with just a slightly different set of climate controls.
And I want you to remember, after I go through this discussion, that the past 10,000 years
have been the warmest, mildest, and most stable weather conditions that we can have.
When the climate returns to previous and more normal levels, the challenges for human
civilization may be severe.
So let's go back in time.
Let's start 100,000 years ago and run the clock forward and look and see if we can find
where events in human history correlate with climate events.
Back 100,000 years ago, Homo sapiens was emerging as the dominant hominid.
I mean, there were other hominids around like Neanderthal.
Why?
Why were we favored?
Why did we survive?
Well, one possibility that anthropologists have suggested is there may have been an evolutionary
selection for large brains during the very strong ice ages that occurred 120,000 to 90,000
years ago.
In other words, you needed to be able to think in order to survive.
If you go 60,000 to 40,000 years ago, there was a huge diaspora of people out of Africa
going into Europe, Asia, Australia, all around the globe.
They moved along the coastlines largely at a rate of about a kilometer per year.
That's the rate at which people spread out.
Why?
What happened then?
Why didn't this happen earlier?
We were genetically the same.
Well, this was a period of much stabler temperatures that followed these periods of very rapid cooling,
like what happened after the Toba eruption that I talked about in the previous lecture.
There were better sources of food.
There were more stable coastlines.
The shoreline wasn't moving back and forth so rapidly.
Again, as I talked about previously, humans could reach Australia because the sea level
was so low there were land bridges.
Humans came to North America 14,000 years ago, crossing from Siberia to Alaska.
50,000 to 40,000 years ago, in Europe there was a cultural explosion at the time.
Jewelry, figurines, perhaps religious icons were made.
Why?
Well, there was a warming trend in Europe.
And life was easier, perhaps.
Maybe there was time for other things besides just scraping out a living.
The beginnings of agriculture and the first pre-civilization communities, cities like Jericho,
didn't actually evolve and occur until about 10,000 years ago.
Why?
What happened at this time?
Well, this was the start of our last interglacial, the start of that warm and relatively stable
climate period.
Remember I talked about the Milankovitch cycles, the fact that there were these oscillations
in Earth's ellipticity and that the interglacial periods, the times of warm climate, corresponded
to the fluctuations in the shape of Earth's orbit, that roughly 100,000 year cycle.
And at the end of each period of ice ages, there became a rapid increase in temperature,
leading to a fairly brief period of interglacial warm temperatures.
But why were there such rapid increases 16,000 years ago?
Well, the answer is probably there was a runaway greenhouse effect.
In other words, there's a dynamic feedback here.
You have reduced ice coverage on land.
You have more of Earth's surface, which emits more infrared radiation, which warms the atmosphere,
which can hold more greenhouse gases, which continues to warm the surface, and you go
into this cycle of runaway greenhouse temperatures.
So that's probably why the ice ages came to a fairly rapid end and do at the end of
each period of ice ages.
There's another possibility, however, and that is the rapid release of methane from
ocean sediments.
Now, this is a really interesting situation.
At the end of an ice age, you have really low sea levels.
So a lot of former marine environment, marine sediments, are exposed above land, and they
are rapidly eroding.
It's interesting, if you go to the Mediterranean, you see evidence of lots of huge landslides
at the end of the last ice age, rushing off coastal regions down into the Mediterranean
sea.
Well, these areas had a lot of methane in frozen offshore hydrates.
I'm going to talk more about this in lecture 43.
And the sudden erosion of these sediments would have released enormous amounts of methane,
and that sudden release of methane could have triggered the runaway greenhouse event.
It could have been the event that essentially kicked off that sudden global warming.
Of course, there may be other causes as well.
Again, we're just beginning to figure this out.
Now, global temperatures began to increase dramatically about 16,000 years ago, but then
stopped 13,000 years ago, and dropped back into another 1,200 years of freezing cold.
This is a period known as the Younger Dryas, named after an alpine tundra flower, the dryas.
The effect was most significant around the North Atlantic.
In fact, temperatures in places like Greenland dropped by 10 degrees Celsius.
Why?
What plunged us back into another short, brief ice age?
Well, this was probably a shutdown of the whole thermohaling circulation of the Atlantic
Ocean that I talked about in the last lecture.
The Gulf Stream stopped flowing.
At this time, there was a huge Glacier Lake, Glacier Lake Agassi, that released enormous
amounts of water off the surface of Canada into the North Atlantic.
The freshwater was too buoyant, it couldn't sink, and the whole Gulf Stream stopped and
shut down, sending Greenland and Europe and North America into a period of freezing.
But why did it happen at this particular time?
And why is this event not seen at the start of other previous interglacials?
Well, here's another unusual, possible climate change event.
It could be a large comet caused this short, brief freezing.
There's evidence for a large comet exploding over Canada at this time.
If you look at soil, it contains the element iridium, melted carbon droplets, even tiny
diamonds.
The sort of materials that you would expect after some sort of a meteorite or comet impact.
However, we don't see any crater in Canada, so it's thought that this explosion would
have occurred in the atmosphere, which would have meant it would have been an icy comet
instead of a rocky meteorite.
The heat from the explosion would have caused wildfires, extreme heating, glacial melting.
It would have shut off the Gulf Stream, chilling the Northern Hemisphere.
That's interesting.
At the same time in the Southern Hemisphere, there had been a milder episode of cooling,
which had actually started a thousand years earlier.
So obviously it couldn't have been caused by this impact of a comet, could have been
caused by something else.
We still haven't figured this out.
Again, we have to be very careful.
It's often not appropriate to talk about global climate change because things get so heavily
influenced by regional weather patterns, and one of the best examples of this happened
in the Sahara Desert.
From the peak of the end of the ice age, 22,000 years ago, to about 10,500 years ago,
the Sahara was bone dry, even worse than today.
In fact, the Sahara extended 400 kilometers farther south than today.
Humans existed only along the Wet Nile River, not at all in the desert regions.
But about 10,500 years ago, monsoon rains from the Indian Ocean began arriving regularly.
The Sahara was transformed into a savanna environment.
Settlement spread all across what's now Egypt, lots of cattle grazing on grasses.
About 7,300 years ago, there began to be a retreat of those monsoon rains.
The prehistoric peoples had to either retreat south into what's now Sudan, or move towards
the Nile.
And by 5,500 years ago, 3,500 years before the Common Era, there was a full return back
to the dry desert.
This represented the start of dynastic Egyptian civilizations along the Nile.
All of this change was the result of regional variations and atmospheric circulation.
They were affected by, but clearly distinct from, global changes that were occurring
at the same time.
Now, in spite of regional effects, in general, civilizations around the world largely began
about 6,000 years ago.
This happened simultaneously in the fertile Crescent around the Euphrates River, the Indus
Valley in what's now Indian Pakistan, the Yellow River Valley in China, along the Nile
and Egypt, along the Mississippi River Valley in North America.
All of these sprung up at about the same time.
Why?
What was going on 6,000 years ago that allowed civilizations to suddenly start simultaneously
everywhere?
There were probably two reasons.
First of all, the sea level finally stabilized.
If you go back 10,000 years ago, the sea levels were 50 meters lower than they are today and
rapidly rising.
9,000 years ago, the sea level was 25 meters lower than today.
7,000 years ago, the sea level was still 7 meters lower than today, but by 6,000 years
ago, the sea level was less than a meter lower than today.
It hasn't moved very much since then.
And this is very important for civilization because it allows a stabilization of shoreline
communities.
You're not having to move back and forth as the sea level changes.
And it turns out shoreline communities were also important for inland civilizations because
there's archaeological evidence that inland civilizations imported a lot of fish from
the shorelines.
The other important factor here is simply that in a warmer climate with an elevated
sea level, the plant and animal biomass increases rapidly.
You have continents with flooded continental shelves, which means lots of shallow water
extending for long distances offshore.
This gives rise to large ocean shoreline fish populations.
Taken together with the increase in shallow environments and the warmer temperatures,
the coastal margin productivity, a measure of how much biomass is in the whole shoreline
regions, probably increased by a factor of 10.
In other words, you could begin to support large communities of people.
The shoreline stopped moving, there was lots of fish and food.
You had warm, stable climates that could lead to good agriculture, and this was the beginning
of complex, large civilizations.
Now, it's interesting.
If you go back to the times of the earliest civilizations, many cultures have myths that
are similar to the story of the expulsion from Eden.
Why?
Why does this theme run throughout civilizations?
Well, for a very simple reason.
They were expelled.
The rising sea levels that followed the end of the Ice Ages permanently forced all shoreline
communities tremendous distances from their initial homelands.
If you go to the Persian Gulf today, you can see archaeological remnants of previous communities
that are now flooded beneath the Persian Gulf.
The water flooded up in towards the Tigris and Euphrates regions, moving that fertile
delta constantly inland, flooding all the communities, forcing people to leave what
were once their homes.
Now, it's interesting.
Sometimes these floods occurred catastrophically.
It's very interesting.
If you look in Eastern Europe, turns out this was the origination of several peoples who
now live further south in the Middle East or even in Africa.
Some Egyptian and Semitic peoples actually originated in Eastern Europe.
Why did they leave?
Well, it turned out that 5,600 years before the common era, the Black Sea flooded dramatically
and catastrophically.
The sea level was rising throughout the Mediterranean, but that didn't affect the Black Sea, which
was initially an entirely separate lake, entirely landlocked.
But at some point, the sea level rose high enough and that water burst through what's
now the Bosporus, right by Istanbul.
The water flooded enormous amounts, 12,500 cubic kilometers of water burst through the
Bosporus and essentially created the Black Sea in a remarkably short amount of time.
Whole towns are underwater there.
You can still see the remnants beneath the surface of the Black Sea and those peoples
all had to move elsewhere.
Many cultures have similar flood myths from this time.
You can go to the Baltic Sea in the north.
Again, you have whole communities that once existed before the flooding of this region,
but as the sea level came out, this whole area became water and people had to very rapidly
leave their initial communities.
Starting about 3,600 to 2,800 years before the common era, the climate went into a phase
of rapid small changes that we call that a period of climatic deterioration.
It was a series of alternating droughts and floods and it's interesting because the civilizations
had to change at this point to handle these alternating droughts and floods.
The Indus Valley civilization in modern day India and Pakistan began to develop large
irrigation and drainage systems about 3,100 years before the common era in order to deal
with this.
Larger civilizations in the Middle Eastern region began to develop in order to survive
and this was the beginning of one of the major large empires in the Fertile Crescent, the
Akkadian Empire in modern day Iraq.
About 2,900 years before the common era, there was an extreme flooding which actually brought
about the end of one empire and the start of the Sumerian Empire.
Interestingly, this flooding, these extreme rains, may have been another cause of the
flooding myth and in fact may have been the origination of the story of Noah's Ark and
the biblical deluge in the Old Testament, which is actually taken from a Babylonian
version of a Sumerian legend called the Epic of Gilgamesh.
At the same time in Egypt, we have the story of Joseph warning the Egyptian pharaoh to
prepare for seven lean years.
Why was this important?
Well, the climate was changing and cultures had to be able to store enough food in order
to last through these periods of drought, to feed the people and survive and those communities
that were able to do that, to have the foresight to prepare, are the ones that survived and
the ones that exist today.
Those communities that didn't make these preparations didn't survive and were overrun
by other cultures and communities.
Starting about 2,200 years before the common era, century long droughts caused the collapse
of the old Kingdom of Egypt and of the Akkadian Empire in Mesopotamia.
This was a very rough time.
The Indus Valley culture around 1,900 years before the common era essentially became overrun
by desert sands from the expanding desert.
1,200 years before the common era, there was a northward shift in the winter storm paths
that actually caused significant droughts in the Mediterranean and at the same time
flooding in Central Europe and this essentially brought about a collapse of the Bronze Age.
At this time in the Middle East, there was a large abandonment of agriculture which just
didn't work stably and was failing in a shift by a lot of peoples to a nomadic lifestyle.
There were mass migrations of peoples, the Phrygians and the Hittite peoples from what
is now modern-day Turkey, southward and the influx of these people into the Middle East
led to the huge numbers of battles and conflicts that are described in the Old Testament.
Things got better.
In about 800 and 500 years before the common era, we went into a period of warm and mild
Atlantic climates.
There was wide prosperity in the Middle East.
There was the spread of the Celts in Britain, the start of the Roman culture along the Mediterranean.
However, at 500 to 400 years before the common era, as I talked about in the previous lecture,
the warming was so great that it caused a huge melt of Greenland ice we think it shut
down the Atlantic Ocean circulation and it temporarily froze Europe, interestingly giving
rise to the Macedonian Empire, again which I talked about in the last lecture.
The continued warming in Asia at this time opened up mountain passes and it created for
the first time large-scale trade between Europe and Asia, the opening of the Silk Route.
People like Marco Polo were going back and forth between Europe and Asia, allowing the
two cultures to finally grow somewhat in parallel and learn from each other.
Europe got a couple things that were absolutely invaluable to its whole future, things like
gunpowder and even ketchup.
If you go to about 2,000 years ago, we were just in a period of very warm, stable climates.
About zero to 100 years in the common era, this allowed the Roman Empire to thrive tremendously.
The Roman Empire at that point had more than 60 million people in it.
Rome itself, the city, had about a million people and controlled lands that extended all
the way from England to the Middle East to Northern Africa.
So why did Rome collapse?
Well again, if you've studied European history, you can probably rattle off a whole bunch
of reasons that involve things like lead in the water and a general decay of the people.
Well yes, that's true, but there also was a climate effect to this.
At 400 A.D., the climate went into an extended period of freezing, a very strong cold spell
that had followed many centuries of warm, stable climates.
Europeans throughout the lands were starving, their crops were failing and they moved south.
The Huns, the Ghats, the Visigoths, the Ostragoths, these people began moving towards the Mediterranean.
Again, it was the same situation as the westward expansion of the United States.
What would cause people to just pack up their materials and just move out of their homelands?
They'll do it if they don't have enough food to eat.
And the southward migration of these many northern peoples eventually overrode the Roman culture
and was a significant reason for its final demise.
Now, a little bit later on in history, again, we had a warming period and it's interesting
because look at Leif Erikson later on.
Why was Leif Erikson and the rest of the Vikings, why were they able to sail to America?
Well from about 900 to 1300, there was an extended warm period that we call the medieval warm period.
At the same time, there were severe droughts in Central America and Southwestern North America.
This led to the collapse of the Mayan cultures and the Anasazi civilizations in Southwestern
the United States.
It's an unfortunate result of warming, but when global temperatures increase, the climates
in the Southwestern U.S. and in Central America get very warm and dry.
And this happened at about this time.
In fact, we actually have very good records for the climate change in these regions because
we have tree rings from trees that were alive at this point.
The tree rings show us that there was a period from 1118 to 1179 in the common era of extreme
drought.
We see this in trees on the modern day Colorado Plateau.
It was during these times that all of these cliff dwellings, you know, Bandelier and Chaco
Canyon and Mesa Verde, all these communities, they just disappeared.
The cliff dwellings were abandoned.
There's no sign of war, there's no sign of strife, the cultures just seemed to disappear.
And we think we know why now, it's because the climates got so dry, they simply ran out
of water.
They didn't have the technology to be able to drill down underground to pull water up
from the ground, from groundwater that we have today, and they just ran out of it, ran
out of water.
Interesting.
There was a thong of the North Atlantic ice that, as I mentioned, that allowed the Vikings
to establish these settlements in Vinland in what is now Labrador in Canada, but with
the end of that medieval warm period, the cold spell that started in about 1300, the
North Atlantic froze up and all those Viking settlements got stranded, were no longer able
to sail back and forth, and those communities died off.
The cold spell that started around 1300, however, had much worse consequences for the
whole world.
Remember, when you have a colder climate, you reduce the amount of humidity that the
air can hold, the amount of water vapor the air can hold, and that falls out as rains.
So the increase in cold, an increase in high humidity, more rains, you had severe snows,
you had cold hard rains in summer, and this led to the Great Famine of 1315 to 1317.
Within a few years, a quarter of the population of Europe died off, mass starvation.
I mean, did you ever wonder where stories like Hansel and Gretel could ever come from?
And the rest of the grim stories, abandoned children, cannibalism, well these things happened
during the Great Famine when people didn't have any food, and it followed a period of
long prosperity, so populations were high, and the populations just could not be sustained.
Interesting, do you also know why the Black Plague struck in the 1300s, wiping out more
than half of Europe by 1350?
Well, the story actually begins with flooding in China.
The same change into a flooding, wet, cold climate caused massive floods in China.
In fact, it's estimated that in the year 1332, more than 7 million people drowned along
the Yellow River in China.
And with so many people dead, there were no people left to bury them, and the bodies of
humans and other animals were just left at the surface, and that led to a boom in the
population of rats.
And on the rats are fleas, and it's the fleas that carry the Black Plague, the Bubonic Plague.
So you had a boom in the population of rats and fleas, and the plague began to spread
throughout China.
But here's the issue.
Europe at this time, because it was starving, was importing grain from wherever it could
get it, and ships of grain were being sent from China towards the Middle East and Europe.
Now in China, the devastation of the plague was also tremendous.
More than two-thirds of the population died there.
But the plague spread both by land and by sea, with anyone traveling westward from China.
From every port city in the Middle East and European countries, the plague spread out
as those ships filled with grain carrying the rats arrived, eventually killing a quarter
to two-thirds of the populations.
Finally reaching Britain in 1349, where it killed 70% of the population by the end of
the century.
Now there are some parts of Europe that have actually never returned to the high populations
that they had at the start of the 1300s.
There are areas in France where the modern day populations are less than they were at
that time.
In other words, Europe still hasn't fully recovered from this catastrophic event.
The plague wasn't done just in that year.
It returned in 1563, in 1578, in 1593, 1603, 1625, 1636, and 1665.
In fact, the outbreak in 1563, in places like England, was actually worse than when
the great plague first hit in 1349 in Britain.
It's even been suggested that the plague contributed to the little ice age that followed.
Bizarrely, you had a situation where all these fields that had been plowed for agriculture
were now abandoned, and millions of trees sprang up in these abandoned fields and rapidly
pulled carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere, playing a factor in cooling climates.
The plague entirely changed the social and economic structures of Europe and Asia, with
more than half of the populations gone.
For one thing, there was a tremendous loss of faith and support for the Catholic Church
because it couldn't do anything to stop the plague.
In fact, it suffered some of the worst losses because often the church members were trying
to help with the plague, and they got exposed to it at greater rates than other people.
There was also, in Europe, the beginnings of significant racial discrimination.
Hundreds of different massacres of Jewish communities occurred.
In fact, there occurred a permanent relocation of many Jewish communities to parts of Eastern
Europe, like Poland, where the plague didn't hit very hard.
And so there weren't the same social and economic and political strife occurring in
places like Eastern Europe.
Interestingly, there were other significant differences between the whole future of Eastern
and Western Europe that stemmed because of this event.
In Western Europe, the incredible decrease in population led to a loss of cheap labor,
and it essentially brought about an end of serfdom, and it started the very beginnings
of capitalism.
It began an era of free enterprise and entrepreneurship that continued on with the whole industrial
and scientific advances of the Renaissance.
This didn't happen as much in Eastern Europe, where the plague didn't hit very hard, so
social structures remained pretty much in place, and serfdom actually continued until
the late 19th century.
The whole course of history was changed forever because of rains that came with the cooling
that came with the ending of the medieval war period.
Now in lecture 45, I'm going to bring this story of climate and climate change back up
to the present, but this gets a bit more complicated because humans begin to play a dominant role
in the story.
Before I do this, I want to talk about a few more areas where geology has shaped human
history.
And in the next few lectures, I'm going to talk about how the distribution and formation
of natural resources like minerals and metals and sources of energy like fossil fuels and
uranium have also played a significant role in affecting human history and culture and
economics.
