Welcome. In this lecture, I want to talk about natural resources. Now, I have a theme going
here of how the earth affects humans and human civilization, and there's no better
example of this than in the natural resources we've been able to use from the earth.
I mean, in the previous lecture I talked about how geologic events in the form of climate
change affected the course of human history. Well, here I'm going to talk about the economic
effects of geology and the history of geologic change. After all, as the old mining saying
goes, if you don't grow it, you mine it. I mean, we don't live in caves anymore or
wear animal skins. Why is this? It's natural resources that we've taken out of the ground.
I mean, look around you right now, and I don't just mean at the TV. Look at your home, your
work environment, your modes of transportation. All of it is based on the mineral, metal,
and fossil fuel resources that we get out of the ground. I mean, even the clothes that
you're wearing, if they're polyester, rayon, or nylon, etc., they're made from petroleum
products. I bet that you're not aware of the magnitude of this. I mean, every year,
more than 25,000 pounds, that's 11.3 metric tons of new non-fuel minerals must be provided
for you and for each person in the United States to make the items that each of us
use every day. It comprises about $2 trillion out of our annual $13.2 trillion gross domestic
production, and the issues involved with maintaining the supply of minerals are incredibly complex,
far beyond the scope of this lecture, this course, because for a natural resource to
be available, it has to be available in many different ways, not just geologically, but
technologically, politically, economically, socially, and environmentally. And there are
some really tricky issues involved. For instance, the United States has to import 100% of many
of these minerals. They just don't exist within the boundaries of this country. We're entirely
dependent upon other countries for them. Suppose a country that has a monopoly on a particular
resource doesn't want to export it. I mean, what does the rest of the world do about it?
An unending source of political conflict has always come from the uneven distribution of
these resources, and always will. For example, as Jared Diamond pointed out in his acclaimed
book, Guns, Germs, and Steel, this uneven distribution significantly contributed to Europe's ability
to achieve dominance over the Americas and other parts of the world. For instance, when
Cortez arrived in Central America, his army of a couple hundred men defeated an Aztec
army of many thousands without a single loss of life. He had horses, and he had steel swords.
And this uneven distribution of resources is a direct result of the geologic roulette
wheel, the chance history of things like plate tectonics, metal ore deposits, the location
of oil fields, the existence of coal seams. All of these are a result of particular geologic
events that just happen to create the resources in some regions and not in others. And another
serious issue is that many of these resources are very limited. The reserves for many, at
least in expense of reserves, may well run out within this century. By the way, I need
to define two terms. A mineral reserve is a known quantity of a substance. It's what
we know exists down there. Resources are projected quantities of these resources, of these minerals
based upon previous geologic discoveries. It's reserves we know we don't know. A lot
of discussion has occurred about the limited future of petroleum reserves. But this turns
out to be true for minerals and metals as well. And how we handle this issue is really
going to determine the future of humanity, not only in the distant future, but in the
near future as well. I mean, the discovery of metals controlled our very history, the
stone age, the copper age, bronze age, iron age. In fact, archaeologists often define
human history in terms of the sequence of the discovery of what are called the seven
metals of antiquity. Gold was discovered and how it could be used about 8,000 years
ago. Copper 6,200 years ago. Silver 6,000 years ago. Lead 5,500 years ago. Ten 3,000
750 years ago. Iron about three and a half thousand years ago. And mercury a little less
than 3,000 years ago. Each of these metals has very different properties that could be
used for a variety of different mechanisms. Let me get back to geology for a moment. Fortunately
for us, naturally occurring geologic processes concentrate metals and minerals we use in
everyday life. To levels that make them usable for us. It allows us to take them out of a
ground with a real minimum of effort. And this is due to the way that plate tectonics
works. It's just the natural sequence of ocean rifting and the motion of the ocean sea floor
across the mantle, the subduction of that material, and then the subsequent volcanism.
For instance, most valuable metals and minerals exist within Earth's crust at incredibly
low concentrations. It would really be impossible for us to use them if they weren't naturally
concentrated. For example, gold consists of about three parts per billion of Earth's
crust. That's 0.0000003% of Earth's crust. In order to make a wedding band, you would
need to grind up and extract the gold from 3,000 tons of crustal rock. That's just not
going to happen. But fortunately, the geologic processes will do this for us. The process
of plate tectonics concentrates metals and these minerals in ways that prevent us from
having to do it. Now, there are exceptions. There are exceptions. There are exceptions.
Things like sand and gravel exist at concentrations that are high enough for us to use right out
of the ground. But for most minerals and metals, we need these tectonic processes to concentrate
them. What's the key to this? The key is, and something I've talked about earlier, that
atoms for large elements don't sit well within the silicate mineral structures. Remember,
when we were forming minerals, I said that the minerals had to meet two criteria. The
electrical charges of the different ions had to balance to zero, but the different sizes
of the ions also had to match. Well, if you have a large atom like gold or silver or tungsten,
it just doesn't fit well within that mineral structure. As a result, these materials tend
to be the first to dissolve and leave a rock, the first chance they get, and this process
occurs for us at mid-ocean ridges. Remember, I talked about the process of having hydrothermal
circulation through the mid-ocean ridge system, where you have heat there that causes water
to expand and come out of the seafloor in these large smokers, these large thermal chimneys.
In the process, it pulls water down into the rock for a wide region all surrounding the
ridge as that water enters the rock, it begins to heat up, and as it begins to heat up, it
begins to dissolve that material right out of the rock. So it focuses, it concentrates
already, materials like gold and silver, tungsten, all these heavy metals get pulled
into the hot liquid. As the liquid comes out of the mid-ocean ridge, it gets instantly
chilled, it solidifies out, and that's why you get this black water coming out of these
thermal vents that deposits those mineral reserves either in the chimneys themselves
or the surrounding region. Well, that material then moves away from the ridge over tens to
hundreds of millions of years, gradually buried by successive ocean sediments in the process.
Okay, so already we've had a factory at the mid-ocean ridge for pulling out valuable elements
and laying them on top of the ocean seafloor. Well, the story doesn't end there, right?
The ocean seafloor enters a subduction zone and that concentrates the minerals even further.
Some of the sediments get scraped off and get formed into these large accretionary wedges
on the edges of continents. At some later point, perhaps in a continent-continent collision,
that accretionary wedge becomes part of a mountain range eventually exposed with erosion,
and that, interestingly, the process of erosion can further concentrate them. For instance,
if you go to places like California, people will pan for gold. Well, that's because the
gold veins there are exposed and eroded, get carried down in streams, and people can sift
it out of the streams, pan for gold. Some of the material gets carried down into the
subduction zone itself, and here it can flow upward with the water, it can flow into the
melts, and then can crystallize beneath these arc volcanoes. Tremendous amount of further
concentration occurs by hydrothermal circulation at the island arc volcanoes or continental
arc volcanoes themselves. In other words, you have a similar process going on at these
volcanoes that you had at the volcanoes at the mid-ocean ridge. You have water pulled
in, heated, coming out, dissolving these rich metal atoms, concentrating them, and then
putting them in very narrow particular regions. So it's not a coincidence that gold rushes
have occurred near current or former subduction zones, places like California and Alaska,
and subduction zones tend to have the richest metal and ore deposits. So if your country
has former subduction zone rock, you have access to these concentrated metals that
you don't have in a country that hasn't had subduction as part of its geologic history.
Continental volcanoes can also be places of mineral concentrations. Hydrothermal circulation
again can pull that material out of the middle of a continent if you have volcanoes forming
in that particular region. Over time, erosion will expose these bodies of ores that have
formed, allowing humans to extract them. Now, there are other resources as well that form
in a variety of different ways. For instance, diamonds and other gems. How do they form?
Well, it's interesting. They form from other processes. For instance, you can get precipitation
of crystals directly out of water, similar to how salt forms. Silica-rich fluids become
minerals like amethyst and agate. Copper-rich fluids become minerals like turquoise, malachite.
You can also get the precipitation of minerals directly out of hot fluids in the very last
stages of the cooling of a body of magma underground. They can form cracks of quartz-rich crystals
called pegmatites. These pegmatites are often locations of lots of other minerals and metals.
Some different gems require the presence of very particular elements to form. For instance,
the presence of beryllium can lead to the formation of gems like beryll, emerald, aquamarine.
The presence of boron can lead to the formation of gems like tourmaline. You can also get
crystallization within pre-existing gas bubbles of volcanic rocks. Interestingly, gems like
zircon and topaz and ruby sometimes form this way. You can also get gems forming in high-pressure
metamorphic environments. Garnet, jadeite, and tourmaline will begin to form in these
ways. Of course, we have the interesting case of diamonds, which as I mentioned previously,
will form anywhere near the surface. They have to form at least 150 kilometers beneath
the surface. How did those diamonds get to the surface? Well, it's a very interesting
process that we really don't understand, but it turns out early on in Earth's history,
in the oldest Archean cratons, the cores of continents, there occurred rapid explosive
high-pressure ejections of rock from way deep within the Earth, from hundreds of kilometers.
We find them now at the surface as what we call kimberlite pipes. The kimberlite is
named after the location Kimberley, South Africa. Many of these have been found in some
of the oldest cratonic rock in South Africa. These must have been incredibly violent explosions
because these kimberlite pipes involve tremendous amounts of rock all jumbled together that
we think some of it actually got ejected up and fell back down into the pipe. They're
rare and more importantly, they haven't happened for billions of years, but they're the locations
where diamonds came up to the surface. The United States and other industrialized nations
face several large issues concerning mineral reserves and resources. First of all, we're
incredibly dependent upon a wide range of metals and minerals that have very specific
and unique applications in our modern technological world. And many of these resources are either
very, very small or are being used, pulled out of the ground at very rapid rates. And
in addition, the uneven distribution of these resources causes industrialized nations like
the United States to be tremendously dependent upon foreign imports. Let me give you an example.
At the start of the 20th century, cars were made of essentially five things, wood, rubber,
steel, glass and brass. Well, nowadays modern cars are made of at least 39 different minerals,
in addition to rubber, plastic and organic materials, etc. Some functions of the cars
like catalytic converters and the electronics use very specific minerals with no known substitutes.
For instance, the catalytic converter in a car, especially for diesel engines, requires
platinum. We don't know of any other element that will replace this function. For instance,
the element indium is used for liquid crystal displays and cell phones. We don't know
of any substitute yet for this. As I mentioned before, many minerals also have reserves
that may run out within the century. Gold, copper, silver and tin were pulling these
out of the ground at incredibly fast rates. And we may simply use it up. Copper, humans
use 15 million metric tons each year of copper alone. It's the best material for electricity.
We don't have a good replacement for it. I got a sense of how important copper is when
I visited the biggest hole in the world. It's the Bingham copper mine in Salt Lake City.
It's a mine that's two and a half miles wide and half a mile deep. It's just a tremendous
amount of ground that has been dug out in order to access this copper. Now, there are
likely more than 1.6 billion tons of copper geologically available. But, at the rate
of 15 million metric tons each year, that's 100 years. Now, of course, more resources
will be discovered and exploited and dug out as the price goes up. But nonetheless, these
are not infinite supplies. Perhaps no better example exists for this than in what are called
the Rare Earth Metals. Many of these metals have unique applications in industry and,
as I mentioned, don't have any substitute. For instance, the Rare Earth Metal Europium
is used for the red phosphor and color TVs and LCD screens. Even though prices are now
more than $2,000 for a kilogram of this, that's 2.2 pounds, we don't know of any substitute.
It's the only thing that gives us that red color. Herbium, the metal herbium, is used
in all fiber optic cables because of its unique optical properties. Again, it has no substitute.
The metal cerium is used to polish almost all our mirrors and lenses because of very
unique chemical and physical properties. Rare Earth elements like neodymium, samarium,
gadolinium, dysprosium, and pricidimium are used for high performance permanent magnets
in our electronics, our video games, military devices, disc drives, DVDs. There are no substitutes
for them. These are materials you never hear about in everyday life, but you are absolutely
dependent upon them. If you ever use a cell phone, you need these. And there are other
uses for yttrium and lanthanum and turium and all these other materials. And we import
100% of these. We have almost none left in the United States. Most of these rare earth
metals, three fourths, come from China. Now, the good thing is, there are still centuries
worth in terms of the amount of these elements left. But, the whole world must rely upon
global trade to get at them. And that just requires countries being nice to each other.
Another critical resource, platinum group metals like platinum, rhodium, osmium, and
iridium, they're also very rare. 80% come from South Africa. About 5% exists within
the borders of North America. These metals have a unique property. They act as catalysts
for a huge number of chemical reactions. As I mentioned, platinum is the only thing that
works for diesel catalytic converters. Rhodium is used for removing nitrous oxide emissions.
It doesn't have a known substitute. Now, there is one thing that's already helping tremendously
to extend the lifetime of many of these mineral and metal resources. Recycling. It's a real
advantage of mineral and metal resources over non-renewable fossil fuels, for example.
Because in many cases, you can continuously reuse metals. And as recycling becomes more
and more economically advantageous, it is greatly extending the projected lifetimes for many
of these resources. Now, there is a whole other large area of natural resources that
I haven't talked about yet. And that's what most people think of when they hear the term
natural resources. And that's hydrocarbons, coal, oil, and natural gas. I'm going to talk
more about them in the next lecture as well. But what I want to do is give you a sense
of just how these things form and how we get at them. Coal, like diamond, also forms from
carbon, but in a very different way. Coal is a sedimentary rock that's essentially fossilized,
swamp, and bog. It requires a particular condition where organic material gets buried in an anaerobic
condition. In other words, in an environment without a lot of free oxygen. Why is this
important? Because it doesn't get eaten primarily by bacteria before it's buried. Most organic
material, when plants die, bacteria in other organisms eat them and the carbon gets brought
right back into the surface carbon cycle. But if that material sinks in the bottom of
a swamp or a bog, without a lot of free oxygen, it doesn't get eaten and it gets buried and
essentially gets removed from the surface carbon cycle. Now, if you have shorelines advancing
and retreating, you get swamp material deposited over broad regions, like shoreline sediments.
Go to Florida now. The Everglades, these areas are future coal reserves as these regions
will get buried, especially with a rising sea level. All the swamp material is going
to get buried over and in a few hundred million years will be coal. We'll form what we call
coal seams, layers of coal that exist extending horizontally like other sedimentary rocks.
Now, the organic material that gets buried goes through several stages of sedimentation
and even metamorphism to get the coal that we use. The point is, you've got to compact
it, you've got to squeeze out other stuff and you've got to concentrate the carbon.
Now, if you go to a current day swamp, dig up the stuff and dry it, you get what's called
peat. You go to many parts of the world and people still heat their homes from dried peat.
It's about 50% carbon, it will burn, but it's a very dirty, smoky source of energy because
it's 50% other stuff as well. If it gets compacted over time, first becomes a coal called lignite
and then bituminous coal and eventually anthracite. For instance, in bituminous coal, the material
is about 86% carbon and in anthracite, you get up to 98% carbon. Essentially, everything
else has been removed and squeezed out. Now, anthracite is obviously the most desirable
but it's actually very rare. Most of the world's energy comes from bituminous coal, at least
energy in the form of coal. Because coal requires certain geologic conditions to form, you need
a swamp. It's not found everywhere, but because swamps and bogs have been in a lot of different
places, coal is actually fairly abundant as far as resources go. Most of the coal that
we get comes from swamps and bogs that existed between two periods of time, about 300 to
250 million years ago and about 150 to 50 million years ago. So, the coal that we use
is really old. New coal is going to form continuously, but it forms too slowly for much to occur
at all during our lifetimes and that's why we consider this a non-renewable source of
energy. Now, this coal formed back during warmer climates, the sea level was high, continental
shells were flooded with shallow waters, the material was buried deeply in basins, particularly
if you were next to a road in mountains and that gave us huge supplies of bituminous coal.
In particular situations where you had metamorphism occurring, let's say in a continental collision,
that bituminous coal can be converted into anthracite. The other major source of hydrocarbons
exists in petroleum, oil and natural gas. These also come from carbon-based organic
materials, but in an entirely different setting. Petroleum, oil and natural gas form from shallow
marine sediments, mostly zooplankton and algae. And unlike coal, petroleum needs special conditions
not only to form, but to survive underground. First of all, you need to rapidly bury and
compact the organic sediments. And with increasing pressure and temperature, you essentially cook
these sediments and you begin to extract the hydrocarbons out. That process of heating and
pressing the material breaks down the complex organic molecules into simpler waxy hydrocarbon
molecules called kerogen. This is the stuff that's found in tar shales. With further compression
and heating the kerogen breaks down and forms simpler hydrocarbons either in a liquid form
oil or in a gas form natural gas. However, unlike coal, oil and natural gas are mobile.
They're lighter than rock, so they're going to rise to the surface. Almost all the petroleum
that has happened in Earth's history has quickly seeped right back up to the surface, entered
back into the carbon cycle, been consumed by organism bacteria and removed from the
ground. It's interesting, there's a town in western Pennsylvania called Slippery Rock.
Where did this name come from? It's a place where these hydrocarbons are currently seeping
right to the surface and the streams, the rocks in the streams have a slippery feel because
of the presence of these hydrocarbons in the water. Special geologic conditions are also
required in order to trap these hydrocarbons underground therefore and keep them from rising
up. I talked about this previously when I talked about the folding of sedimentary layers.
You need either a dome-like structure or an anticline where the sedimentary rock forms
a fold that has a peak in the middle where these liquids and gases as they rise up can
be trapped. You need to have some sort of a reservoir material that's usually both porous
and permeable. Sandstone is usually the ideal rock and it needs to be overlaid by some cat
rock. An impermeable layer usually shale and so as the hydrocarbons rise up they accumulate
in the sandstone. They're covered over by the cat rock and if you drill through the shale
into the sandstone you can quickly pull out the oil and natural gas. Now petroleum has
formed in several tectonic settings but the most common is actually in rift zones. Now
I already talked about rift zones in terms of the formation of salt layers. Remember
how you can have a situation where the ocean can flood in a growing ocean like the red
sea that's just beginning to rift apart but if the sea level drops the water evaporates
and you end up with a layer of salt. Well when the ocean floods back in again at a period
of warmer climate of higher sea levels you get rich marine life on top of that salt layer
which then can dry out again. Over time you get alternate layers of salt and these organic
sediments. That's exactly what happened with the Gulf of Mexico. There are rich organic
sediments that formed when the Gulf of Mexico was forming when Africa was rifting away
at the opening of the breakup of Pangaea and these sediments are trapped often by the salt
layers that exist on top of them. With continental collisions you can get the folding of rock
underground and the sedimentary layers can form large anticlines and that's what happened
in the Middle East. Arabia collided with Asia during the close up of the Tethys Sea and
two thirds of the world's petroleum lies in a few anticlines beneath the Persian Gulf
area. In other words it's just the happenstance of where we are now in our plate tectonic
process of what's going on between Arabia and Africa and Asia that has allowed that
petroleum to not only occur at a period of rifting but then to accumulate under these
very broad anticlines. I mean who knew hundreds of years ago that beneath the desert sands
of Arabia would lie an ocean of oil. I mean it's ironic, the Persian Gulf was the cradle
of civilization which I talked about in the previous lectures. Mesopotamia, Acadia, Sumeria
and Babylonia and now that same region is the focal point for the world's civilizations
again but for a very different reason because that's where the petroleum is. In the next
lecture I'm going to continue to talk about energy resources that involve fossil fuels
and I'll talk about some of the issues that surround the use of coal, oil and natural gas.
