Welcome.
In the next two lectures, I want to talk about energy sources.
In this lecture, I'm going to talk about non-renewable sources of fossil fuels and nuclear power,
and in the next lecture, I'm going to talk about renewable sources largely driven by
the sun.
Because few topics are as important, relevant, all-encompassing, and politically charged
as energy, it's just an incredibly important resource for all of humanity.
Structures are fought over.
The future depends upon it, and currently, most of it comes out of the ground.
A big part of the issue is that humans just have an incredible need for energy.
We consume it at a remarkable rate of about 15 terawatts.
Remember I defined a watt as being an energy, a rate of energy use, joules per second.
And remember I defined one joule as the amount of energy to lift a plum one meter.
So 15 terawatts is 15 trillion plums lifted up each second.
And also remember earlier in the course, I talked about how the whole rate at which
earth is cooling off is about 44 terawatts.
So we are consuming energy almost at the rate that the earth is actually cooling off and
losing its heat out into space.
It's an enormous rate, and it's continuously increasing.
The energy that we consume, about 86% currently comes from carbon-based fossil fuels.
Now if you include nuclear fission, the splitting of uranium, that's 92% of all our energy comes
from non-renewable sources.
And when I say non-renewable, what I mean is they are created by geologic processes
that are far too slow for any appreciable amount of these materials to be created during
our lifetimes.
Obviously, they formed naturally over the course of earth's history, but earth is really
old and it takes a long time to make this stuff.
Interestingly, both fossil fuels and nuclear power have several things in common.
First of all, they're both mined, they both come out of the ground, they're non-renewable,
there are big questions about how much of them is in the ground still, there are concerns
on how to get it out, and it turns out there are even bigger questions on how to put stuff
back into the ground.
In the case of nuclear power, it's the radioactive waste that's left over from the reaction process
of splitting apart the uranium.
For fossil fuels, it's how to take carbon out of the exhaust from burning them and putting
that carbon back into the ground.
Now the world's energy supply is provided not only by fossil fuels and nuclear power,
but also by other sources as well.
But when I break out these sources, you'll see how much the whole energy budget is dominated
by these fossil fuels.
Thirty-eight percent of the world's energy consumed in all different purposes currently
comes from oil.
That's more than a third.
Twenty-five percent.
A quarter comes from coal.
Twenty-three percent, essentially another quarter, comes from natural gas.
Six percent from nuclear fission.
Five percent from hydroelectric power on rivers.
And three percent from everything else.
Now one-third of all of the world's energy use, about five terawatts, five trillion joules
per second, goes into making electricity.
So it's interesting, we actually only get about two terawatts of that power.
Why?
Because the production of electricity is not terribly efficient.
There's so much lost in the transfer of a source into electricity and in the transmission
of that electricity through power wires that we only get about forty percent of the actual
energy that goes into making electricity.
Though almost all of our energy comes from fossil fuels.
As I think you'll see after these next two lectures, it's really not a feasible long-term
plan because we have limited resources.
The questions are, how long do we have?
How do we make the transition to something else?
And what is that something else that we will eventually transition to to supply our energy
needs?
Now, one important issue that we have to deal with when we're talking about fossil fuels
and nuclear power is that unlike mineral and metal resources, non-renewable fuels can't
be recycled and reused.
You use them once and they're gone.
Another very important factor is that the energy use and energy sources are not evenly
distributed around the world.
The industrial nations have a very small portion of the world's population but use most of
the energy.
For instance, the United States uses energy at a rate of about 11.4 kilowatts per person.
That's equivalent to 285 40-watt light bulbs running constantly for each person.
In fact, there's only one other country in the world that uses energy at a higher rate
per person and that's Canada because they have such large heating needs during the winter.
In contrast, if you look at developing countries like India, India uses power at a rate of
about half a kilowatt per person, one twentieth what we do in the United States.
It's interesting if you look at a country like China, China is actually going to play
a very important part in the whole energy equation because it's actively transitioning
from a developing country to an industrialized country.
It now uses energy at a rate of about two kilowatts per person and because its population
is four times that of the United States, it now consumes about as much energy as America
does.
Now, because of the important role that oil plays in just powering the whole industrial
complex of the world, oil is arguably the most important substance in the world.
It gets consumed by all different purposes at a rate of about thirty-one billion barrels
every year.
Now how long is this going to last?
Well, if you look and add up our reserves all around the world, it adds up to about
a trillion barrels of oil, okay, do the math, a trillion barrels at thirty-one billion barrels
per year will give you thirty-two years.
However, it's not so simple.
Our reserves have been at about a trillion barrels for the past fifteen years or so.
The amount of new reserves discovered each year roughly equals the amount used.
Interesting, I took an energy course as an undergraduate back in 1980 and I remember
my professor telling me at that point that given the world oil supply and the world oil
use, our oil at that rate would run out in seven years.
Okay, that would have meant 1987.
Obviously our oil didn't run out and now it's later and we have even more years projected
to use up our current reserves.
So clearly we've been able to find oil at a rapid rate and that's an important part
of the factor of the whole equation.
However, it's impossible for us to tell how much oil is actually in the ground.
It's just with the same situation with minerals and metals.
There's a very big difference between reserves and resources.
Now the United States uses currently about one-fourth of all the world's oil, about eight
billion barrels a year, but it only has two percent, about twenty-one billion barrels
of the world's reserves.
The U.S. oil supply would therefore last less than three years without foreign oil and that
includes Alaska and everywhere else.
So you can see we're in a very politically unstable situation and not surprisingly it
drives much of the U.S.'s foreign policy.
In general, distribution of petroleum throughout the world is very uneven, much more so than
many other natural resources.
Almost all of it is in the Middle East.
If you look at just five countries, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait
and Iran, those five countries have two-thirds of all the world's oil.
Saudi Arabia alone has twenty-five percent, one-fourth.
Okay, Saudi Arabia is a country with a land area that's one-third of one percent of the
earth's surface and a population that's four-tenths of one percent, and yet it has twenty-five
percent of the oil.
So it's not surprising that the last two U.S. wars have been fought in this region.
Remember I talked about how U.S. military camouflage fatigues have switched from jungle
green to desert brown.
Now after those five countries, actually the sixth country in order in the amount of oil
reserves is Venezuela, and it has the largest reserves of any non-Middle Eastern country,
and it was incidentally also the founder of OPEC.
Previously when I talked about seismic waves, I talked about how oil and natural gas are
discovered with the use of seismic imaging, and how important that was for the whole economy,
world economy, because we can see where the rock layers are saturated with liquid and
gas petroleum, and this greatly reduces the cost of oil in general by preventing the construction
of too many dry wells.
You can just drill where you know there's going to be oil for the most part.
However, it also means that we're not missing any big oil fields.
The Earth's crust has been very well examined from seismic imaging in all parts of the world,
and we'll continue to be so, but we're not going to get any big surprises with huge oil
reserves, which means the oil is going to run out at some point.
Now most petroleum is in liquid form, but there are other sources for it.
Tarsans and shales have also begun to be mined, and they contain raw carrageon.
Remember that's the waxy substance that I talked about in the last lecture that has
to break down in order to make petroleum products.
However, this raw carrageon has to be mined, and it's much more expensive.
However, it will become economically profitable when the price of oil goes up enough.
Places like Alberta and Canada already strip mine out these tar sands and cook out the
carrageon for use in petroleum production.
In general though, because oil is liquid, the ease of taking that liquid out of the
ground and then converting it into gasoline makes it the fuel of choice when you need
to get around some place, when mobility is important.
And as a result, most of the world's transportation uses liquid petroleum, and that's another
important part of the whole equation, and that is different fuels have very different
applications and needs in different instances.
Now another major source of hydrocarbons, as I mentioned, is that of natural gas.
And by the way, a hydrocarbon simply means a compound of hydrogen and carbon.
Natural gas is primarily methane, which has a formula of CH4, one atom of carbon to four
atoms of hydrogen.
But there are also other hydrocarbon gases like ethane, butane, and propane that are
contained within natural gas.
And natural gas also, when it's pulled out of the ground, contains other non-hydrocarbon
gases.
And these gases have to be removed before the methane can be used for human consumption,
for fuel.
Incidentally, one of those gases that's removed is helium.
It turns out about 7% of natural gas that you pull out of the ground contains helium.
Did you ever wonder where helium comes from?
Remember, when I talked about the formation of the earth, I said that earth's gravity
was too weak to hold onto it, there's no helium in our atmosphere.
It just flies off into space.
And remember, helium is a noble gas, it's one of those happy atoms that doesn't bond
with anything else, unlike hydrogen.
So how would you ever make a helium balloon?
Well, remember also, I talked about, it's the radioactive decay of uranium and thorium
that heats our mantle and drives mantle convection and drives plate tectonics.
Well, one of the byproducts of that decay is helium.
So helium is continuously produced within the rock of the earth by this radioactive
decay.
Most helium rises to the surface and flies off out into space, but some gets trapped
beneath the same capstones underground that trap oil and natural gas, and it accumulates
there.
Now, because natural gas is a gas, it's easily piped and compressed and even liquefied, it's
a very important energy source for heating buildings.
Natural gas actually used to just be burned off.
If you ever see a refinery or drilling process where there's a flame at the top, they're
burning off the natural gas.
When people were drilling for oil, they just viewed it as an unnecessary byproduct.
Now it's usually collected as well when you're drilling for oil, though sometimes it's actually
pumped back into the ground to create added pressure to pump out more liquid oil.
The world reserves for natural gas are large, about 180 trillion cubic meters.
But we use natural gas at a rate of about 2.6 trillion cubic meters per year.
Again, do the math, that works out to be about 70 years of our known natural gas reserves.
But as with oil, more is found all the time, so our resources will last longer than that.
But we don't know how much longer.
Most of the world's natural gas reserves are actually in Russia, Iran, and Qatar.
US has about 5.7 trillion cubic meters of natural gas and we use it largely for heating
at a rate of about 600 billion cubic meters per year.
So the US known supply would only last about nine years without imports.
There are cases where the US has regularly runs into shortages of natural gas, particularly
in the winter when it's used rapidly for heating.
And so when your heating bill sometimes rises dramatically in the winter, that's due to
a shortage of natural gas.
The other major source of hydrocarbon that I've talked about in the last lecture is coal.
It's fossilized swamp.
And it, unlike oil, is both more abundant and much more evenly distributed.
There are hundreds of countries that mine coal within their borders.
And the known world coal reserves are on the order of about a trillion tons.
That's actually easy to remember, right?
Oil is about a trillion barrels, coal is about a trillion tons.
The world consumes coal at a rate of about 5.5 billion tons per year, so the known reserves
would last about 180 years.
However, the estimated coal resources are probably much larger than this, and will probably
extend the lifetime of coal to many centuries.
With coal, there's some good news for the US.
The US has some of the largest coal reserves of any nation, 275 billion tons, more than
a quarter of the global reserves.
US uses coal at about a billion tons a year, but its known supply would last for about
275 years at the current rate.
And it's well distributed.
Coal is, Russia has 16%, China has 11%, India has 8%, Australia 8%, Germany 7%, South Africa
5%.
Interestingly, I mentioned China.
China is actually the largest consumer of coal.
It uses 1.3 billion tons a year, but at that rate is also rapidly increasing.
Coals usually used for large industrial and electrical uses, electrical power plants,
used to be used a lot for individual heating, but not so much anymore.
The problem is because coal is solid, it can only be removed by mining.
This mining used to happen primarily underground, but surface strip mining is now replacing
it largely.
For instance, in the United States, the billion tons that were mined last year, 400 million
tons came from underground mining, and 600 million tons came from strip mining.
Strip mining is cheaper, but it also has serious consequences for the surface.
You grind up the surface.
However, US strip mining is largely done in a process that involves reclaiming the land
immediately.
In other words, the land that gets torn up for the coal gets filled in, leveled and replanted
with vegetation.
This greatly reduces erosion and effects of pollution.
In fact, you can even remove and store the topsoil and put that back as well.
The major concern with coal, however, is that it adds a lot of carbon dioxide to the
atmosphere.
Remember, I talked previously how we put about 7 billion tons of carbon into the atmosphere
every year.
That's largely from coal, and it seriously contributes to global heating.
Burning coal also adds a variety of pollutants like sulfur oxides and nitrous oxides into
the atmosphere.
But again, there's a solution to this.
Scrubbing and sequestration.
Chemicals, catalysts that are added to the combustion process can absorb carbon on those
other pollutants like sulfur.
That material then can be taken, that carbon, and buried back underground sequestered away.
You need to have that carbon underground for at least a thousand years or so before it
gets reabsorbed by the ground layers.
Current technologies are able to remove most of that carbon, more than 95%.
Of course, there's an additional cost, the cost of removing the carbon and sequestering
it away.
It's hard to estimate, but it's probably on the order of about a third of the cost of
production of coal itself.
So that's a lot of money, but in reality it's probably far less than the true cost of carbon
emissions without scrubbing and sequestration, because you'd have to account for national
health costs from the pollution, or from the global warming you'd have to account for
water uses during droughts, building larger levees for rising sea levels.
If you look at the long-term picture, taking that carbon out and putting it away is actually
going to be much cheaper than dealing with the consequences of not doing that.
And technologies are improving.
That process will probably get considerably cheaper over time.
This is a theme that I'm going to come back to in lecture 45, but I want to say it here.
I personally believe that we shouldn't be pessimistic about the problems that come up
with using energies, sources, and a variety of other things.
I mean, humans are remarkably resourceful.
Look at London, it used to be black and filled with smog from the burning of coal.
That doesn't happen anymore.
Yes, we have become the greatest agent of geologic change, and we are changing the surface
rapidly.
But that also means that we have the ability to handle problems as they come up.
As long as we understand what the problems are, and we make that understanding widely
known.
And that's part of my job as a scientist and as an educator.
There's one source of hydrocarbons that I haven't talked about yet, and it's very exciting,
very interesting.
I just touched upon it briefly earlier.
It's called methane gas hydrates, also known as methane clathrates.
They are frozen deposits of methane containing ice.
If you take the stuff out of the ground, it looks like snow, but if you hold it in your
hand and light it, it will burn.
As the snow evaporates, there's methane actually trapped within the ice, and it will be released.
It's a large source of hydrocarbons.
It forms naturally in marine sediments, usually at a depth of about a third to two kilometers
deep.
It also forms in permafrost and tundra regions, and it's formed largely through biogenic processes
as a byproduct of bacterial processes.
It can also form from a breakdown at a high temperature of deeper marine organic sediments
that get trapped in shallower sediments as that methane rises up.
But there's an enormous amount of it.
Now, there's a huge engineering challenge in getting it out.
We haven't quite figured out how to get this snow out of the marine sediments without having
it evaporate and lose the methane out into the atmosphere, but that's an engineering
problem that I'm sure will work out.
Vantage of clathrates is it's discovered in many regions all around the world, and there's
just a huge amount of this stuff.
The initial estimates were very, very high.
The amount of carbon stored in these methane clathrates was twice as much as all other
fossil fuels combined.
No recent assessments have brought that down somewhat.
But it's still likely that these clathrates contain about half as much carbon as all other
fossil fuels.
That's a huge amount.
Again, it's hard to tell how much is actually there.
We've just begun to search for it.
Nonetheless, it's quite possible that clathrates contain 10 times as much carbon as natural
gas resources and a third to a half of the world's total fossil fuel carbon budget.
However, there's also a growing sense that methane gas hydrates play a very important
role in rapid climate change.
Remember many of those sudden increases in global temperatures I talked about?
Like what happened at the end of the Snowball Earth episodes back in the Precambrian, where
the Earth swung rapidly from being totally frozen to a runaway greenhouse effect that
overheated the Earth, and at the end of each of these small recent ice age episodes where
temperature gets colder and colder and then rapidly heats at the start of one of these
interglacial periods.
These are probably due to the rapid release of these frozen methane clathrates.
When it's cold, the sea level drops, these ocean sediments are exposed, they erode, the
methane gets emitted, and you trigger off a runaway greenhouse effect.
So we obviously need to keep a very close track on these clathrates.
They have the potential to release a tremendous amount of methane in a hurry, and so we need
to be careful we don't trigger one of these large releases.
The last area of non-renewable energy is in the form of nuclear fission.
Nuclear power is not a fossil fuel, but it is a non-renewable energy source because we
have limited amounts of the elements of uranium and plutonium.
Nuclear fission involves the controlled release of energy from the splitting apart of either
uranium-235 or plutonium-239 isotopes.
This is totally different from the nuclear fusion that I've talked about, like what goes
on within the Sun, where you smash hydrogen atoms together to make helium, releasing energy
in the process.
Here you break apart large atoms, but also in the process a small amount of mass is converted
into energy.
Only about 15 percent of the world's electricity is generated from nuclear fission.
About 21 percent of the United States energy comes from nuclear power, generated currently
by 103 nuclear reactors at 64 different power plants.
But if you go to some places in Europe, for instance countries like France, Belgium and
Lithuania, they get more than 50 percent of their electricity from nuclear power.
In the nuclear fission process, a uranium isotope gets bombarded by a neutron at very
high energy.
And if the neutron has enough energy and hits that uranium atom, it breaks apart, forming
two other smaller atoms, krypton and barium, and two highly charged neutrons, which then
go flying off.
In the process, a small amount of mass gets destroyed, and remember E equals MC squared?
You take a small amount of mass, you convert it into electromagnetic radiation, and you
get a whole lot of radiation, a tremendous amount of energy.
The process, however, of having those neutrons fly out, gives you a chain reaction.
Usually in a nuclear reactor, the uranium gets stored in rods, and when those rods are submerged
in water, the heat gets absorbed and the chain reaction stops.
And so you can therefore control the chain reaction, it's called a controlled reaction.
But the heat that gets radiated from this goes into heating water and running turbines
to make electricity, just like any other turbines.
Only it's incredibly efficient given the amount of fuel involved.
One kilogram of uranium, 2.2 pounds, produces as much energy as 1,500 tons of coal.
Most nuclear fission uses uranium 235.
Unfortunately, that's not very abundant.
Uranium 238 is more than 140 times as abundant.
However, using a special type of reactor called a breeder reactor, you can convert uranium
238 into plutonium 239, and that can be used for nuclear power as well.
The world reserves of uranium oxide currently are in the order of about 3.5 million tons.
Our resources are probably 10 million tons.
The world consumption rate is about 75,000 tons of uranium ore per year, and again you
do the math that gives us 100 to 150 years of uranium at the same rate that we're using
it today.
However, interestingly, it might be possible to extract uranium out of seawater and also
other minerals as well, and if the price of energy rises high enough, at some point
that might become economically feasible.
That may happen sooner than later.
The price of uranium has risen quite rapidly.
It was at about $10 a pound in 2003, and it's now reached over $110 a pound in 2007.
But there is an upside, a large upside of nuclear fission, and that is it doesn't produce any
greenhouse gases.
There's no carbon released.
There are serious objections that people have made to nuclear power on both political and
environmental basis.
For instance, a large concern with nuclear fission has always been a reactor meltdown,
the China syndrome, the sort of thing that happened at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania
in 1979, or the Chernobyl reactor in the Ukraine in 1986.
One of the reasons was when people moved early on to nuclear power, they really rushed early
designs, and reactor designs are now much more efficient and much safer.
However, currently there's no demand for them in the United States, while coal still remains
so cheap.
Also, there are risks of a reactor meltdown in the context of global terrorism.
If nothing else, it makes for a lot of movies and TV shows.
There's a more important concern, a larger concern, and that is nuclear fission produces
highly radioactive byproducts, and they've got to be disposed of and left alone for extremely
long periods of time.
Over the past 20 years, it's estimated that the U.S. has created more than 8 million tons
of radioactive wastes, and there is still no centralized location to put them.
Most radioactive wastes are stored on site at the reactor, currently indefinitely.
That's usually fine, but in some cases, containers leak and this material does get out into the
environment.
For example, a few miles north of the arch in St. Louis along the Mississippi River
is a building that's permanently sealed away.
It was used during the Manhattan Project to create fissionable material for the nuclear
bombs.
Usually using it to develop very high cancer rates, it's still tremendously hot, and no
one goes in or will go in for, I don't know, indefinitely.
There's nothing you can do with it.
These sorts of wastes have to be dealt with at some point.
There's a lot of debate and discussion as to what to do with them, where to put it.
Do you put it on the bottom of the ocean, sea floor, do you blast it into space?
We have partially constructed a disposal facility at Yucca Mountain in Nevada, but currently
at this point, it's still locked in a legal debate as to whether or not we'll actually
be able to put our wastes there.
There are also other issues.
You would have to have many trains carrying radioactive wastes all across the country
to a repository like Yucca Mountain.
Suppose there was an accident on that train.
Another issue is plutonium is incredibly toxic.
Even the tiniest microscopic amount of plutonium will kill you, and these sorts of issues have
to be figured out and taken into consideration.
So in this lecture, I've talked about the two major forms of non-renewable energy sources,
petroleum and uranium.
They power the major part of our world's economy, and they're going to be around for
our lifetimes and our children's lifetimes and our grandchildren's lifetimes.
But over time, the increased problems of dealing with these byproducts of carbon and radioactive
waste and the dwindling resources will make them less attractive.
But that's okay, because in the next lecture, I'm going to discuss a whole suite of other
energy sources that are ready to take their place.
