In this lecture I want to talk about renewable energy sources.
Now in the last lecture I talked about how fossil fuels are going to dominate the global
energy budgets for centuries to come, until they're nearly all used up.
But there's every reason to be optimistic about the future of society and of our economy.
Our society is not going to collapse because of a lack of energy for a very simple reason.
Go ahead, walk outside on a sunny day.
What do you feel on your face?
That's heat, energy from the sun.
The amount of energy we get from the sun is relatively unlimited and essentially never ending,
at least from a human perspective.
The Earth receives more solar energy every hour than the total amount of energy the humans use in a year.
Earth receives about 174,000 terawatts, that's trillion watts from the sun,
or about 120,000 terawatts of useful energy once it actually reaches in through the atmosphere towards the surface.
That's 10,000 times the total human energy use of 15 terawatts.
Now let's stop for a moment.
Let's think about what sunlight is.
It's electromagnetic radiation, waves.
Remember waves are the transmission of energy.
So the sunlight from our star is energy that's being transmitted from the nuclear fusion
occurring in the core of the sun to the surface of our planet.
Now remember energy was that thing that was hard to define, but that had the capacity to do work.
And energy also, remember I talked about obey the law of conservation,
that when it transformed from one form to another, the total amount had to be conserved.
And remember mass was part of that, mass was a form of energy.
Okay, so here's the trick.
This energy in the form of sunlight comes into Earth's surface,
and we have to figure out ways to get it into useful forms that we can use in our daily life.
Well, what is it that we need?
Well, we need electricity to power lights and motors, all sorts of things.
Motors take the electricity, which is in the form of flowing electrons, and will make a wheel spin.
Well, if you make a wheel spin on an axle, you can do most anything else with it, with gears and pulleys.
And once you have things spinning, you can supply our entire industrial needs.
Factories, mills, treadmills, whatever.
Okay, what else do we use energy for?
Well, we need heat to stay warm with.
Usually we use natural gas for that, but heating can also be done with electricity.
We need portable energy for transportation, what gasoline does for us with cars and trucks.
If you're interested, electricity can also be used to do this.
And in fact, in many forms it already is.
Subway trains and trolleys already use electricity for transportation.
And of course, we have the option of portable batteries as well.
Now, electricity is a wonderful form of energy, because it's easily movable,
because of the equivalence of electricity and magnetism.
Okay, let's go back to the basic fundamental force of the universe.
I talked about the four forces, and one of them was the electromagnetic force.
Well, the reason it's the electricity and magnetism is listed as one force, the electromagnetic force,
is because the two can transfer back and forth.
If you take a wire of metal and you move it through a magnetic field,
you generate an electrical current within that wire.
You create electricity from magnetism, and that's what a turbine does.
Take large coils of wire, spin them within a magnetic field,
you generate large amounts of electricity.
Okay, well how do you spin the coils?
Well, what we usually use is water.
Either water flowing downhill, running a hydroelectric power plant,
or water turning into steam that expands and is used to spin those coils.
So, you need to heat water to make steam to create a turbine to generate electricity.
That electricity then flows through a set of wires into a motor,
which creates another spinning wheel again.
So, the electricity is a way to take a spinning wheel in one place,
transfer that energy, and make a spinning wheel in another place.
It's very flexible.
It's a big concern with all this, however, and that's efficiency.
Energy conversions always include some loss of energy into heat,
from friction, radiation, conduction, etc.
You can never convert all of your energy from one source into another useful source,
something that we always have to consider whenever we're dealing with energy in any of its forms.
Okay, so we have all this electromagnetic radiation from the Sun.
The trick is how to convert it cheaply and efficiently into other forms we can use.
Now, solar energy is usable in both direct and indirect forms.
The direct solar energy is the use of solar radiation to create electricity,
as I've talked about before, either using photovoltaic cells or other means,
which isn't usually very efficient, or directly.
It hasn't directly heating water or buildings, and that tends to be very efficient.
The other form of solar energy, what we call indirect solar energy,
involves the natural conversion of solar energy into all sorts of other different forms,
through geologic processes, and I'll get to these in a bit.
Now, in addition, there are also some renewable energy sources that don't come from sunlight,
like geothermal energy or tidal energy, and I'm going to talk about these as well.
Now, there are many benefits of using solar energy,
in addition to the fact that there's just so much of it available.
First of all, the solar power is pollution-free.
It doesn't contribute to global heating because there's no release of carbon dioxide.
In fact, there are no other pollutants as well.
There's no acid rain generated from sulfur or nitrous oxides,
so solar power, as a result, is also inexpensive that way.
There's no cleanup required after it.
Also, facilities using solar power tend to run with very little intervention
or maintenance once they're set up.
The initial expenses can be quite high, and it's a downside of solar energy
compared to more simple fossil fuel-powered turbines,
but the operating costs are generally very low compared to non-renewable fossil fuels
over the long operating lifetimes because there's not a lot of maintenance.
The whole process runs quite cleanly.
So, in the long run, using solar power actually is already economically advantageous
in many situations.
Another advantage of solar power is that indirect solar power comes in several different forms
that can be adapted to the different climates of different regions around the surface of the Earth.
Again, because renewable energy sources are already cheaper than fossil fuels in some cases,
technologies are in the process of developing to take full advantage of them.
The actual pass that energy futures will take turns out to be highly dependent upon government and corporate policies.
Government incentives like California's programs of the Solar Initiative
and Million Dollar Solar Roof's program are going to go a long way
towards helping renewable energy sources develop more quickly,
easing us in that transition from fossil fuels to something else.
Let's start with direct solar power, which uses sunlight for heating or electricity.
As I said, it comes in two forms, active and passive.
Passive solar power is using sunlight directly for heating.
It's a very good local means of reducing energy needs
because homes and buildings can be designed to use sunlight directly to supply much more of their heating.
Simple things, common sense things, where you put your windows, the angle of your roofs,
or even setting up systems of pipes that let water flow through the roof
to heat up and take advantage of the sun that hits the building.
In fact, even in third world countries, simple solar ovens,
which are really just a set of folding out reflecting sheets,
are replacing scarce firewood as a means of cooking food,
takes the load off of strained vegetation in many parts of the world
especially suffering from desertification,
and it also reduces carbon dioxide production going into the atmosphere.
Active solar is the direct conversion of sunlight into electricity,
and it's used on both local and large scale power plant levels.
The real challenge here is the efficiency of solar panels.
That efficiency is really key in active solar,
and it's been considerably increasing over time.
Since currently commercial panels are about 15% efficient.
In other words, 15% of the sunlight that hits the solar panel
actually gets converted directly into electricity.
Experimental panels now bring that number up to about 22%,
and there are nanotechnology panels that are being developed
that have efficiencies of over 40%,
and that's really important because if you have double the efficiency,
you need half as many solar panels.
In North America, the land here receives an average insulation,
energy from the sun of about 125 to 375 watts per square meter.
If you take the current 15% efficiency of photovoltaic cell conversion,
that gives you 20 to 55 watts per meter squared.
That's about 140 watt light bulb being generated for each square meter of land.
And that doesn't sound like a lot, but there's so much land on Earth.
If you took a square region just 600 kilometers on a side,
400 miles by 400 miles, you'd generate all of the world's energy needs.
This is something that's smaller than 1,000th of the world's surface
would give the whole planet its energy needs, all the humans on the planet.
That's really remarkable.
Energy demands are increasing over time, but so is silicon solar panel technology.
And silicon is not something we're going to run out of on this planet.
There's a lot of silicon.
It's the fundamental material out of which the silicon rocks are made,
and so that's a resource that we don't have to worry about.
Now, of course, you never would actually want to have all your energy produced in one place.
It would be a tremendous loss of efficiency because as that electricity travels along power lines,
those power lines radiate off heat and you would lose that energy.
So you actually want your power created locally and distributed over small distances.
As a result, active solar power actually works very well in areas that are off the grid,
that are far from large power distributions, because solar panels can come in any sizes.
You can generate enough power for a single house as well as a whole block or town.
There are large power plants that do generate electricity to power large regions.
They don't usually use solar panels.
They actually use some sets of reflecting mirrors and a variety of different structures
to concentrate sunlight and heat fluids and then drive the turbines to generate electricity.
Some of the most successful and cost effective solar power plants actually use a structure that involves a parabolic trough.
It's a long curved sheet that generates a reflected light onto a pipe,
but in the middle that pipe contains a fluid, it heats up, drives the turbines.
One of these in California, the largest such plant, actually generates 350 megawatts,
350 million watts of power from one active solar power plant.
Now, if we ever needed to, we could even get more energy by putting solar collectors out into orbit in space,
the way we do with satellites.
There are discussions now going on about how to collect sunlight with large space-based reflecting mirrors
and focus the sunlight onto a surface-based receiving area.
I mean, it's still off in the future.
It sounds like science fiction, but there are no physical obstacles to this, just the engineering challenge.
And hey, we've done a lot more remarkable things like land people on the moon and actually bring them back.
And even far off in the future, there may be a day when we need more than 10,000 times the energy we use now,
maybe to mine deep down into the earth, to do things we can't even imagine of now.
Well, we have that power in the form of the sun.
And there are actually theoretical discussions going on now about how to wrap a sphere around the solar system itself
in order to capture much of the sun's light before it goes off into space.
Yes, it is science fiction now.
But look, the books of Jules Verne that are not that old are filled with things that were science fiction back then,
but are reality now.
It may not be that far off in the future.
Okay, where else in the course have I talked about power from the sun and earth's surface?
The water cycle, the sun-driven hydrologic cycle.
I've talked about how much work water does as it washes off the land.
Well, we can harness a small portion of this as hydroelectric power.
In fact, we already do.
It's actually currently the most utilized solar energy source.
Water flows down, it physically moves the turbines that generate electricity
and provide 5% of the world's energy use currently.
19% of the world's electricity actually comes from harnessing that gravitational potential energy of water as it flows downstream.
Now hydroelectric energy has some real advantages.
It's inexpensive and it's, again, very clean.
There are some disadvantages that largely come about from building dams.
Things I've talked about already.
There's a loss of water to increase evaporation when you let it sit out in a wide area.
There are increases in mosquito-borne diseases.
Dams also can prevent migration of animals like fish up and downstream along the rivers,
though many dams now have special spillways that actually allow the fish to bypass the dam.
Hydroelectric power is also going to be limited to regions with large streams and steep slopes
because you actually need a big drop in elevation in order to run large turbines.
But hydroelectric power has been used for a long time.
The first plant actually was built in 1870 in Cragside, England.
Hydroelectric power in general, however, works best in temperate and tropical regions.
So the largest producers of hydroelectric power are China, Canada, Brazil, and the United States.
In the U.S., 80 gigawatts, that's 80 billion watts of electricity is generated from streams, from rivers.
Well, where else at the surface does sun's energy go?
It goes into the atmosphere, into winds.
Wind power is another form of solar power.
Now, currently, wind power generates less than 1% of the world's electricity,
but it's also the area with the most rapid advances in technology,
and wind power actually quadrupled simply over the period between the year 2000 and 2006.
A small percentage of sunlight actually goes into winds,
about 1-3% depending on conditions of solar radiation entering the atmosphere gets converted into winds,
but that's still a lot of energy.
Now, most of the winds, the strongest winds, occur very high up in the atmosphere, things like the jet stream.
Up there, there are continuous wind speeds of well more than 100 miles per hour, but it's hard to get up there.
Fortunately, there are also places at Earth's surface where the wind regularly blows quite strongly.
The plain states of the United States are very good location, mountainous regions, shorelines as well.
It's interesting, winds are often strongest at near shore or offshore locations
because of the large change in temperature that happens over the course of a day.
Remember, I talked about how water changes its temperature much more slowly than land or rock,
simply because of its high heat capacity.
Well, during the daytime, the land may be warmer, the air might be rising,
and you get wind coming from the sea into the land.
At night time, the land temperature cools, and you have wind blowing from the land out to sea.
You have wind turbines, you can change their direction,
and they can take advantage day and night of the winds blowing along shores.
And a lot of wind turbines are increasingly being located along shorelines.
Now, yes, the downside of windmills of wind turbines is that you're going to have to see a lot of windmills,
a lot of wind turbines along the surface of the land.
But remember, the appearance of windmills is nothing new.
They've been used for centuries.
They're an icon, for instance, of the Dutch landscape in Europe.
Remember Don Quixote tilting at windmills.
You know, I think we will just get used to seeing wind turbines as well.
The advantage of the wind turbine over the old windmill is there are really important technological
and engineering advancements that have allowed them to become much more efficient,
largely in the form of having much stronger metal alloys that don't fall apart,
and systems that involve the blades spinning more slowly,
but still able to generate large amounts of electricity.
Lower spins, spin velocities, stronger alloys means they're more durable.
They last longer.
And also, they pose less threat to birds, especially migratory birds,
which are damaging to the wind turbines and the birds.
Now, the largest wind turbines currently, in ideal conditions,
can actually generate about a megawatt of electricity each.
That's enough to power 160 homes.
You can also have small rooftop mounted turbines on an order of about a kilowatt.
And that's increasingly used because you can go to any remote location,
particularly in a mountainous region, and again, generate electricity right on the spot.
Many farmers in the U.S., Midwest are currently putting wind turbines on their land
in order to increase and supplement their farm income.
And often, they actually make more money per acre from selling electricity to the power grid
than they do from selling their crops.
In fact, some recent studies have shown that with current technologies,
wind power could easily be scaled up to provide more than 70 terawatts of power.
That's five times the current global energy use
and 40 times the current electricity requirements.
And again, wind power is clean, there's no pollution generated,
and once they're constructed, they're very inexpensive to maintain.
There's no fuel that you have to buy.
The source comes from the wind, which just is continuously there day after day, year after year.
Wind power also can be scaled up in the future.
Giant airborne wind generating kites have been planned
that would take advantage of those strong, steady winds way up high.
They haven't been constructed yet, but they're actually closer to reality
than putting giant solar mirrors up in space.
There's one other form of energy that comes from winds,
and that's the generation of waves on the ocean.
As the wind blows across the ocean surface, it creates waves,
those waves reach the land, and new technologies are being developed
to actually harness the energy in those ocean waves.
There's a device that was constructed off the coast of Portugal in 2006
called a palimous machine, which actually takes energy from those waves
and converts it into electricity.
It's small, about a little bit more than two megawatts of electricity,
but again, this is a new technology that may build up over time.
Let's think of where else sunlight goes.
It goes into the biosphere, biomass.
That's another way to convert sunlight into energy,
and that wasn't something that we had to figure out.
Photosynthesis, the life figure that out on its own two and a half billion years ago.
Biomass is the use of plant crops to provide energy.
Now, of course, biomass is the oldest source of energy, burning wood,
and it's actually still used in many parts of the world,
but we now can actually grow certain crops and convert that biomass into biofuels,
into liquid hydrocarbons, like ethanol.
So crops like corn, sugar beets, sugar cane, and switch grasses
can be converted into biofuels,
and that is already taking some of the burden off of fossil fuel demands.
In the long term, this may not be sustainable and may not be an ideal source of energy,
because with the increasing human populations,
we may need that output from limited agricultural crop lands to feed people,
rather than feeding cars.
But, talking about increase in the numbers of people,
there's another wonderful source of energy, and that comes from garbage.
Biogas is methane that's extracted from waste treatment plants of crops,
sewage, paper production, animal waste.
I mean, bacteria are going to eat that stuff anyway.
You may as well harness it and capture that methane and put it to use.
By the way, it's interesting.
Kerosene is currently the only major source of fuel that is usable for jet airplanes,
and that's a real problem as our fossil fuels run low.
It turns out an acceptable replacement can actually be produced from biomass.
Now, there are two major sources of renewable energy that are not powered by sunlight.
Earth's heat and the gravitational poles of the sun and moon in the form of tides.
Now, both of these have very limited geographic applications
and aren't going to be a large part of our energy budget,
but they are used very importantly in some parts of the world.
Earth is cooling down. I've talked about this quite a bit during the course.
I'm cooling down at a rate that's currently three times the human energy consumption,
but it does so very slowly and broadly.
Only about 80 milliwatts of power come out of the surface per square meter.
That's 80 thousands of a watt.
Normally, you'd have to go down several kilometers under the surface of the Earth
to find water that was more than 100 degrees Celsius
in order to turn it into steam to drive the turbines to get electricity.
Geothermal power can be used in those areas
where you only have to drill into shallow regions of the rock
to reach very hot rock that will give you the steam for your turbines.
That usually means volcanic regions.
Currently, about 100 gigawatts of thermal power is generated
by tapping into these hot regions underground.
The largest single steam field in the world comes from a place called the Geysers in Northern California.
Remember, we've got the Wanda Fouca plate subducting beneath North America,
causing magma to rise up to the surface,
and you get all these volcanoes from Lassen all the way north up into Oregon and Washington.
Well, that volcanic rock can be tapped into in order to give us power.
Iceland is the ideal location.
Iceland gets over 50% of its electricity from geothermal energy
and also a tremendous amount of direct heating of homes.
Remember the island of Jaime where they stopped the flow of lava?
Well, they not only got a better harbor out of that once the lava cooled,
they also have tremendous amount of heating,
and they warm all their houses with that lava, that rock that's still quite warm.
Tidal power uses the conversion of gravitational potential energy,
causing water to flow kinetically at the surface
that can be tapped into to run turbines and generate electricity.
It uses the twice daily raising and lowering of sea level.
It's just like hydroelectric power,
only it can be reversed to handle water flowing both into a region like a river or fjord
and then back out again twice a day.
In some parts of the world, if you have just the right geometry of bays and channels,
the tidal swell can be more than 10 meters.
Remember I talked about the Bay of Fundy where it was 50 feet up and down in ideal conditions?
Well, you can tap into that flow of water to run turbines,
and like hydroelectric power, it's very efficient, about 80%.
However, it's limited to just a few locations around the world.
One possible source of renewable energy
that was once considered to be the likely source of most future energy
but just hasn't panned out is nuclear fusion.
This involves taking heavy hydrogen atoms and smashing them together,
and in that process of fusion, energy is released.
That's what goes on in the core of the sun.
However, we haven't been able to recreate that in an economically feasible way yet,
because it takes a lot of energy to smash those atoms together,
and the best that we've been able to do is get the same amount of energy back
that we've put into smashing them together.
Nuclear fusion may still work one day,
but it's not going to play an important role in the near future.
Now, as I mentioned, the portability of energy is a really big concern.
Transportation accounts for a huge percentage of the energy that we use.
Well, one option is using hydrogen fuel cells,
and people sometimes get confused on this.
Hydrogen fuel cells are not a source of energy.
They are simply a means of storing energy.
They're like batteries.
They're a means of converting electricity from one stationary source,
a big coal plant or nuclear or a direct active or solar or wind plant,
converting that energy into a portable form that can be used in cars and trucks.
Very well may one day help replace petroleum as a form of mobile energy.
What happens with the hydrogen fuel cell is you take the energy in one place
to break apart water into the separate oxygen and hydrogen atoms,
and that hydrogen is pumped into battery-like containers within a car.
Another approach is simply use a battery and have an electric car
where you draw electricity more directly right off a grid.
In other words, you take your car, you drive it home,
and you plug it in the wall just like you would your cell phone.
Electric cars are already a very proven technology.
They work remarkably well,
and there's already a huge demand around the world for them.
Now, over the past two lectures, I've talked about the two sides of energy
as far as human needs are concerned.
One part, the last lecture, represented the world of today largely driven by fossil fuels.
And the other part, what I've talked about here, represents the world of tomorrow,
and of many tomorrows to come.
It's solar power that has practically no downsides to it.
Now, I can't help it.
I'm a geologist.
I take a long view of things.
Yes, human beings are the new kids on the block.
We've been around for merely a couple hundred thousands of years,
insignificant in the long geologic timescale.
But if we play our cards right, there's no reason it can't be hundreds of millions of years for us to be here.
I mean, after all, there are a few species that have managed to do that.
The foundation of this will be to find a sustainable way to live,
and an important part of this will be renewable energy from the sun,
which is clean, efficient, and as far as we're concerned, limitless.
I mean, the sun's not going to go red giant for another four billion years.
Look, it's inevitable.
Looking at the big picture, there's just such a small amount of fossil fuel on the planet.
The only questions will be how long it takes to move to that sustainable lifestyle,
and how smooth that transition will be.
In the next lecture, I'm going to talk more about our ability to make this transition.
I'm going to talk about our recognition and understanding of the immense power we have become as a geologic force.
