Welcome.
In this lecture I want to talk about evolution and the history of life on earth.
Now I think you'd agree, life, the biosphere plays a vital role in how the earth works,
the whole story of our planet.
Because frequently during this course I've talked about how life affects earth's surface,
the importance of the biosphere for geology.
And in previous lectures I've talked about how climate has affected human history.
In fact, in the last lecture I talked about how humans are currently shaping all of earth's
history.
In this lecture I want to step back and look at the broader process of having life on a
planet.
From the perspective of how conditions on a planet affect life, how does life even begin
on a planet?
Why does it change?
Why do some species evolve and others become extinct?
And then I'm going to give an overview of how we came about, the path that led from one
celled organisms to humans.
Now it may seem a little out of place to talk about the history of life in a geology course.
But the evolution of life is intimately interconnected with the whole environmental conditions that
shaped it.
And the biosphere is a vital part of earth's science.
But we have the fossils.
Nalientology has been a vital part of geology since its very beginnings.
Now I can't emphasize strongly enough how powerful evolution is as a tool for solving
the biological riddle, what kind of life is best suited to a particular environment.
I mean years of computer and wind tunnel testing, and we still can't come up with a more aerodynamic
model for flying than a hawk.
It's with light hollow bones and feathers, it's an amazing structure.
Or we can't come up with a better hydrodynamic model for swimming than a shark with its skin
and fins and gills.
I mean it's incredible.
But the answer, the reason that occurs, is quite simple.
If there were a better way, it would exist.
It would survive.
It would get the food, reproduce and have offspring, and the less efficient models wouldn't.
It's the simplicity of natural selection that makes it so powerful.
The better model survives, the others don't, and over time what you end up with is what
works best.
Okay, but I'm getting a little bit ahead of myself.
Let me define evolution.
Evolution on earth has three major components to it, reproduction, mutation, and natural
selection.
Now, reproduction is an amazing process, but I'm going to leave that to biologists to
explain whether it occurs sexually or asexually.
The point is you transmit the genetic code, the DNA, the dioxyribonucleic acid from one
organism on to offspring.
It's that continual transmission of genetic information.
That's what reproduction does.
However, that reproduction does not occur perfectly.
There are mistakes, and that's really important.
And in fact, this is where earth's environments begin to play a role, because when that genetic
material gets copied, sometimes the parts of the DNA aren't copied correctly.
And what that does is it allows for genetic drift.
Over time, your species will change.
Now, it can happen slowly.
If you have a single population that's spread out, separated geographically, over time different
parts of that population can drift genetically so they can no longer interbreed.
They actually become separate species.
The classic example is Darwin's Finches on the different islands of the Galapagos Islands,
separated geographically, they evolved into separate organisms.
They followed different evolutionary paths.
Sometimes those mutations, however, cause big, significant changes.
Now, most of these we call birth defects.
They're bad for the organism, and they kill it.
But sometimes you get a genetic change that's beneficial.
It's an improvement.
It allows the organism to survive better, and you end up with a new species.
The biologist Stephen Jay Gould called this punctuated equilibrium.
Now, the way the earth plays a role in this is mutation is partly affected by solar radiation,
which damages the DNA structures.
Remember before ozone, before two and a half billion years ago, the sun's radiation at
the surface of the continents was too intense for life to exist.
There was no life on continents.
The mutation rates would have been too high.
Life had to begin in the oceans.
In fact, there turns out to be an optimal mutation rate.
If your species changes too slowly, if your mutation rates are too low, you're unable
to keep up with climate change.
You just don't survive.
However, if your mutation rates are too high, you get too many birth defects, and your species
isn't stable.
The third part of evolution is geology's big contribution, and that's natural selection.
Natural selection occurs when an individual organism lives long enough to reproduce and
pass its genetic information onto its offspring.
It doesn't happen at a species level.
It happens at an individual level, and it's a form of immortality.
Your genes live on into following generations.
Organisms that are well suited to particular conditions at that point in space and time
survive and reproduce, and those that are not well suited die and don't reproduce.
And here's the key.
As climate and geologic and geographic conditions change, species that may have previously been
well suited may no longer be so.
They get replaced by different species.
Because as we saw repeatedly, the climate on Earth's surface is always changing.
All the different styles of reproduction, and transportation, and eating, and avoiding
being eaten, etc., have all come about through natural selection in particular environments
that are constantly changing.
But again, I'm getting ahead of myself a little bit, because I haven't said yet how
we ended up with multicellular life, people.
It turns out that the path from single-celled organisms to humans is just a remarkable story,
and I'm going to just be able to summarize it in a few short descriptions.
But think of it as a Homo sapiens family tree, so to speak.
Now, we don't know exactly how life began on Earth.
We weren't there, and there are no fossils.
There's no organisms remaining from the first times that life existed on this planet.
We just don't know what those first organisms were, but we do have a record of a sort.
We have DNA, our DNA, and the DNA of all other organisms on this planet retain a record that
goes back to that first common ancestor, and we've actually been able to interpret the
DNA and read back in time to get a sense of what's happened.
To briefly describe the process, the important thing is that life originates naturally and
relatively quickly.
In other words, if you start with the elements and molecules that existed on the surface
of the Earth, you end up with life.
It's inevitable.
If you take that same situation again, you get life occurring again, because all the
building blocks for life were here, in place and available, and they were in a large liquid
ocean that provided that aqueous solution within which all the biochemistry could take
place.
Now, the first step towards creating life from what was initially inorganic material
is the creation of organic compounds from the basic elements that life had, making the
stuff of life.
And there have been lots of experiments that have shown if you start with Earth's early
conditions that had water, carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, phosphate, ammonia, methane,
all present in Earth's early atmosphere, and you take that material and you heat it, or
you zap it with ultraviolet radiation, or you freeze it, you get amino acids.
And amino acids are the building blocks of DNA.
For example, if you take hydrogen and carbon and nitrogen together, that makes a molecule
of cyanide.
But if you take a whole lot of cyanide and you expose ultraviolet radiation, like from
the sun, it naturally bonds together to form the amino acid adenine.
And all of the amino acids form naturally in the conditions that existed in Earth's
ocean.
The next thing for life you need is a cell membrane.
Well, it turns out that many amino acids, when you heat them, naturally polymerize.
They join together in large masses to form long chains called peptides.
And sometimes these peptides will naturally form spherical shells called microspheres.
Now, the microspheres are not alive, but they're cellular in appearance.
They actually absorb additional peptides on the inside of their structure, and they grow
and divide.
They add peptides to their shell.
When they get too big, smaller pieces actually bud off to form new microspheres.
Now, there are lots of different microspheres, but the ones made of lipid bilayers, made
from fatty acids, provided the basis of living cell membranes.
Now, the next thing for life you need is the development of biochemistry, what we call catalytic
activity.
It turns out that microspheres provided safe environments for those organic molecules
to exist, and an organic molecule is just a molecule that's carbon-based.
These materials began to grow and interact with each other, and even react with the outside
environment by ion exchange across the membranes.
You had amino acids forming longer chains, nucleotides forming longer RNA molecules, ribonucleic
acid, which eventually could actually begin to split and self-replicate, and at that point
you led to a process of natural selection, because the molecules themselves would begin
to compete with each other inside the spherules.
Very quickly, molecules that replicated most efficiently began to take over, and you had
a situation that evolved very quickly towards the development of the most efficient biochemistry,
which is what we have today.
Modern proteins form most of our biochemistry.
They out-competed simpler RNA molecules, and they became the dominant compounds for all
living cells.
It happens naturally.
If it were to happen again, it would happen the same way.
Now what's interesting is that it happens on another planet under different conditions.
Does it also happen the same way?
Do you still get proteins in RNA and DNA?
I don't know, that's what NASA and the space program are currently trying to find out.
The first life consisted of single-celled organisms.
These microspherules began to carry out the organic chemical reactions that we call life.
The story of the evolution of life from that point onward really has three parts to it.
From a big picture perspective, it's very interesting.
First of all, our biochemistry all works in one way.
It was like that at the beginning, it will always be like that, and it's a direct result
of the laws of physics and chemistry and the conditions on this planet.
You could teach a course on the history of life and spend almost the whole course, maybe
except for the last week, on single-celled organisms, because all of the biochemistry
and animals and plants and fungi and all that, all the proteins and catalysts and chemical
reactions all occur in single cells.
They haven't changed.
They began with an incredible diversity at that single-celled level, but not much complexity.
They were all single-celled.
When multicellular life first evolved, life began to become much more complex and there
was a burst of diversity, all kinds of creatures.
However, over time, the life that we see today currently on the planet is actually a refinement
of just the most successful organism types.
In fact, in a sense, it's actually less diverse.
Let me explain.
The initial life was in the form of these single-celled organisms.
We call them prokaryotes.
They're simple cells.
They have no cell nuclei or mitochondria or other organelles, and the prokaryotes took
two major forms, archaea and bacteria, which evolved from some common ancestor.
The first actual fossil evidence of these goes back to 3.85 billion years, though geochemistry
and rocks from that time suggested that life existed even before four billion years ago.
That's amazing.
Almost as soon as there were oceans, there was life on Earth.
The earliest fossils are either in the form of stromatolites, which are mound-like structures
that we think were colonies of bacteria.
We see them off the coasts of modern-day Australia today, and also algae-like strands of fossils.
These early archaea and bacteria experimented with a tremendous number of different and
very unusual metabolisms and biochemistries.
There was a huge amount of organic material to feed on, and so organisms developed to
eat methane and nitrogen and sulfur and many other different materials, a tremendous amount
of biochemical creativity.
However, about two and a half billion years ago, one particular type of bacteria, cyanobacteria,
developed photosynthesis.
It was a really hard trick to learn, but they figured out how to make their own food.
And when they did, they radically changed the whole scene of life on Earth.
Remember I talked, that's the time at which oxygen was created into the atmosphere in ozone.
Now, sometime between 2.1 and 1.2 billion years, we don't know, we don't have good enough
fossils to determine exactly the point in time, but we know that those simple celled organisms
evolved into more complex single celled organisms that we call eukaryotes.
These developed a symbiotic relationship with mitochondria.
Now, mitochondria are the foundation of cells of creatures today, of multicellular life.
They initially existed as a separate form of bacteria.
Mitochondria provide energy to cells, but they have their own DNA and they reproduce
independently of us.
At some point, mitochondria entered into another kind of bacterium and survived to
the benefit of both.
They developed a symbiotic relationship, and this became the foundation for all multicellular
life which evolved from eukaryotes.
Now, eukaryotic plants actually developed a further complexity.
They also developed a symbiotic relationship with another protobacterium called chloroplast,
which also has its own DNA, and they became the basis for all modern plants.
Now, multicellular life developed sometime after a billion years ago, and it's very
interesting if you look at the tree of life, what you see is that there are three major
life forms.
For instance, modern trees that show the diversity of life are done using the genetic changes,
and if you use those genetic changes as a basis, you can see bacteria and archaea are
separate branches, but they had some common ancestor back, you know, beyond 3.8 billion
years ago.
But the third branch, eukarya, is also consists of single-celled organisms.
So the whole tree of life is all single-celled organisms, all the diversity of different
types of metabolisms and biochemistries.
So where are the animals and plants and fungi?
They are a small branch off the corner of the tree of eukarya.
They are slight variations.
They're in there with giardia and paramecium and amoeba.
All of the single-celled organisms that are more complex are very closely related to us.
The most significant period of evolutionary diversity for multicellular life began, however,
not at a billion years ago, but sometime about 600 million years ago, the start of the Cambrian
period.
This is the earliest multicellular fossils, began about 600 million years ago.
They are fossils found in the Ediacara Hills in Australia.
These fossils show the early ancestors of mollusks and worms and jellyfish.
These fossils are very rare because there are no shells or bones from this time.
But starting with the Cambrian explosion 540 million years ago, we see the beginnings
of shells and spines, claws and jaws, and all sorts of other creative body parts.
The most important fossil outcrop from this time comes from a place in Alberta, Canada
called the Burgess Shale.
And we see the origins of predation and evasion.
There's active natural selection showing up in the fossil record, evidence of claws and
jaws for predators, of spines, and shells and other hard body parts for prey.
The Burgess Shale fossils display an unbelievably bizarre assortment of life.
Creatures like the Mirella and the Opabinia and Helusogenia have no equivalent today.
We don't even know how to classify them.
They don't fit into any sort of life structure we see existing on our planet today.
Life at that time was experimenting incredibly creatively with multicellular organisms.
I mean, there wasn't much competition initially.
So sort of anything that rolled off the assembly line would fill some ecological niche and could
survive.
Though the number of species has increased in time since then, it's really only been
a fine honing, however, of the few life types that are most efficient.
The diversity of life at the start of the Cambrian was incredibly diverse with many approaches
on life, but most got outcompeted.
They just weren't that efficient and they didn't survive.
Life has definitely become more complex, but it's been a refining of a few efficient
mechanisms.
Now, from the start of the Cambrian onward, natural selection started on a long road of
experimentation with life evolving to fill every possible ecological niche.
Where liquid water existed, on the land, underground, up in the air.
I mean, reproduction changed in many different ways, eggs or spores eventually live young.
Body metabolisms changed as did the shape and style of organisms in order to survive
in differing environments like deserts and jungles, fresh and salty water, deep oceans
or alpine tundras.
Animals learned how to move through an incredibly remarkable diversity of mechanisms, waving
little flagella or running, flying, swimming, crawling, all these different mechanisms.
Even plants figured out how to move.
Plants and fungi figured out how to disperse their spores and seeds through fruit eaten
by animals, birds that stuck on animals, even exploding seeds.
Animals find food currently with all five of their different senses and obtain it through
burrowing and grazing, sucking, chewing, poison, even plants, plants like the venus flytrap
and the polypitcher, have tried their hand at predation.
They catch up living organisms in sex.
But as fast as predators evolve, so does prey evolve in order to avoid being eaten.
And prey have evolved a remarkable array of techniques to survive, camouflage, evasion,
deception, intimidation, confusion, armored protection.
One of my favorites is an insect, the 17 year cicada, which stays underground for 17 years,
which is a prime number, so that no predator from its previous emergence 17 years ago could
at all be prepared for the next large emergence.
Getting their food from some other organism.
I mean, your body is filled with them, most of them are harmless.
It's actually bad for business for a parasite to kill its host, because it doesn't have
any more food.
I mean, tapeworms can grow 50 feet inside your digestive tract, but they rarely kill you.
Some of the most fascinating evolutionary survival mechanisms involve symbiotic relationships
between different organisms.
I mean, I already mentioned in previous lectures, the symbiosis between the tropical acacia trees
that develop these large hollow horns that provide homes for whole ant colonies.
It's incredibly common.
Sometimes a symbiotic relationship can look like a single organism.
I mean, like us, our bodies in the mitochondria that provides power in ourselves.
Or lichen, which is a symbiotic relationship between a fungus and something that carries
out photosynthesis.
It can either be algae or cyanobacteria.
Sometimes, however, symbiosis occurs between separate cooperative individuals.
For instance, there's a Malaysian tree called the chempidek, which is pollinated by insects,
gallmages.
But the insects will only pollinate the tree if the tree gets attacked by a particular fungus.
So what you have is a symbiosis between a plant and animal and a fungus, and it benefits
all three.
A whole host of mechanisms for survival have evolved.
Some of them are even very bizarre.
The lodgepole pine tree has cones that don't even open up until they're heated by a forest
fire.
I mean, that's designed not only to survive forest fires, but to be the first organism
to take advantage of the fertile soil left over from the ashes.
I mean, one of my favorites is the whole process of surviving the seasons.
I mean, think about it.
If you're a plant with fragile tissues soaking up water, what do you do about winter?
How do you handle ice and cold and snow?
How do you deal with a planet that has a tilted axis and therefore has seasons?
Well, it's not a big deal in the tropics, right?
Because it's warm there year round.
But what about land far away from the equator, near the north or south pole?
Well, one way is the evolution of furs and pine trees, needles.
Needles are long and skinny.
They have lower surface area to volume ratios than leaves, and they survive through winter.
Or you drop your leaves.
You close up shop for the winter.
I mean, it took more than 100 million years to figure this out, but as soon as it did,
deciduous trees spread all about the continents.
For land plants in general, it was just a remarkable transition in order to figure out
how to survive on continents out of the oceans, the development of whole vascular systems
holding water inside of walls.
Let me get back to humans.
I led off of the Cambrian explosion in the Burgess Shale Fossils.
Perhaps the most important organism that we've found from that fossil find from a human
perspective is a flatworm called Pekaya, because it's the first known cordy, animal with some
primitive spinal cord.
Pekaya may well be the ancestor of all vertebrates, including humans.
The evolutionary path from flatworms like Pekaya to mammals actually only took 300
million years, because not very much change was needed.
All vertebrates are very closely related.
Remember, I said previously, you share 50% of your genes with a mushroom.
Well, you share 95% of your genes with a mouse.
You have nearly identical body structures.
You have appendages coming off a central spine.
And for the appendages that you pick, arms, fins, wings, they're all structurally similar.
The whole structure of a vertebrate is very efficient and effective.
And nearly all large animals are vertebrates.
Natural selection favors vertebrates.
From flatworms onward, it was a fairly straightforward evolutionary route, you know, with some tinkering
here and there.
From four billion years ago to flatworms was a huge, enormous amount of time.
But from flatworms to modern humans just took a few hundred million years.
Well, flatworms evolved into early fish.
The fish initially were jawless.
This is back in the Eurodivision period, 450 million years ago.
Things like agnatha, which is an ancestor of the modern lamprey.
These early jawless fish then led into jawed fish like placoderms and acanthoderms.
Some of them had massive, large, bony jaws, but no teeth yet.
Interestingly, sharks and other fishes that have cartilage and not bone diverged off at
this point.
From those early jawed fish came ray fin fishes like most modern fishes and then lung fishes
and then lobe fin fishes like the famous living fossil, the celacanth latimeria that
was found the beginning of the 20th century off the coast of Madagascar.
These lobe fin fishes had sturdy fins that actually let them go up a little bit onto
land to get the food, plants and insects that were beginning to proliferate along shorelines.
Fishes evolved from fish that was pretty tricky and took a while because it's hard to survive
up on land.
In fact, a very famous fossil, the tiktilic, was found in 2006.
It's a type of organism called a tetrapod that's really a transition.
It's somewhere in between fish and amphibians.
Lived 375 million years ago and from it evolved the early amphibians.
Things like acanthostega and ichthyostega.
Fishes lived both in the sea and on land but took advantage of the growing plant life on
continents.
Amphibians ruled the whole shoreline in near shore areas from about 350 to 300 million
years ago.
But reptiles evolved from them at about 300 million years ago and eventually largely
replaced them.
Reptiles diversified into a huge variety of forms that walked or slithered, that flew
and swam.
Most of those early reptiles are all extinct but some paths have led to our modern day reptiles.
One group of the reptiles, the thecodons, evolved into crocodiles, the flying pterosaurs
and then dinosaurs which then evolved into our modern day birds.
But the path to mammals led through a particular type of reptile called a therapsid.
It was a very early reptile closely related to the fan-backed pelicosaur.
Therapsids like diktodon and cedignathus were warm-blooded.
They had skin glands instead of scales and mammals evolved from them about 200 million
years ago.
Now, for a while they were a very minor form of life but over time they began finally to
dominate.
Now, it's interesting, the whole fossil record is filled with large extinction events.
They mark out the many divisions between the geologic periods.
The largest of these occurred at the end of the Permian 250 million years ago and it was
a devastating extinction.
It was worse in oceans than on land.
In fact, 90% of all marine species died off and almost all organisms themselves was the
end of the trilobites, all the primitive fishes.
On land, 70% of all land vertebrates went extinct, including almost all the reptiles.
It's not clear what actually caused the Permian Triassic extinction.
It's likely that there were several factors involved, severe volcanism, immediate impact,
rapid climate change including glaciation, maybe even a loss of habitats due to the close-up
of the supercontinent Pangaea, but the loss of most of those large reptiles allowed for
the dominance of the dinosaurs and the start of the early mammals.
Mammals weren't very significant for more than 100 million years.
They simply couldn't compete with the dinosaurs.
The dinosaurs dominated almost all niches for large animals.
The first mammals, like Morganucadon, were small nocturnal shoe-like animals.
They had leathery eggs, but they suckled their young.
Now, they eventually gave rise to the three forms of mammals we see today, monotremes,
marsupials, and placentals.
Monotremes like the platypus are mammals that are most like the early ancestors.
They still lay eggs.
Marsupials like kangaroos and opossums are also a more primitive branch of mammals, but
most modern mammals are placentals.
And they went through two large bursts of diversification, about 85 and 55 million
years ago.
Now, I've talked about the extinction of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago.
Interestingly, that didn't immediately cause the dominance of the mammals, but the loss
of the dinosaurs opened the door for the later expansion and diversification of mammals.
The cretaceous tertiary extinction 65 million years ago didn't just kill off dinosaurs.
It killed off most other large reptiles and all sorts of numbers of species of birds and
marsupials and insects, also many of the marine animals like ammonites.
The cause of the mass extinction, however, we do know.
It was the impact of a large meteoroid that hit Yucatan, Mexico, and created the chicksalub
crater.
Now, the earliest primates had existed before that meteorite impact.
The earliest primates were most closely related to flying lemurs and tree shrews.
Apes and monkeys diverged from them about 30 million years ago.
Humans diverged from other apes about 13 to 10 million years ago.
And we have a very rich fossil record from about 10 million years onward of the steady
evolution of humans, Australopithecus, which evolved about four and a half billion years
ago.
The Homo species began about two and a half million years ago, and it turned out there
were actually more than a dozen different identified species of Homo.
Homo habilis two and a half million years ago, Homo ergaster one point nine million
years ago, Homo erectus one and a quarter million years ago, the Heidelberg man 600,000
years ago, Neanderthals 230,000 years ago, and finally 195,000 years ago, us Homo sapiens.
It's important not to look at this history as an ascent of man because it's nothing
of the sort.
It's a random walk of evolution that led to mostly dead ends.
It's entirely shaped by the unique climate histories that existed on earth at the time,
impacts, ice ages, floods, volcanoes, and it will likely not end with human species,
the human species Homo sapiens as well.
Remember, all multicellular life was just a tiny branch off of the Eukaryotes tree.
It's variations on a single theme, but a very successful theme.
In the next two lectures, I'm going to take this show on the road.
I'm going to look for any other places in the solar system in the galaxy where life might
exist to see if there are any other planets like earth out there.
