Welcome. I think that by this point you probably have a pretty good understanding of the remarkable
and complex factors that have gone into making our planet. And from the last lecture, the
incredible component of life, the whole biosphere, including humans, creatures that can not only
explore their world, underground and outer space, but write and teach about it to others
for them to share. In the next two lectures, I want to step back and review what it means
to be planet Earth. I want to review the many remarkable geologic processes that have not
only created our planet, but continue to work together. As if in some complex dance, or like on a
multi-dimensional loom, weaving together threads of all different kinds, coming from all different
directions to create the continuing fabric of Earth's evolution. I want to do it in the context of
answering a simple question, however. Are there any more out there? I mean, are there any more
planets like Earth? As we travel out into space, are we going to find any other planets that we
could live on? Are we going to find anyone else there composing music and poetry? These are very
different questions, but both very interesting. And in this lecture, I'm going to start close to home
in our own neighborhood, in our own solar system. After all, life exists here on Earth, so we know
that our sun is clearly a suitable star to foster the evolution of life. And in the next lecture,
I'm going to broaden out my search to include the whole galaxy to look at what conditions would be
required to allow for the evolution of some other creature that would also be, at this very moment,
trying to figure out if we might exist. Now that we know what it takes to make an Earth, and to keep
its geology active enough, and its climate warm and stable enough to support life for billions of
years, what are the chances of there being life, others like us, on other planets like ours? Let's
start in our own neighborhood. I'm going to start with Mercury and work my way outward. And you'll
see that each of the worlds in our solar system is very different from the others, but many share
very similar aspects of geology. I mean, things like sand dunes, ice caps, volcanoes, rivers,
hurricanes, things that are found on Earth are also found on other planets in our own solar system.
But remember, what we're looking for if we want to find complex life there, or if we want to go
there someday, is a combination of just the right kinds of rock and water and air. Doesn't sound
like too much to ask? Well, let's take a look. The four inner planets in our solar system, Mercury,
Venus, Earth, and Mars, are called the terrestrial planets, and they're all very similar to each
other. Interestingly, they are all very dissimilar from the other four planets in our solar system,
the gas giants, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. But the gas giants have moons, and those moons
turn out to be like smaller versions of terrestrial planets, sort of. And then there's a whole lot
of other stuff, a whole lot of smaller objects in our solar system as well. Well, let's start with
Mercury. Mercury is mostly iron. It has an iron core, fairly large, a rocky mantle, and a crust,
like all the terrestrial planets do. But because it forms so close to the sun where conditions were
hot, it ended up being able to form mostly from iron and not hold on to the lighter materials,
the gases, the ices, even not very much rock. Remember when I talked about how the whole solar
system formed early on in the course? Now, Mercury, interestingly, has a very strong magnetic field
for its size. That means it probably has a molten outer core, just like Earth's. However,
Mercury is small. It's very small. Its radius, 2,440 kilometers, is less than the size of Earth's core
by quite a bit, though it actually turns out to be a little bit larger than our moon. So,
if Mercury is small, it has a weak gravity, which means it has no atmosphere and therefore
a lot of craters. And that's what you see all over the surface of Mercury. Enormous numbers of
craters pockmarking the whole planet. Why? Because an atmosphere burns up meteoroids as they pass
through it. That's what a meteor streak is in our atmosphere. It's a small piece of rock or metal,
or even ice of curcomet, burning up as it streaks very quickly through our atmosphere.
It's interesting on Mercury. Some of these impact basins are huge, so clearly it got hit by some
very large objects. The largest is the Chlorus Basin. It's about 1,300 kilometers across. And
interestingly, on the other side of Mercury is a large area of rifted, fractured terrain. We think
what happened was the impact was so large that it caused seismic waves to spread all the way around
on the planet and converge at the back end. It essentially blew the back end of the planet off.
This would have happened during that late heavy bombardment phase. Four billion years or older.
And that means that the planet, Mercury, is essentially dead. Its surface is not changed
in more than four billion years, other than accumulating more and more of these craters.
And in addition, its interior is probably unchanged as well. So Mercury is not going to be the sort
of place that we would want to go. Now, it's an interesting question. Why is Mercury so
geologically inactive when compared to other planets like Earth? It turns out that small
objects cool off a lot more quickly. The heat has a shorter distance to go to reach the surface
and escape. Another way to think of it is it just has a larger surface area to volume ratio.
It's interesting. If you take two objects that have the exact same shape, the smaller one will
actually have a much larger ratio of surface area to volume. If you don't believe it, check it.
You can do it for homework. Take two cubes, one meter on a side and two meters on a side.
Calculate their areas and their volumes and take the ratios. You'll see that they're not the same.
Size matters. It controls the rate that the planets cool off. And other things as well. It
turns out in biology that principle of the ratio of area to volume is incredibly important. It's
why elephants have large ears. Elephants are large. They have fairly small surface area to
volume ratios. It's hard for them to cool off. The ears increase their surface area, allow the heat
to leave their bodies more quickly. They're sort of like radiators. It's all the same principle.
Mercury being so close to the sun where it's so hot also means it has no water. And if it has no
water, it has no life. You would never want to be there. The temperature of mercury as it moves
changes incredibly. It's minus 175 degrees on one side and 425 degrees Celsius on the other.
Interestingly, mercury has a very unusual orbital pattern. It's closest to the sun,
so it orbits the fastest. It revolves most quickly of any of the planets.
One year going around the sun only lasts 88 Earth days. But one day on mercury actually
lasts 59 Earth days. And the rotations and revolutions are locked in a particular integer
ratio of three to two. In other words, mercury rotates three times for every two revolutions
it makes around the sun. It turns out as we go through the rest of the solar system,
that sort of pattern of an integer variation between the revolutions and the rotations
is very common. It's called a tidal resonance. Earth's moon has that. The same side of the moon
always faces the Earth, so it has a one to one ratio. It rotates one time for every one revolution.
Well, let's move out. Let's go to Venus. Venus is very close to Earth in size. It's radius.
It's a little more than 6,000 kilometers. 95% that of the Earth, which means its volume turns out to
be about 86% of the Earth. So the force of gravity is about 90% that of Earth's. That's pretty close.
You'd weigh 10% less. It'd be a great way to instantly lose some weight. So maybe Venus is
a better option as a place to go either to live or find life. The planet Venus is still
tectonically active. It still has volcanoes. Not too many. These volcanoes probably resurface
the planet on average every half a billion years as large gravity, so it has an atmosphere.
And because there's volcanism, we know that there's carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,
so it's warm. There's a greenhouse effect there. But here's the catch. It's too warm.
The atmosphere in Venus is 95% carbon dioxide, and the surface temperature is 460 degrees celsius.
It's still too close to the sun. It's way too hot, and there's no water. There's no liquid water.
There's no ocean, and therefore there's no life, so there's no way to pull the carbon dioxide
out of the atmosphere. And the atmosphere as a result is huge. The atmosphere, the pressure
at the surface of Venus from the atmosphere, is 90 bars. That's 90 times the pressure of
Earth's atmosphere. It's equivalent to being under almost a kilometer of water. Venus has a huge
runaway greenhouse. In addition, within this atmosphere, it's got droplets of sulfuric acid.
These make thick clouds. We can't even see the surface. We need to use radar mapping to figure
out what Venus is made of. Well, volcanism also means there's mantle convection,
but there are no signs of plate tectonics. Why? Well, think about it. If you have no water,
you have no isthenosphere. And on Earth, it was the isthenosphere that was vital to have
plate tectonics. It provided the lubrication in the mantle that allowed the stiffer plates to move
over it. No water, no isthenosphere, no plate tectonics. We know that Venus has an iron core,
and probably even a liquid iron outer core, but Venus doesn't have any magnetic field. Probably
because it hardly rotates. Very unusual. Venus actually counter rotates once in 243 Earth days.
And perhaps what you need to get a magnetic dynamo to generate a magnetic field
is rotation in order to have a significant Coriolis effect, in order to cause gyres of
fluid in the liquid outer core, in order to move the material in ways that would generate a magnetic
field. So, no water, 90 bars of pressure, 95% carbon dioxide, 460 degrees Celsius, sulfuric
acid in the atmosphere. There is no life, and I guarantee we will never want to live there.
I mean, never has a planet been so poorly named. How does the song go, you're my Venus, you're my
fire? Well, I don't have any desire. And neither do NASA or any of the programs doing exploration
in our solar system. Earth has a moon, a fairly large one, that formed at the same time that Earth
formed. It has a similar composition. It has a mantle and a core. It has a crust, what we call a
regolith. It's actually comprised of shattered rock from impacts on the surface. But Earth's moon
is quite small as far as planets or planetary bodies go, and therefore it can't hold on to an
atmosphere. Gravity on the moon's surface is one-sixth that of Earth's. It's just not large
enough to hold on to gases. Like Mercury, the surface of the moon has largely been unchanged for
billions of years. It shows the remains of thousands of impacts that have occurred over
billions of years. And when you look at the moon, you see both white and dark areas. Those white
areas are the highlands. They occupy most of the planet's surface. And those go back, those rocks
date back to about four billion years. The dark areas are called maria. They formed a little bit
more recently, three and a half to three billion years ago. Now, it's interesting, maria is the
Latin word for oceans. And boy was that wishful thinking. The maria and reality are flat flood
basalts during a period of tremendous volcanic activity that ended three billion years ago.
There's been no water found there. It's bone dry. And we should know, because the moon is the only
planetary body that we visited. We've brought rocks back, and we know what the composition
of the surface is. So no water, no life. And unfortunately, if we don't find water on the
moon, that means probably no human colonization in the future either. Because frankly, it would be
really hard to have to bring water to some other place to live. We really rely on it being there
if we would ever live there. Now, we move out to Mars. This is a slightly different matter.
Okay, Mars is still small. It's about the size of Earth's core. So the gravity on the surface of
Mars is only about a third of Earth's. It's got therefore a very thin atmosphere, and it's cold.
But it's not that cold. Temperatures on the surface of Mars range from minus 87 degrees Celsius to
about minus five degrees Celsius, just less than the point of freezing. So it's sort of like Antarctica.
It's almost livable. Mars has ice caps. Are they water? No, they're carbon dioxide,
because the atmosphere like Venus is 95% carbon dioxide. Well, plants would be happy at least.
And Mars does have quite a few Earth-like environments. In addition to the ice caps,
it has deserts, sand dunes, dust, dust storms. And it's still a tiny bit tectonically active.
There are some bits of evidence that there has been volcanic activity in the not-too-distant
geologic past, though it doesn't seem to be occurring currently. It never had plate tectonics,
but it does have signs of crustal deformation that occurred in the past. For example,
there's a massive rift called Valles Marineris, a huge crack in the planet that would actually
span from New York to Los Angeles, a huge valley. And it shows evidence of massive volcanism,
three and a half to three billion years ago. In fact, the volcano Mount Olympus
is the largest volcano in the solar system. It would actually reach from New York to Cleveland.
It forms in a region of lots of volcanoes called the Tharsus Bulge. Probably what happened was
there was a large hotspot within the mantle of Mars, but because Mars didn't have plates and the
surface wasn't moving, the hotspot just kept pumping magma into the same spot on the surface
and created a large number of volcanoes that create a significant lopsided bulge to the planet.
However, if you had that much volcanism, you probably had on Mars at one time a thick atmosphere
and probably even an ocean hundreds of meters thick. And what makes people think that is because
everywhere in the surface of Mars, you see evidence of water, dry lake beds, stream beds,
stream erosion. I mean, there's no liquid water at the surface now, but there's some evidence that
it actually might still be leaking out of the sides of cliff walls. And we see evidence of
water molecules still leaking out into space. So is it there frozen underground, perhaps?
This is a very important topic that the NASA program is trying to investigate.
In 2004 in January, one of the most successful missions of NASA ever involved putting two rovers
Spirit and Opportunity on the surface of Mars. They were designed to operate for three months and
ended up working for years. They were actually co-led by Ray Arvidson in my department at Washington
University in St. Louis. In fact, much of my whole department packed up and went to jet propulsion labs
in California in order to help steer this thing around the surface of Mars. And these things
went through all sorts of adventures. They got stuck and unstuck in sand dunes, they had to last
through dust storms, drove for kilometers all about the surface in and out of craters,
and what they found everywhere was evidence of water. Sedimentary rocks that would have formed in
marine ocean settings, various forms of a mineral hematite that form in water, chemical
weathering aided by water. Was their life very possibly if there was liquid water there?
Now, could we live there? Again, the key is we would need water, we would need to discover water
somewhere beneath the surface of Mars. If you move out from Mars next, you get to essentially a
rubble heap that we call the asteroid belt. Countless small asteroids between the orbits of
Mars and Jupiter. There are more than a million of these that are a kilometer or larger in size.
In fact, we've named 160,000 of these asteroids. The largest series is considered a dwarf planet,
but it's still tiny. In fact, if you took the whole mass of all the asteroids and put them all
together, they still would only make up 4% of the mass of the moon. It's not a lot of material.
We used to think that the asteroids formed from a smashed planet, but now we think that probably
these are remnants of the early solar system. These are planetesimals that were never allowed to
become a planet due to the strong gravitational force of Jupiter. Now, these asteroids are closely
monitored because some of these occasionally swing in towards the orbit of the Earth and have caused
fairly significant changes in the history of life on our planet, as with what happened 65
million years ago at the start of the Cenozoic era. However, these small objects have no water,
no life, and not much interest from us in terms of a place that we would live. Interestingly,
when you go out beyond them, you get to the four gas giants, and also those are not a place where
we would expect to find life or be able to support life. The giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
and Neptune, are planets with thyroid cases. They grew like other planetesimals at the start
of the solar system, but they formed just beyond the condensation point for ices. In other words,
they could begin to accumulate materials like water, ammonia, and methane, which we call ices
in the context of the solar system because they're usually frozen. So they formed with
rock and metal like the terrestrial planets, but also the water, ammonia, and methane,
and they got really large, really fast as the solar system formed, and they became large enough to hold
on to the abundant light gases of hydrogen and helium. In fact, if Jupiter were actually about
50 times larger than it is, it would have been a star in its own right. Turns out that Jupiter and
Saturn are quite similar to each other, and Uranus and Neptune are similar to each other,
though there are some significant differences between them. For Jupiter and Saturn, they're
mostly made of hydrogen and helium. They don't have any surfaces. The gas transitions directly
to a liquid at high pressures. In fact, the name gas giant is really a misnomer. They are mostly
made of liquid hydrogen and helium. They have weather. They have methane and ammonia in the
atmosphere that forms these colorful bands that can change a little bit as they move.
Those separate bands that you see are due to a very strong Coriolis effect, just like the
Hadley cells on Earth. However, Jupiter and Saturn rotate really quickly. Jupiter goes through one
day in only 10 hours, and because it's so large, the velocity at any point on its equator is about
45,000 kilometers an hour, whipping around the axis of Jupiter, and that causes a very large
Coriolis effect and very many different bands of atmospheric circulation. As you get out to Uranus
and Neptune, their composition is mostly that of ices in the mantle, water, methane, and ammonia,
with smaller hydrogen and helium atmospheres. Now, each of these has very interesting individual
characteristics. Jupiter is the largest. It's about 11 times wider than Earth, but its volume is
therefore about a thousand times larger. It has a large red spot, which is actually a storm. It's
like a hurricane. Only it has lasted a tremendously long period of time. As long as we've observed
Jupiter, it still had that red spot. Now, Saturn is interesting. It has actually the lowest density
of any of the planets. Its density is less than a gram per cubic centimeter, which means if you
could possibly put it into a giant bathtub, it would float. Saturn is best known for its rings,
which are made of rock and ice, and though they look quite substantial, are incredibly thin.
They're only tens of meters thick. To try to give you a scale, imagine that you had a round piece
of paper to represent those rings. That piece of paper would have to be two miles across to have
proportionally the same thickness as Saturn's rings. Uranus also has noticeable rings. In fact,
all the gas giants do. The most unusual thing about Uranus is it's actually tilted on its side
a little bit more than 90 degrees. We still are not sure how a planet of that size could be tilted,
but it's thought perhaps a very large impact with another planet early on in its history
actually knocked the planet on its side. The farthest of the planets is Neptune, which is 30
astronomical units away from the Sun. One astronomical unit, by the way, is equivalent
to the distance from the Earth to the Sun, and it's 30 times that distance. Because it's so far
out, it takes a long time, a full 165 Earth years to make one revolution around the Sun.
Interestingly, Neptune has a tilted axis that's about 29 degrees, not too different from the Earth,
and as a result, it has seasons. It actually has changes in its atmosphere probably due to the
change in the direction of that tilt of the axis with respect to the Sun. For instance,
when Voyager 2 came by in 1989, there was a very large storm spot seen in its atmosphere,
but that was entirely gone by 1994. Well, in our search for other Earths,
there's just not much here. Any rocky surfaces on the gas giants are thousands of kilometers beneath
thick mantles and atmospheres of ices and gases at unbelievable pressures, but they have moons
and lots of them with some very interesting geology. Jupiter has four large ones and many
smaller. They were discovered by Galileo in 1610 and actually brought about an end of the whole
geocentric model, Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. Io is interesting. It's the most volcanic
place in the surface, in the whole solar system. It's constantly erupting. You have tidal heating
from Jupiter stretching and compressing the planet, creating molten rock and sulfur. We have huge
volcanoes of sulfur making the moon turn yellow. In fact, it's probably the worst smelling place in
the solar system except that you don't have an atmosphere, so because it's too small, you wouldn't
smell anything. The next moon out there is the most interesting from our perspective, Europa.
Like other large moons, it's made of iron rock, but also it has a large saltwater ocean beneath
a thin frozen icy crust. The water layer is probably 100 kilometers thick or so with an ice
layer that may be up to 10 or 30 kilometers, could be much less, but what's interesting is the
icy crust is very cracked and sometimes water actually comes up to the surface to fill the cracks.
Again, it's that heat that drives this process is the result of the tidal forces from Jupiter,
but because we've got liquid water, sometimes at the surface, it's the most likely place in
the solar system other than the Earth that life could exist. The other moons are interesting
also. Ganymede, which is half rock and half ice, actually it's the largest planetary moon,
is made of rock and mantle, but also has an icy crust. The crust is old, about four billion years.
We see signs of old impact cratering, but it has an induced magnetic field that probably is a result
of a layer of saltwater beneath the icy crust. It's deeper down than Europa's, so it's less
likely than Europa to have life, but it still is a possible candidate. Callisto, the next moon out,
also is about half rock and half ice, but it's smaller and farther from Jupiter than Ganymede.
It's about the size of Mercury, and it therefore has fairly insignificant tidal heating, and as a
result, the moon never just separated, it never differentiated very well. It may also have a
small deep liquid ocean, but it's less likely than either Europa or Ganymede. Actually, NASA
considers it a fairly good place for a human base for future exploration of the outer solar system.
One of the most unusual places in the solar system is Titan. It's the largest moon of Saturn.
It's the second largest in the solar system to Ganymede. It's the only moon with a dense
atmosphere, one and a half atmospheres. It's 50 times thicker, sorry, 50% thicker than Earth's
atmosphere, and it's largely nitrogen, just like ours, and it has hydrocarbons like methane and ethane.
It actually has lakes and rivers. However, it's really cold. It's minus 180 degrees Celsius,
so these lakes and rivers are not water. They're liquid hydrocarbons. However, it's got climate,
it has clouds, it has wind and rain, that creates surface features similar that of Earth, sand dunes,
shorelines, even as changing seasons. It's sort of like what Earth would have looked like in early
Earth, but under much colder conditions. So cold that it's unlikely to have life, but it'd be a
great place to stop and refuel your rocket ship. There are many other moons and many other smaller
objects in the solar system that are not planets, dwarf planets like Pluto, centaurs, trojans,
trans-Neptunian objects, comets and meteoroids. They're all mixtures of metal, rock and ice,
though the farther you go out, the less metal and rock and the more ice that you have. Pluto,
interestingly of course, used to be a planet, but it was demoted in 2006 to a dwarf planet status
because it no longer meets the criteria for a planet. A planet has to orbit the sun and only
the sun, not the moon or something else. It has to be large enough to be a sphere and it has to
clean out the region around its orbit. Pluto meets all those except for the last. It swings
inside the orbit of Neptune and so is no longer considered a planet. Besides Pluto's small,
it's actually smaller than many of the moons around other planets. Pluto's part of a kuiper
belt that extends far out into the solar system. Lots of objects, more than 70,000 objects, probably
larger than a kilometer in size, going out from Neptune to 55 or so astronomical units away.
If you go even farther out, you get to the Oort cloud of comets that goes out to 100,000
astronomical units. Probably millions of small bits of ice that sometimes get deflected into the
inner solar system and we see them as bright streaks across the sky, the comets. But their total
volume is very small. There are lots of them, but they're really small ice balls, snowballs.
In fact, when Halley's comet came through in 1986, we're able to see that even though its tail
stretched for millions of kilometers, the comet itself was only about 15 kilometers across.
So what are our prospects here in our own local solar system? Well, is there anything else that
looks like Earth? Anything alive? Is there any place that we could live? There are several places
with liquid water, but not right at the surface. They're cold, harsh environments. There do seem
to be some moons with liquid water in an ocean beneath the surface and life could exist there.
Again, anywhere that we find liquid water on the surface of the Earth, we find life,
but it would be a hard life. Earth has had a liquid ocean at the surface, lots of heated nutrients,
and it still took three billion years for multicellular life to evolve here.
I don't expect anything other than single-celled life could exist anywhere else in our solar system,
even though we know we have a sun that can support complex life like what exists on Earth.
Nothing is going to come visit us one day, no Martians and certainly no Venusians. Could we
live there? Maybe. Lots of places have water and rock to build and live by. We need a source of energy.
Nuclear power works, but uranium is always in limited supply. Title-heating works in places like
Io to keep the geothermal energy going, but Io is not a very friendly place to be. You really want to
have sunlight. Mars would work if there's water underground. There are even lots of other things
that would remind us of home, sand dunes, sedimentary rocks, even ice caps. If you go out in the solar
system far from the sun, you would need some space-based solar reflectors to concentrate
the weak sunlight. Some way to capture sunlight, but you could do it. There's lots of rock and ice,
water ice, and Titan even has clouds and weather and rivers and lakes, and a whole lot of petroleum
as well. Well, in the next lecture, the last lecture, I'm going to extend my search outward.
What are the chances of finding other Earth-like planets in the rest of the galaxy? And in the
process, we'll review what the properties are that have been vital in making Earth the remarkable
place that it is, geologically and biologically.
