Welcome to the Basin Conspiracy, I'm Eni Ashbrotsky, I'm Stephen Zuber, and today we have a guest.
Hi, I'm Patrick Chapin.
Whoa, putting on a sexy voice for the audience.
Yeah, hello. I'm a professional magic player, game designer, and writer.
And we are having Patrick on with us again because there is more AlphaGo goodness to talk about.
For people who have not been with the series from the beginning,
Episode 4, we talked with Patrick about AlphaGo and it's legendary.
At this point, I'm pretty sure we can call it legendary.
At the very least, historic five-game series of Go against...
He wasn't a world champion, yeah.
Yes, Lee Sedol was the 18-time world champion, and the most recent match that just took place is against KG, the best Go player in the world.
The two of them have been head and shoulders above a lot of other people, so it's a little tricky because one of them being the world champion and one of them being the highest ranked.
KG is a bit of a prodigy. He's much, much younger than...
He's very young for such a... There aren't very many Go players remotely as good as him, but he's very young.
And definitely humanity's last help with Lee Sedol going down.
Right. So it was very big news and it was a fascinating and exciting episode.
One of the few episodes of our show that I can actually say was exciting to listen to.
So go back and listen to that if you'd like to because we probably are going to reference it a bit.
And there's going to be a test after.
Yes, huge test. But a short version is AlphaGo beat Lee Sedol 4-1, including a move that a lot of people have described as a move that no human could make.
It is just an inhuman move that no one really understood but ended up winning AlphaGo the game.
And that was when people really started to realize that this neural net deep learning thing was a very big deal.
And recently, by recently I mean was it last week or two weeks ago?
Oh yeah, just a couple weeks ago. Just like it just finished.
It's been going on at the Future of Go Summit in China.
It's kind of resolved... I mean after Master's performance, Master was AlphaGo's kind of identity during a secret test that was halfway between current day and Lee Sedol from a year ago.
Yeah, we should mention that AlphaGo has been training in the interim.
Yeah, it's been thinking a lot about the game.
Actually though, this AlphaGo... So they actually ended up blowing up the entire way they went about it.
Like they learned a lot from the original AlphaGo.
But by the time AlphaGo adopted its Ulterigo Master briefly, it was actually kind of brand new.
It was starting from... Yeah, it was starting over because AlphaGo's strategy...
It was novel compared to other computer programs because of how much it was making its own strategy.
It studied games, but it was its own strategy.
By the time it was Master, it mostly just thought about Go.
And then developed strategies from playing against itself a lot.
Instead of looking at previous games...
Instead of just being trained on all the games that all the humans are playing and so on.
Like it's learned more and more and more and more from itself.
It's just built a lot of its structure.
It's a lot of its understanding of the game based on its own just thinking about the game,
like playing against itself a very, very large amount of times.
Master, if I recall the story, no one knew at first that it was AlphaGo,
that it was a software program when it was playing on the Internet.
Because this was all Go that was happening online.
Oh yeah, there's a popular message board where the best Go players in the world could play.
And this is the message board. This is absolutely the most elite people could play here.
And a mysterious character that nobody knew who it really was,
but it was listed as Nindon, which is like the highest rating anybody can have,
called Master showed up and just started playing some games against other top players in the world.
And at first people didn't think too much of it,
but after a while it goes on this win streak,
Master's going on this win streak that was unrivaled and people started becoming suspicious.
And it was also clear from Master's play that there was a very good chance
that Master had to be at the very least computer assisted, if not a computer,
but it didn't make sense because Master first of all, Master just plays too fast.
Second of all, Master was making legendary moves multiple times per game,
where it's like the kind of move that this would be the greatest move of your year
and you would talk about this and this would be a whole big thing.
It was doing that multiple times per game and it was like,
it became such a thing all the other best players started just coming into play against Master,
except Lisa Dahl.
That was interesting.
So Master just basically 100-0, just beats everybody.
There was one match that for a little while actually displayed as a draw
because on the message board, if somebody times out or something,
there's certain conditions where if the game hasn't gone on long enough, it just lists it as a draw.
And one of his opponents was unable to continue and so temporarily it was a draw,
but they later redid that one and Master won that as well.
But after Master was so convincingly strong, it seemed as though,
eventually Google reveals, yes, it was actually us all along and life goes on
and from that point they announced Future of Ghost Summit
and they want to get everybody together and talk about what's next and go
and talk about the implications of AlphaGo and other people's programs
because there's a lot of other companies that are starting to make extremely good go-playing programs as well.
For instance, China actually has a program now that is so good that it's beating other high-level players.
It wasn't at the space of AlphaGo, but it actually, they did not compete against each other.
I think one of the terms, it was really strange.
I think the Chinese government had some, the Chinese government and Google have a,
they're trying to ease back into a positive relationship with each other.
Google left the country after the Chinese government allegedly raided their location there
and number of years ago Google left China because of, according to Google,
violence by the Chinese government that they were responsible for.
I had missed this.
Oh yeah. It's been a very uneasy situation. They just left, everything got out.
What did the government want from them?
Information. They just wanted primarily information about all of the, everybody in the country
and everybody's contacts, everybody's connections with everybody else, everybody's,
every message they sent, they basically just want all the information about all the Chinese citizens.
But in any event, it's been a while and they've talked it out a little bit
and they've kind of come to a place of trying to repair relations and move forward in some way.
And in this spot, one of the things, a lot of people ask,
oh, did you have the Chinese program playing against AlphaGo?
And it's, no, no, no, we don't think, we don't want to have just computers playing against each other.
Wait, why don't we? I think that would be awesome.
Between you and I, it's pretty clear that it is because of the strength of AlphaGo.
Right, but in the future, it'd be kind of interesting to see which country can make the best build playing in.
I think it would be extremely interesting.
One robot is wiping the floor with another one, robot fight.
Yeah, but in this spot, one of the robots is owned by the Chinese government who is hosting the event.
They actually cut the feed after AlphaGo's first game against KG or Dearing It.
It was massacring KG.
It was so brutalizing KG that they cut the feed and stopped broadcasting it and censored it.
Wow.
And they still put on the event and everything and they put out their own press release.
They just stopped showing the game in question and so on.
The commentary, because the commentators were being honest about what they were watching and what they were witnessing.
And even though the game ended up only half a point in favor of AlphaGo,
and the Chinese government really held on to how close he kept it and so on, but it was never close.
It was already 100-0 effectively. It was just off the board much, much, much earlier.
It's just that AlphaGo does not care about the margin of victory.
It only cares about maximizing the probability of victory.
Yeah. Did we ever get to see the end of that match?
Oh yeah. Yeah, yeah. Everywhere else except China got to see it.
It was only censored internally. It's on the internet. You can just go get it.
It's just, yeah, actually all the matches out.
So they did a variety of events.
The headlining thing was three games against KG where the winner gets $1.5 million
and the runner-up gets $300,000, which is, you know, a pretty good deal for KG.
But he knew going in that it was going to be extremely difficult.
He was very outspoken about how he could beat AlphaGo a year ago,
like witnessing, particularly when Lee Sedol actually won a game.
By the time Master rolled around, KG was of the opinion that there was a good chance
that AlphaGo would be too strong.
And in the course of this match, during the first game, you know,
they asked him beforehand about what his chances were and he said,
this is the match he's prepared the most for in his life,
but he thinks it will be very, very difficult. He's going to try.
It's going to be very difficult.
And after the first game, he said that he will not play against computers
after these next two games and that there is no more competition
and that there are no good Go players except AlphaGo.
AlphaGo is the God of Go.
Well, I take it the games, all three games, went very poorly for the humans.
Although, interestingly, I mean, AlphaGo won all three.
But the second game, according to AlphaGo's metrics,
the second game is the most perfect it's ever seen a person play.
Oh, cool.
Like, he actually 100 moves into the game.
I mean, first of all, his first 50 were effectively flawless,
but even 100 moves into the game, it was still competitive.
And it sounds funny to use that as a metric,
but almost nobody has ever lasted more than 25 moves
and still having good chances.
And here, he's 100 moves in and still has chances.
Typically, AlphaGo has already long secured the victory.
You're just going through the motions.
And so...
I think that's a perfectly valid metric to make when, like, you're this outclassed.
To say, I kept up for this long still really counts for a lot.
Oh, for a while.
I mean, he might have had the floor soup to them at the end,
but to know that he went down as valiantly as any human possibly could or ever has,
that's probably, or maybe not necessarily possibly could, but ever has,
that's still something to celebrate.
Oh, absolutely.
His performance was absolutely marvelous,
because part of the thing that makes this match so different than a year ago
is that when Lisa Dahl played against AlphaGo,
AlphaGo was merely playing stronger than any human ever has.
This AlphaGo...
So AlphaGo a year ago, stronger than any human,
by the time it was master, it was making brilliant game-changing moves
that you would write books of theory about multiple times a game,
but it was still playing go.
By the time this event rolled around, it was no longer playing go.
It's alien.
Its strategies are ineffable,
where AlphaGo before was, there was this golden period for a little while
where people were watching and it's like every single game they watch,
AlphaGo is just pioneering new strategies, new styles,
opening up all this exploration,
completely flipping the table of so many different,
so many paths are being opened by AlphaGo,
but now watching AlphaGo, it was so alien, it's hard.
You can find moves and things that you can use,
but it's very difficult to understand what it's doing,
because its strategy doesn't adhere to its actions, its behavior.
It's like there is no rhyme or reason that we can grok yet,
and people are trying to put the pieces together
of why do you make a move here sometimes, why do you make a move there,
but it's so alien that it's hard to know what you're even doing.
It appears to be just random moves,
but somehow always ends up being a huge blowout victory.
Well, it's not just pure random, it's like...
No, but from our perspective.
Whatever the order is, we can't see it.
We don't know what the patterns are.
We don't know, because there's all these heuristics
that people use for point-and-go that AlphaGo doesn't play
go the way that people do.
It doesn't seem to...
So many of the things that are basic tenets, it doesn't adhere to.
It does so many moves that humans should never do,
and we don't know why you can do them some of the time,
and when we try, we fail,
because we don't know whatever later things that are happening
that make this work out, and we're trying to put the pieces together,
but at this point, actually, this match was so decisive
that AlphaGo has retired and is no longer playing anymore,
partly because watching it's not the same thing anymore,
but partly also because at this point, they have proved their case.
It's so far beyond...
One of their things wasn't...
I was kind of saddened when I heard that,
that AlphaGo is retiring now.
Like, it could just keep continuing being more and more alien
and ineffable, right?
AlphaGo existing makes there no robot-vers-robot fights
that anybody cares about,
because they would want it to face AlphaGo,
and AlphaGo is so much stronger at the moment,
and they don't want there to be a perpetual arms race
for winning this against other...
There's going to be an appetite for robots that face other robots
and other companies to do that,
but I think that is outside the scope of what Google
and DeepMind want to do.
What do they want to do? Why would they retire AlphaGo?
What interest of theirs does it serve to stop AlphaGo now?
They're moving on to other things.
AlphaGo has played many games other than Go,
and is going to be playing many other games.
They just want to move more of their focus to some of the other games,
because in this spot, their premise wasn't just that
they could make a computer program, that they could make AlphaGo beat humans.
They also wanted to demonstrate their ability
to convert processing power and CPUs into ELO.
And use ELO as a measure of intelligence
and demonstrate the relationship between an increase in power
and an increase in processing centers and intelligence.
We should really quickly clarify for people,
ELO is the ranking system.
Yes, ELO is effectively a way of describing the skill.
What are your chances of winning?
And Google, one of their things was that it's not just
we can make something better than a human at this.
They wanted to demonstrate we can increase electricity
and we can increase how many computers we put in the network
and demonstrate a math formula of the function
of how much more processing power do you need
to get each unit of intelligence more.
They also were improving their efficiency,
whereas AlphaGo a year ago had thousands of local hubs
connected in a giant network.
They brought a laptop to beat him this time.
AlphaGo has become so good
that they could just bring it with them.
And in this spot they were able to demonstrate.
They said we actually know exactly how good it is
with this much processing and this amount of efficiency
and this whatever.
Currently, this version of AlphaGo is playing at a 4,500 ELO,
which to give some context of what it means.
Effectively, it's a logarithmic scale of sorts
and the amount better that AlphaGo is
than the best player in the world is...
No human is even remotely close to that.
I was slightly sad to hear that it was so...
On the one hand, it's amazing that there's an ineffable God of Go among us.
On the other hand, in our previous episode,
like I said, it was actually exciting
because you relayed the games to us
and there were really interesting parts
where it was human versus machine
and there was the one legendary move that everyone talks about.
There's like less to talk about because it's awesome.
That's only in the match against KG.
See, the plot thickens.
Wait, really quick, I have a quick introduction.
You mentioned that it was making crazy moves a lot
when it was playing online as Master.
Were those moves as ineffable as the legendary move against LisaDoll?
Was it like those five times a game?
Yeah, it's like the moves that it did against LisaDoll.
I mean, it was playing brilliantly,
but one of the moves that it did against LisaDoll,
it's like it was doing that multiple times a game
instead of one time in the whole match.
Yeah, it was like it was doing that multiple times a game
where it's like, oh my God,
this is like a paradigm-changing move,
but it's doing it multiple times.
That's awesome.
I think I see Enoch's point that it makes it seem less special
because it's doing it flippantly all the time now.
Oh!
I remember that time, I don't know,
I did this crazy magic thing.
Well, now I'm just doing that casually.
I can do that with one hand with my eyes closed.
Every single move is like that.
There's really not much to talk about anymore.
It's just like, yeah, God came in and did his magic.
But, see, the plot actually thickens.
AlphaGo may be so much stronger than a human,
but the best human versus the best computer
was only one of the events at this Future of Ghost Summit.
They also had a match of AlphaGo versus
six of the best players in the world,
or five or six of the best players in the world,
and teaming up, which is actually relatively efficient.
You would think, you know, it might be challenging,
but there is a way you can be efficient about go
together as a team that isn't just going to slow you down
and make you worse than some of the parts.
Interesting.
And perhaps even more fascinating,
which AlphaGo, by the way, routed him.
AlphaGo is still just too strong compared to even humans teaming up.
But the part that I found particularly fascinating,
AlphaGo playing on a team with an expert level player,
not even a professional level player,
somebody who would be, I guess they would be somewhere
in the ballpark of 100, they would never win.
They could never ever win a game against KG.
Ever.
They could never win a single game,
and like when an expert player plays on a team with AlphaGo,
they actually crush AlphaGo.
They actually win five out of six times
against AlphaGo without a teammate.
Even though they're a human that's so weak of a human,
they could never beat the best human player ever.
They're so helpful because humans are so much better
at coming up with ideas of what to look at and think about
that when the human, instead of the human deciding what move to make,
if the human's job is to point to areas for AlphaGo to think about,
suggestions, ideas, if it's providing seeds and feedback,
humans would appear to be monstrously more effective
at coming up with ideas and suggesting things than AlphaGo is.
That is super interesting.
And so now there's this question of there's this new era
because one of the big things they unveiled is just how real of a sport
go tandem with a computer is because go tandem with a computer
is actually very meaningfully different than humans playing with chess.
When humans play chess with chess robots,
the chess robot just tells them what to do.
When humans play with Go, there's a new skill set,
a new strategy, area for strategy of how to most efficiently
provide suggestions to AlphaGo.
And AlphaGo can actually record how useful the human suggestions were
and give points to people that it plays with based on how effective
they are at providing suggestions and it can provide feedback
so that the humans can learn how to provide better ideas,
like it can reward the human for which types of ideas
we're giving the AlphaGo the right ideas of where to look at.
And meanwhile, AlphaGo is also learning from the humans,
like trying to figure out the pattern of where do humans suggest
looking at in circumstances and so on.
So it's trying to replace us anyway with little mini human simulators.
So there's this brief window now where cyborg fights
will be more fun than just robot fights.
Oh yeah, I think right now the fact that a human playing with a robot
versus a human playing with a robot is actually incredible
because when a human plays with a robot,
they play better than any human on Earth,
but it still looks...
And this is without AlphaGo playing is even better
because of how much it looks more relatable
when they just have other people's programs playing,
but when people are playing with a robot on their team,
it's like the difference between two people running
to the end of the 100 meter dash or a sprint or whatever,
a mile run or whatever.
Two people are running this race versus two people in cars.
It's a different sport, but it's a new sport.
That's sort of the mental model I was picturing,
except I was doing it with gladiators.
I know robot isn't necessarily the best word for this,
but it's just what I'm picturing just to make it fun for myself
and I think it's relatable.
But when I was picturing two robots fighting against each other,
I was thinking robot wars,
whether they build robots with saw blades and stuff like that.
And it always turns out to be either a spinner or a flip pot that wins.
Right, but then I was thinking, oh cool, cyborg fights.
And then I was picturing gladiators with augmented arms
and shields and stuff,
but I know that's not super helpful.
What I was thinking of is it ties into,
a car is an augmented person in the sense that
it just enhances our ability to go fast,
kind of torturing the analogy.
Maybe bicycling is the better way to put it.
In some ways, it's like bicycling.
Yeah, there's got to be some, there's no good mid-ground motorcycle.
Do you know enough about how this team-up thing works
to talk about it at all?
What does the human do?
Suggest moves, stones,
just provide ideas of possible moves
or possible sequence of moves.
It just keeps feeding it ideas of things to think about
or things to look at.
And why are humans so much better at that than the computer?
You would think the computer could do that too, right?
The computer's approach to how to come up with ideas,
it's somewhat cumbersome.
Even though the computer's strategy,
how it values things, how it thinks about things,
is its own devising.
It's just not as efficient.
It uses a lot of random generation of...
It comes up with ideas using effectively random number generators,
like variations of its own strategy, its own experiences.
And for reasons that are not yet clear,
there is a skill that humans seem to have.
There is a efficiency of processing
where they are able to parse out
what are good things to look at
much faster and more efficiently than AlphaGo on its own.
It's providing ideas that are much more than some of the parts.
So AlphaGo does all the really detailed looking?
AlphaGo looks all the way to the end of games,
many, many, many times.
Every second it's looking at thousands and thousands and thousands of entire games.
And humans don't do all that.
So AlphaGo spends a lot of processing power playing out games,
and the humans can spend a lot of processing power doing other things.
How they're coming up with these ideas is not clear,
but that's one of the areas that I think DeepMind and others are interested in trying to figure out,
is how do humans imagine things?
Like how are humans so good at imagining things?
But actually on your topic about the fighting,
that's already been proposed.
There's actually standing off already for robot versus MMA fighter now.
It's a tricky thing because I think that there's...
I'm assuming they would pad the robot or something?
I don't think that there's any...
I also just don't think that...
I don't know.
I mean, maybe you could find the right person,
but to me I think that it's a difficult thing to watch a human versus robot fighting
because it just seems so clearly like,
dude, you can just make the robot...
Like, I mean, I already have experience of what it's like to try to fight a car
driving 70 miles an hour at me.
There was a Rick and Morty episode that references that.
They did one of the inter-dimensional cable episodes.
It just flashes between these random bullshit improv shows.
And one of them was human-spiding cars.
And then like, oh, look, he's going for it.
And then, oh, no, he got tripped and he's being chewed up by the tires.
And then it's like, wouldn't the car just win every time?
I think that's exactly what would happen.
You just make the robot too hard to hit.
You can't dent-steal with your fists.
Right.
So there have to be some other rules.
If you hit it hard enough, it registers as, I don't know, something.
You'd have to make the robot vulnerable in some way.
It could be like a pointed system, like an attack 1-0 match or something.
But that sounds a lot less boring than watching a robot try and kill a person
who's like, agreed to try and not be killed by the robot.
Right.
I'm not a violent person, but I would watch the hell out.
I might watch the hell out of that.
I'd see how gruesome it was first.
Watching two robots fight each other, though.
I mean, it's one thing if they're just doing the whole spinners and flipping, you know.
But like, if they got to meet specifications with, you know,
if they look like people and they're cyborg, robotic or whatever,
and it's literally just remote-controlled and there's two humans fighting with the cyborgs.
Oh, that would be interesting.
Pacific Rim.
Yeah.
I got a feeling that if you just have the robots use machine learning in order to figure out how to fight,
it might end up being much less compelling of viewership.
It might be awesome, but I bet the window of where it's awesome to watch is relatively small
before both robots are, like, weirdly hiding on the edges of the cage
and, like, just spastically bouncing around in some, you know, like, unknowable pattern trying to position.
Yeah.
You know, they're trying to arrange all the atoms in the air into a way that...
90% of it is just them standing at each other, and then there's one flash of movement and someone has decided to win her.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So I'm not so sure that...
I mean, I don't know if you've ever seen...
There's a video on YouTube of machine learning playing Super Smash Bros.
It's weird watching.
It doesn't really play like humans do.
It mostly hangs out off the edge of the map, like, exploiting, being able to jump off the end,
and it bounces around in a way where it's just...
Yeah, it's not...
It's weird to look at.
It's like, okay, I guess this is Super Smash Bros.
Like, if you think it's obnoxious when people play Street Fighter II and they just do ducking,
or just trying to trip you over and over again, the AI is shameless about being exploitive in its strategy.
Because it literally has no shame.
The first thing we gotta do is program shame into our computers.
I don't know.
I feel like that might be how it all goes south, though.
I mean, yeah, well, what do you do when you're sufficiently shamed?
You lash out, right?
We don't want that.
If all it cares about is winning, it doesn't care about, like, shaming us right back.
You know, I don't know, whatever.
One of the current exciting next steps for AlphaGo is moving on to other games.
It's got new challenges, right?
One of the things it's trying to do now, which seems like it would have been unimaginable a year and a half ago,
is it's learning to play StarCraft.
Yes!
Now, this is fucking amazing.
Oh, yeah.
So one of the parameters that makes it particularly interesting is that they're going to limit it,
its number of actions per minute, to being like a human.
Because already there are programs, like, it's already...
There are already ways that people have demonstrated that you can literally just brute force certain things
by allowing the computer to just make thousands and thousands of operations in a minute.
It's like, okay, yes, if you're just a monstrous hive mind and you can control...
Your micro is just so far off the charts, you can brute force the game.
But instead, AlphaGo is going to try to learn how to play StarCraft
with only having as many, you know, as many operations as humans get.
You know, as many...
It's micro, yeah, exactly, being just like a human, but it just rely on its strategy.
That'll be interesting to see how that one goes, you know,
and actually Blizzard announced partnering with them in this way and letting them kind of go in,
because normally it's against the terms of service of StarCraft to let bots play.
Yeah, you're not supposed to actually have bots playing the game,
but they're going to allow AlphaGo to take a crack at it and supervise that whole thing, but...
It seems like if you ask first, and your Google Blizzard should be like,
yeah, that's... Okay, you know, you're not some asshole trying to, you know,
boost your score on the boards here.
Right.
You've asked permission.
It would be weird if they're like, no, no robots, that's the rule.
They actually partnered with a couple companies, like both Blizzard making Hearthstone
and Wizards of the Coast making Magic the Gathering, where AlphaGo effectively...
Same thing, DeepMind was learning how to read specs,
like the specifications by designers of what cards they wanted implemented for Magic or for Hearthstone,
and then writing a script for how to implement those cards in the digital versions,
the digital card games, because it's part of the language.
All this stuff has to do with ways... DeepMind is trying to learn how to think
and how to think like a human and how humans think.
And one of the biggest areas is with language.
Language is very, very, very challenging for machines.
And so to be able to read the specifications of what it wants,
of what the humans want made, and then instead of having to pay an engineer to like literally write the code,
AlphaGo would just write the code for the humans of what they wanted,
and they would evaluate how good was AlphaGo able to figure out what we wanted
and then literally write new scripts to implement it.
That's reaching into the scary territory, in my opinion.
Yeah, plus I don't want to be out of a job.
Well, I mean, that too, but...
And in the end of the world.
Right, just the fact that it would be able to...
I mean, at that point you're actually doing thinking.
One of the challenges, though, is that so far,
one of the reasons that one doesn't get publicized as much is that it's not ready yet.
It's not good enough at that. It was okay, and it got better,
but it capped out and still just wasn't good enough to do...
Yeah, they need to make some serious advancements because it's curved.
It isn't getting enough better to be...
It's missing a vital component of being able to figure out new things.
It can do derivative things, but it's missing a certain ability to grok novel concepts
that it wasn't making progress on yet,
but they're going to keep working and they want to revisit eventually after AlphaGo,
or after DeepMind, going some new ways to think.
I'm somewhat excited about this StarCraft thing because there's so many variables in StarCraft,
so many different ways that units can't interact,
and so many units you have on screen at one time,
plus the way they act with their environment,
it doesn't seem to me like a thing that is easily translated into a machine.
So one of the things...
Well, it's easily is doing a lot of work in that sentence, right?
That's true.
There's a reason it wasn't done 15 years ago.
Let's put it this way.
One of the biggest challenges is how do you simulate an entire game of StarCraft?
You can just play games of StarCraft,
but humans can only play so many games of StarCraft.
There's just not enough time in the day.
One of the advantages to go is that AlphaGo could think about...
AlphaGo has thought about more games of go than all humans have ever thought about, put together.
So it's a very different thing.
How is AlphaGo going to think about StarCraft
without being able to simulate the games all the way to the end?
Because that is actually impossible, right?
It can't play against itself.
Impossible is a funny word.
I don't know how impossible works.
The only three types of impossible are we can conceive of how to do it,
we just don't yet have the technology,
or we can't even conceive of how to do it,
but it's not forbidden by physics,
or it's forbidden by physics,
so we would need to have a new framework for how to think about physics.
All three types are just defined by what it takes for them to be possible.
That is a very interesting way of looking at impossible.
I'm going to try to remember that.
Those are the three types of impossible.
I mean, what is impossible?
I mean, impossible.
There are some people who think about the system as being all...
Like, it's just this is the only thing there is,
and all there is is inside of this.
But there's more than just playing with this.
There's more than just playing within the framework.
There's also playing with the framework,
because what if you just looked at everything a different way?
Playing with the framework sounds like a different order of problem.
I thought of impossible in terms of impossible and principle,
which is faster than light travel,
unless that turns out to be wrong,
then that's just impossible, like, in principle.
But then there's impossible in practice,
I don't know, me getting to the moon for 15 bucks, right?
For like an afternoon trip.
Like, that's currently impossible in practice,
but not impossible in principle.
So, the first type, it's like getting to the moon for 15 bucks.
Maybe eventually you can.
I know that, like, in almost all of human history,
it would have been really weird to be able to get from Denver to Chicago for 15 bucks.
I've done it for 19, you know, not too long ago.
Like, one way on an airplane.
$19?
Yeah.
Wow, it's a hell of a deal.
Oh, yeah.
But in terms of the type two possibility,
you know, obviously technology improves.
Teleportation, actually,
teleportation is a great example of one that right now we have,
it's just, we don't have it in a practical way.
The teleportation is increasing
and we're improving our teleportation all the time.
Like, already right now, we can teleport things.
Okay.
It's just, you know.
No, I have no idea what you're talking about.
Oh, yeah.
So, look, this up too.
Dude, technology is happening really fast these days.
Okay.
But you can actually teleport,
you can teleport, like, the phase of electrons and information
and get it from one place to another without it having to move through that space.
And it's very inefficient.
But the amount of power and the amount of processing it would take
in order to be able to transport much larger things,
it's not even remotely feasible yet.
However, things are going to get better,
we're going to get better technology in the future,
almost assuredly, you know.
I mean, it'd be very unlikely for us not to.
But the type two possibilities,
the type two possibilities would be like,
for instance, certain forms of time travel,
where it's like, we have,
it's very hard to even imagine how it works taking negative energy
and using it inside, like collapsing a black hole or any sort of,
but it's not actually forbidden.
Yes.
Well, so, so the next question is,
reversing entropy actually bridges into it nicely.
Things that are forbidden by our physics,
like entropy always increases and you can't go faster than light.
Wait, are you of the opinion that time travel is not forbidden by our physics?
Definitely it's not forbidden by our physics.
Okay.
Yeah, oh yeah, in my opinion anyway,
based on all the physics I know anyway.
I don't know all that much physics.
It's not forbidden.
Okay.
There's a lot of things that are very difficult,
highly convoluted, but the universe might be a very big place.
The faster than light, however,
I don't even know what it means to go faster than light
because the kind of the definition of light involves this
in a way where you can't or you would need a new definition.
It just by definition doesn't.
You can get from one place to another faster than light.
In fact, we,
some people would say that there have been,
definitely people would say this,
but there are some who say that they have successfully achieved
reproducible faster than light speed communication
in certain experiments with being able to transport information
through quantum entanglement where.
Oh, is that the transportation you were talking about?
No, actually there's more teleportation than even just that.
Okay, that is what I had heard about and I had my doubts about that one.
That one, it's tricky because the margin of error is large enough
that it could be still in the realm of information could have traveled fast enough.
So, yeah, it's really confusing how the world works or how the universe works.
Besides, I mean, for all we know,
maybe it's connected in, you know, a tightly furl dimension
and things are much closer in a different axis than what we're looking at.
I just know that no one comes to Stephen Hawking's time travel parties.
Aw. Does he keep throwing this?
I know at least he did once, but it takes his once, right?
He sends out the invitations afterwards.
And so, like, if anyone could have come down the line when they heard about it
after, you know, when it was announced, they would have shown up if they wanted to
and maybe future mindsists don't like it.
Maybe there weren't enough cool people at the party so they didn't want to go?
It might have just been him to keep the secret, I don't know.
Yeah, but the thing is, don't you think that, like,
if you literally have a time machine,
it occurs to you that maybe a person who's publicizing this very, very widely,
like, maybe the universe, there's a selection effect.
The universe is where the time travelers go back to that spot and go to the party.
That's the one where the time travel terrorists put a bomb in that party.
Right.
Time travel terrorists.
Why not?
Yeah, right. Someone's going to get their hands on that tech.
Besides, are you telling me with the events of the past year
that you have it totally out of the range that somebody isn't using time travel right now?
Just to troll us?
Oh, God.
Let's see what happens to the Americans if they get the Trump.
Oh, God.
That ups my simulation hypothesis a little bit.
Definitely, as the numbers, I was watching the numbers in 538 on November 28,
or November 8, and I'm like, every time when it switched from, you know,
when Trump took the lead and didn't fall back down, I was like,
oh, okay, this could be alternate history, infinite numbers,
whatever, let's see what happens to Trump won in 2016, hit enter.
I mean, that crossed my mind.
Right.
I don't know why that event specifically would increase your odds, though.
Like, I mean, how crazy is it that World War I started?
Okay, something would have sparked it off eventually,
but you heard about how unlikely the assassination of Archduch Ferdinand was, right?
Sure.
I guess this was the first, like, I don't know,
A, it was my mind rebelling against reality,
another part of how my brain coped with it,
but another part was that I thought the odds weren't astronomically low.
This wasn't like, he becomes president and immediately gets killed by a meteorite,
and then his body gets struck by a lightning 50,000 times.
It wasn't like the LHC got shut down by a donut or something.
Yeah, I mean, he's got to be on your list of top 100 people, most likely,
every four years for the last 12 years, right?
If you were making a list of 100 people...
That's true.
I mean, he's run before.
That alone gives him a bonus point.
People who have expressed an interest, go to the meetings,
go, like, have political connections.
It's like, how big of a pond is it when it comes to the people who are making major plays at these things?
I mean, maybe not top 100, maybe top 300, I don't know,
but certainly there are 300 million people,
like the vast majority of people have a substantial...
They'd be way lower on my list.
Like, right now, pick somebody.
Mark Zuckerberg, he's way high on my list compared to most people.
No, no, you're totally right.
This wasn't my brain doing the speculation.
It was more just like my brain freaking out at the moment.
The next morning, he'd wake up and be like,
well, one in five things happened.
It was 20% was what roughly 538 had him at.
And I was like, well, that happens more often.
About 20% of the time.
Exactly.
So that was not the kind of universe-shattering,
everything I believe is false observation
that it would take to shatter my reality.
But like I said, that was...
I'm like the Patriots.
The Patriots come back,
the single greatest come back in the history of football this past.
The number of off-the-board...
Oh, I don't know, I didn't watch the thing.
So there's a game in America called football.
But I hear they don't actually use their feet on the ball very often.
Well, I don't know about very often, I'm not one to judge,
but mostly you touch it with your hands.
There's important points that involve the foot.
You're mostly running on your feet is the thing you're doing with your feet.
Then you could call any sport football.
Of course.
But if you call them all football, then you get confusing.
Except for water polo.
And regular polo.
So the Patriots are one of the best football teams in history.
They just have won many championships.
Very, very prolific team with arguably the best coach in the history of football,
or one of the best coaches.
Certainly the best current coach.
And they were losing by an enormous margin versus the Falcon.
They were losing by just such an enormous amount that no team has ever come back
from this much in a Super Bowl to win.
And they actually did.
They rallied late and it was...
They called up AlphaGo.
They were like, what do we do, AlphaGo?
I mean, you know, I don't know.
There's a lot on the line.
A lot of people would have made a lot of money.
I don't know if AlphaGo knows how to play football yet.
No.
I don't know.
Do you think football would be more complicated than StarCraft?
So it's confusing.
There's so much randomness in both.
I think that StarCraft would be harder.
Assuming that we set aside the whole, you need to have a body and you need to move.
If the AI is just able to...
If we hand wave the whole controlling all the humans on the field part,
I would guess that football is easier than StarCraft.
I would assume it's much easier to simulate than a StarCraft game would.
Manly, because there's so many fewer moving parts.
Yeah, exactly.
There's a lot of just random number generator things where if you just know the correct math,
you can just leverage math and then whatever utility functions you're optimizing for,
such as lift, weight, or have energy, or be able to move fast, or whatever the thing is.
Actually, a lot of teams are experimenting now with technology for improving their athletes' abilities.
For instance, Steph Curry, one of the absolute best basketball players in the world.
So he's only like 6'2".
Most of the best basketball players, very, very tall.
Giant, freakish, abnormal sized humans.
Steph Curry, aggressively normal sized human.
Do you know that 1 out of 6 people that are over 7 feet tall are in the NBA?
Or 1 out of 6 Americans that are over 7 feet tall are in the NBA?
Yeah, that's not surprising.
It's insane. It's like right now.
It's like the number of people.
So no, Steph?
Yeah, so he has a neural coach.
There's a guy who used to work at Facebook that worked on a lot of AI stuff there
that does some training with different athletes.
There's a variety of other people actually who are getting into it now too.
But Steph Curry, the way he works, he has these goggles, or glasses of sorts,
that have flashing lights.
And he goes through the motions of certain drills,
and they have staff that are helping, that are actors,
that are all playing out the parts.
You know, a bunch of people who, maybe they played college basketball,
or maybe they played in the European League, or maybe they're...
Whatever, they're having a bunch of people, or it's the farm system.
They're just people who are going through the motions,
who know what they're supposed to be doing, and they re-enact it,
and they play the simulations over and over and over again.
And Steph will know which simulation he's doing,
which routine, which practice route,
and the light will flash, and he does it in the light flashes,
and he does it in the light flashes, and he does it in...
And they do a variety of these, and there's a separate one they do
of training where the light flashes without him knowing which one he's going to have to do,
and then he just has to react as fast as possible and do it.
And then they just go through over and over again without him knowing which one it's going to be,
and he just responds to the light over and over and over and over and over again.
He does this so much, and eventually he sees the flash of light without the visor.
Oh, cool.
So he just... And he doesn't even react.
I mean, he doesn't even think about it. He just is reacting.
So are these situations that he's training on ones that occur often in the game of Bahama?
Yeah, they are the ones that are the highest leverage, most common,
and ways for him to gain advantages.
And after he does his training, he actually sits in a sensory deprivation chamber,
because apparently they ask him about it.
It's like, you know, some people only do it once in a while,
but Steph actually stays in for much longer than a lot of people,
and they're like, are you going crazy? You sure?
I've been spending a lot of time in the sensory deprivation chamber,
but supposedly he's like, you know, you can only...
Like, he does X amount of reps in an hour of neural training,
and he says he does twice as many in the half hour he spends in sensory deprivation,
because your mind has nothing left to do,
and so it just keeps replaying the patterns over and over and over again
of the things that are in your short-term memory.
Jesus, that sounds almost like he's getting to the point of a sort of a
Jiro Dreams of Sushi kind of basketball playing robot, you know?
What was this guy's name? What else is he...
Steph Curry, so he's so off the charts breaking the model.
I mean, actually, 538 have written quite extensively about he has broken basketball.
The entire game of basketball has been revolutionized in the last three years
because of some ways that the Golden State Warriors, the team that he plays on,
and certainly this year are the best team any team has ever been, ever.
They are way ahead of certain types of metrics and using, you know, valuing things.
They're very much, it's a bunch of Silicon Valley, and they're really into math,
and they're really, and they have a very futuristic look at the game.
He completely changed the game with regards to shooting, like, for instance, three-pointers.
In basketball, if you shoot from far away, you get three points,
and this is a rule that has only existed for about 30-something years.
They added it to help make the game more interesting, make more swings,
but for most of the history of basketball, there haven't been that many three-pointers,
even close to as many three-pointers as there are now.
One of the challenges is that they're so hard because of how far away you are.
However, people now have gotten so much better at training, they're so much stronger,
and also they have been spending their entire lives shooting three-pointers.
Whereas the people before were learned as adults, now the people have learned
since they were small children, they're so much stronger, so much better,
and one of the big things that happened just recently that Steph Curry almost accidentally discovered
was that weightlifting can actually help you tremendously.
It's kind of counter to a lot of the existing things.
Like, if you lift weights in the short run, it's harder to shoot three-pointers.
It throws off your arm strength, your balance, your depth perception,
not depth perception, your sense of how far to throw the ball or how hard to use.
But, Steph Curry's case, he's a very gifted player,
but his ankles kept giving out when he was in college,
and when he goes onto the pros, he's having all these ankle injuries.
There's all these giant people, and when he hits them, he goes down,
and he goes down hard on the ground, and he's running so fast,
and he keeps having ankle injuries that are going to be real problematic,
and one of the things they try is having him lift weights,
and he lifts more and more and more weights with the idea of being if you're just stronger,
and also you learn how to fall.
And if you watch Steph, he falls like 20 times a game because he doesn't try to land.
His ankle's a break because he's going so fast and so hard.
He just flops down and lets the people knock him around because they're so much bigger than him.
His strength has gotten so high that he can shoot from much, much, much, much further than other people.
For instance, he can actually make the majority of his...
If he just shoots from half court, he can just make it.
And I think last year, half of all the shots from a certain distance back
in the entire game he made, he was making,
and it's like the equivalent of, I don't know which sport would be the correct analog here,
baseball of hitting 117 home runs when the record was in the 70s.
It's like by so large of a margin that it doesn't even make sense what we're watching anymore.
That's really awesome, and like you said, AlphaGo for basketball,
but I'm interested that so many of the details of his training methodology are known,
because you'd think if it's getting that much of an edge, you'd want to keep it on the down low.
It's only after a few years, and I think enough other people are doing it now,
that they started talking about it.
It's interesting though, there's lots of ways that are rapidly expanding,
like Mark Cuban, the owner of the Dallas Mavericks and other basketball team,
he's been working on technology, like for instance, he's got visors,
that when you're wearing the visors, when somebody, the glasses of sorts,
when somebody shoots the ball,
instantly it starts giving you probability assessments, one on the right,
one on the left, and one on the middle, of whether the ball is going to bounce to the right
when it misses, or bounce to the left, or if it's going to go in, you know,
and they've improved the technology to such a degree that by the time you let go of the ball,
when the ball is only just a few feet from your hand,
it already is off the board certain of where the ball is going to go.
It already knows if you've made it or not, it already knows which way it's going to bounce.
Because that's determined as soon as it leaves your hand,
it's just how soon can you, with the technology, tell.
There's so little interference because of the air, it's predictable, it's very predictable,
it all cancels out so much that by the time it lets go, it's already done the calculations,
and if somebody were wearing the glasses, they would, as soon as the ball was shot,
they would be able to tell where they need to go to get the rebound, or if it's going to go in.
I'm assuming those sort of glasses would not be legal for play though.
Correct, no, no, there's lots of rules about which kind of technology you can use or not,
but I wonder sometimes, you know, with sports, there's so much money on the line,
there's so much prestige, there's so much, like, win at all costs at times.
I wonder who's going to come up with contact lenses to do this.
That was my first thought too, because they already have contact lenses that can project images
in a way that isn't blinding or doesn't even light up your eyes,
but I guess we're going to put the camera up, but that wouldn't be that hard either
once you're already putting stuff in your face.
Yeah, I mean, I'm assuming that's not too far from now though,
be able to just have those from cameras watching the field,
and so commentators will be able to say as soon as it leaves someone's hand,
oh, that's not going to go in.
That'd be funny.
I also would watch the hell out of a game of both teams all wearing these glasses,
just to watch the entire, like, dynamic, it would change the game completely.
That'd be awesome.
Imagine if underneath your shorts, there was just a couple triggers that indicated to you,
if it was going to be on the right side or the left side, or if it was going to go in,
and you just felt it.
You wouldn't even need to have anything in your face.
The camera could just be doing it.
You just feel the tap, and then you behave and react accordingly.
That is the sort of thing that sometimes...
So I know this is the ideal that you strive for when you are working in a physical art.
The one I most often think of is the martial arts,
where if you have to think about what you're doing,
you're going to lose against someone who just reacts on instincts,
who has drilled so much on it that when a punch starts coming at them,
their body does the thing without any conscious thought needing to get in the way.
And that was, you know, one of the really cool things I thought about the Matrix,
when they uploaded Kung Fu into Neo's head,
and he said, I know Kung Fu.
It's not like he had any physical, like any actual idea, mental knowledge before.
He was really surprised that now, when a punch came at him, his body would just do the thing.
And I had that experience before playing Guitar Hero.
And it's basically when I stopped playing Guitar Hero,
because always before the notes coming on the screen, you know, I would play on my guitar,
and I got to the point where I'd been playing long enough,
I noticed at one point in a particularly tough song when it got to the solo,
like the notes were just being hit.
And I wasn't present.
I was just watching what was going down,
and my body was doing the thing for me,
and it was kind of awesome that my body could translate what was coming into my eyes
and do what I wanted to happen.
But on the other hand, it felt like I wasn't involved anymore.
And that was when I stopped playing, because I was like,
well, now it's just my body playing the game and not me.
Were you playing the hardest levels?
Yeah, yeah.
Okay, I was going to say, because there's still room to go,
to go to the madness levels or something, right?
Oh, well, I mean, and after I stopped playing for a few weeks,
then my skills deteriorated to the point where I could now play it for fun,
but I don't play it as intensely as I used to,
because I know that's where you want to get with almost everything,
but to me, it feels like you're almost subtracting the human at that point.
And so when I see athletes like that,
that just their entire life is just training, reacting, doing the thing.
I was like, what is their internal experience like?
I want to weigh in two things really quick.
One, that I think peaking, like hitting the best you can ever do,
probably take some of the fun out of whatever it is you're doing,
because part of the fun is getting better.
And once you've gotten as good as you can get,
or as good as is possible for you,
then it's like, well, now all the fun of getting better is gone.
Then it's just trying to maintain.
I knew it was pretty short, too.
It was only about 45 seconds, and then I fell out of that,
and I had to think again.
Sure.
But just the fact that I had those 45 seconds was just...
And the more that you did it, the longer those seconds would probably be.
But then I've got to think, too, like with professional athletes,
they probably hit that point for a little while,
but then because it's so hard on them physically,
by when they're in their 40s, they can no longer play.
Yeah.
So they don't have the time to put into where they can hit that,
where they can peek long enough for it to stop being fun,
I would guess, because they just destroy themselves.
Well, I think it is fun for a lot of people.
They refer to it as flow or something, or being in the zone,
where you just...
Everything that you want to happen just happens
without having to be consciously dictating things.
I think flow is a little different,
but it is similar in the sense that you're not active like you described,
but you're not necessarily optimal.
You're just flowing.
When I was in Atlanta about three years ago,
just a little over three years ago,
I was competing in a magic tournament for Magic the Gathering,
and it was the biggest win of my career,
winning first place at this pro tour.
And I trained for several weeks.
I actually took a couple of weeks off of work,
and I was really, really focused on this particular...
the new cards and the new strategies.
And the way I play, I try not to think about my plays.
I try to train myself as much as possible
when I'm going up to a competition
to be able to make it so that my body knows how to play.
And I save my brain for things that my body doesn't know.
There's triggers that my body will indicate
that this is a spot where my brain should think about something.
But I have found I only have so much processing power to begin with,
and it is best to think about the things that my body can't do for me.
And in the course of this tournament,
I played some of the best I've ever played.
I also got quite fortunate.
Things broke my way and ended up winning,
but throughout the tournament,
it was a very, very different kind of fun than the preparation.
I typically enjoy the preparation more than the tournaments themselves.
The preparation has all these problems to solve.
There's ideas to try.
Most things fail.
You get excited about the things you're learning and the ways you're growing.
You don't want to be doing the learning and the growing in the tournament.
You want to just be a robot who is executing the task.
And there is a different kind of joy to the flow state
that you get to almost of when it works well.
You're not always in a flow state,
but there's a certain...
That perfect execution.
You do it right.
It's so hard.
It's like you get challenged with a thousand things.
And when you can do those thousand things,
you can do those 998 of the thousand things, right?
And you can just feel that you're in the rhythm
and you're just doing it.
You're getting exactly the right amount of...
You're presented with new problems and you can solve it.
And it's exactly the amount of problems that you're prepared to face.
You're like maximally pushed.
That's pleasurable in a very different way.
I see. I see.
I'm thinking I guess I couldn't have it that way in a game like Rock Band
because that's just a game
whereas something like this where you're competing.
Well, they're all games.
It's just even the ones where you're competing with yourself.
Because it doesn't have to be about taking home $80,000
and smashing the opponents.
It can also be about the realization
I have never been this good at Guitar Hero.
And I wasn't even there.
It was like I was just in the zone and I was doing it
and for 45 seconds I was the Alpha Go of Guitar Hero.
My entire life is going to be chasing those 45 seconds again.
Well, one of the things that you do is you develop new puzzles,
new challenges to go on to.
It's really tough to keep trying to chase the previous things
because the highs that were high before
they don't satisfy the same way in the future.
This might be worth Googling for anyone who plays Dark Souls
where there's all kinds of videos of people beating Champion Gun Deer
with just throwing dung piles and parrying every move
and then doing a 720 spin and doing a gesture.
Or I saw a girl beat Pontiff Sullivan.
These are just bosses in the game.
But beat him blindfolded.
Oh, you told me about that.
She could hear him make the move
and as long as she thought she was locked on,
she could parry and attack.
That blew my fucking mind.
So that's the next step, right?
And I've also seen people play that game with a Guitar Hero guitar.
You can always up the difficulty for yourself
if you're looking for somewhere to go.
The amount of dedication,
the following that Dark Souls has is inspiring.
I've never seen anyone beat Pontiff Sullivan blindfolded
with a Guitar Hero guitar, so there's still room.
I'm curious your thoughts on tool-assisted speedruns.
There's this relatively new phenomenon in gaming
where people are challenging themselves.
Speedruns have existed in everything,
since humans have been doing anything,
is how fast can we do it?
And the way a speedrun effectively works
is you're just doing something ritualistic
very, very quickly, such as beating Super Mario Brothers
or something. How fast can you do it?
There's a relatively new pursuit
of some people, tool-assisted speedruns,
where when you're playing,
they use a device that effectively makes it
so that when you're playing, you can rewind time.
If anything goes wrong, if anything bad happens,
you can rewind time to any moment previous.
So it's like you keep getting to go back
over and over and over and over again
to try to make the perfect run.
And if you actually could reset time infinitely,
like as often as you like,
how fast are you capable of chaining together
all of your perfect executions of every element of the game?
And it takes on a very, very different texture
once you know that you can rewind time
as much as you want.
That's okay now.
One of the really impressive things
about unassisted speedruns is the fact
that someone had to practice this
until it was perfect,
and any tiny minuscule mistake means
they have to go all the way over to the beginning
and start over.
So the amount of time that they put into it
is really impressive.
With the tool-assisted, I was slightly less impressed,
although I could still see some of the artistry behind it,
and some of the stunts you could pull are really impressive.
But things that you would never have been able to figure out
just without the tool-assist,
the various ways you can chain,
leaping off of shells and other things
to do the most crazy shit,
which is literally impossible, not just impossible,
but you could not have had the idea to do it
if it wasn't for the tool-assist.
But the thing that really I enjoy about tool-assist
is now people make special levels,
like hell levels,
specifically for people who use tool-assist,
that just...
fuck the player.
Things come out of nowhere, impossible to see,
and the fact that you have the tool-assist
means you just rewind, and it's almost like
a real-time puzzle that you're trying to solve
as you're going through it.
And that, I think, is pretty impressive.
It's fun.
Using the technology in order to find new ways
to new artistic expressions,
new puzzles, new challenges, new games,
I mean, if you look at, for instance,
some of the biggest games in the world now,
like League of Legends,
and Heroes of the Storm,
these games are
a style of game that is
derivative to some degree of Dota.
And Dota...
They're still known as Dota games, aren't they?
There's Dota 2.
Dota 2 is a game that people are still playing now.
But Dota 2, Heroes of the Storm,
and League of Legends
are all descendants.
Basically, the three people working on Dota
split up into three different...
made three different...
Is that literally what happened?
It was a whole confusing thing
early on of who has the rights to Dota,
because one of the things that was really interesting
about Dota is that no game company made it.
It was just some people with a modification.
Dota was a mod for Warcraft 3.
Right, and so Dota,
as a mod for Warcraft 3,
turned into a game that eventually spawned
three new games
that became bigger than Warcraft.
And it's like, wow, it's funny.
Counter-Strike was a mod to Half-Life.
Oh, wow, I didn't know that.
Yeah, yeah. The original Counter-Strike
was a mod to Half-Life, and that...
I mean, to me, that's very interesting
because it was a whole new game,
which eventually became its own game.
But the thing with Dota that really I found awesome
about it was that it was a mod that created
a new genre of game. A new type
of how to play games on the computer.
And that I don't think I'd seen before
from a mod of an existing game anyway.
Lots and lots and lots of cool stuff.
I think technology is...
It's very promising.
Hopefully AlphaGo lets us keep playing games.
Yeah, so we're at about the...
We're at about the one hour mark.
Do you have any predictions
or thoughts as to what AlphaGo's
existence and presence
means to
humanity as a whole, either game playing
or more generally?
Can I add a sub to that question,
which was a year ago, we talked about
how estimates of AGI went up
after AlphaGo kicked ass against Leastadol
because it beat
predictions. In fact, I was...
I got to reading Different Intelligence pretty late
to the game. I was reading it a few months ago.
And Nick Bostrom was talking
about how it seems like maybe by the end of the decade
we can have a Go winning...
Oh, we can have a Go robot that can beat humans.
And that happened in 2015?
It was not expected to happen until
2020 or later.
He put it tentatively towards the end of the decade.
Yeah, it wasn't even until 2016
that AlphaGo was legitimately
better than any human.
I don't even think his claim was
like the deep blue of Go.
I think it was just like, can be competitive.
Oh, yeah, it wasn't until 2015 that they could
even win against anybody.
That's awesome. So with that in mind, as far as
the trajectory for
AGI arrival and
I guess just... I wanted to just put that
flavor on Enya's question.
Yeah, I think...
I mean, I don't know.
I'm rooting for Google.
I'm hoping for DeepMind.
There's a variety of different
approaches. There are some people who...
You know, I think like Facebook's approach
is a little bit more put everybody in the matrix
and that's how they're going to save us from AGI.
And I think that... That? Really?
Yeah, I think...
Facebook's approach is very much...
Nobody's going to make
an AI that kills us all if everybody's in the matrix.
Damn good.
And maybe the AI will let us...
Where did you get that impression? Has Zuckerberg said something of that effect?
Look at all of the actions and all of the strategies
and all of the different types
of mechanisms that
Facebook uses.
No.
Zuckerberg has not explicitly stated that.
So what is it that Facebook does that makes you think
that that is there?
They move more and more and more of people
they're functioning into a place
into a vehicle that Facebook controls.
Yeah.
That could just be
regular business pursuing business goals.
The more people are forced to use Facebook
the more money they make.
And the more time in app the more
ad exposure. Increase revenue.
Yeah. All those are
real valuable as well.
But there's only so many humans on earth
and the amount of
engagement for the humans...
Okay. Let's put it another way.
When you
use Google
your search history is available to you
and you can
search for anything you want. You just
type whatever it is you want to know about
and it gives you that information.
Facebook's approach
is very different. Facebook's
approach is
wildly
obfuscating. It's not built for
search. You can't just type into the
search bar of Facebook and find
all of the
key work. You can't get
all of the same information searching
all of your... You could search for the names of the people
you know and you can search for certain types of things
but you don't have access to
an encyclopedic reference
of every post every person's made
directly in such a searchable fashion.
Facebook is shitty is the shorthand that I use.
Facebook is
also set up to train you.
It's set up to have
your eyes look at things that are advertisements
and not know they're advertisements. It puts
things in different places
to trick your eyes into taking more of the information
and to get you to click on certain
links and it auto plays things
to try to force you to look at them
and it tries to sculpt your behavior.
Facebook is...
I had a fantastic episode about this recently
but that's all...
To me that's all like
the standard predatory business of
I want all of your
attention all the time for all humans
because that is
what I am motivated to seek
because I can sell your attention.
But what's the endgame?
At a certain point you don't need to sell anything
when you have everything.
I don't think there is an endgame.
It's just the endgame is
give me more of your attention
all the time because that's what
translates into dollars for them right now
and I don't think they have an ending goal
it's just perverse incentives.
So Franco Simoto
is a guy who
made the first magic strategy website
many years ago and hit a bunch of stuff for the internet
he
recently introduced me to this concept of
the difference between infinite games
and finite games.
In a finite game the players
objective is to win the game.
The way they do this is they
take more power
until they win the game.
They just are seizing power
until they win the game and then the game is over.
The way a finite game works
and the way that an infinite game works
is that you
get better at the game
so that you can keep playing.
Like if you for instance
are trying to do some ritualistic
speedrun against yourself
you are
actually trying to get better
so that you get to keep playing
because if you improve your time
by one one hundredth of a second
now you have the next game
and the difference between
games where the purpose is to keep playing
where you have to keep leveling up
versus games where you want
to destroy and end the game
I think that it's not clear
I don't think every human is on the same page
about
wanting the game to keep going
I personally am a big fan
of future paths
involving everybody leveling up as much
as possible so that we can keep playing the game
because I think it would be interesting to know what's going on on Mars
I think it would be interesting to know what's going on on Pluto
I think it would be interesting to go to other galaxies
I think it would be interesting
to travel to other star systems
and build other galaxies
or build things, build civilizations and structures
hell I might
find myself inclined to reverse entropy
and preserve the universe rather than heat death
I don't know, I could see what else there is to do
You'll find no challenge to any of those missions for me
I'm a big fan of living for
well forever
or as close to forever as I can manage
I'm a big fan of all time and those all sound great to me
that seems like a bit of a
digression though
Facebook is still just kind of seeking
human attention because that's what
as a corporation it is designed to seek
based on its business model
it doesn't have an end goal
it just wants more human attention all the time
I don't know
you think it does have an end goal
I'm not totally sure what it is
but yeah, I think that
that's a good point
by it I meant
the incentives and power structures
that seem to
dictate what actions are taken by that corporation
I think
that there are a non-zero number
of actors
that each have their own approach
to how to control the future
ok
and people are getting
more and more and more powerful
it's not just people at the top either
I mean if you think about
like Denver for instance has places
there's all kinds of places for
homeless people to charge their cell phones
their smartphones
on street blocks
it's the notion that there are more people
on earth with cell phones
than people with toilets
that is
wild, that's very weird
that's weird
but powerful too, don't get me wrong
it'd be really nice for people with toilets too
but the power that a cell phone has
for instance
if you can just type into
and this is for smartphones which is still
billions of people but if you can just type
into a, you just type whatever
you want to know and 99%
of the world's knowledge is at your fingertips
like it's like
you can do a lot of things if you just
have the ability to have whatever
if you can think of a question you can get
the answer most of the time
that's crazy powerful
that's crazy powerful
the most fun of that is lost on us
because we're used to it and then we just get
bugged down when we're on
3G instead of 4G and it takes
5 whole seconds to get that answer
instead of 5, you know, half of a second
no but I do agree with you
that that is an awesome power
you kids today you don't know how good you got it
when I was your age
that's what I was saying
maybe I
conveyed that poorly that's exactly what I was saying
to put it another way I feel like
in 100 or 200 years
we're gonna like so we've got this
demarcation now of like BC
and AD I sincerely
think it's extremely likely that
we will look at pre-net and post-net
as a as the next
you know
calendar-shifting paradigm you know the way
that we think about history because the world
has changed so much in the last 30 years
and it'll I think
I think once those changes sink in at more
levels and become even more ubiquitous
that that's gonna be it's like nothing the world's ever seen before
like that's what you're saying too
oh yeah yeah it's wild
yeah yeah but it's also
from another perspective like
Louis C.K. says you know it's like
he gets in an airplane
he's taken off and
and suddenly they say oh yeah
so we've got wireless internet on the airplane
now and he's like what
you have the internet on the airplane
you know and then eventually there's
technical malfunctions
and the next time he flies it's like oh sorry
the internet's not working and
what the hell come on man
say how quickly you're just entitled to
internet on the airplane all the time
you're literally flying through the sky
and watching cat videos on youtube
and you're the second that one of those two things
is taken away from you you're like what is this the Dark Ages
yeah or worse
it's not even taken away from you it just takes
a second to load and it's like
give it a second it's going
to space
so um
did you have any predictions on what
this advance in DeepMind
means for the future well the biggest thing
that we've already seen is that
Google has been
very sharing with
regards to
machine learning technology for people
who want to have
machines learn how to do things do you think
it's a good thing or a bad thing extremely good thing
it seems good from an egalitarian point of view
but on the other hand it
also kind of maybe will speed the apocalypse
well maybe
also kind of maybe might end the world
maybe maybe but
honestly maybe it's important
yeah the question though is
how much is it moving the needle versus how much is it
moving the needle the other way because
I think that the technology is being developed
you know regardless
whether we like it or not and
the more of it that is public
and open source and available
and
the group
the majority
everybody rather than
somebody in a room
is getting the advantage you know
I wonder if this is a lot like publishing
how to make nuclear weapons
right like it would have been really cool
if no one who didn't know how to make a nuclear weapon
could find out how to make a nuclear weapon by just looking it up in a book
that this might be we might look back
this could go great
but we might look back and be like man that sucked
we shouldn't have just given that information to anybody who wanted it
they should have at least had to have had the skill
to get that information themselves
on the other hand based on our episode with
Chase open source software
I really if it gets to the point where there's
a lot of AIs running around in the world
would want all the AIs that I
rely on for anything to be open source
sure absolutely I do not want
a corporation to lock my AI
behind a box and be fully
in control of that and I have no idea what's going on in there
I would like like Facebook
like you were talking about earlier
we'd like it to be open to the community
so they can audit it and
we don't have access to the algorithms that it uses
to show us what campaign ads we were
seeing last year that sort of thing
in fact in an important way Facebook doesn't have
access to see what Facebook is doing because it doesn't know
what it's on machine learning algorithms are showing
or alternatively Mark Zuckerberg is going to run
for president in the next eight years
I'd vote for Mark Zuckerberg I mean I would vote for
literally any American right now
I'm saying it in eight years though
you don't know who will be running in eight years
if Mark Zuckerberg
optimizes whatever
positions in order to be
maximally effective for being able to
I mean it would be interesting to see
it would be interesting to see
I happen to be a much much bigger fan
of the open source approach that Google
has of let's elevate everybody
let's try to work together
let's you know Facebook's
approach is you know you
can't trust humans will keep you safe
everybody get in the box
you know like obviously some people want to keep
the AI in the box
and Facebook wants to keep everybody
else in the box
it's very safe in that box as long as
Facebook is looking out for us
yeah I see what you got as your complaint there
that's not even a good point I don't know
I don't know maybe I'm betting on the wrong team
it's kind of tough at this point because I think already
Facebook and Google know
so the lines are already drawn
I don't think it'll matter too much though
you think there's a third actor it's just going to be Facebook
no there's plenty there's plenty
for instance I don't know how realistic it is
it might also be just kind of transitioning
people easing people into the idea
certain types of transhumanism
but like Elon Musk's
you know like neural net type
of you know like being able to stick a wire
in your brain and get the updates yourself
I think that the version that is being described
right now a little fantastical
but also that's the way most brilliant
new technology works I think that
there's a certain normalizing and easing
people into the idea
of humans and AI
fusing I'm looking forward to it
I just want a car that drives itself
I mean that is step one
yeah but I'm looking
forward to being we were just talking last week about
being able to upload our consciousness and not being
stuck with this body that's eventually going to decay
yeah in a scary dangerous universe
yeah it'd be nice to at the very like
whichever whichever is easier like making the universe
less hostile and punish and so pun so
punitive or making a
a new universe that's that's nicer whichever
we can do first and totally on board with
so I'm just wondering if this is a if we're currently
doing a tool assisted speedrun
of life god I sure hope not
wait what do you mean currently doing a tool assisted
speedrun of life like we are in
a simulation if my life is someone's best
effort no no no no no no no
we're not done yet
no no not even just decided in general like us like
maybe you're going through life
maybe you've already gone like through life some
number of times already maybe rather
than at the point where you know you've
fucked up you go backwards maybe
instead what you do is you don't know for sure
because life is very complicated and confusing
and it's not always clear what
are the cause and effect because you watch
a tool assisted speedrun it involves strategies
that are very bizarre and weird they look
they look crazy they look
crazy to the eye but
in retrospect when you see the beauty of the design
and you look back and you're like oh my god
how was everything
in the exact perfect place for me to learn
all the right lessons grow
all the right ways everything worked out
all this crazy stuff happened
that's really
weird it's almost as
if I kept going back in time to the spot
in order to perfect get
the exact perfect path
I feel like if I could get myself
to somehow understand exactly what
that would be like or to believe that I didn't know
it was like to be like really religious
no I mean that like because that's all like god
made this whole plan for you right right
and this current run right now is going to be your best effort
no sure but
it would mean that you are the only
real person in the universe because
no no no no why
because you are the one who has control over when everyone
gets around
what does it mean to have control
what if everything is in perfect harmony
like a tool assisted speedrun
but in tool assisted speedruns the levels don't get harder
the better you get they just they're
designed already to really do them
in the tool assisted speedrun you have
that you are tracking like Mario for example
the universe is all about Mario
so what is your
object of evaluation
if it's not one individual person is it
like all of society together
being speedrun
no no no okay let's say for instance
that and I don't know this is
keep in mind we're all talking about some impossible things
that are highly unlikely but like
what's to say that we couldn't
already have
like why can't there be a very
large number of people that are
each executing
a run or like for instance if the universe
of the multiverse is just very very very large
there's many many many many many variations
what's to say there isn't
everybody's perfect
run or a perfect harmonization
between each person's run
again if they were separate then I would
feel like the person who was the object
of that run would be the only real object
but what does it mean to be real
exactly
this is the kind of thing I
often do not like talking about
because then I'm like well no one else around me
is real and that's the problem for me
I think there's a difference between other people
not being real versus us all be connected
like to me
like to me I don't know what's
true or not I'm the last person to know
but I operate as though it's true
that you guys are different people
than me but that we are connected that we are all
one and that the universe is
to some degree there's some larger connection
between all of us and
so is there like the
the relationship between that
that matches all the different speed runs together
into one harmonized run
I don't know anything about the speed run thing
that was nearly positing that I wonder
it occurred to me just now how much
it sure is convenient
the way certain things work out
I always just sort of assumed that
that it was a combination of selection effect
you know just me being a human looking
for pattern versus
some amount of maybe there is a pattern
design right and it's it's confusing
maybe that's where a certain amount of the
personal choice comes in of how much
to you do you think there is a pattern
versus are you just looking for a pattern
in the chaos because that's what humans do maybe
but there's another option
which is maybe it starts out
extremely chaotic like a machine
learning like the plays that AlphaGo would make
before it's very good and maybe it just learns
over time it plays over and over
and over again simulating
games like a speed run
on that note I think right of time
okay
thank you guys for having me
no this was awesome it was a lot of fun
thanks for coming thank you for joining us
and we'll see you all again in two weeks
bye bye
bye
