These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by The Teaching
Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines. The lectures in each course
are either 30 or 45 minutes long. By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish
even the longest course in just weeks. Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much
you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college
classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Peoples and Cultures of the World, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Edward F. Fisher. Dr. Fisher is an associate professor of anthropology
and director of the Center for Latin American and Iberian Studies at Vanderbilt University.
He received his bachelor's degree from the University of Alabama at Birmingham and would
on to earn his master's degree and his doctorate in anthropology from Tulane University.
Professor Fisher has an impressive list of scholarly articles and reviews and has written
or edited six books including Cultural Logics and Global Economies, Maya Identity in Thought
and Practice, which was named Outstanding Academic Title for 2002 by Choice Magazine.
He is the recipient of two teaching awards, the Jeffrey Nordhaus Award for Excellence
in Teaching and the Ellen Gregg Ingles Award for Excellence in Classroom Teaching.
Professor Fisher prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures. The course
guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, biographical notes, and
a bibliography. To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along
with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1, The Study of Humanity.
On Monday, Thursday, the Thursday before Easter in 1994, I was living in Tekpon,
Guatemala with my wife, Marika, who was pregnant with our first child. I was doing my doctoral
dissertation fieldwork in cultural anthropology, which brought us to this predominantly Cachiquel
Maya town in the highlands of Guatemala. So on this day, we had woken up early, as usual,
one wakes up with the roosters in Tekpon, and fixed breakfast in our propane stove in
the little two-room former schoolhouse where we lived. As we were washing dishes at the
garden spigot that morning, one of our neighbors came by to give us a plate of sweet rolls.
We invited her in and served her coffee and served her some of the rolls, as is the custom
in Tekpon, but we were somewhat surprised by this gift out of the blue. And then, not
soon afterwards, the daughter of some other friends in town stopped by with another plate
of the same sort of rolls. So we invited her in and began to quiz her on why the sudden
gift of these sweet rolls. And she explained that everybody gave them to their neighbors
and friends on Monday, Thursday, on that day. She just wasn't sure why. It's just what
everyone did. So after she left, we rushed to the bakery around the corner and bought
the last few rolls and cookies that they had left. Back at home, we scrambled to divide
up our paltry offerings between all of the many people who had opened their homes and
their lives to us over the last months, trying to work out the intricate political calculus
that has to go in to such gifts and a steady stream of friends dropped by the house delivering
their pandulces, trying to make too many, too few rolls fit on too many plates. I got
aggravated, aggravated first that I, the cultural anthropologist in town had not known
about this obviously important ritual. And then aggravated that my day's plans would
be totally ruined as we would have to go around and deliver our embarrassingly small
offerings to our friends. And then aggravated a bit by the senselessness of it all. We would
be giving out gifts of about equivalent value to people who had earlier that day given us
such gifts. And we ended up recycling lots of the rolls. And I suspect everybody else
in town was doing the same thing that day. As we made our rounds, however, my aggravation
gave way to delight, delight at getting to visit with our friends over coffee, delight
at being able to symbolically reaffirm the bonds of friendship that were so important
to us. So as I wrote up my field notes that night,
I became embarrassed by my earlier aggravation. It wasn't very culturally sensitive of an
anthropologist to be aggravated by such cultural customs. And as I wrote of the important role
of such exchanges in maintaining community and culture in Tecpán, the way in which seemingly
quirky or meaningless customs make sense, not only make sense, but appear indispensable
when they're understood in their full cultural context. I marveled at how the exceedingly
intricate and elusive social fabric of Tecpán was publicly revealed and fortified that day
in the exchange of sweet rolls. So in this course, we will be looking at cultures around
the world and attempting to explain why they do the things that often seem to us to be
odd or exotic or even sometimes repulsive. Our goal is going to be twofold. First, to
expose you to other cultures and other ways of doing things, to give you an overview of
the extent of human diversity and cultural diversity in the world. This may range from
the quirky, why do we have traffic lights in the United States that go green, yellow,
red? Why don't we have traffic lights that go red, yellow and green? Why do we call our
mother's, sister's, son, cousin? It's just the way it is. But in many societies around
the world, mother's, sister's children would be called by a different kinship name than
father's sister's children, for example, both of which we call cousins. So it's going
to range from quirky elements such as this to more profound elements. What does it mean
to be a man or what does it mean to be a woman? What's the meaning of death? Is rationality
a human universal? And what do we as humans share and what makes us different? What can
this tell us about ourselves as human beings and about human nature? Anthropology, like
philosophy, touches on these fundamental questions of being. But anthropology does so in a very
grounded way, relying not on hypothetical situations or on musings, but rather on the
data of field work, our observations about what people actually do, what people think,
how they act in the world. So in addressing these larger issues, the second aim of this
class is to turn the anthropological lens on our own culture, our own ways of doing
things, making anthropology, in the words of the anthropologist Alfred Krober, a mirror
for humanity. By studying other cultures and other customs, other belief systems, I hope
to make you question some of your own assumptions about what is natural, what's human nature,
what just is. And it's my belief that in doing so, we can provoke new and creative perspectives
on our own lives. I think that the study of other cultures is inherently interesting.
I mean, of course, I'm partisan. I'm a cultural anthropologist. But I think it has something
valuable to offer all of us as members of our own societies. It's a privilege for me
to be able to share with you my passion for anthropology, and I trust that you will find
it worthwhile as well. Now, when you hear the word anthropology, what probably comes
to mind is an Indiana Jones-like figure dressed in khakis and a pith helmet, chopping his
way through the jungle in search of hidden treasures and temples. Or perhaps you think
of scientists studying human evolution, piecing together early hominid skeletons such as Lucy
or digging them up in East Africa. Or maybe you think of anthropologists as going to study
far away locations to study exotic peoples. And in fact, we do all of these things. I'm
a cultural anthropologist. I study living peoples, living cultures. Although I work
alongside archaeologists, biological anthropologists, and linguists. Cultural anthropology, as the
name implies, is the study of modern cultures. Through cultural anthropology, we attempt
to explain variation and document alternative ways of life. Now, the word culture comes
to us from the Latin root, the same root as cultivate and agriculture. And the sense
of cultivate gives rise to its usage as a synonym for high culture. We often think of
culture as being the opera, ballet, art, the sorts of things that cultivated people can
appreciate. But culture also has this more democratic modern usage, recognizing that
everyone has culture and that we all have different sorts of culture. Multiculturalism
has become a catchphrase of the day. So I'm going to save a more detailed discussion
of the culture concept for a later lecture. But since we're going to be using the term
so frequently, it deserves defining now. We can define culture as the learned behaviors,
the ways of looking at the world, worldviews that are shared by a variably defined group
of people, a culture group. Culture encompasses symbols and beliefs as well as behavior and
things. Now it's important to remember that the distribution of any one trait within a
group is variable. Cultures are not internally homogeneous. Think of our own culture. Think
of how diverse U.S. society is. And yet there are discernible overall patterns. Now we
can speak of various levels of culture, national culture, regional culture, various sorts of
subcultures based around music or sports or sexual identity or other interests. I'm a
member of an academic culture. I'm a member of my campus culture. I'm a member of my
neighborhood culture, of southern culture, of U.S. culture. We each belong to a multitude
of different kinds of identity groups and ever more so in this age of globalization.
And in this sense, we all juggle multiple identities that we can call on and identities
that we improvise on in particular context. And this is really the art of living socially.
So it's too easy to think of culture as simply being this strict category. There's always
a lot of internal diversity within cultures. We allow this for our own culture and as we're
going to see in this class, we have to allow it for other cultures as well. Not all Maya
people are alike. Not all Germans are alike. Not all Kayapo people are alike. And we're
going to focus on some of this diversity in the class. It also bears emphasizing at this
point that culture is something that we improvise on. It's models that we hold in our mind, but
we're not cultural automatons. We improvise on the cultural schemes that we get through
socialization. So there are a few cultural universals. There are very few cultural universals
in the world. Every culture recognizes different genders. That's a cultural universal. Every
culture has language. Every culture, interestingly enough, plays games. But these cultural universals
are so broad as to tell us very little about what makes us human. Every culture has a moral
code, for example. But what that moral code is varies significantly from society to society.
The one great rule of culture is that it's always changing. Indeed, someone argued that
it's misleading to speak of culture as a thing, to use it as a noun. In many ways, it's better
conceived of as an ongoing process, something, as I've said before, that we're constantly
improvising. The anthropologist Arjun Apatari argues that the term should only be used in
its agitival form. Cultural elements, cultural beliefs, cultural practices, and doing so
avoids any implication of stasis or boundedness. Culture is not a thing. It's a process. It's
a dynamic process that is changing all the time. So to back up a bit, what is anthropology?
We've defined culture, but what is anthropology if we're going to be studying cultural anthropology?
Anthropology comes from Greek roots, and it's basically defined as the study of humanity.
Now, Anthropos is the Greek root for man, really mankind or humanity. There was another
Greek root for the gender male honor, but Anthropos is man, humanity.
Allogy implies science, the study of, coming from the Greek word logos for word. Thus, we
can define anthropology as the science of man, or rather the science of humanity.
But interestingly enough, logos can also be translated not as just the study of or the
science of, but also as discourse. And in fact, logos, with implication of logic and
scientific rigor, was not distinguished from mythos until the work of Pythagoras and the
other scholars in the 6th century BC. Before that, the discourse of logos referred to myth
as well as science, and even to gossip as well. And this leads us to an alternate meaning
for definition of anthropologist, the bearer of tales, or the bearer of scandals, the bearer
of gossip, which is what we as cultural anthropologists really do. We bring back stories from the
field, stories of other people's lives, stories and legends that they tell, and we bring back
and we represent, and I use represent here in a dual meaning, we represent these elements
to our audience here in the States, and we use them as representative of larger social truths.
So we bring stories back and we represent these stories to our audiences here, and hopefully
use them to illustrate larger truths about social processes and about the human condition.
Clifford Geertz, an anthropologist who works at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton,
in a very influential 1973 book titled The Interpretation of Cultures, gives us a very
useful definition of culture. And he says, quote, believing with Max Weber, a famous German sociologist,
believing with Max Weber that man is an animal suspended in webs of significance, he himself
has spun, I take culture to be those webs, and the analysis of it, therefore, not to be an experimental
science in search of law, but an interpretive one in search of meanings. So these alternate
definitions, is anthropology science, is it the science of humanity, or is it an interpretive
endeavor, the bearer of scales, of tails, is it a discourse based discipline. These alternate
definitions reflect a growing division within anthropology between scientists and humanists.
Some anthropology departments have even split up, most famously Stanford has two separate
departments, a department of anthropological sciences and a department of cultural anthropology.
Now despite this divide, what we as anthropologists really do best is straddle these divisions.
We anthropologists argue that no one perspective has a monopoly on the truth, and thus we should avail
ourselves of all the analytic resources available, be they science or not, or discourse or humanities.
In practice anthropologists are generally a little bit of both, a little bit scientist, a little bit humanist.
We certainly gather data, we're much concerned with the reliability of the data that we collect, we develop
hypotheses and theories, we test these based on field work and data collection, and yet at the same
time we mold these data into stories, representing our findings in a way that's meaningful to our
contemporary audience. The German sociologist Max Weber made a useful distinction between
Verstehen, understanding, more subjective comprehension, Verstehen, and Echlerung, clarification,
explanation, the nuts and bolts about how something works. And so based on this distinction what
anthropologists try and do really is to capture both Verstehen, the subjective sense of the
experience, and Echlerung, the scientific explanation for why things are the way they are.
Now anthropology, in contrast to the otherologies, biology, sociology, ecology, psychology, anthropology
looks at not one aspect of the human condition, but at the interconnectedness of all aspects of
humaneness. Economists study the economic life of humans, psychologists study the psychology, sociologists
the social aspect, and these are all very important disciplines and they have a lot to teach us.
Indeed we as anthropologists frequently poach the insights of biology, of economics, and psychology
as we will see in the course of this series of lectures. But anthropology is a very ecumenical
discipline and this is really what attracted me to it in the first place. Anthropology sees that
what gets lost in such particular perspectives, such disciplinary perspectives, is the interconnectedness
of it all, of life, of the human condition. One aspect of human behavior is influenced by and influences
other spheres. We know this instinctively in a way, politics is tied to religion, economics is tied to
psychology, biology is tied to social organization, and this is all tied together with the glue of culture.
Again this is something that we intuitively recognize I think. One's religion affects the way in which one
votes for example. Politics affects religion, religion affects politics. I was reading not long ago
actually that church attendance is a better indicator of party affiliation in the United States than
income is. But anyway this is something that we as academics can easily forget the interrelatedness of it all
as we work away in our increasingly narrow perspectives and specialization. Thus a basic tenet of anthropology
is its holistic approach, looking at the whole of the human condition and not just one aspect. In some ways
this is akin to gestalt psychology, gestalt analysis. The school of psychology that interprets phenomena as
organized holes rather than as aggregates of distinct parts, maintaining that the whole is greater than the
sum of its parts. Most phenomena, material and social, are simply too complex to be fully understood
by looking at just one variable, from being approached from just one angle. There's an effect we call in
anthropology the Rashomon effect and this comes from his name for the classic 1950 Japanese film that looks at a
rape outside the city gates of a Japanese city from four different and four contradictory points of view.
From the point of view of the victim, from the point of view of a policeman, from the point of view of an
observer, from the point of view of the perpetrator, the same objective event but it gets interpreted in very
different ways. And so in anthropology we say nobody has a hold on the truth. It's good for outside observers,
anthropologists to come in and have one perspective, also to record the perspective of cultural insiders and by
combining multiple perspectives by looking at the same phenomenon from different angles we get a much richer,
much more complex, a much deeper understanding of the phenomena we are trying to describe.
Now using the broadest definition, anthropology is the study of humanity, the study of people. And under this definition
we're all practicing anthropologists, not just those of us who have PhDs in the field. We're all practicing anthropologists.
We all constantly analyze the world around us. We try and divine the motivations of others and act accordingly.
It's our very nature to try and understand the social world around us and thus to be anthropologists.
When friends ask how much I work, I tell them I'm working all the time. I'm working right now studying you, studying
human behavior, human interaction. Now sometimes studying anthropology can be a burden.
It can make one hyper aware of social situations, too aware for one's own good if that is indeed possible.
We're going to give a lecture later on in the series about gift giving. And I often have students come up to me and say,
you know, that lecture you give on gift giving, it's made me think about giving gifts way too much ever since then.
And it can really paralyze people in some ways to know too much about why we do what we do.
Now interdisciplinarity is very much in vogue in the academy these days.
Partly as a reaction to the hyper specialization of academic fields.
Anthropology was interdisciplinary long before it was cool.
This is the very basis of the discipline to look at human behavior and the interconnections of different aspects of human behavior.
And why should we be constrained by disciplinary boundaries which are themselves just historical artifacts of a time when knowledge seemed much more containable?
American anthropology is generally divided into four sub fields.
And these are biological anthropology, which looks at human evolution and modern biological variation.
Archaeology, the study of ancient civilizations and peoples attempting to reconstruct past cultures based on material remains.
Linguistics, the study of language and the many ways that humans communicate both verbally and non verbally.
And finally cultural anthropology, which is often called social anthropology in England, in England and at Harvard.
Which is the study of modern human traditions, customs and worldviews.
The structure of this course follows an expanding concentric circle to examine human culture.
In the first part of the course we're going to begin by looking at what makes us human.
The role of culture in biology and human behavior, the influence of language on thought and thus culture.
We see for example how men's speech differs from women's speech in modern U.S. society.
We look at the cultural misunderstandings that can ensue from dialectical differences.
And we look at how certain cultural metaphors such as time as money can mold our views of the world.
In the second part of the class we move out from the individual's relationship with culture to look at the basic social forms that hold communities and societies together.
We're going to look at the role of rites of passage as marking stages in people's lives.
We're going to look at how kinship ties and religion can bind people together.
We'll learn about the Trebriand Islanders of Melanesia, a matrilineal society where descent is traced through female lines and yet where formal positions of power are held by men.
We're going to study the full bay of northern Cameroon and their unique blending of Islam and indigenous traditions of magic and sorcery.
Now in the third section of the class we're going to turn to cultural patterns of societies at different levels of complexity.
And we're going to follow a typology of bands, tribes, chiefdoms and states.
We're going to examine, for example, the dobi-juwansi of Botswana and Namibia, nomadic gatherers and hunters who have no chiefs or permanent political leaders and who have very little conception of private property.
We're going to see how family ties and reciprocal bonds hold society together in such circumstances.
We then contrast this with a political structure of groups such as the Yanamamu who find themselves in frequent conflict and at war with neighboring groups.
The Yanamamu exemplify some of the more exotic customs that we're going to examine in this class, but keep in mind exotic from our perspective.
Exotic is always relative. Customs are very rarely exotic, if ever, for the people who are practicing them.
But the Yanamamu, they practice cannibalism. They have shamans who ingest hallucinogenic snuff to contact the spirit world.
Their headmen often have several wives.
Now modern native cultures cannot be seen as isolated entities.
Since the glory days of Western expansion, they've come into increasing contact with the outside world.
So we're going to look at some of the deadly misunderstandings that accompanied early European contact and try and explain the death of Captain Cook at the hand of Hawaiians in 1779.
We're going to turn to the expansion of capitalist economies and look at rational choice models of traditional economics and how these don't hold up in many ways under cross-cultural comparison.
We're going to review the attempts of economists and anthropologists to come to terms with cultural differences.
And we're going to look at contemporary U.S. culture and the bases of our own economic system and the symbols and identities that have become highly marketable commodities in this age of late capitalism.
We're going to conclude the course by looking at how globalization has affected native peoples around the world in surprising ways, including the erosion of traditional life ways and the simultaneous resurgence of ethnic groups.
Here we're going to focus particularly on the Maya of Guatemala and Mexico, where I've conducted most of my own long-term ethnographic fieldwork.
My early work focused on the Mayan cultural activists in Guatemala and their fight for civil rights.
My more recent work looks at how Mayan peoples fit into the global modern economy.
You might be surprised, for example, to learn that a fair percentage of the broccoli in this country is grown by small-holding Mayan farmers in the Guatemalan highlands.
And as we're going to see in a later lecture, our vegetable consumption in the U.S. has hidden impacts on native peoples such as the Maya in faraway locations.
There is a pronounced romantic tradition in anthropology.
I think it's the allure of the foreign and the exotic that pulls us toward the discipline in the first place.
But in the process of doing fieldwork, we anthropologists move beyond such shallow romanticization to give a more intimate, a richer, a more complex understanding of the people that we study.
In studying such societies, you will be asked to suspend your natural ethnocentrism.
Ethnocentrism is the belief that your culture's way of doing things is the only or the best way of doing things.
Now, this can be difficult. We're going to discuss customs that you may find odd or even repulsive, cannibalism, ritualized homosexuality, domestic violence.
But before we can pronounce moral judgment, we must fully understand the context in which these customs operate.
Often, what appears to us to be exotic or even bizarre is seen to make perfect sense within the cultural context in which we find it.
And here we can distinguish between emic and edic views of the world.
An emic perspective is a cultural insider's view of how things are.
An edic perspective is an outsider's view.
And what we do in anthropology is combine an outsider's perspective and edic perspective on culture with insider's view and emic perspective on culture.
And in combining those, the idea is that we can get at a richer understanding of human behavior.
Now, at the beginning of this lecture, I mentioned that my wife was pregnant with our son while we were living in Tekpan in 1994.
We went back to Germany, where my wife is from, for the birth.
But during the pregnancy in Tekpan, we employed the services of Angelina, a woman widely considered to be the best midwife in Tekpan.
Angelina's mother was a midwife, as was her mother's mother.
She suspects the tradition goes back even farther, although she can't say for sure.
Angelina is a trained nurse, as well as a traditionalist midwife.
And she's able to perform ritual sweat bath therapies, which involve herbal massages and prayers to Mayan and Catholic gods and offerings,
as well as refer us to the regional hospital for ultrasounds, if she thinks we need it.
We became very close to Angelina and her family during her stay, and I've always respected the way that she's able to manage their diverse and sometimes contradictory cultural identities.
Angelina herself was pregnant at the time, and she delivered her girl a few months after my son was born.
A Stephanie, her young girl, is a precocious, somewhat spoiled child, the youngest of four sisters.
Now, in addition to midwifery, Angelina sells hand-woven blouses and skirts,
the colorful dress that you probably associate with Mayan peoples, and she often dresses her daughter a Stephanie exceptionally well.
I was surprised to find out during a recent visit to Tekpan a few years ago,
that a Stephanie was very much infatuated with Pikachu and Pokemon and all of these other Japanese animated characters.
I found it ironic that this young, kachikel-speaking, traditional dress-wearing girl was taken with the not quite latest thing in global pop culture.
In fact, I used a photo of a Stephanie holding a Pikachu balloon while decked out in her finest traditional dress on the cover of a recent book.
But I've come to realize, in looking at this photo over and over again, that the irony that I see in the Stephanie's fascination with Pikachu is my irony.
And it's not Stephanie's and it's not her parents. A Stephanie and her parents see nothing ironic about being Maya and being modern at the same time.
They're just trying to live their lives as best as they can, given their circumstances.
And, as we'll see in the lectures to come, native peoples around the world find themselves in similar circumstances.
In this course, we're going to go beyond these ironies to discover the more profound lessons we have to learn from the Maya, from the Trobriand Islanders,
from the Fulbe, from the Dobiju Onsi, and from other indigenous peoples.
