Lecture 2 The Four Fields of Anthropology
Anthropology has the grand goal of studying all of humanity.
Anything related to the human condition is fair game for anthropologists to study.
And this is an incredibly liberating scope and an incredibly intimidating mandate.
Now, of course, human behavior is too complex to study using a unified overarching paradigm,
such as we find in physics or chemistry or biology.
And as a result, anthropology is a very diverse field.
We break down the discipline into four main subfields,
and those are biological anthropology, archaeology, linguistics, and cultural anthropology.
Each of these subfields has its own set of sub-subfields and is increasingly specialized.
Yet the benefit of working under the umbrella of anthropology is that we have the intellectual freedom to cross over these boundaries.
Now, in the lecture today, we'll review these four subfields, focusing on how they link together to help us understand and define modern human cultures.
What makes us human?
If humanity is our subject, then what is it that defines it?
To answer this foundational question, we have to turn to biological anthropology.
Actually, when I was in school, this was called physical anthropology,
and today so many anthropologists are using genetic research that we've redefined it as biological anthropology.
And biological anthropology is concerned with the evolution of the human species,
with the behavior of non-human primates, and with biological variation between human populations.
Let me say a couple of words about evolution.
It's a common misconception, first of all, that Darwin invented evolution.
Evolution was an idea very much in the air in the time in the mid-19th century,
linked with notions of the inevitable ability of progress.
This was, after all, the age of industrialization and dramatic social, political, and technological changes were occurring in the world.
And in fact, as we all know, Darwin only published his results when it looked like Alfred Wallace was going to trump his findings.
And so it was in 1859 that Darwin published on the origin of species by means of natural selection
or the preservation of favored races in the struggle for existence.
Now, Darwin didn't invent evolution, but he gave us the mechanism for how evolution works, and that is natural selection.
Darwin's notion of natural selection or the struggle for existence states that under natural competition,
favorable traits will allow certain individuals to be more successful, and this means to have more offspring,
and thus pass these favorable traits on in greater frequencies to the next generation.
Over time, and this can be hundreds of years or thousands of years, maybe even tens of thousands of years,
if these traits offer enough reproductive benefits, they may become the norm for a population.
As a sideline, I would mention here that Stephen J. Gould has made his career critiquing Darwin's gradual evolution,
and Gould says that actually what we find is punctuated equilibrium, periods of rapid evolutionary change,
followed by periods of stability, and then punctuated once again with rapid evolutionary change,
and this seems to suit the facts of human evolution better than Darwin's theory in some ways.
But Darwin's theory of natural selection gives us the classic definition for evolution.
Descent with modification enacted through natural selection.
Now, Darwin didn't know what caused the variation.
We now know that it's caused by genetic mutations and recombination, but he gave us the mechanism through which it works.
The evolutionary history of humans is relatively brief in the big scheme of things.
The Earth is over 5 billion years old, and modern humans only came along about 200,000 years ago.
The hominid line, and this is human-like apes, of which humans are the only extant species,
the hominid line probably broke off about 5 million years ago,
and the earliest best examples we have are of the Australopithecines, such as Lucy, famous Lucy,
which was found in 1974 by Donald Johansson in Ethiopia.
Lucy and the Australopithecines evolved into Homo habilis, the first humans to use tools,
or the first hominids to use tools about 2.5 million years ago, which evolved into Homo erectus about 1.7 million years ago,
and finally Homo sapiens around 200,000 years ago, a drop in the bucket in the big evolutionary scheme of things.
Now what sets us apart as biologically as human beings are the combination of three key traits,
opposable thumbs, bipedalism that we walk on two legs, and having these huge big brains.
Now, alone, these don't distinguish us from our closest living primate relatives.
All primates, for example, have opposable thumbs.
I was at the zoo recently and I looked at the gorillas, and the gorillas have these incredibly opposed toes as well,
big toes, so that they can use their feet as they would their hands.
So opposable thumbs, the benefit of them is that it allows for more precise tool use,
and tool use has been seen as being distinctly human trait.
Although some recent studies of chimp populations show that chimps can sometimes use tools as well.
For example, they've been observed in the wild going out and they'll break off a branch of a tree,
take off all of the leaves, and then carry that branch around for a period of time.
And then when they run across a termite mound or an ant hill, they'll stick the branch down in there
and let the termites or ants crawl up the branch and then pull it out and eat it like a lollipop or a popsicle.
chimpanzees also will sometimes pick leaves and chew them and make them into a little bundle
and then soak up water in the crevices of trees and then squeeze it into their mouths.
Now granted, these aren't the most sophisticated tools in the world,
but crucially they indicate foresight, breaking off a branch of a tree and carrying it around for a while
and then sticking it in a termite mound.
So they're tools, it's tool use, taking an item from nature, modifying it for a different purpose,
and then using it later.
So opposable thumbs, even opposable thumbs that use tools, don't distinguish us from chimpanzees.
But combined with bipedalism, walking on two legs, this really sets hominids and the hominid branch apart
from the rest of our primate relatives.
It's still something of a mystery why there was a switch to bipedalism,
because it seems that there are all sorts of drawbacks to walking on two legs.
We have severe lower back problems, we have knee problems, we have ankle problems,
but it did free up our hands for tool use and for transportation.
But the tool use and the bipedalism really come together when brains start getting larger.
And this was late, this was very late in human evolution, long after bipedalism appeared.
Lucy and the other Australopithecines, they were bipedal, they had opposable thumbs,
they probably used tools, but they had brains the size of chimpanzees.
And it's not until we get into Homo sapiens that we get these ungainly large brains.
But it was the increase in brain size that allowed us to develop language and thus to develop culture.
But it brought problems as well.
Big brain babies are hard to give birth to.
And in fact, the human female's pelvic size and shape are a compromise between having
as large of a birth canal opening as possible and still being able to walk upright.
And as large as human babies' brains are at birth, they don't stop there.
Humans have the sustained period of postnatal brain growth and development.
This is why nutrition and intellectual stimulation are so crucial in the first years of life.
Now, biologists distinguish between different types of reproductive strategies.
And there's a continuum that ranges from R that stands for the rate of reproduction to K.
And K stands for carrying capacity.
K, carrying capacity, good figure.
But it's a continuum.
R-selected species have lots of offspring, and they don't invest a lot of time in them,
but they offset the high mortality rate for their offspring by high absolute numbers.
And here we can think of all the insects, mice, rats, roaches,
even cats and dogs are more R-selected, have more offspring than humans do.
K-selected species, on the other hand, have fewer offspring and invest very heavily
in the offspring that they do have, making sure that they survive to reach reproductive age themselves.
And having helpless infants with these big brains may well have led to human...
And humans are the most K-selected species of all.
And having helpless infants with these big brains may have well led to pair bonding between parents
to care for their children, and thus the early foundations of society as a whole.
Now, big brains allow us the capacity for language and thus the capacity for culture.
And big brains in language and culture changes everything.
They changes the very rules of the evolutionary game for humans.
We can change our environment rather than be changed by it.
Look at cities like Phoenix or Tucson, these huge cities in the middle of the desert
with manicured lawns and even golf courses outside.
It's a remarkable feat of human engineering that we can live in such environments.
The National Science Foundation maintains a research station in the Arctic Circle.
We can live anywhere as human beings now, but we remain biological beings.
And, given this, our ultimate mandate is to go forth and multiply, to reproduce ourselves.
But here again, culture has been able to short-circuit the pleasure mechanism
that allows us to reproduce ourselves.
With birth control, for example, we can have the gratification without the reproductive consequences.
Let me say a word or two here about race.
Race, we are all homo sapiens. This is the first and most important thing.
We are all homo sapiens. And at the genetic level, racial categorizations are all but meaningless.
There's greater genetic variation within races than between races.
Granted, the variation that does exist produces very visible features.
Skin color, the shape of the face, the shape of the eyes, the shape of the nose, and so forth.
And we often use these physical traits as a shorthand for cultural patterns.
Race is an important social category, but not a very important biological category.
So what do physical anthropologists do?
Biological anthropologists.
They study human evolution and probably the most famous images we have of biological anthropologists
are paleo anthropologists such as Richard Leakey and his family digging up fossils in the deserts of East Africa.
Physical anthropologists also work as primatologists showing how our close relatives might shed light on human evolution.
Researchers such as Jane Goodall working with chimps or Diane Fosse with gorillas conduct almost cultural studies of these primate populations.
And if you've seen any of the films in this genre, you realize just how human gorillas and chimps can be.
Or perhaps just how gorilla and chimp-like humans can be.
But physical anthropologists are also turning their attention to new areas of research.
And foremost among these, the fastest growing field in anthropology is probably forensic anthropology.
Using the techniques developed to study ancient human skeletal remains to solve modern crimes.
And so police departments, the FBI, will call in physical anthropologists to help sex and date skeletons that they've found, for example.
Reconstruct victims' facial and body appearances.
Most famously, the anthropologist Bill Bass, who works at the University of Tennessee, runs what is called the Body Farm.
And this was made famous by a Patricia Cornwell novel of the same name.
And there he and his colleagues, his graduate students and colleagues, placed donated human corpses in different sorts of contexts.
So they'll put them underwater, they'll bury them three feet deep, they'll bury them six feet deep, they'll put them in a tin shed or in the trunk of a car.
And then they document the decomposition of the human bodies, the levels of gases, the amino acid breakdown, the life cycle of maggots that grow when human remains.
And these data can then be used to help police departments determine the time of death, post-mortem circumstances, and so forth.
So let me turn to archaeology.
Now, archaeology, we're all familiar with archaeology.
Archaeology looks at the material remains of past cultures attempting to understand those cultures through their artifacts.
And this is no small task, trying to reconstruct a civilization basically based on their garbage, on their trash.
And this requires a lot of imagination.
Archaeologists are able to document the processes of plant and animal domestication, of urbanization, of the rise and fall of civilizations.
They ask the big picture questions.
What caused the fall of Rome?
Why did Mayan civilization collapse?
Was it warfare?
Was it environmental degradation?
Was it climatic change?
To think that we have nothing to learn from ancient cultures is just hubris.
And just as statesmen and diplomats these days still study the Peloponnesian Wars, it's good for us to learn the lessons of ancient civilizations that flourished and then failed.
Archaeologists employ a number of different methods.
The most basic is dirt archaeology, literally going up and digging up the remains of ancient civilizations.
And in recent years, technological advances have really changed the nature of archaeology.
We can use satellite images to identify new sites.
We use mass spectrometry to allow us to source obsidian and clay and reconstruct ancient trade routes.
Working with biological anthropologists, archaeologists are using isotope isolation analysis to uncover the diets of ancient populations from their skeletal remains.
This is all remarkable stuff.
A whole new world of information opened up by these technological changes.
But as anthropologists are gaining a sharper image of the past, they're also increasingly engaging modern indigenous populations.
My colleague, Arthur Demarest, who works in the Maya area, is a great example of this.
He made his name discovering ancient Mayan cities.
He's been called the real Indiana Jones.
And right now he's working at the ancient Mayan city-state of Cancun.
And as part of the project, he started involving the local communities of Mayan Indians who lived in the area.
And this started simply, first giving soccer uniforms to the local team, donating a mill or helping them build a well.
But this has gradually evolved into a more holistic plan for the development of the area.
And this is an area of extreme poverty.
So the archaeologists are working to help set up health clinics, community pharmacies, even promote ecotourism in the area.
Now, Demarest and these archaeologists got involved because this is just the right thing to do.
People were literally dying of hunger outside of their archaeological camp.
They had to do something.
But it turns out it's good archaeology as well.
It makes these local Mayan populations feel vested in the archaeological site.
They feel like it's theirs in some meaningful way.
So they protect it from looters.
And they see the value in archaeology, especially since it promotes tourism.
And it even rekindles a sense of ethnic pride.
Another interesting thing that archaeologists have been doing lately, and this is also another Mayan archaeologist,
William Rathjay at the University of Arizona.
And he runs what's probably the most unconventional archaeology project in the world.
And it's called the Garbage Project.
And it's been going on since 1973.
Rathjay began in Tucson where he did archaeological methods, laying out a grid,
recording the stratigraphy, digging trenches, all of the things that we associate with archaeologists.
He did this in the garbage dump in Tucson.
And what he found was surprising, especially given the prevailing wisdom of the burgeoning environmental movement at the time.
The bad guys, if you'll remember, in the early mid-70s were fast food packaging and disposable diapers.
And it turned out, based on Rathjay's archaeology, that these don't take up very much space in the dumps.
Fast food packaging only accounted for about half of 1% in weight and 0.3% in volume.
Diapers only 1% in weight and 1.4% in volume.
So what wasn't?
There was something that provided clear stratigraphic layers for Rathjay that could mark every year, year in and year out.
And what it was, was paper products.
Newspapers, but more than that, telephone books.
A clear stratigraphic layer for every year of yellow and white pages.
Now Rathjay has gone on to do similar sorts of work in other cities around the world.
New Orleans, Milwaukee, Mexico City, even Sydney, Australia.
And he's expanded out the scope of his work, not only looking at environmental implications of garbage dumps, but looking at diets.
For example, it turns out that people, when they self-report what they're eating, often idealize their diet.
And if you go back and look at their garbage, you see all the Twinkie wrappers in the vegetarian households garbage and so forth.
So we see what's really going on rather than what people say is going on.
Linguistics.
Linguistics looks at the different forms of communication, variation among human languages, and how thoughts are developed within the mind.
And let me make a clear distinction here.
Most anthropological linguists are descriptive linguists.
And we contrast this with prescriptive linguists.
Descriptive linguists try and describe how people actually speak.
They very often work with undocumented languages.
So they're writing dictionaries and writing grammars.
Prescriptive linguists, and this is probably what you've had the most association with, grammar school teachers, college professors,
William Sapphire's column in the Sunday New York Times.
Prescriptive linguists try and tell us how we should speak.
And there's a big distinction here.
How we do speak and how we should speak.
And it leads to all sorts of political machinations that we probably don't even think about.
Dictionaries, for example, who would think that there's a politics of dictionaries?
These are just objective documents recording the words in a particular language.
But in English dictionaries, there's a wide range of ideological variation.
Websters, for example, is much more willing to accept new words, to include ain't, or include new technological words.
Whereas the American Heritage Dictionary is much more conservative.
The American Heritage Dictionary leaning toward prescription, Websters leaning toward description.
Now the first, the great rule of language is that languages are always changing.
And in this light, language purity movements are fighting a losing battle.
They might slow the pace of change.
Take the example of France, for example, very rigid in trying to promote a pure French.
It can slow the rate of change, but it can never completely stop it.
By the other, on the other hand, languages can also be resuscitated from the edge of extinction.
And here we could count Welch, Hebrew.
Hebrew was dead for almost 2,000 years, a virtually dead language only spoken by scribes and scholars.
And now 3.6 million people speak Hebrew today, the national language of Israel, of course.
We should also keep in mind in making this distinction between prescriptive linguists and descriptive linguists,
the arbitrariness of grammatical rules.
The most famous example probably is, don't end the sentence in a preposition.
This is beat into us in grammar school, in college.
Don't end the sentence in a preposition.
But we can all think of perfectly good sentences that we can end in prepositions.
That's what I was thinking of. That's where he was going to.
In fact, Winston Churchill, one time, he spotted a copy editor's remarks in his memoirs
where a preposition had been eliminated.
And he sent back a missive to this copy editor saying,
this is the sort of English up with which I shall not put.
Now, describing anthropological linguists work at describing the grammar of languages
in a descriptive and not a prescriptive fashion.
Prescription often is just an idiosyncrasy that's been codified, that's taken on the status
that everybody has to speak in a certain proper fashion.
And the prepositions at the end of the sentences is one of the best examples.
So linguists, what do linguists do? They describe languages, but also they work in academics.
And beyond that, they've long found careers with the CIA, with the military, with the State Department,
for example, working as code breakers.
A lot of the code breakers in World War II either were linguists or they went on to become linguists.
And more recently, they've branched out into the commercial sector, working for private companies,
testing slogans, testing new product names, working with advertising agencies, working as business consultants.
The most interesting thing I think that linguists have done in recent years, however,
concerns the Waste Isolation Pilot Project.
And this is a project of the U.S. government, a way to...
They're creating a place, it's near the Nevada-California border,
where we can store our highest grade plutonium waste from nuclear weapons production.
And they want to keep this in a place that's going to be safe for 10,000 years, the half-life of this plutonium.
And they're putting it in salt mines, which are very good at soaking up the radioactivity.
But they also want signage, they want signs that can be read in 10,000 years,
warning people of what's there.
But what language are we going to speak in 10,000 years?
English hasn't been around that long.
I mean, just think back to Chaucerian English.
We can only understand word, every other word, words here and there.
And that was only 650 years ago.
Indo-European, the common language of both Sanskrit and English, is only 4,000 years old.
Writing is only 5,000 years old.
So how do you create signs that are going to be able to communicate in 10,000 years
that there's deadly plutonium at this site?
And the linguists working on this commission have developed a couple of different strategies.
One is to use pictographs, images.
And most famously, they use Edvard Mook's The Scream, that image, that impassion,
that horrifying image of a person screaming on a bridge to communicate this idea.
And they also use a modern-day Rosetta Stone.
So they include warnings in a variety of languages, including the six official UN languages
and indigenous languages, such as Navajo, with the idea that in 10,000 years in the future,
nobody's going to speak English, nobody's going to speak Chinese,
nobody's going to speak Russian or German.
But by having a warning in all of those different languages,
they can work out what the warning is.
They can break that code.
And finally, let me turn to cultural anthropology.
What is culture?
Very broadly, culture is everything that people collectively do, think, make, and say.
It's an integrated body of beliefs, behavior, technology, ideas shared by a group of people.
Now, this is a fine definition, a pretty standard definition.
But let me add a couple of important caveats.
First of all, culture provides a template for behavior.
Much more so than strictly prescribing actions.
We're not mere cultural automatons, rigidly enacting cultural patterns
that have been passed down to us from generations ago.
We're creative. We do new things.
And it's culture that provides the template for this creation, for this improvisation.
So culture is a way of looking at and acting in the world.
And culture significantly overlaps within a given group of individuals, a culture group.
But it's also important to keep in mind that culture is never perfectly distributed within a group.
We don't all hold all of the elements of our own culture.
But there's enough of significant overlap that allows us to communicate
and to create in-group and out-group sorts of allegiances.
It's integrated, culture is integrated, but it's loosely integrated.
And finally, people are generally not aware of their culture.
What goes without saying comes without saying.
Pierre Bourdieu, a sociologist from France, said that culture is silent about itself as a tradition.
It seems normal. Our culture seems normal, natural, the only ways of doing things.
It's what we take for granted.
The study of social anthropology, and this is what is studied in Britain.
It's also what the department at Harvard is named.
Social anthropology implies studying formal, legal, economic, and civil structures.
Sociology, political science, economics, and social anthropology all work at this level.
But culture is more dispositions. It's more ephemeral. It's harder to grasp.
It's the presuppositions that we as members of a particular society hold.
Of course, the two are intimately connected, but I prefer the moniker cultural
because it gets at what we have to offer much, much better.
And like linguists, a number of cultural anthropologists have found employment outside of academia in recent years,
particularly in helping large corporations with business consulting and with marketing.
General Motors, for example, has employed anthropologists to do shop floor studies,
studies of shop floor culture.
The United Nations and the World Bank employ anthropologists to help them make their development projects
more culturally sensitive.
One cultural anthropologist, Clauter Rapaye, who runs a consultancy called Arc Types International,
has helped develop cars, the PT Cruiser for Chrysler,
and has also advised on advertising for a variety of food companies.
And one of the most interesting things he did concerned the advertisements,
television advertisements, of a French importer of French cheeses,
importing French cheeses into the United States.
And they used as a commercial for their Brie cheese, a film, a television ad that had been produced in France,
and they just used a voice overlay in English for the States.
And in the commercial, a woman was picking up unwrapped cheese and squeezing it.
You could see her fingerprints on the top of the cheese.
She was smelling it, and she was just reveling in this cheesiness of it all.
But the television ad wasn't playing in the United States,
and they brought in Clauter Rapaye, this cultural anthropologist,
and he said, of course it doesn't.
The French Arc type of cheese is that it's something alive.
They relish in the fact that it is living cultures in cheese.
In the United States, our cultural Arc type is that cheese is dead.
It's sterile.
We wrap it tightly in cellophane wrap, and we want to have it not be alive.
So some of the interesting things that cultural anthropologists are doing these days.
So to conclude, in order to manage the wholism that anthropology strives for,
we break down the discipline into these four subfields,
biological, archaeological, linguistics, and cultural.
At the same time, the greatest strength of the discipline is in bridging these boundaries.
For our purposes in this course, physical anthropology can tell us
not only about our common evolutionary heritage, but about contemporary cultures as well.
Take the Maya of Guatemala, with whom I work.
It's impossible to understand modern Mayan culture
without understanding the civil war that wreaked havoc in Guatemala
in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
But most of these massacres in Mayan communities were not documented
and the bodies were buried in clandestine graves.
Teams of forensic anthropologists are now recording the atrocities of this unwritten history,
validating the stories told by survivors.
Likewise, archaeology not only reconstructs the ancient past,
but also influences the self-perception of groups
and even motivates them to redefine their modern cultural forms.
Again, I mentioned Arthur Demarest in his work in Cancun in Guatemala with modern Mayan populations.
And, as we'll explore further in later lectures,
linguistics looks not only at abstract language structure,
but how language is used to form groups and even mold cultural categories.
With this background in the four subfields,
we move on in the next lecture to discuss concepts of culture in more detail.
Thank you.
