Lecture 5 Nature, Nurture, and Human Behavior
In this lecture we turn to the eternal question of nature versus nurture.
Now this is a phrasing that comes to us from Prospero's description of Caliban in the Tempest.
It says, a devil, a devil born on whose nature nurture can never stick.
So what part of who we are as individuals is determined by birth?
And how does such innate predispositions affect culture?
Mainstream anthropology comes down firmly on the nurture side of this debate.
Since the times of Boaz we've argued against scientific racism.
We've argued that culture can be determinant in who we grow up to be.
At the same time, we must acknowledge that we're biological beings,
that we live within the bodies that we're given, although perhaps less so in these days of plastic
surgery. And there's certainly a given take between biology and cultural constraints and
possibilities. And it's at this nexus between biology and culture that sociobiologists,
also called evolutionary psychologists, look for common elements, common elements across
cultures and try and look back and see which of these common elements might have a genetic
basis, might have some sort of evolutionary cause. So in this lecture, we're going to look at what
sociobiologists have to tell us about altruism and nepotism, attractiveness, and mating strategies.
So the question is, how much of who we are is determined at birth?
In contemporary terms, this would mean how much of who we are is genetically given.
And these questions really hit at the heart of anthropology.
On the one hand, we as anthropologists argue that all humans are fundamentally alike,
at least biologically. We're all homo sapiens. We're all members of the same species.
And further subspecies differentiation is virtually meaningless at the genetic level.
And yet, in addition to studying the commonalities of humans, this fundamental similarity of humans,
we anthropologists also study the many differences between human populations.
What makes us different? The different marriage patterns, different kinship patterns,
different sorts of religious beliefs, political organization, and so forth.
So this idea of what is natural and what is given to us by culture gets at the heart of
anthropology. For predecessors to this, we can look back, we can look back to Herbert Spencer
and the social Darwinists of the 19th century who argued that who we are is determined at birth.
We could look at John Locke and his idea of the tabula rasa, the children are born a blank slate
on which we, everything that we learn in life is written after we're born.
Who we become as adults is based on what we learn as children.
Now, before we get deeper into a discussion of sociobiology, I want to talk a little bit
about the politics of this discipline or this sub-discipline. Actually, there are sociobiologists
who are anthropologists. There are sociobiologists who are psychologists. There are sociobiologists
who are biologists as well. And a number of them these days prefer the term evolutionary
psychologist to distance themselves from the negative implications that sociobiology has
taken on over the years. Now, I think that there is a resistance to sociobiological explanations
in part because we like to see ourselves as unique as humans. We don't like to see ourselves as
animals. We'd like to see ourselves set apart. And so looking for biological explanations
for our behavior offends our sensibilities in some way. But it's also a fact that looking for
any sort of explanation for human behavior is tainted by histories of racism, the histories of
eugenics, the Nazi ideologies of trying to create a superhuman race, these uber-minch,
by breeding what they thought were particularly good-looking human beings. So looking at the
biological bases of behavior has this taint of eugenics as well. There's also the taint of racism
in looking for biological bases for behavior. Take IQ tests, for example. There are vast
differences in cultural responses to IQ tests. And we found that IQ tests are extremely culturally
dependent. If you were brought up in a Western culture, which values this linear, logical way
of thinking, you probably do quite well on standardized tests such as the IQ test. Now,
people from other cultures around the world who don't share our same linearity of logic
do very poorly on IQ tests. And this doesn't mean that they're stupid. It doesn't mean that they
don't have the same sort of mental capacities that we have. They just see the world in a different
way. And thus, it's a way that's not measured very well by IQ tests. So we can look at correlations
between IQ and race. And a number of books in recent years have done this, The Bell Curve,
most famously. But what does this really tell us? It really tells us more about the different
cultures of the people rather than biological differences between them, rather than differences
in what their minds can think. And it's telling us more, at least in the United States, where most
of these studies have been done, about economic status. It turns out that economic status is a
much better indicator of IQ test results than is race. It just so happens that in the U.S.,
race is highly correlated with economic status. And so it's easy to confuse these variables and
the cause and effect here. So this is just to give you an idea of some of the reasons why
sociobiology has been viewed by some as a suspect discipline, as potentially a racist discipline.
Now, from my own point of view, I think we cannot ignore plausible sociobiological explanations
for human behavior. And if we really, we have to keep an open mind in this.
Sociobiology itself is not racist. People can use sociobiological findings toward racist ends,
but as a methodology itself, it's not racist. So we've mentioned before that Darwin gave us
the mechanism for human evolution, which is natural selection, natural forces acting on individuals
to favor certain variants. But he didn't tell us where this variation was coming from.
Darwin observed variation, but he didn't say where it was coming from.
Now, Gregor Mendel was on to the reasoning behind this, but this 19th-century Moravian
monk who was doing his experiments with different colored and shaped peas, his work went ignored
for about 70 years, and it wasn't rediscovered until the early 1920s in a line of research that
ultimately led to Watson and Crick discovering the double helix structure of DNA in 1953,
and all of the changes that that has brought about. Now, along with our rise and our understanding
of the field of genetics, we've developed a new approach to evolution, which is called the synthetic
approach. And the synthetic approach basically just combines genetics, Mendelian genetics,
with Darwin's theory of natural selection. Explaining variation, what is the source of
variation, which we know today comes from random genetic mutation and from recombination,
and this provides the variation upon which natural selection acts. So it is, in the new synthesis,
biologists have argued that it is the genotype rather than the phenotype, our external physical
appearance, which is important in evolution. And this leads us to an important modern definition
for evolution, changes in gene frequencies within a population over time, changes in gene
frequencies within a population over time. We used to say that evolution was just biological
change within a population over time, but now we can be more specific. We can say that it's changes
in gene frequencies, and this becomes crucially important as we turn to sociobiology. Now the
sociobiological revolution really happened in the mid-1970s, and it started with a famous biologist
named E. O. Wilson, and in 1975 he published a work called Sociobiology, the new synthesis,
and he was obviously playing here very self-consciously on the synthetic approach, and he was offering the
new synthesis. Other people writing around the same time introduced the same ideas into the field,
Richard Dawkins in particular in 1976 published a book called The Selfish Gene, and Sociobiology,
the ideas of Sociobiology have probably been most popularized by Desmond Morris, the British
scholar, who gives us the sexed up version of Sociobiology, if you will. He had published a
book in 1968 called The Naked Ape, and after all of this vocabulary of Sociobiology entered the
field in the mid-1970s, he became one of its most vocal and most prominent proponents. He has a
number of television documentaries that are out, for example. Now going back to E. O. Wilson, E. O.
Wilson, in 1975 he published Sociobiology, the new synthesis, and he was a specialist in social
insects, ants in particular, and he was fascinated by the behavior of ants. Why do we observe all
of this sacrificial behavior on the part of worker ants? Why did they spend all of their time provisioning
the queen when they could be out looking for mates themselves? Why aren't they investing
all of this time and energy in reproducing themselves, improving their own rate of reproduction?
And what explains this altruism, Wilson was asking, that we find among social insects?
And his answer was that the workers share their genes with the queen, and so if they help the queen
reproduce, they're actually helping reproduce their own gene pool. Now this changed the way we
looked at things, not looking at the individual in an individual's reproductive success, but the
influence of the reproductive success of their entire gene pool. Dawkins, Richard Dawkins,
is the one who made this most clear, and he said that individuals are just containers for genes,
and that we're containers for selfish genes. He says we have to stop looking at ourselves as
individuals to understand human nature. What we want is not necessarily just to have a bunch
of children ourselves, but to pass our genes on into the next generation. And so if we help somebody
who shares our genes, then we're actually helping ourselves. We're helping push our genes on into
the next generation. So if we help a brother, or we help a sister, or we help a cousin, any of
our close relatives, we're really helping ourselves. We share our genes in known proportion
with our relatives. You share half of your genes with a parent. You share half of your genes with
a full sibling. You share a quarter of your genes with an aunt or an uncle. You share an eighth of
your genes with a first cousin. And what Dawkins and Wilson were arguing was, and this is the
socio-biological position, that if we look at ourselves and we try and pass our genes on to
the next generation, we're helping our relatives. We will help our relatives, the relatives that
have a proportion of the same genes that we do. Thus, it makes evolutionary sense. Let's take a
hypothetical situation. You could rush into a burning house and you would sacrifice yourself in
order to save other people. A sociobiologist would say that it would be worthwhile. It would make
sense for you to run into the house if you could save three siblings, or if you could say five of
your aunts or uncles, or if you could save nine of your cousins. Because collectively, that group of
people would have more genes, more of your own genes, than you do as an individual.
So, sociobiologists say that there are certain human behaviors that are universal. These are deep
seated propensities that have evolved way back when in what they call the environment of evolutionary
adaptation, the EEA, the environment of evolutionary adaptation. Now, conveniently,
that this environment of evolutionary adaptation is more or less co-equal with the Pleistocene.
And that's about 1.8 million years ago to about 11,000 years ago. Now, human evolution, I mean,
modern humans emerged about 100,000 or 200,000 years ago. So, it really ends there. But for
convenience sake, we can say that the environment of evolutionary adaptation is co-equal with the
Pleistocene. Now, evolutionary biologists, sociobiologists argue that humans evolved
in East Africa way back when, and that we are stuck with these bodies that were adapted to the
East African savanna and the East African grasslands. And the pressures that acted on us then in these
early days of evolution continue to live on in our bodies today. Now, of course, we've developed
these big brains. We have culture. We have language. We have all of these mechanisms that we can
reduce the pressures of natural selection acting on us. But, the sociobiologists point out, we're
still stuck in these bodies that are best adapted to Pleistocene East Africa. And to a degree,
this is certainly true. I mean, we're predisposed to stock up on fatty foods, for example, in proteins
to eat as much sugar as we can get at any given time. This would be very adaptive. Again, living
in the Pleistocene savannas of East Africa, you have to pig out when you can because you don't
know when your next meal is coming from. But in contemporary society, this predisposition
has become a health problem. The newspapers are full of descriptions of the problem of obesity
in modern American culture and the economic repercussions that come from this. So we have
this absurdity, really, that's developed of diet industries, which for most of the world is crazy.
I mean, half of the world's population today lives on less than $2 a day. They think that
paying someone to tell you to eat less and to exercise more is simply absurd. But we do it. We
have to do it because we have these Pleistocene bodies stuck in this incredibly wealthy society,
this affluent society, where we can gorge ourselves, where we can indulge our pleasures
as we see fit. So what is fitness? What is genetic fitness? What is evolutionary fitness?
We can talk about two types of fitness. The first is direct fitness. And this is really the old
view of evolutionary fitness, how many children an individual has, how many of these children
live to be of reproductive age and have children of their own. Indirect fitness is something that
the sociobiologists begin emphasizing. And indirect fitness refers to helping not only yourself,
not only the number of children that an individual has, but how many of what percentage of an
individual's genes get passed on into the next generation. And by looking at indirect fitness,
it leads us to what sociobiologists term kin selection, that we're much more likely to help
out our close relatives than other people because they share our same genes. So the sociobiologists
say that we should think about inclusive fitness in addition to direct fitness. And inclusive fitness
again includes not only yourself and your children, but other close relatives as well.
There's a recent book by Adam Bellow called In Defense of Nepotism. And Adam Bellow was the
son of the great contemporary American literary figure Saul Bellow. And in this book, Adam Bellow
argues that nepotism is really a good thing for American society, that it tempers some of the
excesses of blind meritocracy. He says it's natural for humans to be nepotistic. And here he calls
them sociobiological data that says that kin selection makes a lot of sense. And he argues
that it's a good thing for the economy and for American society today in that it provides some
sort of long range view. Now of course, beyond the obvious irony here of Adam Bellow writing a
defense of nepotism, it also seems ironic. And it odds with American meritocracy, this idea that
you get what you want, you become who you are in American society through your own merits
and your own work. But sociobiology was and is revolutionary because it addresses not only
competition, which Darwinian theory was very good at, but it addresses cooperation as well.
Why do people cooperate with each other? Is there some sort of biological basis for this?
It makes sense to sacrifice yourself for your family if you can, because more of your genes
can get passed down into the next generation. So the sociobiologists argue that what appears to
be true altruism, what appears to be true self-sacrifice is really self-interested behavior,
because we're containers for these selfish genes. Now why might somebody do something
sacrificial or altruistic to non-relatives? Why might a soldier, for example, throw himself on a
hand grenade to save the other members of his platoon to whom he's not related at all?
A sociobiologist would probably argue that we have this deep-seated propensity to help out our
relatives. But culturally, we extend who our relatives are to non-relatives at times. You may
know somebody that as a child that you called an aunt or an uncle, who was really just a close
friend of the family, this sort of fictive kin. And among soldiers and platoons, very often,
they treat each other like brothers. There was that Stephen Ambrose book, A Band of Brothers.
Soldiers working together day in and day out treat themselves like siblings in some way.
And so a sociobiologist would argue that a soldier would be willing to throw himself on a
hand grenade to save the other members of his platoon, because in his mind, he's thinking of
them as if they were brothers of his, as if he were saving his own blood relatives and thus his own genes.
Now, some of the most controversial work in sociobiology has looked at the difference between
men and women, the psychological and biological differences between men and women.
Now, I need to insert here another disclaimer. A number of these studies were done like
psychological studies. Professors will take groups of their students in a classroom and
conduct a study and then extrapolate out from those results to the rest of humanity.
And so sometimes, the results of these studies ring true to college-educated people in the states,
for example, where they don't hold true in other cultures around the world. So we have to keep that
in mind when we're talking about sociobiology. So sociobiologists remind us that humans are an
extremely K-selected species. You'll remember that there's this continuum of reproductive
strategies from K to R. Our reproductive species have lots of offspring and don't invest a lot
in any one of their offspring. K-selected species, like humans, have very few offspring and invest a
lot of time and energy in the offspring that they have. And we as humans, we give birth to these
incredibly helpless infants. We have to invest a lot in our children. I was reading the other day
that if humans were born at the same level of development that gorilla infants are born at,
the gestation period would be 21 months long. Can you imagine a pregnancy 21 months long giving
birth to a one-year-old baby? I mean, it would be physically impossible. But that's the difference
between our development. We're such a K-selected species. Now, sociobiologists approach human
sexual attraction and mating from an economic and evolutionary perspective. They argue that women
have a window of opportunity during which they can become pregnant. And that ranges from Menarch,
their first menstruation, which can be in some societies as late as 17 or 18 years old. In our
own society, the age of first menstruation has been going down from 13 or 14 to these days,
about 12 years old or even younger in some cases. So the window of opportunity for pregnancies ranges
from first menstruation to menopause, which happens sometime in a woman's late 40s. This varies a lot,
but sometime in the late 40s. After a woman gives birth, there's a period of natural infertility.
There's some evidence here to suggest this is related to lactation. Producing mother's milk
releases hormones in the body that act as a natural form of birth control. So giving birth to a child,
you have a nine-month gestation period. You have a period of natural infertility after birth. So it's
a one to two-year commitment on the part of a woman to have a child. And she can only have children
during this window of opportunity from first menstruation to menopause. And even having
children in the late 30s becomes biologically problematic, very risky for women. So you have
this period of 20 to 30 years in which women can have children. And raising those children is
incredibly costly. Not only in our own society where we have to pay for clothes and CDs and video
games and college tuition and so forth, but even in less developed societies, if you will. It's
incredibly costly to have children. So in economic terms, women have access to an incredibly valuable
commodity. A woman's eggs are extremely valuable, her pregnancies are extremely valuable,
and they're risky. A woman can die during childbirth. In contrast, the cost of male
reproductivity approaches zero. You know, I hate to tell you men, but the cost of sperm,
the value of sperm is virtually zero. Men produce an unlimited amount of sperm in their lifetime.
And so their reproductive costs approach zero. So the sociobiologists say we've got competing
intentions going on here between men and women. The women are trying to guard those pregnancies
and make sure that the children are going to be cared for, that they grow up and flourish.
And men can be more careless about how they spread their seed.
The sociobiologists argue that there's a point of diminishing returns here. And for women,
that point is reached very early. If a woman has sex with 10 men, and this results in one
pregnancy, the other nine men, the other nine besides the one who impregnated her, are irrelevant.
They're unimportant. Men, however, don't have this point of diminishing returns. A man can
impregnate a virtually unlimited number of women, assuming that he has access to
receptive females. So men don't have this problem of decreasing returns.
So some sociobiologists, not surprisingly men here, some sociobiologists have argued that men have
a genetic propensity to infidelity, an infidelity gene, if you will. And they point out that humans
are not a naturally monogamous species. But of course, it's not all up to men. Men don't have
the only say in this. Sociobiologists would argue that men should have as much opportunistic sex
as they can, that this makes mathematical sense for their reproductivity. But men have to have
access to women in order to reproduce. And women, thus, have a very important say in
who they will choose to reproduce with. And thus, the women can select for certain types of males.
And sociobiologists argue that females look for men who are going to be good providers,
who have access to resources, money, or the possibility to make money in the future.
They're good with kids, men who are going to be willing to invest in their common offspring,
make sure that the kids are going to grow up and grow up right. And so women want this sort of
dependability, sociobiologists argue, in a man, a commitment, a willingness to invest in children.
So I was taking German classes this summer, and the teacher would throw up these slides on a screen
of groups of men and women. And she would ask us to describe the people who you would, who would
you like to go out and have a cup of coffee with, for example. And we were supposed to use our
adjectives here. Well, I would go out with the tall one or the short one or whatever it may be.
And the class was about halfway divided between men and women. And she would show pictures of
groups of women to the men. And they would say things like, well, I think I would like to go
out and have coffee with the blonde one, or the tall one, or the cute one. I really like blonde
girls, or I really like tall girls, or I really like slender girls or so forth. And she would show
pictures of groups of men to the women students in the class. And the women had problems with this.
They would say, well, I don't really know who I would like to have coffee with. But then when
she pressed them, they would say they would use descriptive, they would use adjectives, but
different sorts of adjectives, personality adjectives. Well, that guy in the tweed suit looks like he
would be nice. The guy in the beard looks like he would be sympathetic. And so that's who I would
like to go and have coffee with. So we have very different criteria at work here. The men looking
at external physical appearance, and the women trying to get at internal personality traits,
people who would be good providers for their offspring. Sociobiologists say that there are
a number of things that we look for when choosing a mate. The number of things that lead us to see
certain people as being attractive. And that these are biologically programmed. So the sociobiologists
argue that men look for youth that's going to indicate a longer period of potential fertility.
They look for youth infertility and that women look for stability, access to resources. And this
is often correlated with age, with being older. And so the stereotype is that men look for younger
women and that women look for older men. Now sociobiologists say that we find a number of physical
features naturally inherently attractive, naturally beautiful. Facial symmetry, for example. And
there have been studies where they will take a picture of a person's face and they will digitally
manipulate it. They'll cut it down the middle and they'll create a mirror image. So we have a perfectly
symmetrical face. And in studies of individuals, people almost inevitably choose the perfectly
symmetrical face as more beautiful. Now why might that be? Why might we see facial symmetry as being
beautiful? Sociobiologists argue that it's because it's a sign of genetic healthiness. It's an
indicator that this person is genetically healthy and can have a healthy offspring as well.
So other symbols of such genetic healthiness that sociobiologists point to include full lips,
few skin blemishes, a waist to hip ratio for women of 0.7. And this means having a big bust,
a narrow waist, and then back out to have large hips, good childbearing hips. That ratio for
women prefer men with a 0.9 waist to hip ratio, which is like an inverted triangle.
So a lot of these sociobiological explanations hold true for American college students at least,
maybe for large portions of American society. But we can find counter examples in various
cultures around the world. We've studied attractiveness, for example, among Andean populations
in Peru, in Bolivia. And they don't find the hourglass figure that's supposed to be inherently
attractive to human males. Andean men don't find this attractive at all. They prefer short,
squat, sort of square-figured women. And one could argue that this is adaptive for the environment
that they live in, this harsh, high-altitude environment with extremely cold temperatures.
So sturdier women, perhaps, are better adapted. But it derides the sociobiological explanation
that this is a universal human propensity. Think back in our own culture, in Western culture.
Think back to the pictures of Rubens, or Tishen, or any of these other painters who painted these
voluptuous women, who today we would consider to be slightly overweight at best.
So sociobiologists argue that women are trying to get men to commit. It's in men's best interest
to commit very often because they'll have a sure thing. It makes biological,
economic evolutionary sense to have a single partner, to be in a monogamous relationship,
to ensure that the children are going to be raised well and to survive and reach reproductive
age themselves. However, sociobiologists also argue that men have this infidelity gene, this
metaphorical infidelity gene, that encourages them not only to have the sure thing at home,
but to seek out opportunistic sex as well. What the sociobiologists ignore in all of this is the
power of culture. The power of culture in changing the way in which people live and work. Take
celibate priests, for example. Sociobiologists have a really hard time explaining why we have
celibate priests. And there's been a lot of news lately about priests who are not celibate,
and yet the vast majority of them remain celibate. How does a sociobiologist account for that?
What reproductive sense does that make? They can't. And so what the sociobiologists,
I think they have a lot to offer us in terms of basic propensities that are built into the human
condition, perhaps evolving in this environment of evolutionary adaptation. But they miss that
culture trumps biology very often.
