Lecture 6 Languages, Dialects and Social Categories
Language is something that makes us human.
We have language so we can communicate with each other.
And not just facts, but ideas, hopes, dreams, emotions, theories.
It's what allows culture, language allows culture.
Most of what we know about culture, indeed most of what we know at all, comes to us through language.
So in this lecture, we're going to look at just exactly what language is and what it is not.
What are its components?
We'll talk about the sounds of language, alphabets, grammars.
What sets it apart from other forms of animal communication?
And what do we have to learn from chimps and apes who have learned variants of language?
And we're going to conclude today by looking at dialects as markers of identity
and how one speaks can tell a lot about who one is.
So we don't know when language first arose among our ancestors.
The physical remains that would tell us about this are mostly soft tissue like vocal cords
and they don't last very long in the archaeological record.
But at some point our larynx falls creating our Adam's apple and allowing us to produce
the vast range of sounds that we need to speak.
There was dangers in this as well.
When the larynx fall, it also allows us to choke on our own food.
So there had to be some huge evolutionary benefit to allowing our larynx to fall
and that evolutionary benefit is spoken language.
Now this first occurred maybe 300,000 years ago, maybe 100,000 years ago.
We're not really sure because the tissues don't remain in the archaeological record.
Now writing, this is important to note, writing only comes along about 6,000 years ago.
Most languages in the world were not written and are not written.
We do know that if language is not learned early on, it cannot be fully mastered.
So we have this biological capacity to produce language.
But if we don't learn a language early in life, we'll probably never learn it.
And we can see this in the very few cases we have documented of feral children.
In the 17th, 18th, 19th century Europe, there would occasionally be these children found
that were raised in the wild by wolves or whatever it may be.
And they never fully mastered language.
So if they didn't learn it from a very early age, they could never master it in later life.
So language is a system of communication.
It is the one great rule of languages that like culture, it's always changing.
Languages are always changing.
There are about 6,000 languages spoken in the world today, although they're dying out fast actually.
There may be as few as half of that in 100 years time by some estimates.
Following European contact in the New World, for example, the number of native languages fell by half in very quickly.
So languages are always changing.
Languages are also all fundamentally equal.
If a speaker of any language has something that they want to say, they can communicate that idea.
So languages are all fundamentally equal in that way as well.
Some languages have a larger vocabulary than others in certain domains.
Technology in English, for example.
We have this huge vocabulary of technological words that some other languages don't have.
Those languages need to refer to that computer or to that software or whatever it may be.
They come up with a word.
In Kachikau Maya, the language in which I worked, for example, until not long ago, there was one word, cheech, for all metal things.
It could be a typewriter, it could be a bus.
If it was metal, it was called cheech.
But today, as more and more Maya are becoming educated, as more and more Maya are participating in the modern economy,
they have elaborate vocabularies, not only for cars and typewriters, but for computers and software.
So when there's a need for someone to say something, when there's a need for a language to communicate an idea,
that language can always be flexible enough to meet it.
Now anthropological linguists work mostly with undescribed languages, undocumented languages.
And a lot of what they do is writing dictionaries, writing grammars, recording these languages for posterity.
In doing, in describing languages, technical linguistics we can call it, we can break this down into several different components.
And the most fundamental of which are sounds, different sounds and languages.
And I'd like to introduce two vocabulary terms here.
Phonemics and phonetics.
Phonemics refers to the sounds that a native speaker hears.
Phonetics refers to the more objective qualities of the sound waves.
So, and you'll remember early on we made this distinction between emic and edic.
Emic being the view from within a culture, and this comes from phonemic.
And phonetic gives rise to edic, the more objective, the more scientific, the outside view.
So just as we learn to divide up the color spectrum into meaningful segments, red, yellow, green, blue and so forth,
we also learn to break up the sound spectrum into meaningful segments as well, A, E, I, O and U.
And these are culturally specific.
There are very few cultural universals in terms of language.
All languages, for example, distinguish between vowels and consonants.
But beyond that, there's a huge range of variation.
And not every language recognizes the same sounds.
In Japanese, for example, they don't recognize a difference phonemically from within the culture between R's and L's.
Something that sounds very distinct to an English speaker, but for a Japanese speaker, doesn't sound very distinct.
In Spanish, we find the same thing with V and B.
They don't really hear this distinction, and so it's very hard when they learn English that makes a clear distinction between V and B.
In my own dialect, I'm from the south, I grew up in Alabama.
In my own dialect of English, we refer to this as a pin, the same word that we would use for the sewing instrument, a pin.
We sew with a pin, and I write with a pin.
In many dialects of English, there would be a clear phonetic distinction between those two sounds.
There are also tonal languages.
In tonal languages, the inflection changes the meaning of a word.
And the most famous example comes from Chinese, which is a tonal language,
where the word, which is transcribed in English with MA, we would pronounce it as MA, can mean four different things.
So you can say MA, which is mother.
You could say MA, which is linen.
You could say MA, which is horse, or you could say MA, which is scold.
Depending on how just this one syllable word is inflected, it changes the difference.
And lots of students of Chinese, English speakers learning Chinese, have said things like,
my horse and my father and my brothers and sisters, we all live together in one happy family.
So tonal, and these tonal differences are very hard for native English speakers, for example, to learn.
If you don't learn these sound differences early on in life, they're very hard to pick up later on.
Another interesting phonetic structure we find in sub-Saharan languages, called click languages.
And here there are a number of sounds, clicking sounds.
So, for example, you have kum, you have sounds like this that are difficult.
English speakers can make these sounds, but it's very difficult to put them in a word.
Try and put these sounds in the middle of a word, and our tongues just can't seem to wrap around it.
And so if you don't hear the sounds of a language before the age of 6, maybe 7, maybe 8, maybe as late as 12 years old,
you can never fully internalize the phonetic maps of these other languages.
Now most languages, as I mentioned, are unwritten.
Written languages are really the exception rather than the rule, although we associate writing with language these days.
But in terms of written languages, there are three main types.
And these are logographic, meaning that a one sign stands for a word or an idea.
Syllabic, a sign stands for a syllable, or alphabetic, like our own system.
Now in logographic systems, the problem is you have to have an immense number of characters to represent all of the words in the language.
Let's take Chinese again as an example.
Chinese, it's commonly called the logographic language, although actually it's a combination of logographic and phonetic elements.
But Chinese has 1300 logographic components.
It is an incredible barrier for people trying to learn this language.
The benefit to this is that speakers of Cantonese and Mandarin, though, can look at the same symbol and pronounce it in their own language.
So it's not as closely tied to the sound patterns.
Syllabic languages first arose with the Phoenicians.
Mayan hieroglyphs are syllabic, for example, and they represent a vowel consonant combination with one sign.
And English, famously, is alphabetically, is alphabetic.
Only 26 characters.
We have 26 characters in our alphabet to represent the whole range of words and sounds that we can make.
So alphabetic systems are much more flexible and much more streamlined in this manner.
Although there's always a slippage between the alphabetic sign, or not always, but there can be slippage between the sign and the sound that it produces.
My five-year-old daughter, for example, thinks that car is spelled with a K.
And we learn over time when to pronounce a C as a C and when to pronounce it as an S sound.
We learn all of these variants, but it's not necessarily given in the alphabetic character itself.
So linguists study phonetic differences and phonemic differences between languages.
They study how these phonemes are combined to create morphemes, and morphemes are the minimal units of meaning.
Usually a word, but it doesn't have to be a word.
Bike is a morpheme, but if we add an S to that, bikes, it becomes a two morpheme word.
So linguists look at how phonemes are combined to create morphemes, how morphemes are combined to create words,
and how words are combined through the rules of syntax and grammar.
Now grammar, all languages, grammar is basically the rules of a language.
How you put words together to make meaningful sentences.
All languages have a grammar.
Not all languages have a little brown handbook.
Not all languages have a Chicago manual of style.
Not all languages have a written grammar, but all languages have a grammar.
And these grammars differ rather dramatically.
If you've ever tried to learn German or Chinese, you'll appreciate the vast differences in grammars in different languages.
But functionally, they're equal.
And this gets back to a point that we made earlier in the lecture, that any language can communicate any idea.
So functionally, grammars all serve the same purpose.
Creating common rules that everybody can understand in order to facilitate communication.
The linguist Noam Chomsky has argued that humans are not only born with the capacity for language,
but really what he calls a black box in the brain, which produces grammar.
And he says that there is some sort of proto-grammar that's innate in humans' brains.
Is grammar innate?
I'm not sure.
Do humans have an innate capacity for language?
Most certainly.
The language that humans learn, however, is precisely that.
It's what they learn.
It's not given at birth in any way.
So linguists study phonetics.
They study grammar.
Linguists also study semantics, the meanings of words.
Not just the dictionary meaning, but the subtle shades of meanings that particular words can carry.
And for language, I mean, for language to work, there has to be some fundamental agreement about what words mean, right?
This is the whole purpose of communication.
We all agree what certain words mean.
But a lot of times there's slippage here as well.
Take, for example, if you ever had the experience of using a word, perhaps frequently,
and then discovering that you don't really know what it means.
You may have read it in a newspaper.
You read it in a book.
You intuited the meaning of the word from the context.
And then it turns out later that that's not really the word.
But it suited you very well to use it in your own particular idiosyncratic way.
So these sort of things happen all the time.
We have phonetics.
We have grammar.
We have semantics, the meanings of words.
But linguists have also been turning recently to the study of body language.
And they point out that a lot of what we communicate actually happens non-verbally.
In some studies, they estimate that as much as 80% of the information communicated happens non-verbally.
And this can happen in a variety of ways.
Through body language, which we call kinesics, body language.
Do you speak to someone with your arms folded?
Or do you speak to someone with your arms open?
What sorts of subtle signs are you giving to the people that you're communicating with?
One interesting thing that I read not long ago is that if you raise your eyebrows
and we subconsciously do this when we meet somebody or when you see somebody that you like a lot,
you unconsciously raise your eyebrows.
And so we can use these things to manipulate social situations as well.
Next time you meet somebody, raise your eyebrows and see if the interaction happens any differently.
So body language.
A lot is communicated by body language.
A lot is communicated by proxemics.
How we stand in relation to the person that we're communicating with.
In the U.S., we have a fairly big comfort bubble.
We need to have two or four feet between us and a person that we're having a casual conversation with.
In other cultures around the world, that comfort bubble is much smaller.
And if you've ever traveled, if you've traveled in Latin America, for example,
you may feel uncomfortable when everybody comes up and puts their arms around you
and touches you in a way that we would consider to be very intimate.
But for them, it's just a natural way of showing their friendship and their appreciation.
And this can result in a sort of ballet in certain situations.
There was a study done of different banks in New York City.
And this graduate student went to a really wasp bank, a really white bank where all of the clientele were white.
And then she went to a bank in an Italian neighborhood in New York City.
And what she would do is she would stand in the teller line and she would get gradually closer to the person in front of her.
And when she was at this wasp bank, she would basically end up chasing these patrons around the bank.
As she got closer, they would move away and she would get closer and they would move away still.
And then when she went to the bank in the Italian neighborhood,
she could practically be hugging the person in front of her and they wouldn't move.
So there was this very different cultural sense of space in what's appropriate.
And we could apply this to all sorts of things.
Office design, how our office is designed, what is the height of the chair of the person behind the desk
and the person in front of the desk, for example.
In my office at my university, I have a chair that's very, very low that students sit in.
And I sit in a normal chair and this creates this very subtle power differential between us.
So there are all sorts of ways in which proxemics can facilitate, often in subtle ways,
but facilitate communication and communicate lots of ideas.
Okay, so that's a basic overview of what linguists do.
But I would like to talk here specifically now about language and what language is.
We generally consider language to be uniquely human.
This is something that only humans have is language.
But what is then language?
The linguist Charles Hockett tried to come up with a list of features that define language as uniquely human.
And he came up with a total of about 13, although I'm only going to go over a few here today.
And Hockett argues that language is one, it's an open system.
It's not a closed system.
Chimpanzee communication is what we call a call system.
They can only say a limited number of things.
Bees can communicate, but they can only say a limited number of things.
In human language, we can say an infinite number of things.
It's an open system. It's productive.
We routinely make up entirely new constructions.
And think of some of the great literary figures in the world.
James Joyce, I mean, reading Ulysses.
This is so difficult because he has, he's really using the productivity of language,
putting words together in a totally new way.
For Alan Ginsberg's how we can all think of linguistic pioneers or literary pioneers in this way.
So language is an open system. It's not a closed system.
The second feature is displacement.
Human language can talk about things that are not in the here and now.
We can talk about the past.
We can make up fictions.
We can talk about our hopes and dreams for tomorrow in the future.
Animal like call systems can't do this.
And it's a fundamental feature of human languages.
We can teach a dog to bark on a certain command,
but we can't teach that dog to bark tomorrow if it's raining, for example.
So there's very, there's a fundamental limitation in call systems
and other forms of communication in terms of displacement.
And third, we have arbitrariness that language is arbitrary.
The symbol and sound combination that we use that we link together in language is arbitrary.
You can call this furry four legged creature a dog.
You could call it a Hund in German.
You could call it a Pedro in Spanish.
All of these are perfectly good words.
And we just agree that we're going to use those words to refer to this object.
But there's an arbitrary relationship there.
There's not a natural relationship between the words that we use and what is denoted by those.
And this is something that was actually given to us by Ferdinand de Sassure,
the father of scientific linguistics, of modern linguistics.
And he said that we can divide signs up into two components.
In a sign, you have the signifier, and that could be a symbol.
It could be a word.
It could be a written word.
It could be a spoken word.
And then you have the signified.
The signified is the thing that is being referred to.
And Sassure, one of his important contributions was to make this distinction
that there's an arbitrary relationship between the signifier,
the word that we use in the signified, the object that we're referring to.
Now, can you think of any exceptions?
When I ask my students this, most of the time they say,
well, what about anamanapoetic words?
What about animal sounds?
But even here, if you've studied foreign languages,
you'll know that even here, foreign languages have different sounds for different animals.
In Spanish, for example, a rooster says,
key, key, key.
Whereas in English, it says, cockle doodle do.
So even anamanapoetic words share this quality of arbitrariness.
Studies with apes have shown that with intensive training, apes, chimpanzees,
and gorillas can be taught rudimentary language skills.
And here I'd like to mention two in particular.
The first is washaw.
And this was a chimp who was trained first at the University of Nevada
and then moved to the University of Oklahoma.
And work was done with washaw in the 1960s.
She was taught a modified version of American sign language.
They worked with her for about four years.
And all in all, she learned 150 different signs
and could communicate basic ideas.
So we have washaw the chimp and cocoa,
cocoa the gorilla now lives at a foundation in California.
Coco was born in 1971.
She was taken, she was first at the San Francisco Zoo,
and then she was taken for research at this private foundation.
And researchers have worked with Coco for over 25 years,
also teaching her a modified version of American sign language.
And she now has a vocabulary of over a thousand words Coco does.
Now I bring this up at this point because work with these apes
has made us question some of Hockett's list
of what is distinctly human about language.
Let's take productivity, first of all,
that we can produce totally new linguistic phrases
to encompass new ideas.
We find this among these apes.
Washaw, for example, when she first saw a fur coat,
called it a hair coat.
This seems pretty basic, a hair coat.
But she took two words that she knew previously from other contexts
and put them together to describe something she had never seen before.
She was being productive in her language use.
The first time she saw a candy bar, she called it a sweet banana.
Again, using two words that she had known before
and putting them together in a different way.
We've also seen productivity with Coco, Coco the gorilla.
The first time Coco was out on a field trip one day
and saw a duck for the first time
and signed to his trainer, Waterbird.
The trainers just went crazy because, again, a sign of productive speech.
Let's take displacement.
Coco, Coco's erstwhile mate, companion, recently died,
was Michael, another gorilla that was captured in the wild as an infant.
It was captured wild as an infant in Vienna
and eventually made it to this foundation in California.
At one point, Coco taught Michael a lot of signs.
The trainers also taught Michael a lot of signs.
At one point, he described seeing his mother be killed.
It's assumed that his mother was killed by poachers
and that as an infant he was taken away and sold.
But this describes displacement.
He was able to talk about something not in the here and now,
something way back when, displacement.
So, Hocket and others started adding to this list of features
that make language uniquely human.
Language has to be uniquely human, so let's add to this list of features.
And one thing they added was pre-verification, lying.
Only human language can you lie.
But actually, we've seen evidence of this as well.
Coco, unbeknownst to her, was filmed all the time, 24 hours a day,
a little video camera in the corner of her.
You can't really call it a cage. She really lives in a room.
And at one night, she broke her feeding bowl.
And the next morning, her trainer comes in and says,
what happened to the bowl?
And she signs back, the other trainer did it.
And she didn't realize that she was being filmed, but she lied.
She lied because she was embarrassed about what had happened.
We've also seen in the wild,
we have evidence of lying among chimpanzees in the wild.
Chimpanzees have been seen to find a slaughtered animal.
Let's say an antelope that a lion has killed,
eaten part of, and then left.
And sometimes chimpanzees will call out a warning signal
to the rest of their troops saying,
watch out, there's a lion in the area, everybody leave.
All the other chimps leave.
This chimp comes down, gorges on the antelope meat,
and then presumably comes back to the troop later and says,
yeah, well, that lion just left.
I don't know what happened to him, but...
So we find lying, we find displacement,
we find productivity, all of these among apes
who have learned variants of American sign language.
Nonetheless, Coco, Washall,
the other apes who have been studied this way,
they never get beyond the vocabulary of a three or four,
maybe a five-year-old human.
They never reach beyond a few hundred words.
Coco is the most, with a thousand-word vocabulary today.
So it's still very limited,
but they do share some of these characteristics
with human languages.
So there are 6,000 languages spoken in the world today.
The most widely spoken are Mandarin Chinese,
Hindi, English, and Spanish.
English is by far the most widely spoken language
if we include second language speakers as well,
for whom English is a second language.
In some places, especially where there are dramatic
ecological geographic barriers
to communication between communities,
we find high densities of different languages.
For example, in Highland New Guinea, there are hundreds,
perhaps as many as 900 different languages spoken
in this little area of Highland New Guinea,
because the geography is so grand.
One community couldn't communicate very effectively
with the community on the other side of the hill,
and so over time, they developed distinctive variants.
In Guatemala, where I work with the Maya,
there are 21 separate Mayan languages spoken,
not dialects languages, 21 languages spoken,
and this is in a country smaller than the size
of the state of Tennessee.
But what is a language and what is a dialect?
So languages, if one speaks a different language,
it implies mutual unintelligibility.
You cannot understand what the other person is saying.
In contrast, a dialect implies mutual intelligibility.
It's a variant of the language,
but we can still understand what is being said,
and the variations can be phonemic.
They can be grammatical.
They can be in terms of vocabulary, intonation, body language.
We can all have all sorts of dialectical variations.
So a language is not mutually intelligible from others,
but there are a lot of gradations here.
Swedish and Norwegian, for example,
consider to be separate languages,
and yet, among good-willed speakers,
they can understand each other.
But there's this whole history of political conflict
between the two countries that leads them
to establish themselves or promote themselves
as being two separate languages.
Spanish and Portuguese, a bit greater distance there,
but again, among good-willed speakers,
I'm a pretty good speaker of Spanish,
and I can follow a basic Portuguese conversation.
And so where is that line, then,
between a separate language and a dialect?
We often speak of the Chinese language,
but of course there are many Chinese languages,
Mandarin and Cantonese, for example,
and it's a very powerful political statement
to talk about the Chinese language,
grouping all of this heterogeneous group together
as a single entity.
The linguist Max Weinreich famously defined a language
as a dialect with a navy.
A language is a dialect with a navy.
And what he was getting at here
is that language distinctions are really
very often political distinctions as well.
It's not based on science.
There is a science to this
to distinguish between a dialect and a language,
and the way in which we do this
is judging the percentage of cognates
and cognate words or words that have the same root
or can be recognized as being the same.
Cognates, hound in English and hooned in German, for example.
So we can look at the percentage of cognates
between two languages or two dialects,
and we can create a cutoff point.
For example, if these two variants
have less than 70% shared cognates,
they're separate languages.
Or we could say 80%, or we could say 90%,
but at some point we can draw a line
and say this is a separate language
and not just a dialectical variation.
But where do we draw the line?
It seems very scientific to use percentages like that,
but where do we draw that line?
It ultimately becomes arbitrary.
Is 70% a common vocabulary?
Is that a different language?
80%, 90%?
Who knows?
Now, languages and dialects
can serve as very powerful identity markers.
Languages are not easily learned.
They're not easily shirked off.
We don't lose a language very easily.
So they can serve as powerful symbols
of a person's cultural heritage.
And we use them this way.
In English, so you want to take English English,
British English, a public school dialect
versus a commoner dialect.
This tells a lot about a person,
and the way in which the person speaks
tells a lot about that person.
Now, in English, we refer to standard English
as SAE, or American English,
Standard American English,
sort of this non-descript Midwestern dialect
of Standard American English.
And this is the most highly valued form
of English in the United States.
A number of studies have been done
showing that people have prejudices
against those with strong Southern accents,
strong Northeastern accents.
Any sort of strong accent invokes
a number of stereotypes about the person who's speaking.
One study, one interesting study,
was done by the linguist William LeBov,
who went around to different department stores
in New York City, looking at whether the final R,
in a word, was pronounced.
If people would pronounce the final R
in floor, for example.
And he found that at Saks Fifth Avenue,
all of the shoppers and all the storekeepers
would pronounce this final R.
And he said that this was a sign
of a certain socioeconomic status, a high status.
He found it climbs a much lower price department store
in New York City that hardly anybody pronounced this R.
And again, an indicator of socioeconomic status.
We could talk about black vernacular English,
also encompassing lots of stereotypes
about how people speak and about who they are.
So we've looked at a great diversity of language,
even if Noam Chomsky argues
that there's a common foundational grammar,
there's a great diversity of languages spoken in the world.
But we communicate not only with words,
but with body language as well.
And not only what we say, but how we say it.
Our language, our dialect,
tells a lot about our social identity
and about our politics in cases as well.
So while the capacity for language may be innate,
its realization is always a unique, creative, productive process.
Thank you.
