So as we said last time, the language and dialect we speak can tell others a lot about
who we are.
And this is a symbolic quality, independent of what's being said.
In fact, it might overshadow what's being said in certain contexts.
But language, of course, also serves as a vehicle for communication.
And so in this lecture, we're going to look at the relationship between language, how
we communicate, and thought, what we want to communicate.
Now can you think of something that you cannot say?
Can you think of something that you can't put into words?
If so, the responses I normally get are that it's an emotion, I'm so mad I can't speak,
I'm so in love with you that words escape me.
Or perhaps it's a visual or an auditory impression, a painting or a piece of music that touches
you in ways that are impossible to fully articulate.
But given these exceptions, to a large extent, our language does mediate our thought.
We don't simply express ourselves through language, we also think through language in
many ways.
Language gives us the categories, the vocabularies, the verb structure, and so on, that frame
not only how we talk, but how we perceive the world.
We see green, where other cultures might see blue, because of the linguistic category
that we've constructed called green.
In this lecture, we examine the ways in which language influences thought.
We're going to look specifically at the Sapir-Wolf hypothesis, and the ways that we construct
ourselves and present ourselves linguistically, such as in men's and women's speech, and the
role of metaphors in the way in which we look at the world.
So I'd like to begin by discussing the work of Benjamin Lee Worf.
He was born in 1897, he died in 1941.
He got his degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a BS in chemical engineering,
in 1918.
After graduation, he went to work for the Hartford Fire Insurance Company as a trainee
in fire prevention engineering.
And after graduation, he kept up with his interest in linguistics.
So he studied on his own.
He studied Hebrew.
He studied Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs.
He studied Maya.
He even traveled to southern Mexico to look at Mayan glyphs.
And he took a few classes from Edward Sapir at Yale, and Sapir was a student of Boaz's.
So Worf remained with the Hartford Fire Insurance Company for the rest of his short life, developing
a national reputation as an expert in industrial fire prevention.
And he authored several articles on fire prevention, including one titled Blazing
Icicles.
And this offered a linguistic interpretation of fire prevention.
It's probably the most readable fire prevention report ever written.
And he looked at a couple of case studies in particular.
At one, there was a warehouse that had burned down in a fire.
And so he goes and investigates, and he finds out that what they would do is they used,
in their production process, they used gas.
And they would take empty gas containers and put them on the loading dock.
And they were labeled as empty gas containers.
On the same loading dock is where the workers would come out and take their breaks.
And one day, a worker was out taking a break, smoking a cigarette, and flipped his cigarette
into these empty gas containers, which promptly blew up, of course, and burned down the building.
Now what Worf said was that the seeds of this disaster lay in the semantics of empty.
Empty means both without its usual contents and null and void or inert.
And so here, these gas containers were without their usual contents.
They weren't filled up with liquid gas.
But they were all the more dangerous because of that.
Because an empty gas can is actually full of gas vapors, which are more flammable than
the liquid gas was in the first place.
And so it was a linguistic, a semantic slip that allowed for this disaster to take place.
So he looked at a couple of other instances like this.
Instances of inflammable, labels saying inflammable being confused.
And it's a very confusing word.
Inflammable means flammable.
And it throws us off because this in prefix usually means a negation, inconsistent, incoherent.
So why inflammable?
And he showed that it led to a number of fire disasters.
Spun limestone.
He gave another example of a factory that used spun limestone that people would treat very
carelessly because it was stone.
It's limestone.
But actually this particular product spun limestone when it's heated up produces acetone,
which is very volatile, can catch fire very easily.
And so he was looking and blazing icicles at these cases where linguistic misunderstandings
led to fire disasters.
The categories employed by a language, he argued, determined the way in which people
looked at the world.
The words these workers were using influenced their behavior and led to these disasters.
Now this line of thought that he developed has come to be known as the Sapir-Warf Hypothesis.
It's probably more accurate to call it the Warfian Hypothesis.
He took a sentence from a book written by Edward Sapir and expanded on that and made
this whole theoretical structure.
The Sapir-Warf Hypothesis or the Warfian Hypothesis, if you will, it says that the
structure of a language determines cognition.
The way we think about the world and thus culture is given to us by the structures of
our language.
Now the Sapir-Warf Hypothesis has two main variants.
We can talk about the strong version and the weak version.
The strong version of the Sapir-Warf Hypothesis, also called linguistic determinism, posits
that linguistic structures, vocabulary and grammar, determine the way in which one can
think.
The strong version, linguistic structures determine the way in which one can think.
The best example of this comes to us from literature in George Orwell's novel 1984 and
the language Newspeak, which was developed to enforce the ideology of the society that
Orwell described in 1984.
Let me read just a short passage here because it illustrates so nicely the strong version
of the Sapir-Warf Hypothesis.
The purpose of Newspeak was not only to provide a medium of expression for the worldview and
mental habits proper to the devotees of Ingsoc, but to make all other modes of thought impossible.
A thought diverging from the principles of Ingsoc should be literally unthinkable, at
least so far as thought is dependent on words.
Its vocabulary was so constructed as to give exact and often very subtle expression to
every meaning that a party member could properly wish to express while excluding all other
meanings.
Language determining thought in this case.
The strong version of the Sapir-Warf Hypothesis.
Now the weak version of the Sapir-Warf Hypothesis, which is much more palatable and is also called
linguistic relativity, holds simply that there is a relationship between language and thought,
that language influences the way in which we think, and that the way in which we think
influences language.
This weak version is the most accepted version.
It still doesn't resolve this chicken and egg question, however, of what comes first,
thought or words.
Now Warf used a couple of different lines of evidence to support his hypothesis.
When the first came from vocabulary, he famously noted that Eskimos have more words for types
of snow than English speakers do, and he deduced that therefore Eskimos must perceive of snow
differently.
Now this is an example that has come to take on apocryphal proportions in anthropology.
Sometimes you'll read in introductory textbooks that there are a hundred different Eskimo
words for snow, this word that we only have a single word for in English, and we can trace
this back, however, to the work of Franz Boaz, and in 1911, he published the handbook
of North American Indians, and he noted that Eskimos have four different words for snow,
where English just had one.
The Eskimo have aput, means snow on the ground, kana, falling snow, pixiri poke, drifting
snow, or kimuksuk, for a snow drift.
Now English, we can make these distinctions, but we need a phrase to make a distinction
where Eskimo just had the one word.
So Warf latches on to this idea that he had read in Boaz's book and then takes off with
it, and he publishes an article in 1940 called Science and Linguistics, and let me quote
from him here.
He writes, we have the same word for falling snow, snow on the ground, snow packed hard
like ice, slushy snow, wind driven flying snow, whatever the situation may be.
To an Eskimo, this all inclusive word would be almost unthinkable.
He would say that falling snow, slushy snow, and so on, are sensuously and operationally
different, different things to contend with.
He uses different words for them and for other kinds of snow.
Now you'll notice here that he's taken Boaz's observation that there are four Eskimo words
for snow and sort of made it a little bit more nebulous, so it sounds like there are
more than four words for snow.
And there's been a lot of controversy in anthropological linguistics about this, exactly
how many Eskimo words for snow are there.
And it turns out that the Eskimo have certain prefixes and suffixes that can make words
look like different words when they're actually just variants of the same word.
So one linguist that I read in Atlanta go, estimates that in fact there are probably
about 12 to 15 words in the Inuit language for snow.
And in fact, this isn't so different from English.
Think of English words for snow, avalanche, blizzard, a dusting, a flurry, frost, hail,
hard-packed snow.
We have a fairly extensive vocabulary as well, although it varies.
It varies on how much you need to use that vocabulary.
Skiers have a very extensive vocabulary of snow.
English speakers living in Miami probably have a minimal vocabulary for snow.
So it depends on the need to use those words.
It doesn't mean that English speakers don't perceive of different types of snow, but Eskimos
speakers have more of a reason, a need to use these fine gradations.
So we can use this line of reasoning, this vocabulary line of reasoning, to talk about
other words as well.
In Brazilian Portuguese, for example, there's a word, and it means it's hard to translate
into English.
It means a longing, a sort of nostalgia, but it's like a pleasurable feeling tinged with
regret or with pain.
We don't have a good word for this in English.
And not having a good word for it, and it being a very salient and often used word in
Brazilian Portuguese tells us that there's something going on here.
There's something about Brazil and about Brazilians that we can learn because of their
emphasis on this word.
It doesn't mean that English speakers don't feel the same sort of emotion, but that it's
more salient for Portuguese speakers.
Or take the German word, Schadenfreude, it's the secret delight that one takes in the misfortunes
of a friend.
So you have a friend who has a very healthy ego and some small misfortune.
They don't get the raise that they were looking for.
They don't get the contract that they were looking for.
And you might take a little secret delight in the back of your mind.
Well, I'm glad nothing really bad happened to them, but they needed to be put in their
place.
Schadenfreude.
We've probably all experienced this at one time or another.
We don't have a good English word for it.
We borrow the German word.
It doesn't mean that we don't experience this emotion, but it's just that it's not as salient
in our own language.
So there are differences in vocabulary, whether these determine different ways of looking
at the world is very much open to question.
But they do indicate important differences between cultures.
But Warf's more radical claim concerned grammar.
And he argued, based on somewhat questionable translations of Hopi, the North American Indian
language of Arizona, Warf argued that they don't have the tense system.
They don't have past, present, and future tenses, that he assumed to be sort of a natural
way of things, or at least the way in which English is organized.
So whereas in English, we see it as quite natural to say, I saw the girl.
I see the girl.
I will see the girl.
In Hopi, those sorts of distinctions aren't made.
At least not in the same way.
And Warf also argued that the Hopi don't break time up into units the way in which English
speakers do.
And what he used this for, to argue for, and a really neat thing, that the image of the
lazy Indian, that the Anglos in Arizona and the Southwest held about the Hopi, was really
based on different grammatical structures of verb tenses.
And it wasn't that Indians were lazy, they just conceived of time in a different way.
Research, subsequent research, has shown that Warf actually misunderstood Hopi in some
fundamental ways.
They don't have the same sort of past, present, future tenses that we have in English.
Instead, they have what are known as validity markers.
And so in Hopi, rather than putting a verb tense, you will say whether something is mythic,
whether something is known to be true, or whether something is conjectural.
And these don't make the same distinctions that our verb tenses make in English, but
they can get at the same sort of idea.
It's a similar kind of categorization.
Future events, for example, if you are always conjectural.
Events in the past, which one doesn't know for sure happened, are conjectural as well.
So there's a little bit of play there.
But more or less, you can get the idea of past, present, and future.
And Warf himself observed, and I quote from him here, the Hopi language is capable of
accounting for and correctly describing all observable phenomena in the universe.
Yes, and this has precisely been the critique of Warf.
Yes, Hopi can describe all observable phenomena in the universe.
So can every other language.
Therefore, how much can language dictate what we think?
But that's the critique of Warf, and I'm going to come back to more critiques in
just a moment, let me give you one more example.
And this comes from Yucatec Maya.
And I take these examples from the work of Victoria Bricker.
In Yucatec Maya, there's an obligatory grammatical category called numerical
classifiers.
This means that every time you mention a number of some object,
one, two, three, 500, 1,000, whatever it may be,
anytime you number an object, you have to use this descriptive classifier with it.
And to give you an idea of what these are, at one point,
there were a couple of hundred of these.
Today, used in every day Yucatec speech, there are a couple of dozen.
And they're things like elongated, handful of, a chunk of, torn piece,
a slice, a slab, a bite.
Anytime you talk about a plural, or even a singular, if you number an object,
you have to use one of these modifiers with it.
Therefore, when a Yucatec speaker talks about three bananas, for example,
he or she cannot simply say three bananas, as we would in English.
It always has to be modified, three elongated bananas, or
three chunks of banana, or three torn pieces of banana.
It always has to be modified by one of these numerical classifiers.
And I would think that certainly Yucatec speakers,
therefore, not only talk about bananas differently, they see them differently.
English speakers can see these differences as well, but
we don't have to invoke them every time we talk about bananas.
But Yucatec speakers do.
And so certainly this leads to a different way of perceiving the world.
Now, Steven Pinker, the linguist Steven Pinker,
has summarized very effectively a number of arguments against the Sapir-Wolf Hypothesis.
And he notes that, first, supposed limitations on expressions in various
languages are almost inevitably based on faulty linguistics,
such as Worf's misunderstanding of Hopi.
The Hopi do, in fact, have words for time.
The Hopi can, in fact, talk about time in different ways.
Second, that thought is possible without language.
We talked about emotions a moment ago, or things that you may see or
hear that impact you in a non-linguistic or a pre-linguistic way.
That babies, babies can think, certainly they can, but
they don't have language yet.
So language is not, thought is possible without language.
And finally, that language is an inadequate medium for communicating thought.
Language always contains ambiguity.
What I try and say, I try and be as clear as possible in giving these lectures,
for example, but there's always going to be a bit of ambiguity.
And what you perceive is going to be different than, slightly at some points,
maybe radically at other points, but
is going to be different than what I intend to say.
So while it's difficult to say to what extent language influences thought,
there's certainly some sort of relationship here.
It's probably not determinant.
Language doesn't determine thought, but
there's a back and forth between language and thought.
And in this respect, it's interesting to look at the recent work done on gender in language.
And here, I refer particularly to the work of Deborah Tannen,
the linguist Deborah Tannen, who's looked at men's speech and women's speech in the United States.
She makes a distinction between two types of discourse strategies.
One is called rapport, and she associates this more with women.
And the other, she calls report talk.
In rapport, there's much more of a back and forth going on between the two interlocutors.
So for example, a woman will back-channel.
This is a term we use in linguistics, back-channel a lot.
When she's conversing with someone, she will give little indicators
that she's following along with the argument in the conversation.
And it could be nodding the head.
It could be saying, mm-hmm, uh-huh, yeah, right.
Things like this, to remain engaged in this back and forth of rapport talk,
Deborah Tannen associates more with women.
And if this doesn't occur, a woman will often use confirmation requests.
We'll ask for her interlocutor to do this.
So if somebody's not back-channeling and nodding their head and saying, mm-hmm, yeah, right,
then a woman will ask for these by saying, right, huh?
What do you think?
You know?
Or using a final rise in intonation.
And this is particularly prevalent in teenage girls, I think.
We went to the movies, and it's a statement.
It's supposed to be a declarative statement, but it sounds like a question
because you rise in intonation.
It's asking the person that you're telling the story to, give me some help.
You know, give me a sign that you're still alive.
Nod your head.
Say yes.
And Tannen argues that this is more important for women than it is for men.
She argues that men have much more of a direct way of speaking.
And this is report talk.
And this ties into another distinction that she makes between men's and women's
speech, that women tend to speak more indirectly and men tend to speak more directly.
We can see this, and there's a continuum here of directness and indirectness.
So Tannen says, let's take commands, for example.
A very direct command would be take the garbage out.
Take the garbage out.
And then we could move toward more indirect speech.
Take the garbage out, please.
Could you take the garbage out?
Would you take the garbage out?
Or, and then we could move to the other extreme, a very indirect speech.
The garbage can's full.
So not saying what you really want to communicate.
Please take the garbage can out, but just noting this and allowing the other person.
What's today?
Today's Tuesday.
When does the garbage man come?
Something like that, a very indirect way of communicating these ideas.
Tannen also notes that indirect speech includes lots of hedges.
And these are qualifications, I think.
That's what I think, or perhaps in things like this, to sort of hedge what we're saying
to make it a little bit less direct.
Now she associates this with men's and women's speech, and she's made her career
showing how men and women miscommunicate very often in relationships.
But it's not that easily divisible.
Lots of men have indirect speech patterns.
I'm from the south of the United States, and we have more indirect speech
than people from the northeast or people from the west, for example.
There are lots of women who speak very directly.
So we can't correlate this exactly with gender, but there does seem to be some overlap.
It also occurs that subordinates tend to talk to their superiors in indirect speech
and superiors talk to their subordinates using direct speech.
And this can lead to some problems, and there was research done by a linguist named Charlotte Lind,
and she's at the Institute for Research and Learning in Palo Alto, California.
And what she's done is analyze the black box recording from airplane crashes.
And one in particular I would like to go over today, this occurred on January 13, 1982.
It was an Air Florida crash left from Washington National, today Reagan National,
left from Washington National Airport, took off just a few seconds after takeoff.
It crashes into the Potomac.
It was in the middle of a winter storm.
The Potomac was icy, and 74 out of the 79 people on board died.
Turns out later, the reason the cause for the crash was that ice had formed on the wings.
The plane had waited too long after being de-iced, then it took off,
and the rudders and flaps couldn't move, and it crashed into the Potomac.
But what Charlotte Lind has done is look at the black box recordings from this flight,
and let me read you a little bit of the transcript, and take note of the indirect speech
that the copilot is using to communicate his concerns to the pilot.
Copilot, look at how the ice is just hanging there on this back there.
You see that?
Pause, no response, pause.
Copilot, see all those icicles on the back there and everything?
Captain, yeah.
Copilot, boy, this is a losing battle here trying to de-ice those things.
It gives you a false sense of security.
That's all it does.
Pause, no response from the pilot.
Then they're given clearance for takeoff.
Copilot, let's check those tops again since we've been sitting here a while.
Captain, I think we get to go here in a minute.
Copilot, that doesn't seem right, does it?
That's not right.
Captain, yes it is.
There's 80.
Copilot, no, I don't think that's right.
Maybe it is.
Captain, 120.
Copilot, I don't know.
And then they take off 37 seconds later.
They've crashed, and they haven't communicated anymore.
The copilot knew what was going to happen, or he suspected.
He suspected what was going to happen.
He had communicated more directly rather than using these indirect forms of speech.
If he had told the captain, hey, I'm not taking off.
I'm getting off of this plane because this is dangerous.
This could have been averted.
So it's interesting the way in which indirect speech and direct speech can be used to communicate and miscommunicate with each other.
Now, more sophisticated interpretations of linguistic determinism have recently been produced by scholars such as George Lackoff and Mark Johnson.
And they wrote a wonderful little book.
It was published in 1980, Metaphors We Live By.
And they argue that there are certain central metaphors in the English language,
and that these metaphors condition the way in which we think about and thus act in the world.
And my favorite example that they give is that time is money.
In American English, they say there's an overarching metaphor that time is money, or that time is a valuable commodity.
And based on this overarching metaphor, we create a whole substructure of metaphors.
You're wasting my time.
This gadget is going to save you a lot of time.
How do you spend your time?
I'm investing a lot of time in doing this project.
I have to budget my time, living on borrowed time.
We could go on and on and on.
There are tons of metaphors that tie into this idea that time is a valuable commodity.
It's like money.
We can spend it.
We can save it.
We can waste it.
We can invest it.
And as a result, we act as if time were a commodity.
We use this metaphor as a basis for acting in the world.
Another example they give is that argument is war.
And again, we could give a couple of examples here.
Excuse me, you win or lose arguments.
Your claims are indefensible.
You attack weak points in a person's argument.
You can demolish an argument.
You can sink down particular facts and so forth.
And so we act as if argument is war in some fundamental way.
So using such metaphors allows us to invoke powerful presuppositions in our conversation.
It allows us these shortcuts when we're communicating with one another
because we all understand the metaphorical base of this.
Now when you presuppose something, this is a very powerful linguistic device.
When you presuppose something, you're able to start talking about it
like the people that you're talking with know exactly what you're discussing.
The most famous example of a presupposition is the joke where a politician is asked,
have you stopped beating your wife?
That presupposes.
I mean, the politician came in and said, what do you answer?
Yes, yes, I've stopped beating my wife.
I used to beat my wife and now I've stopped.
Or you answer, no, no, I haven't stopped beating my wife.
I still am.
It's very hard to combat that presupposition that's encoded in that first sentence there.
So presuppositions are a powerful linguistic tool.
But the trick with presuppositions, and this is especially true for me as a lecturer,
but for everybody in your everyday conversations,
the trick is not to presuppose too much or too little.
If I presuppose too much, I could easily right now start talking in the rarified language
of anthropology and social theory.
And I could speak over your heads.
It doesn't mean that I'm smarter than you.
It just means that I command the specialized vocabulary that you haven't studied.
So I could presuppose too much and try and wow you now with my knowledge
and speak over your head or try and intimidate you in some way.
On the other hand, the other danger is presupposing too little
and coming off as pedantic, explaining every little thing.
And if I did that as a professor, you would get bored very quickly.
And it's the same thing in everyday conversations.
We have to figure out what we can presuppose with the person that we're talking with.
And we use these as very powerful social tools.
A group of your friends, you have little jokes among yourselves.
You can presuppose all sorts of knowledge that creates a sense that we are a group
and that excludes other people from that group as well.
So presuppositions are very powerful political tools to mark social groups in group and out group.
So here I would like to briefly review what we've covered so far.
We've covered quite a bit of ground today.
The superior war hypothesis and its two varieties, strong and weak.
The strong version is unprovable.
Steven Pinker points out that what we think doesn't always correspond to particular words,
as with emotions for example.
He also reminds us that the linguistic fact that every of the linguistic fact
that every language can communicate any idea that it needs to.
The weak version of the superior war hypothesis is much more palatable.
Certainly language does influence thought, just as thought influences language.
It gives us the salient categories with which we can think.
You could take Mayan speakers, think about bananaism in a particular way.
We think about time in a particular way, given our linguistic structures.
In the next lecture, we're going to build upon these observations
to look at how we construct mental models of how the world operates.
