Lecture 9 Magic, Religion and Codes of Conduct
In the last lecture we talked about cognitive models, mental models of how the world works,
and really this is in many ways our reality, the reality that we live in.
Now these models may be highly idiosyncratic, our personal quirks, the uniqueness of our
personality, or they can be more widely shared, the proper distance to stand from someone,
what to do when the national anthem plays and so forth.
And to the extent to which these are shared, they constitute what we call culture.
So in this lecture what I would like to do is apply our understanding of cultural models
to a particular case, and that is the full bay of northern Cameroon.
And in particular I'm going to talk about three aspects of full bay culture.
The first is their code of conduct, which is called pulaku.
The second is their self-identity as Muslim herders, even though they're farmers.
And third is the relationship between religion and magic.
They're an Islamic culture, although they still have a rich tradition of indigenous
magical beliefs.
Now there's been a long concern in anthropology with religion and magic, and with various
forms of spirituality.
Edward Tyler, the man who gave us that classic definition of culture, noted that every culture
around the world has a conception of some sort of soul, of some sort of spirituality.
Now he believed that in primitive cultures, the belief in the soul emerged from dreams,
from trying to come up with an explanation for dreams.
It seemed to these people that a part of their body had to leave and go somewhere else.
So they assumed that there was a part of their body which wasn't physical, a soul.
And Tyler argued that this belief in souls eventually evolved, he called it animism,
a belief in souls, and that this eventually evolved into polytheism and finally into monotheism,
which he took as a hallmark of civilization.
So Tyler gave us the idea of animism, a belief in souls, and this is found in all cultures
around the world.
Our own culture generally conceives of souls as being uniquely human, but in many cultures,
souls can be found in animals, in plants, in rocks, in the inanimate world as well.
So we have Tyler, another important early scholar on the anthropology of religion was
James Frazier, and in 1922 he published a book, The Golden Bowl.
It actually, at first it was a two volume series, and he expanded it over the years
into 13 volumes.
It was an encyclopedic coverage of religious practices around the world, and it's a classic
text in anthropology and in religious studies to this day.
So in this book, Frazier made a crucial distinction that we still hold today between magic and
religion, and he argued that magic is a type of primitive science.
It's a belief that we can control the world around us, the spiritual world, the supernatural
world, and that if we do certain rituals, if you do certain rituals, just like in a
scientific experiment, if you follow the plan exactly, a predetermined outcome will occur.
If we follow all of the rules of the rain dance ritual, for example, and we don't bring along
any menstruating women, if we don't have sex for a week before we conduct the ritual,
and we do the rain dance properly, the rain has to come.
It's a belief that humans can control the supernatural world and their natural environment.
That's magic.
And he contrasted this with religion, and religion sees humans at being more at the mercy of
a higher power, and this is a sort of spirituality associated with a conciliatory view toward
a higher power, a larger power, recognizing that we're at the mercy of something greater
than ourselves.
And in Frasier's scheme, prayer is crucial to religion, because prayer is requesting
something from a supernatural being.
It's not demanding something, it's not making something happen, it is supplicating, asking
for a favor from the greater powers that be.
Now, religion generally is also more highly organized, more large scale, often has a written
tradition, and a written tradition to distinguish it from religion, from magic.
So, taking this into account, the difference between religion and magic, I would like to
turn now to the full bay of northern Cameroon.
Now, the full bay, they're an ethnic group, they're about 8 to 10 million full bay living
in western Africa, and they range all the way from Senegal, far in the west, all the
way over to Chad, Sudan, and Cameroon.
They speak varieties of the full full day language.
Most of them are cattle herders, which is a very common economic pattern in western Africa.
Most of them are Muslims, they traced their history back to jihads in the 19th century,
which was moving Islam westward.
They were traditionally organized into chieftains, although today all full bay live within the
boundaries of modern nation states.
Anthropologist Helen Regis has worked among the full bay, and in a community in northern
Cameroon, a community that she calls Domayo, and this is a pseudonym, but it's a community
in northern Cameroon.
A small village, about a thousand people, there's a little mosque, a small government
health center, a local school, but in many respects, Domayo is far removed from national
Cameroonian life.
National life in Cameroon is oriented around the port cities and the capital, and Domayo,
way to the north, is far removed from the workings of national life.
Now ostensibly, Domayo is ruled by the laws of Cameroon, but actually in fact, in daily
life, it's governed more by a moral code called pulaku, and pulaku is a moral code that really
stresses stoicism.
One should always refrain from displaying emotions.
One shouldn't show anger or grief or love.
Even physical pain should be endured silently.
Now in terms of this moral code, pulaku, men are especially expected to adhere to it closely,
and there's even some competition between men of who can embody the most pulaku.
So for example, the staple diet among the full bay is millet porridge, and they'll serve
this in a bowl along with a little sauce for spice.
They'll serve this in a common bowl, and everybody will dip out of it with their hand and eat
from their hand.
If a man dips into a scalding hot bowl of millet porridge, he's not supposed to show
any pain or any emotion, and take it up, put it into his mouth, and eat it like nothing
is happening, and then pass it on to the next unsuspecting man sitting next to him.
Now women also are expected to adhere to pulaku.
They're given a little bit more leeway.
Under the rules of pulaku, anger should always be muted, grief should always be muted.
No powerful emotion should be shown.
Now Regis writes about child deaths, a number of child deaths that have occurred in Domaeo
while she's been there, and this is a region, a fairly poor region of West Africa, and so
child deaths are not unheard of.
And she notes that the women in Domaeo, when their children die, refrain from crying at
their child's death.
Now you'll recall Nancy Shepper Hughes, working in the northeast of Brazil, also noted that
poor Brazilian women didn't cry when their children died.
Death Without Weeping was the name of the Nancy Shepper Hughes book.
Regis argues that, in contrast to Shepper Hughes, Regis argues that the women in Domaeo
do feel grief when their children die, but it's muted.
It's muted because it's filtered through this cultural model of pulaku.
Being too much in love with one's wife is similarly seen as being a bad thing, a violation
of pulaku.
It's akin to a mental illness because there's a passion there, a passion that one expresses,
a passion that can be de-habilitating to the individual, excessive laughter, happiness.
All of these emotions have to be muted under the code of pulaku.
Now it doesn't mean that the full bay don't experience happiness, that they don't experience
love or grief or pain or any of these emotions, they just express it in a very different way.
Now pulaku is also closely tied to notions of respect and modesty.
One should always have respect for elders in the society, and yet one could never be
too modest, the full bay say.
And so in pulaku we have this cultural concept, this cultural model, tied to relations of
respect and modesty, and it's a cultural model that people talk about openly.
Many cultural models, perhaps most cultural models, are left implicit in cultures.
They go without saying and they come without saying.
But the pulaku moral code is debated very often among the full bay, trying to figure
out exactly where to draw these lines about what is acceptable behavior and what isn't.
Now one thing about cultural models is they don't have to conform to what we would consider
to be the objective reality, the objective world, truth.
Take cultural models that we mentioned last time of a thermostat.
Many people in the country hold a valve model of how a thermostat works.
This isn't objectively true, it's not scientifically true, and yet it is their reality and they
act on that reality, so it becomes real in some meaningful way.
So we as human beings with these huge brains that we've been given by evolution, we have
an incredible capacity for cognitive dissonance, holding contradictory beliefs at the same time.
And for example, let's take the full bay and their image of themselves as compared to reality.
Now the full bay of Domaio are farmers.
They raise millet.
You'll remember that millet porridge is the staple of the full bay diet, millet porridge
mixed with a little bit of sauce.
Millet in many ways is at the heart of the full bay economy and at the heart of the full
bay symbolic life.
But these full bay don't see themselves as farmers.
They see themselves as herders, as cattle herders.
Most of the other full bay people in Western Africa are cattle herders and they come from
this tradition of being cattle herders.
So even though the villagers of Domaio are farmers themselves, they don't like to be
associated with farmers.
Now this doesn't mean that they're delusional.
They do have some cattle.
They wouldn't say that we don't farm at all.
But their self-image of themselves as a group is of being Muslim herders.
And they contrast this with their neighbors, their pagan neighbors who they call the Mundang.
And they view the Mundang as being almost subhuman.
They're not Muslim, so they're pagan.
They're farmers.
And the full bay of Domaio want to distance themselves as much as possible from the Mundang.
We're Muslim.
We're civilized.
We're the real people.
And these Mundang are pagan farmers.
They don't believe in the teachings of Islam.
They're not like us.
They're subhuman.
They're more of nature than of culture.
So this interesting disconnect between the full bay cultural model of themselves and
the reality of their subsistence points to the fluidity of identity.
What does it mean to be full bay?
In a sense, it means to be a cattle herder because most full bay are cattle herders.
And this is the origin of full bay culture.
Yet the Domaio have found themselves in this situation where they have to be or they want
to be farmers and yet still consider themselves to be full bay.
So they have this paradoxical association between herding and farming.
Now this brings to mind a distinction made by the famous French anthropologist Claude
Levy-Strauss.
And he said that human beings tend to think in dichotomies, that mental models ultimately
boil down to binary oppositions.
For the full bay, they consider themselves to be real humans in contrast to the Mundang
who they consider to be pagans and almost subhumans.
So this idea of us against them, the believers against the pagans, the herders versus the
farmers, the full bay and the Mundang.
Now Levy-Strauss' most impressive work is a series of books that he published in the
starting in the mid 1960s up through the early 1970s called Mythologiques.
And the first was the raw and the cooked, the second was from honey to ashes, the third
was on the origin of table manners and the fourth was the naked man.
And what Levy-Strauss did in this series of books was he took 813 myths and he started
with Baroro who live in the Amazonian rainforest and he moved up through each of these books
up through South America, up through Central America, all the way up the north west coast
of North America, up to the Inuit speakers and he traced their mythologies and he said
that all of the mythologies of both continents, this whole hemisphere, boiled down to one
basic dichotomy, a dichotomy that can be extrapolated out to other realms.
And that dichotomy is the distinction between nature and culture.
Now he says that it's almost human nature to distinguish between nature and culture.
Nature is chaotic, it's unruly and culture is ordered and civilized.
So we have nature is to culture as chaos is to order, as pagans are to believers for example.
Culture is civilization, it's who we are, we can control what we do within our culture.
Outside of our culture area and the wilds of nature, we cannot control the forces that
go on there.
So nature is the culture as chaos is to order.
It's also as Levi-Strauss pointed out, as raw is to cooked.
Raw food starts out in nature, it's picked, it's brought into the cultural realm physically
by cooking it and it becomes a culture product.
So cooked food is more cultured.
We take it out of nature and we make it culture.
Levi-Strauss also said, and so that was the myth that he started out with among the Baroro
that raw and it would concern the origin of cooking food.
And he moves up through these four volumes in these 813 myths up to the Inuit and he
finds the central metaphor, the central dichotomy in Inuit mythology is naked and clothed.
Now they're living way up north, I mean the clothing is obviously very important to us,
but clothing is also something that makes us human, that sets us off from nature.
We wear clothes, we have some sense of modesty, so we're not the animals of nature.
So nature is the culture as animal is to human and Levi-Strauss went on to argue as women
are to men.
In many cultures around the world women are considered to be more natural, more chaotic,
not as civilized as men.
And there's this notion that women are a little more dangerous because they're more in touch
with this natural side of things.
And we see this among the Fulbe, Fulbe men, it's a nominally patriarchal society, but
Fulbe men have a real fear of women.
So perhaps there's something to Levi-Strauss' idea, some sort of binary basis in our minds
for these kinds of cultural models.
Or perhaps we could take an analogy from quantum physics rather than saying that things are
binary in quantum physics, what we've traditionally seen as being binary, either off or on one
or zero, they can be both at the same time, off and on, one and zero.
Just as the Fulbe can simultaneously be farmers and herders in a meaningful way.
So men and women in Fulbe society, Fulbe women go and live with their husband's families
and as a result they're always outsiders.
They leave their own family and they go and live with their husband's family.
If their husband dies, if they get divorced, they have to depend on their children to help
care for them because they have left their natal family behind when they get married.
Fulbe society tends toward patriarchy or male dominance.
The male ideology is patriarchal.
They want to keep women subordinated, keep them in their place.
It's not extreme, but they're definitely patriarchal.
Fulbe men may have more than one wife, but a man has to care for each of his wives in
a proper fashion, a fashion fitting their rank in society.
And if they don't care for their wives, that's ground for divorce.
And divorce is not unheard of.
This is an Islamic society, but nonetheless women can initiate divorce and in fact the
average Fulbe woman has over two husbands, over two and a half husbands in her lifetime.
When they get married, men have to compensate their wives' family.
They're taking her away.
They're taking this reproductive resource away from the wives' family and bringing it
into their family.
So they have to pay.
And what they pay is what we call in anthropology, bride price, the price that a husband pays
for his wife.
In Fulbe society, this payment occurs through cloth.
Fulbe women use bolts of cloth.
They're about six yards long that they use to make skirts and blouses from.
So this cloth is very important in Fulbe society.
The best cloths, a man who pays a high price for his wife will give wax cloths.
And these are made using a batik method where wax is put onto the cloth and then it's dyed
and it comes out with these incredibly intricate patterns.
So the best cloths are these wax cloths and they're generally imported.
They're not made locally.
They come from Nigeria, but more often from Java and from the Netherlands.
To a powerful man, a man who wants to keep his status in society, who wants to marry
a good woman, a good woman from a good lineage, will have to supply lots of these wax cloths
to her and to her family in order to secure her hand in marriage.
Less desirable are print cloths that are made to mimic the look of wax cloths.
And these are made in Cameroon and other African countries.
And today, actually, a great number of them are made in Asia.
So if a man doesn't have a lot of money, he doesn't have a lot of resources, he can't
pay a high bride price, then he will give these print cloths.
And there's always this economic component to the negotiation of marriage.
The woman's family is trying to get the best payment they can for the woman.
The man is trying to give as little as he can.
And this occurs not only at the moment of marriage, but throughout their marriage, throughout
their time together.
Every year, the man has to give his wife gifts of cloth, preferably wax cloth, but in a
rough situation, he can give print cloths as well.
So but men see the women as dangerous.
And as a result, there's a strict segregation of the sexes in full bay society.
A man has to get married, it's seen as an imperative of a full bay man.
He can't make his own millet, that would be humiliating.
A man has to have a wife at home who would care for his children and do all of the things
that a man has to have done for him.
Men don't interact with their wives very much, and they prefer that their wives not
go out in the street very often either.
So there's a segregation between the sexes, partly due to the fact that women are seen
as polluting.
And if men have too much contact with women, then they can get polluted as well and get
de-habilitated.
Now full bay is a Muslim culture, at least nominally a Muslim culture.
Virtually everyone in the town of Domeyo is Muslim, and they're devout Muslims in their
own way.
There are local Quranic teachers called Malams, and a Malam is a person who has read the whole
Quran from front to back, and these are spiritual guides in Domeyo society.
They also serve as magical healers, something we'll come back to in just a moment.
Girls normally go to the Quranic school as well as boys.
The girls will only go until about age 12 or 14, at which point they get married and
they drop out of school.
The boys will continue on with their Quranic education.
Now let me make a point here about Islam.
It's misleading to talk about Islam as if it were a unified, singular, monolithic religion.
I mean it's impossible to say that Christians believe X, right?
I mean we have such a wide variety of Christianity.
The Greek Orthodox Church, the Roman Catholic Church, the Church of God, the Church of Christ,
Methodist Episcopalians, it goes on and on.
So think of all of these varieties of Christianity.
It's hard to say what Christians believe.
And the same holds true of Islam.
Islam is also a religion of great diversity, and the Islam of these Malams of Domeyo is
very far removed from the Islam of Osama bin Laden or the Taliban in Afghanistan, for example.
And the full bay, like people across Africa and like people across the Middle East and
Central Asia as well, have adopted Islam.
But it's combined, it's fundamentally mixed and melded with traditional religious practices.
What Frasier would have called magic.
The people of Domeyo are very devout Muslims on the one hand.
They practice daily prayers, they fast during Ramadan, and they see no contradiction in
doing all of this, and at the same time using amulets, for example, to protect their children
against spirits and demons and souls that live in the full bay area.
The full bay believe that children are, the full bay world is inhabited by these spirits
that are potentially detrimental.
And the full bay believe that children are especially vulnerable to spirit attack.
And the younger they are, the more susceptible they are to attack by spirits and demons.
They believe, the full bay believe that it's very dangerous to be too loving toward a child.
And as a result, full bay mothers and full bay fathers, full bay adults, take what we
would consider to be a very nonchalant attitude, if not negligent attitude toward their children.
They don't run over immediately when they're crying to cuddle them and kiss them and make
them feel better.
They don't do a lot of things that we would consider to be natural signs of loving a child.
As they believe, if you lavish too much attention on a child, it's going to hurt that child.
It's going to steal part of their spirit.
And others who pay too much attention to your children are hurting that child as well.
If a neighbor woman looks at your child very lovingly, it's really a love of envy there
and a love of greed, and that greed can physically hurt the child and result in physical dehabilitation.
So one of the worst things that you could do in full bay society is what would seem
quite natural to an American if you walked into a full bay household and you saw a child
and you went over and patted its head and pinched its cheek and said, this is just the
cutest kid I've ever seen in my life.
This would be an awful insult and an awful danger to the child by paying too much attention
to it.
And what the parents do to protect their children is they put amulets around their neck.
And it's interesting here that the most powerful amulets are those that contain passages of
the Quran written down on a piece of paper, rolled up, and then put into the amulet.
And the word of the Quran has special preventative powers in keeping these souls from being stolen.
And so here we see a mix of what Frasier would have called magic and religion.
Islam, certainly a religion.
These beliefs about demons and spirits, certainly magic.
And so we see this intimate mixing of these two sorts of beliefs.
Now women are important medical practitioners in full bay society.
Women keep a little medicine chest.
A lot of this involves fertility.
Often in the medicine chest there will be a bit of an umbilical cord from a child.
And if a woman is infertile, they will conduct rituals with this umbilical cord to make her
fertile once again.
Women also control a body of knowledge concerning herbal potions that can be used as birth control,
for example, or day after potions, if you will.
So women serve this important medical function, this religious medical function in full bay
society.
Now in terms of spiritually caused illnesses, the worst fate that can befall a full bay
person is an attack by a cannibal witch.
And the cannibal witches come and they eat one's insides.
They eat one's intestines and they also steal part of one's soul.
And in stories about this they tell of a bird that will fly out of the anus of a cannibal
witch and it carries a torch, a fire with them and it goes and attacks people, steals
their intestines, steals part of their soul and goes back and takes it to the cannibal
witch who can pig out on this human flesh.
Now why is this such a fear for full bay people?
Just remember that the full bay of Domaio are farmers but they see themselves as herders.
They used to be part of this herding tradition and they highly value meat, although they
don't have a lot of access to meat these days.
So the beliefs about cannibal witches are tied up in this valuation of meat.
One man that this anthropologist Helen Regis interviewed talked about, oh, wouldn't it
be great to be a cannibal witch?
You could eat a plate full of intestines every day.
And then he quickly corrected himself and said, but you know, I would never do that.
I would never go that route.
But it shows that there's this fear of cannibal witches because of this fear of their own
passion, of wanting to eat meat and of the ultimate rejection in some ways of the norms
of Pulaku.
If you gave in to eating human flesh, which the full bay say is the tastiest flesh of all,
if you gave in to this base desire, you would really be rejecting all of the code of Pulaku.
So we have desire.
We have envy.
We have witchcraft all wrapped up into one.
And to be treated, to be treated from an attack from a cannibal witch, one has to go to the
malam, the spiritual leader, the Quranic spiritual leader who's going to protect you from this
cannibal witch attack.
Now less de-habilitating, but more common than cannibal witch attacks are attacks by
river spirits.
And women are especially susceptible to this because Domayo is located on the side of a
river and they will go down every day and collect water and bring it back up.
And these river spirits can steal part of their soul.
Now it's interesting that the full bay have a lot of lore about river spirits and some
of it ties in with tales about white engineers, French and English engineers who have come
to Cameroon and started building roads as part of the development program in these remote
regions of Cameroon.
And Regis quotes a story that was told to her by a man that she heard from several other
people as well about the relationship of these river spirits to the engineers who are building
bridges over the rivers.
And let me quote this.
This is a full bay man.
I hear it said that there are some whites who build bridges and the spirits destroy them
during the night.
They bring out the engineers, the whites who know how to catch spirits.
They say they capture the spirits, they say they catch it and the spirit says I leave
you be.
They then release him and they can go on with their construction.
I learned that the spirits had captured a white man in Chad, not in Cameroon, strategically
a distance away in Chad.
Until now the man is there.
If they come with their binoculars they see him captured.
He's alive.
He's in the water.
Africans can see him too, but the whites have gadgets.
They have binoculars they can look with and they see him.
The Africans don't have these tools.
It's far, a thousand meters or so, a lot of water.
So this is a wonderful story I think.
It's a commentary on neoclonial relations between whites and the full bays.
And it also recognizes the power of the outside world, the power of these engineers with their
binoculars, with their technology, and also the power of the native spiritual world as
well.
It seems to be a morality tale, but paradoxically the morality is somewhat ambiguous here.
And I think this reflects a fundamental ambiguity of many native peoples around the world trying
to work out their place in an increasingly globalized world.
