Lecture 10 Writes of Passage
Writes of passage are found in cultures around the world.
They mark significant events in the life stage of an individual.
In our own culture we have birthdays, anniversaries, bar mitzvahs, bot mitzvahs, in some part
of the country, debutante balls, various sorts of ceremonies that mark different life stages.
But in other cultures these rights of passage often play a much more central role than they
do in our own society.
In this lecture we are going to review theories of rights of passage and look to two case studies.
First returning to the full bay we are going to look at male circumcision camps that changed
boys into men.
And then we are going to turn to the Sambia of Highland Papua New Guinea and their most
unusual rights of passage that mark the same transition.
The typology that we have for understanding rights of passage comes to us from the anthropologist
Arnold van Gennep who published a book in 1909 titled rights of passage.
And he noted that there are three main stages to rights of passage.
The first is separation from a group.
You take the individual who is going to go through this process out of the normal social
group.
Take them away from the group.
Then you have a period of transition.
And this period of transition might last a few minutes, a few days, a few weeks, even
a number of years in extreme cases.
So you have a period of separation, period of transition, and then reintegration back
into the group taking on this new stage of life.
A boy becoming a man, a woman becoming a woman, a girl becoming a woman.
The anthropologist Victor Turner published a landmark work in 1969 titled The Ritual
Process, Structure and Anti-Structure.
And in this book, basically what he did was theorize van Gennep's middle stage, the stage
of transition.
And he gave it the term liminality.
And in Turner's words, liminality is an ambiguous state of being.
It's betwixt in between normal states or normal conditions.
It mediates between inner desires and social controls.
Turner, when he was writing about liminality, saw it present in all sorts of rituals.
And he stressed that it's an inverse state, a situation of anti-structure, where normal
social norms are reversed.
The normal rules of social life don't apply during a liminal period.
The world is literally turned upside down.
What's normally forbidden is allowed.
What you would normally do is forbidden during a period of liminality.
Now for Turner, liminality symbolically represents a period of regression away from culture and
this ordered aspect of life and toward nature and the untamed chaos of nature.
He said that it's a very important ritual for people to undergo because it allows them
to get in touch with their natural side and then reemerge and reaffirm the social order
of things.
Now we can apply the concept of liminality not only to rites of passage, but all sorts
of other things.
University students, for example, in the states are in this period of liminality.
They're no longer children, they're not living at home with their parents, and yet they're
not fully adults either.
They're probably still relying on their parents for financial support.
So we have certain rites of these certain periods of liminality.
Some scholars have argued that a problem in contemporary U.S. society is we don't have
clearly marked rites of passage.
It's not clear when a boy becomes a man or when a girl becomes a woman.
We have all of these little steps along the way.
At 16, an adolescent can get a driver's license, at 18 they can vote, at 21 they can buy alcohol.
But there's never this one defining moment that says, okay, yesterday you're a boy and
today you're a man, or yesterday you're a woman, a girl, and today you're a woman.
So Turner and others have applied his concept of liminality to carnival celebrations, for
example, carnival celebrations around the world.
These moments when the normal social structure is turned upside down, it's a period of liminality,
where public drunkenness would normally be looked down upon, it's okay.
Where public nudity would be prohibited, it's allowed.
The normal social order of things being turned upside down.
And Turner said that during carnival celebrations, for example, it serves this powerful collective
psychological safety valve.
It allows people to shed the shackles of the social order and to get back in touch with
the untamed chaos of nature.
And then on Ash Wednesday, after Mardi Gras, after carnival is over, then they can reintegrate
and reaffirm the social order of things.
So Turner also argued in talking about liminality, that periods of liminality can induce what
he termed, comunitas.
And comunitas is this feeling of tight solidarity, of group unity that's facilitated by collective
liminality.
So he said that when a group, especially when a group goes through a rite of passage and
they have this period of liminality, it bonds the group together.
And here we can think of hazing rituals in fraternities and sororities, at universities,
in the military.
Various sorts of hazing rituals serve to bond groups together because the group undergoes
a common hardship, this period where the normal order of things is turned upside down
and it creates solid bonds that can very often last a lifetime.
So getting back to the full bay and initiation ceremonies in rites of passage.
Boys are the focus of the full bay initiation ceremony.
When boys are growing up in full bay society, their fathers are very distant.
They're taken care of by their mothers.
They spend most of their time at home with their mothers and their fathers are off with
their male friends.
A strong bond thus naturally emerges between boys and their mothers.
But keep in mind, this is a patriarchal society.
This is a society where men are suspicious of women, where men see women as being potentially
polluting, de-abilitating to the male.
And so boys have to be taken away from women and this world of women and made into men
somehow.
It's a little bit dangerous for them to spend all of their time with their mothers and in
the company of women.
The full bay men, they see women as potentially polluting.
They're especially scared of menstrual blood, menstruating women are not allowed to enter
a mosque for example.
And so all of this kind of pollution can rub off on the boys and this has to be cleansed
away during the ritual process, the rite of passage.
In full bay ideology, women and young children are also seen as being a bit pagan.
And recall, in the last lecture we talked about Levi-Strauss's dichotomy of nature and culture
and nature is the culture as chaos is the order, as naked is the clothes, as women are
to men and so forth.
So women and children are seen to embody this unrestrained chaos of nature in some ways
that men who are seen as being more cultured, more civilized are not.
So they have to take the boys out of this women's world, cleanse them of any pollution
they might have undergone and make them into men.
So what they do is they have a circumcision camp as Regis calls it.
It's an odd verbal image for me, a circumcision camp.
When I think of camp, I think of Boy Scout camp or something and this is very different
letters being written home, I would imagine, from the circumcision camp.
But anyway, so when there are enough boys in a village about between the ages of 7 and
12 years old, when there's a critical mass to form a cohort, these boys will be gathered
up and taken out of the village to a camp set up on the far side of the river.
So the boys are separated from their families, literally taken out of their mother's arms
sometimes and housed in this camp across the river.
The camp will last for several weeks and in the camp, the boys are forced to do all sorts
of things that they would never do in everyday life.
So they enter this period of liminality.
They've been separated from society and their mothers and they enter this period of liminality.
During the camp, the boys will eat unclean animals, they'll even eat road kill and as
you're all aware, the Muslim tradition has very clear guidelines about what sorts of
meats can be eaten.
The boys are fed polluted meats, the meats that they're taught not to eat in Koranic
school and not just fed a little bit, but they're fed so much that they get sick and
they throw up and they vomit and they're fed too much millet and they get sick.
And so during this camp, the normal rules are turned upside down.
What they normally couldn't eat, they would eat, where they would normally show restraint
and pulaku and not eating too much, they're forced to consume more than they normally would.
And so you have this situation where boys are separated from their mothers, they're
breaking with the world of women and put together in this circumcision camp, which creates a
real sense of komunitas between these boys, a sense of togetherness.
They go through all the same hardships, they form a bond and a bond that will last through
the rest of their lives.
Now the full bay circumcision camp basically follows the scheme put forth by Gannett, Van
Gannett separation from the village, followed by a period of transition, what Turner would
have called liminality, and then reintegration.
Now the circumcision itself, in one way the focal point of the camp, the boys are being
taken there to be circumcised, but in another sense it's an anticlimatic part of this process.
The boys are taken apart one by one and the foreskin of their penis is cut off using sometimes
a razor blade, sometimes a knife, sometimes a pair of scissors.
It will be wrapped up with an herbal package and allowed to heal.
It's not unlike in some ways female genital mutilation in other parts of Africa.
Now some symbolic anthropologists argue that cutting off the foreskin removes the female
looking part of the male genitalia, just as female circumcision removes the erectile tissue
from the female anatomy.
And so it's not only symbolically making them into men and women, it's physically making
them into men and women, taking those parts of the anatomy that look like the other gender,
and permanently inscribing the symbolic statement on their body.
So after they've undergone circumcision, they have a number of days to heal and then
there's reintegration back into full base society.
And in this reintegration, after they've undergone the ceremony, there's a huge feast in the
village that's thrown to welcome these boys, now men, back into society.
And the boys are paraded around, almost as if they were brides or some sort of West African
Chippendales, and the women are allowed to ogle and look at them with lust in their eyes.
And this is a carryover of this period of luminality.
Normally women aren't supposed to show any sort of overt sexuality.
It's dangerous, but in this coming in ceremony, they're allowed to go around and ogle the
boys who are being paraded around as new young men.
So there's an overt sexuality in this reintegration ceremony that would normally be opposed to
everything in full base society.
But once they're reintegrated into society, their interaction with women ends.
They'll get married, marriage is very important for the full bay, but they won't spend a
lot of time with their wives.
They don't spend a lot of time with their mothers or sisters either.
Now women in full base society go to Quranic school as do the men.
The boys generally attend Quranic school until their late teens or early twenties.
So they've gone through the circumcision camp between the time they're seven and twelve
years old.
They attend the Quranic school with a malam, learning to memorize the Quran and repeating
the Quran verbatim.
And they normally, boys will do this until they're late teens, early twenties.
And then they're allowed this period of license where they can go out and sometimes they leave
their community, go to a big city, maybe drink alcohol, maybe experiment sexually.
They're allowed this period of freedom and then they're expected to come back to Islam,
to come back to being devout Muslims in their late thirties and forties and go on studying
the Quran.
So that's basically the life cycle of a boy changing into a man in full base society.
And here I would like to mention the stages that women go through, that girls becoming
women go through as well.
In full base life, women have four distinct stages of life, four distinct life phases
that they will hold.
The first is that of a virgin, a young girl, up into the age that she gets married and
girls get married between twelve and fourteen years old.
They often marry a much older man and these virgins are seen as being pure, as being unformed.
Still a girl, not a woman yet, not as dangerous as a woman would be.
Then after marriage, after she's been deflowered by her husband, she's no longer a girl, she's
a woman and she's betrothed, she might have a bit of say in who she marries, but not
a whole lot.
Her family's really going to decide this for a twelve, thirteen, fourteen year old girl
really doesn't know who to marry anyway, one could argue.
The marriage is presumptively, at the beginning anyway, for a lifetime, yet most women in
full base society get divorced.
The average woman has two point six husbands in full base society and women can initiate
these divorces if a husband doesn't give enough cloth at the annual exchanges, doesn't give
enough good cloth, only gives print cloth and not wax cloth.
These are perfectly acceptable grounds for a woman to divorce her husband.
And when a woman gets divorced, she enters into the third stage of her life and that
is the status of a free woman.
And free women, they're women who have been divorced and are in between marriages, they're
probably going to get married again.
And they're considered to be very dangerous beings by the full bay men.
They're more subject to their passions than men are.
Men are considered to be more disciplined in regards to sexuality.
This really turns upside down our own Western cultural model of men and women.
We would assume that men have this unrestrained sexuality and that women are more reserved.
Among the full bay, it is women.
It's women who would be nymphomaniacs if they didn't have a man, if they didn't have a husband
to keep them in their place.
And so men are scared of these free women, these divorced women.
They have no husband to control them and sometimes they have affairs.
They will have affairs with younger men or with married men sometimes.
And eventually they'll get married again.
As I've said, they get married two or three times generally during their lifetime.
So you have the stage of virginity and then a girl, woman is married and then after she
gets divorced, she can be a free woman.
And then finally after menopause, when they can no longer have children, they become asexual
in a way.
Scene is not being as tied to the passions of nature as they once were, not as potentially
dangerous as they once were.
But scene is being wise as someone who's lived through all of the travails that a woman,
a mother, a wife has to live through.
And very often they return to studying the Quran at this stage.
They stopped, you'll remember when they get married, 12, 13, 14 years old, they stopped
going to Quranic school.
But after they become these old women, they can go back to the Quran.
And often they're seen as elders.
People go to them for advice and people sometimes feel able to talk to them in a way that they
couldn't talk to elder men.
So continuing this discussion of rites of passage, I'd like to turn to a group known
as the Sambia who live in Papua New Guinea, the highlands of New Guinea.
New Guinea, you'll remember, is off the coast of Australia.
The highlands are a very rugged territory, high elevation, 7, 8, 9,000 feet high, dramatic
peaks and valleys.
So you have lots of little groups that are geographically separated and don't have a
lot of contact with one another.
And as a result, there are literally hundreds of languages, not just dialects, but hundreds
of languages spoken in New Guinea.
And the Sambia speak an Anga language.
The Samba are made famous by a number of studies conducted by the anthropologist Gilbert Hurt.
He started going there in the late 1960s and early 1970s, and he's kept going back year
after year even to this day.
Now the Sambia is a pseudonymic name.
The name of the group is well known among people who live in the area, but Hurt wanted
to protect their privacy and to protect them from curious tourists because of their unusual
rituals, which we'll talk about in just a moment.
So the Sambia, they live in Highland, New Guinea.
It's a tropical climate.
They get about 150 inches of rainfall every year.
The seasons, they have two seasons, rainy and dry.
It's a region where there are these hundreds of groups divided by rough geography, divided
by language, and you get lots of warfare and conflict between the different groups.
In Sambian society, you also find a strong division between the spheres of men and women.
Now they're not Muslim, so this isn't an Islamic division.
It's not based on Islamic scripture, but men and women are even more segregated in Sambian
society than they are in Fulbay society.
In a Sambian village, you'll have the village proper, and then on the outside of the village,
there'll be a men's house, a club house, we could call it.
And this is where the men go and live when they start their initiation ceremony.
And they'll actually live there from the time they're seven years old until their early
20s.
Sometimes they're mid-20s.
They'll live in this men's hut, live communally, only with other men until their first child
is born.
So in the village, you have a village.
On the outside is a men's hut.
Inside the village, there's a central plaza area and circular houses around them.
And inside these houses, these huts, will live a nuclear family, a man, his wife, and
their children.
But even inside the huts, there's a lot, there's literally lines very often in the
middle of the hut, and women cannot enter the men's side of the hut.
So the women's side of the hut is when you first go in the door, a man would walk in,
step over the woman's side of the hut, and enter his own side of the area.
So in addition, you have the men's club houses, the village proper, and then outside the village
as well, you'll have a menstrual hut.
And this is where women who are menstruating have to go during their periods.
They leave the village, they leave their family, and they go out and they stay in this menstrual
hut during their period.
There's a strict, strict segregation of men and women in the Sambian villages.
And concerning these menstrual huts, there's been conflicting reports about whether they're,
at first they were seen as a very bad thing for women.
It's been an awful way of subjugating women.
These men are forcing women to leave their homes when they're having their period and
go out and live in these menstrual huts.
Some recent revisionist research has suggested, however, that the women don't mind this at
all.
A woman's daily life in Sambian society is not easy.
I mean, waking up at four in the morning, starting the fire, cooking food for the family.
When breakfast is over, starting to cook lunch, it's a very grueling lifestyle.
And this is a chance for women to get together outside of the watchful eye of men and spend
some leisurely time.
And so is the segregation of women into a menstrual hut?
Is this an ugly side of patriarchy, or is it a way in which women can live their lives
a little better?
The evidence is conflicting on this.
But getting back to the segregation of the sexes in Sambian villages, there are even
separate paths through the village for men and women.
Men walk on one path and women walk on another.
So I bring this up just to reinforce how divided men and women are in Sambian society.
Men in Sambian society are expected to embody a quality that they call gerundu.
And this means fierceness.
They have a, historically, there have been a lot of battles between these groups in Highland,
New Guinea, and they value warriors.
The men need to become warriors.
And so they want to instill them with this sense of gerundu or fiercity, fierceness.
And they do this through the initiation process.
Initiation for Sambian boys starts around the age of seven years old, about the same
time that it starts for full bay boys.
But for the Sambian boys, initiation is not completed until their mid-twenties, until
the birth of their first child.
And so it's this really long period of initiation.
And throughout this whole period, they will live in the men's house, live away from the
women.
Now during initiation, the boys are taken out of the village in a ceremony, again, not
unlike the full bay ceremony where they're ripped out of their mother's arms.
The mothers very often are screaming, don't take my child away, don't take my son away.
And the older men and the older boys come and they take these boys away.
The boys don't know what's going to happen, so they're incredibly scared, and they take
them out to a temporary camp set up outside of the village.
When the boys are in this camp, they're put through incredible hardships.
They're made to dance for hours and hours on end.
They're made to take long hikes.
They're not given enough to eat.
They're really pushed to the edge of consciousness.
Not unlike the way in which certain religious sects brainwash their converts, really pushing
them to the edge of consciousness so that the mind opens up and is willing to accept
all of these new things and internalize these new ways of looking at the world.
Now among the Sambia, unlike in full bay initiation, the initiation process is supposed to be
very secret.
The women in society aren't supposed to know what goes on.
There are these huge secrets.
Gilbert Hurt, the anthropologist who has worked there, calls them screaming secrets because
the women actually know what goes on, but they can't talk about it.
They have to act like they don't know what's going on.
So the boys are taken out of their homes away from their mothers, and they're put in these
camps where they learn the secrets of manhood.
In these initiation camps, they learn how to play flutes, and with these flutes, and
these are secret flutes, the women aren't supposed to see the flutes.
With these flutes, the boys, they're made to play the flutes.
They're hit on the head with the flutes, and then the flutes are used as a prelude for
teaching them the basis of Sambian initiation, and this really has to be one of the most
unusual rituals ever observed by anthropologists in the world, and it is ritualized homosexuality
between the older boys and men and these younger boys.
Now to understand the Sambian initiation here, we have to go over a bit of Sambian ethnobiology.
The Sambian believe that men are not born with the supply of semen, and that they don't produce
it themselves.
Instead, the men are born with an empty organ called a tingu, and the semen has to somehow
get built up in the body, and the semen is the source of jirungdu, of fierceness, so
it's crucially important for boys to develop healthy physically, psychologically, and socially
that they undergo this process, that they undergo this insemination, and so the young
boys are forced to, they're taught to perform fellatio, oral sex, on the older boys, and
they do this because they really believe that the young boys don't have any semen, and so
they have to ingest this from the older boys so that they can grow up and become a strong
man.
The Sambia will tell you, of course it works.
Look we take these prepubescent boys and they undergo this process, and in a couple of years
their genitals start growing, they start getting pubic hair, so it obviously works.
Now the justification for this ritual goes back to the origin myth in Sambian society,
which boys don't learn until the very last stage of initiation, when they're in their
mid-twenties, after their first child has been born.
The Sambian initiation myth says that in the beginning there were two individuals, Numbulyu
and Chimchi, and these were basically asexual beings.
They both had insipid genitalia of both sexes, but it wasn't very highly developed.
Over time what happened was Chimchi began performing fellatio on Numbulyu, and Numbulyu
became a man, and Chimchi grew larger breast and became a woman.
Over time, and the Sambia believe that a woman can become impregnated either through intercourse
or through oral sex as well by ingesting semen, they believe that they say that Chimchi got
pregnant and that Numbulyu, when she came to term, cut an opening in her, which became
the vagina, and she gave birth to a child.
We have this first couple, the Numbulyu and Chimchi, the Sambian Adam and Eve, although
they're definitely eating from a different apple tree than our Adam and Eve ate from.
So they have a son, then they have another son a few years later, and when the older
son starts going through puberty, he comes to his father and he says, hey, you know,
I have these feelings, I have an erection, I don't know what to do with it, why can't
I have sex with Chimchi, my mother, your wife?
And Numbulyu, the father says, no way, you know, that's totally out of the question.
So we have this classic, edible conflict reflected in the Sambian mythology, a boy wanting to
have sex with the mother, the father not allowing that to happen, the father prohibiting that.
But the Sambia have come up with this unique solution to the edible conflict, and that
is that the father Numbulyu told the older boy to have his younger brother perform oral
sex on him, and that so that the younger brother could, it would both serve as a sexual outlet
for the older boy and build up the seminal fluids in this organ, the tingu of the younger
boy.
So throughout their lifetime, males have to be very careful about not wasting their semen.
They have to be very possessive toward their semen.
And women are seen as being semen hungry.
So men have to be careful around women about having sex with women.
They don't want to have sex too often because the women are going to soak up all of your
semen, and if this life source is depleted, a man can die.
So after the Sambia have sex, they will actually go out and lick the sap of this particular
tree to help them rebuild their semen supply.
So when they're away during this camp, at the beginning of initiation, they've learned
to perform these homosexual activities.
Gilbert Hurt, who's worked with them, calls it ritualized homosexuality, and it's important
to point out that most of the boys don't want to do this.
They're forced to do this.
It's something that they are embarrassed about.
They don't want to talk with the women about, and very often they don't even want to talk
to anthropologists about this process at all.
The elders are forcing them to do it, and through the initiation process, they haven't been
fed much.
They've been dancing all night.
They've been taken on these long hights.
They're really pushed to the edge of consciousness, and they're very susceptible to internalizing
these new ideas.
So this goes on for a period of time.
Once boys enter into puberty, they become the active partner in this relationship of
oral sex with younger boys.
They will eventually get married in their late teens or early 20s, and they go through
a period of bisexuality where they're still living in the men's house where these ritualized
homosexual acts are performed, and they start having sex with their wives as well.
So we have this transition, this fairly unique transition of homosexuality, bisexuality,
and then men are expected to become fully heterosexual after the birth of their first
child.
This is an unusual ritual, but it's not out of the question.
There are other groups in Papua New Guinea who practice similar sexual practices.
There are groups in Amazonia, although they don't have this ritualized homosexual aspect.
They do have minstrel huts, they have secret men's cults, and so forth.
So while this is an extreme example, the same general sort of pattern of antagonism between
the sexes holds in a number of different cultures.
So these rites of passage marking a transition from childhood to adulthood, and in most cultures
this is a defining feature of becoming an adult is getting married and having a family.
And this is going to be the topic of our next lecture.
