Lecture 11, Family, Marriage and Incest
Today I'd like to talk about marriage and the family.
Both of these is the nucleus of social relationships.
Kinship, which is the culturally recognized relationships based on blood and on marriage,
has long been a staple of anthropology, something we've been concerned with.
Now, your own kinship system probably seems natural to you.
I mean, we were raised from our earliest age to learn our kinship terms.
Your father's brother is, of course, your uncle.
Your mother's sister is, of course, your aunt.
But in many societies around the world, your father's brother would be called father.
Your mother's sister might be called mother.
You might have a number of relatives that you would call brother and sister
that aren't what we would consider to be your biological brothers and sisters.
So we generally take kinship terms to be the equivalent of biological relationships.
And kinship terms do try and represent biological relationships.
But it's important to keep in mind that the anthropological concept of kinship
is concerned with these cultural models of relatedness.
And they overlap with biological relationships, but they're distinct in certain ways.
It's a model. It's a scheme. It's a cultural model, as we've talked about in previous lectures.
So in this lecture, we're going to review different sorts of kinship structures,
lineages and clans, matrilineal, patrilineal and cognatic societies.
And then we're going to turn to marriage, romantic love, and the universal prohibition against incest.
I would like for you to keep in mind during this lecture that the rules of kinship,
like any rule of culture, like any rule of language, in fact, they're always flexible.
They're always changing. We're improvising based on these rules
and changing them based on the situations in which we find ourselves.
So while, as we talk about them, these rules may seem hard and fast.
In practice, they're very often much more flexible.
So we have two main types of kinship that we distinguish in anthropology.
A consanguennial kin and a phenyl kin.
Consanguennial comes from consanguin and the Latin root for blood sanguin,
and it refers to blood relatives.
A phenyl kin, what we would call our in-laws, refers to relatives by marriage rather than by blood.
Now we also have fictive kin, godparents, for example,
or family friends we might call aunt or uncle or even brother or sister
that don't have any sort of biological relationship.
Blood relatives, groups of consanguins, are called descent groups.
And descent groups serve lots of important functions in societies that don't have formal legal structures,
formal economic systems.
Descent groups can regulate marriage.
They often serve as economic units, holding land in common, for example.
They even serve religious functions, as certain rituals will be passed down
from generation to generation in a descent group.
There are two main types of descent groups.
The first is clans, and the second are lineages.
And the big difference between these is that clans trace their common origin back to a mythical ancestor.
And lineages trace their origin back to a known ancestor.
So they both believe that they're descended from a common ancestor,
but in lineages you know who that person is, and in a clan it's very often a mythical figure.
Clans are very often made up of groups of lineages.
They're larger than lineages.
Now there are several types of descent groups.
The first we can talk about is patrilineal descent groups.
In patrilineal societies, and they make up about 40% of societies around the world,
everyone is related through the males.
Descent is traced only through male lines.
The chain of descent always stops with a female.
So in a patrilineal society, you're not really related to your mother and your mother's side of the family
in the same way that you're related to your father and your father's side of the family.
Now this seems odd to us because we see ourselves as being related equally to both sides of our family,
but not in patrilineal societies.
And relatives are conceived in different ways as well.
Mother's brother, who we would call an uncle, your mother's brother, an uncle,
is a very different sort of relative in a patrilineal society than your father's brother, also whom we would call uncle.
So we have patrilineal descent groups.
We also have matrilineal descent groups, which as the name implies, descent is traced through female lines.
There's a much smaller percentage of societies in the world that are matrilineal, only about 15%, so it's fairly rare.
And here, descent always stops with a male.
For example, a man's children are not members of his own matrilineal.
They're not members of his family in this cultural model.
They're members of their mother's family.
In matrilineal societies, ironically, it's not women who really run things.
If women ran a society, we would call that a matriarchy, where descent is traced through female lines.
We call this matrilineality, and we have 15% of known societies are matrilineal,
but in none of these do women hold the formal positions of power, so they're not matriarchies.
Men still are the chiefs.
They hold the formal positions of authority and power in these societies.
There's no recorded case of a matriarchy in the ethnographic record.
We have patrilineal societies, matrilineal societies, and finally, cognatic societies.
And this is the system that our own culture uses.
We're neither matrilineal nor patrilineal.
We trace our relationships through both the mother's side of the family and the father's side of the family.
Now, generally, you have the possibility in our own society, in a cognatic society,
of feeling equally related to your mother's side and your father's side of the family.
Cognatic descent is found in about 45% of the world's cultures, and it's the most flexible system.
It's obviously a lot more flexible than matrilineality or patrilineality, and it's often associated with mobility.
And so, strangely enough, it unites gathering and hunting groups, nomadic groups,
who need a very flexible kinship system, and industrial and post-industrial societies like our own.
So we'll come back to these in this lecture and in later lectures.
But right now, I want to move on to marriage for a moment.
Why do people get married?
And it seems obvious to us.
You get married because you fall in love.
You find your one true life partner fall madly in love and get married and hopefully live happily ever after.
But for most of the people in the world, marrying for love, marrying for these romantic notions that we hold so dear as Westerners,
is not seen as a valid reason.
Love is seen as a youthful folly in many cultures, something fickle, whereas marriage is the ultimate contract,
a lifetime bond between individuals, and not only between individuals, but between families and well as well.
So in many cultures around the world, love is not seen as a good reason for getting married.
And when marriage is occurring at such an early age, you'll remember that among the full bay,
when girls get married when they're 12, 13, 14 years old, maybe, they're not capable of choosing their best partner.
Now this seems odd to us.
Who would know better than I who I should marry?
But if you're 12, 13, or even 14, 15, 16, 17 years old, how do you know who your best spouse is going to be for the rest of your life?
These kids have no idea.
Their hormones are raging wild.
They have these crazy romantic notions in their head.
So the parents think that they should choose who their children's spouses should be.
And it's not just a question of personal choice.
The idea of monogamy is not the norm in marriage customs around the world.
Now a number of historians and anthropologists believe that romantic love is a Western invention.
And this is actually probably the standard view in history and in anthropology as well.
That romantic love arose in the 11th and 12th century France in courtly culture where there were all of these troubadours and the immensely wealthy courts of the time.
All these people just hanging around the court with all of this leisure time.
And so the men and the women to divert themselves came up with this idea of romantic love.
And men started falling in love with women and writing love poetry and so forth.
And the women started falling in love with men.
And the vocabulary of romantic love really entered into popular discourse at this time.
Now I did some research about 10 years ago with my co-author Bill Jankowiak looking for evidence of romantic love in cultures around the world.
And we took a sample of 168 cultures and we read everything we could find about these cultures looking for evidence of romantic love.
And it's hard to find because in most cultures they practice arranged marriage.
So people aren't marrying for romantic love.
So we had to look for things like suicide over unrequited love and elopements or love poetry.
And in the study we found evidence of romantic love in 90% of the societies that we looked at.
90%.
And in the other 10% it was very often probably a case of ethnographers overlooking or not including the data that we needed to make a determination.
So a number of sociobiologists picked up on this finding to argue that perhaps romantic love evolved early on in hominid evolution to facilitate pair bonding.
And perhaps there is some biological basis for feelings of romantic love.
The function that would be to create a pair bond to facilitate raising of children.
And some studies have shown in recent years that when people are in love there are elevated levels of dopamine and other hormones.
And so there are actually physical chemical changes that occur in the brain when one falls in love.
Now an interesting thing is researchers at first thought that they would find the brain waves of people in love would look like obsessive compulsive people suffering from obsessive compulsive disorder.
And what they actually found is when they do these brain scans, PET scans and MRIs and so forth, that the brain patterns of people in love, deeply in love, look more like coke addicts than they do like obsessive compulsives.
And so perhaps there is this addictive quality to love as well that evolved to help us form pair bonds.
Now monogamy is the exception in cultures around the world rather than the rule.
Most cultures allow some form of polygamy of multiple spouses.
And let me make a clarification here about the terminology that we're using.
Polygamy is the overarching term and it means having more than one spouse, a man having more than one wife or a woman having more than one husband.
In anthropology we use two more precise terms.
Polygyny, which refers to a man having more than one wife, polygyny, a man having more than one wife, and polyandry, which is when a woman has more than one husband.
Both polygyny and polyandry are forms of polygamy.
Now polygyny is very common around the world.
About 82% of the world societies allow men to have more than one wife.
But on the other hand, polyandry is extremely rare.
We only know six or seven cases, less than one percent of the cultures that have been sampled in the world practice polyandry.
It's extremely rare and it seems to be most closely associated with extreme environmental conditions.
The best known example is of the ethnic Tibetans living in Nepal, a very rough environment, I mean 12,000 feet above sea level.
Most of the families are poor and have very little cultivatable land.
And they practice a very specific form of polyandry in which brothers share a single wife.
And this is called fraternal polyandry when brothers share a single wife.
Now why might this be?
They live in this harsh environment, not a ton of land to go around, and fraternal polyandry keeps land together.
These men are marrying the same woman so they can all farm the same land.
They compose a single household.
And two, it reduces the rate of reproduction.
Women are limited in the number of children that they can have in their lifetime.
And if one woman has several husbands, the absolute rate of reproduction will be very low.
Now marriage is generally considered to be a human universal.
People in all cultures bond with members of the opposite sex.
But there are a few exceptions.
And actually the exception that might prove the rule in this case is a group called the Nayar.
And we find them in Southwest India.
And they're the example that's often held up to show that marriage is not universal.
But even among the Nayar, we find bonding between men and women something that looks a lot like marriage and is very important to their culture.
Now the Nayar are matrilineal.
They're a matrilineal society.
The core of the household is a brother and sister, or brothers and sisters.
And they will live together and have their lands and their house in common.
And traditionally the Nayar have been a very war-like society.
The men are warriors that would go off for long periods of time and fight and then come back periodically to their own households.
Now among the Nayar, we find two forms of what we can call marriage.
The first is called the Tali Rite.
And this is basically a rite of passage, a puberty rite, a coming of age ceremony for girls, much more so for girls than boys.
So when a girl is somewhere between the ages of 7 and 12, very often prepubescent before she's begun her menstrual cycle,
she will marry a man who lives in the same village and who's been selected by her parents.
But this man should be from another matrilineage.
They will cohabitate for a few days.
The man has the right to have sex with this wife, but they don't always do it, especially if the girl is very young.
The man will not have sex with the wife.
But once the girl has gone through this cohabitation, whether she's had sex or not, before she goes through it, she's a girl.
And when she comes out, she's a full woman.
She's a real woman in Nayar society, and in fact is called by the term that they use for women, the honorific term for women.
This marriage, this tali rite marriage, might only last for 3, 4, 5 days, but it's an important part of making girls into women.
Now afterwards, when a girl gets older, she's going to have very little to do with this first husband, this tali rite husband.
There are a few points in the life cycle where they have to get back together and the husband will give certain ritual gifts to his wife.
But for the most part, this is a 3 to 5 day marriage, if you will, and then it ends there.
But afterward, when the girl gets older, she can enter into another form of marriage, which we call sanbanham marriages.
And these are marriages based on mutual consent. They're not arranged marriages.
And they also have this serial quality.
Sanbanham husbands are also called visiting husbands.
And what they'll do is after dinner, and you'll remember that men are living with their sisters in their family household,
a man will leave his home after dinner, go to his sanbanham wife, put his spear in front of the doorway to let other people know that he's there,
he'll spend the night with his wife, and then leave the next morning and go back to his sister's house where he'll eat and have breakfast.
Now a woman can have various sanbanham marriages at one time, up to 20 for example.
And most women have 2, 3, 4, 5, up to 10. 20 is very unusual.
But they can have multiple sanbanham marriages at the same time.
In some ways, these are very casual relationships.
And they can be terminated without any legal recourse, and people don't seem to really get upset.
They can be ended by mutual consent in that way.
The visiting husbands, sanbanham husbands, will give things to their wives, some cooking oil, maybe a little bit of money.
Not too much, but a little bit to help them get by in their everyday lives.
The women don't depend on their husbands for their survival, but it's a nice little extra bit that they give them.
The crucial thing occurs when a woman gets pregnant.
Every child has to have a father in Naira society. Paternity has to be acknowledged.
But if a woman has 8 sanbanham husbands, for example, how does she know who the father is?
We can always be sure of maternity, but we can never, at least in the days before DNA testing, we can never be absolutely sure of paternity.
And what happens is, one of the husbands has to step up to the plate and claim to be the father of this child.
And often a lot of negotiation goes on between the women and her sanbanham husbands, getting them to claim paternity in this case.
So marriage among the Naira is not exclusive. The couples don't cohabitate.
It's a very different form of marriage than our own form.
However, it's very important. This form of marriage, both the Tali right and the sanbanham, are very important in Naira society.
And it's important to validate paternity, to show who the father of a child is.
And this is a common thread in marriage in cultures throughout the world, claiming paternity.
Now, I'd like to move on at this point and talk just a bit about incest.
Incest is based around rules of exogamy.
Exogamy is marrying outside of a particular group, and endogamy.
Endogamy is marrying within a particular group.
One of the universal taboos found in cultures around the world is a prohibition against incest.
Against having sexual relationships or marrying some category of kin.
Somebody you have to marry outside of a given group. You have to marry exogamously.
But the rub is, what that category of kin is, changes and varies significantly from society to society.
In our own culture, whom one can marry varies from state to state.
First cousin marriage is prohibited in most states, I believe all states.
And in some states, second cousin marriage is prohibited as well.
Although not that long ago, there were a lot of first and second cousin marriages, even in our own culture.
Now, interestingly, we generally take an incest, a revulsion about incest, to be natural.
It's disgusting. Why would anybody want to do that?
It's just one of those perversities of everyday life.
But, as I said, the range of what we consider to be incestuous has changed over time.
The universal prohibition against incest is just with one's siblings, one's parents, and one's children.
So just the basic nuclear family, what we would consider to be the nuclear family.
This is the universal prohibition against incest.
No culture in the world allows marriage or sexual relationships within this group.
Now, I have to admit, there are a couple of very rare exceptions.
Hawaiian nobility, the Egyptian kings and queens.
This idea that where royalty is descended from the gods and the bloodline has to be kept pure,
they allow brother and sister marriage occasionally.
But these are very rare cases.
And for the most part, every culture in the world prohibits sexual relations between brothers and sisters and parents and children.
But the range of incestuous relatives is culturally defined.
Is first cousin marriage incestuous? Most people would agree.
What about second cousin marriage?
Most people would still agree, but where do we draw the line?
At what point does incest start?
In the Western tradition, our prohibitions against incest come from the Judeo-Christian tradition, come from the Bible.
In particular, chapter 18 in Leviticus, verse 6, and in parts of chapter 20 of Leviticus as well,
where we find a number of prohibitions listed.
For example, do not dishonor your father by having sexual relations with your mother.
She is your mother. Do not have relations with her.
Do not have sexual relations with your sister, and so forth.
But this isn't a very wide range of relatives that are prohibited.
One is not supposed to have sexual relations with parents, with aunts or uncles, with grandchildren, and so forth.
It's a very narrow range of what is explicitly prohibited in Leviticus.
But beyond that, the Catholic Church started expanding out what was considered to be incestuous.
And in AD 385, Pope Theodos I prohibited first cousin marriage.
This wasn't prohibited in the Bible. It wasn't found in the Scripture.
But the Pope decided that that was a little bit too close and prohibited it.
And then gradually, the Catholic Church expanded out the range of what was considered to be incestuous.
So that by AD 1059, Pope Nicholas II prohibited marriage to the seventh degree.
Prohibited marriage to the seventh degree. That means that you couldn't marry.
You would have your father, your grandfather, your great-grandfather, great-great-grandfather, great-great-great-grandfather, great-great-great-great-grandfather, great-great-great-great-grandfather, great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather.
And any of their descendants would be prohibited from marriage.
So let's say if you're living in rural France in the 11th century, you can't marry anybody.
Nobody in your village would be eligible to be married.
But of course, there was an exception. You could buy a dispensation from the church.
You could buy the right to marry your second cousin or your third cousin or even your first cousin.
So one intent, whether it was intentional or not, of the Catholic Church's expansion of the incest prohibition
was an increase in the sales of dispensations, of licenses to break canonical law.
Now, the range of what was considered to be incestuous was gradually shrunk back in the Catholic tradition.
In 1215, it was reduced to four degrees. In 1537, it was reduced to two degrees.
It was reduced for South American Indians first and then later for descendants of Africans in 1917.
It was reduced to two degrees. And finally, it was reduced to two degrees for everyone in the world.
But this prohibition, some sort of prohibition against incest, is found in all cultures.
And why might this be? Well, the obvious answer that comes to mind is inbreeding.
We don't marry our relatives because the dangers of having recessive genes come to the fore.
There's one study that has found that the children of very close incestuous relationships
are eight times more likely to be born with birth defects.
Now, this is true, but it doesn't help us understand why there are different cultural conceptions of what is incest.
Why the group that is considered incestuous varies from culture to culture.
Is marrying your second cousin incest? What if your second cousin was adopted?
Would that be incest? Most people would still consider it to be incest, but it's adopted.
So there's not a biological relationship there. So incest is cultural. It's a social prohibition.
Inbreeding is a partial answer, but it's an incomplete explanation for fully explaining incest taboos.
The scholar Edward Westermark offered another explanation, and he coined the phrase familiarity breeds contempt.
And this is from his 1891 work, The History of the Human Marriage.
And what he means here is that if you're raised with someone day in and day out, like a brother or a sister,
even if they're not your biological brother or sister, it's a turn off.
It's not romantic. Sexual relationships won't flourish because growing up together mutes that kind of lust and sexuality.
Now, in the last decades, a few studies have been done that give support to the idea that familiarity breeds contempt.
And the most famous were done in Kibbutzim, in Israel.
Kibbutzim, the communal communities in Israel that were started in the 1950s.
And there were studies done in the 1960s and 1970s looking at marriage patterns
and looking at sexual relationships between people who were raised on very traditional Kibbutzim.
And on these rigid Kibbutzim, children would be raised in dormitories away from their parents.
They would visit their parents every day, but they would be raised as a cohort away from their parents.
So they're raised with this peer group, intimately seeing each other every day, boys and girls, men and women as they grow up.
And so one study looked at 125 couples that had been raised since birth on the same Kibbutzim, and none of them got married to each other.
None of them. And you'd say, who would you find for a potential mate?
I mean, the obvious example would be someone that you were living with day in and day out.
This would be an obvious pool of potential marriage partners, but none of the people in the study married one another.
And there have been other studies that show that there are very few sexual relations as well among youths on Kibbutzim.
Now, the other example I wanted to mention that moves toward proving this hypothesis that familiarity breeds contempt was done by the anthropologist Arthur Wolfe.
And he worked with the Chinese exile community living in Taiwan.
And he noticed that there was a prevalence of a certain type of marriage called a sympoie marriage.
The sympoie marriage is infant betrothal.
And it's normally done by very poor families who can't afford to raise their child, especially a daughter, and so they betroth their daughter at a very early age.
Sometimes as early as six or seven months, sometimes as old as three or four years, but betrothing them to their future husband at a very early age.
The girl then goes and lives with her future husband's family and is raised like a sister.
They very often sleep in the same bed, they bathe together, they eat together.
It's just like she becomes a daughter in this family until she comes of age.
And then she's expected to marry who she's been living with as a brother and live the rest of her life in marriage that way.
So Arthur Wolfe looked at these marriages to see how successful they were.
He found that the fertility rate was 30% lower than other sorts of marriage.
So something's going on here. The fertility rate was 30% lower.
He started interviewing people who were in sympoie marriages and he found out that these marriages were incredibly tumultuous.
The husbands were more likely to cheat on their wives.
There were more avid consumers of prostitutes and pornography.
There was lots of familial strife, domestic abuse, and a high rate of divorce.
And Wolfe concludes that it's because familiarity breeds contempt.
These children were raised with one another since infants, just as if they were brother and sister.
And then when it came the moment to initiate the marriage, to have sexual relationships,
the both sides, the boys and the girls, very often refused.
There are accounts of mothers having to use a broom and force the children into the bridal chamber to consummate this marriage.
So does incest have a biological basis? Probably, potentially.
Are there also important cultural, psychological factors going on here as well?
Most certainly. Does marriage have an evolutionary cause?
Perhaps to facilitate pair bonding, it makes a lot of sense.
But as we've seen, marriages conceived are very differently in cultures around the world.
We have arranged marriages. We have multiple spouses.
We have these infant betrothals of the simple marriage.
Even our kinship terms, which seem so natural to us, are cultural constructions.
Yes, they're based on biological relationships, but we extend that out to step siblings and adopted siblings and so forth.
And so we see here the importance of culture.
And in the next lecture, we're going to apply these concepts of kinship and culture to the Trobriand Islanders.
Thank you.
