Lecture 12, Multiple Spouses and Matrilineality
In this lecture, we return to the Trobriand Islands, that chain of islands 150 miles off the coast of New Guinea
that were made famous by Bronislav Malinowski, and you'll remember he worked there in the early 20th century.
Malinowski, one of the early founders of anthropology, and one of the big advocates of doing long-term fieldwork.
So Malinowski was there from 1914 to 1917, and the Trobriand Islands, based largely on his work,
have become a classic case study in anthropology, and rightly so, given the richness of their cultural patterns.
And indeed, on the Trobriand Islands, we find ample illustrations of a number of topics that we've talked about in this class so far.
The role of language, the importance of cultural models and magic and religion, and the crucial role played by kinship.
And we have not just the work of Bronislav Malinowski, but also the anthropologist Annette Weiner,
who worked in the Trobriand Islanders in 1971 and 1972,
and actually made a number of short trips back in the 1970s and 1980s.
Now Weiner, as a woman, is able to provide us with a different perspective on Trobriand society.
Malinowski had more access to the men. He spent more time with the men.
There may have been a bit of sexist bias built into his work, understandable given the age in which he worked.
But Weiner had unique access to the female society in the Trobrianders,
which really complements what Malinowski had to say.
Now the Trobriands are flat coral reefs covered in very rich soils.
The subsistence basis of the Trobriand Islanders are growing yams, taro, tobacco, and other crops, as well as fishing.
Both Malinowski and Weiner worked on the largest and most important island in the Trobriand chain, which is the island of Kiriwina.
Kiriwina has a population of about 12,000, and that's divided among more or less 60 villages.
So a fairly dense population, about 200 people per village.
Each of the villages on the Trobriand Islanders are composed of groupings of houses, hamlets,
and each village will have six, seven, or eight of these hamlets in a village.
The hamlets are composed of houses, and the Trobrianders have these log houses that are built off the ground with very steeply arched thatched roofs.
And in front of the houses are yam huts, or yam houses, and these are often more elaborate than the main house.
Yams, and we're going to talk about yams in the Trobriand Islanders later in the course, but yams are important,
not only important staple items of the Trobriand diet, but really important symbolic items in Trobriand cosmology.
They symbolize a man's wealth.
The chief's house, for example, will have a huge yam hut out front that will be filled with yams to show the world his wealth.
Now, Trobrianders speak variants of the language Kiliwila.
They also very often speak a Neo-Melanesian Pigeon language, and interestingly enough, they have different languages for gardening.
They have a different language for garden magic, and this is a language that has different words, different pronunciation, even a different rhythm to their speak.
But what we know most, what we remember most about the Trobriand Islanders is the fact that they are a matrilineal society.
The scent is traced through female lines.
As we mentioned last time, in a matrilineal society, children feel related to their mother and their mother's brother and their mother's sister as well,
in a way that they don't feel related to their father, much less their father's brother or their father's sister.
Now, the Trobriand Islanders are a chieftain.
They have chiefs.
Chieftainship is hereditary.
They have lineages and clans, and these are ranked.
Some are ranked higher than others.
But women are not the chiefs, only men.
And men will inherit their position, not from their fathers, but from their mother's brother, their matrilineal male relative on the matrilineal side.
A young man will inherit his position in society from his mother's brother.
And likewise, a father will not pass on his position in society to his own biological son, but rather to his sister's son.
In Trobriand society, there's a great deference paid to chiefs.
One is not supposed to make eye contact with chiefs.
Commoners always sit lower than chiefs, and there's this rigidity of contact between chiefs and commoners.
A number of things are passed down matrilineal in Trobriand society.
Magic spells, for example, are passed down from men to their sister's children, their sister's sons.
Each of the hamlets in a Trobriand village is a matrilineal, although not in practice, not everyone who should live in a hamlet does.
It depends on their particular circumstances.
But everyone would maintain close contact to their home hamlet.
Now, ancestral names are given by the mother's side of the family.
It's a matrilineal society.
They're named by the mother's side of the family.
But fathers also give names to their children.
And this is significant.
A father will ask his sister to give him a name to bestow upon his biological child.
And this is the name that's most commonly used in everyday life, comes from the biological father.
Fathers also, in Trobriand society, give their children certain crucial adornments to wear,
especially shell necklaces, these cowrie shell necklaces.
It makes the child look nice.
It also acknowledges paternity.
And it also reflects on the social standing of the father.
If he can afford to give his child really nice adornments to wear, it reflects well on him.
Now, as Annette Weiner pointed out, Malinowski got it a bit wrong when he described the relationship between fathers and their sons and their children.
Malinowski said that fathers and sons don't have anything to do with each other.
They're like strangers.
But Weiner says that actually fathers play a very important role.
They give these adornments, they give these names.
It's just not as important as mother's brother.
Now, the key relationship in a matrilineal society is not between a husband and a wife.
It is between brothers and sisters.
This forms really the core of matrilineal society.
So a brother is related to his sister in a way in which he's not related to his own wife.
A way that he's not related to his own children.
His own children are not going to be members of his matrilineage, not going to be members of his family.
But his sister's children will be members of his family.
And this very often leads to a joking relationship.
Fathers, this seems paradoxical to us, but fathers often have a joking relationship with their children.
Whereas what we would call uncle, mother's brother, has this strict authoritarian relationship.
So fathers have more of what we would call in English an avuncular relationship, an uncle-ly relationship with their children.
Now, let me mention here the origin myth that Trobrianders tell.
The Trobrianders believe that in the beginning of all time, the primordial times, there was a society underground.
There were Trobriand villagers, there were yam fields, there were chiefs.
Everything that existed in Trobriand society today existed underground in this mythical world.
And in the beginning of time, brother and sister pairs came up through a hole from the underworld up into the current earth.
And when they came up, they came up in pairs.
And the first pair came up, and then the second pair came up, and then another pair,
and all in all, four brother-sister pairs came up from the underworld.
And each of these was associated with a particular animal.
There were the pigs, the dogs, the iguanas, and the crocodiles.
So in Trobriand society today, you have four clans, four people who traced their relationships back to a mythical ancestor,
these mythical brother and sister pairs who came up from the underworld.
And they're a member, all Trobrianders are a member of one of these four clans.
And they're named the pigs, the dogs, the iguanas, and the crocodiles.
And these clans are ranked.
The pigs came up first, then the dogs, then the iguanas, then the crocodiles.
And everyone is born into as a member of one of these clans in Trobriand society today.
In the Trobriand, everybody has to marry outside of their clan, but one doesn't want to marry too far down.
And these clans are ranked.
The pigs are first, the dogs are second, the iguanas are third, and the crocodiles are ranked last.
Everybody has to marry outside of their own clan, but they don't want to marry too far down.
So a pig wouldn't want to marry an iguana.
A pig would want to marry someone from a dog clan.
And so there's clan exogamy, but you don't want to marry too far down.
Now in many societies around the world, I want to talk about Trobriand marriage, but let me preface it with a general note.
In many societies around the world, the preferred marriage partner is one's cross cousin.
Cross cousin.
Now in anthropology, we have two different terms for cousins.
Cross cousins and parallel cousins.
Cross cousins are children of opposite-sex siblings.
Children of opposite-sex siblings.
This means that your mother's, brother's children would be your cross cousins, and your father's, sister's children would be your cross cousin.
Parallel cousins, on the other hand, are children of same-sex siblings.
So your mother's, sister's children would be your parallel cousins, and your father's, brother's children would be parallel cousins.
In many societies around the world, including the Trobrianders, these are two very different types of relatives.
They're not all cousins.
Cross cousins and parallel cousins.
Many societies consider parallel cousins to be like brothers and sisters, and very often they'll use the term brother and sister to refer to parallel cousins.
And in a number of cultures, like the Trobrianders, the preferred marriage partner is one's cross cousin.
So in the Trobrianders, there are four clans, and each person must marry outside of the clan.
To marry inside of the clan is considered to be incestuous.
Malinowski reported that the preferred marriage partner for men is the father's, sister's, daughter.
Cross cousin, father's, sister's, daughter would be the preferred marriage partner for a man.
Now this is neat because the father, sister's, daughter is always going to be a member of a different lineage and clan.
Remember that the children, your father is a member of a different matrilineage.
The father's sister would be a member of that same matrilineage, and father's sister's children would be a member of that matrilineage.
So it's marrying outside of one's lineage and outside of one's clan, but not marrying too far away.
There are already relationships between those families, and so it's marrying outside of one's clan, but keeping the two clans held together, their interests being intertwined.
Now, so Malinowski said that children have to marry their father's, sister's, daughter's, sons do, boys do.
Weiner said, actually, that's not the case. That's the preferred form of marriage.
This is what people would like to do in an ideal world, but in fact, people very often, you know, your father's sister might not have gotten married.
Your father might not have a sister. The children might not be the right age. You might not like your cross cousins.
A multitude of factors could come into play here, and so people very often don't marry their father's, sister's, daughter's, sons don't marry their father's, sister's, daughter.
But so there's some flexibility at play here.
Yams, as I've mentioned, are at the heart of Trobrian culture. It's the staple of the diet, but it's also the symbol of wealth and prosperity.
In terms of marriage, it's significant because in the early days of marriage, for the first year of marriage, a couple will live together, and the husband's mother will cook their food, will cook their yams, and bring it to their house.
And this is like a probationary period for the marriage. And if the marriage lasts a year, the wife will set up a hearth in their own home and start cooking the yams.
And when she cooks the first meal of yams for her husband, this means that the marriage is going to last. It's going to solidify.
Now, Trobrian men can marry several different women. They have a polygenous society.
And this is very useful for Trobrian men because if they have aspirations, if they're of a noble lineage, of a chiefly lineage, if they have aspirations to build up their political power by marrying different women, they can make kinship alliances with various families.
Economically, it's helpful to have more than one wife because there are more people in the household, more women in the household, to help tend to gardens, to produce children, to help take care of the children, and so forth.
So polygeny is really a sign of wealth. It's a public symbol of being a powerful person. But the Trobrian husbands, just like full-bay husbands, they can have more than one wife, but they have to support all of those wives in appropriate fashion.
Now, Weiner paints a Margaret Mead-like picture of Trobrian life in which there's a lot of sexual experimentation going on among adolescents.
The parents aren't very controlling. Couples go off into the forest and have trists in the jungle, and there are all these little signs that adolescents will use to show that they are having relationships with someone else.
A woman will bite off her lover's eyelashes, for example. I guess it's the equivalent of a hickey in her own culture.
And over time, this period of experimentation often flowers into romantic love. That young girl and boy will go off with each other repeatedly, and eventually they may fall in love and get married.
If they're not cross cousins, the parents may allow it anyway because they want to indulge their children. And so romantic love comes into play as much as arranged marriage.
There's also a very rich tradition of love magic in Trobrian society.
So I want to talk a little bit about what happens after marriage in the familial relationships in a matrilineal society.
So a chief in Trobrian society is going to inherit his position from his mother's brother.
Men get their position in life from their mother's brother. So it's inheritance through the female lines, but it's men who occupy these positions.
So how do ranks get established in a family? One gets chosen. The best analogy is English nobility.
They would still have a basically high rank if they're from a chiefly family, but then there's a lot of negotiation, a lot of jockeying for power for people who can move up these ranks.
You have to be born into a noble lineage, but then you can move up.
Now what's interesting about Trobrian society is that it's matrilineal and it has what we call a vunculocal residence, a vunculocal residence from a vuncular, unclely and local.
So ideally a woman when she marries a Trobrian man goes to live with them and they will both live with the husband's mother's brother, his uncle, a vunculocal residence.
So a couple will go and live with the husband's mother's brother. Again, this is an ideal rule, but in practice it doesn't always happen.
If a boy is scheduled to inherit a position, a chiefly rank from his mother's brother, they always go and live with the mother's brother.
In fact, there's a lot of play going on here where people can live elsewhere.
Generally, boys who are destined to become their chiefs will go at age seven, eight or nine years old, they'll move out from their mother's household, their father's household, and go and move in with their mother's brother.
Now Trobrian society, this leads to an unusual situation concerning the Oedipus complex in the Trobrian islands.
Property and status are inherited from mother's brother in Trobrian society. Men exert control over their sisters' sons like a father would.
In a nutshell, as you're all familiar, just to remind you, the Oedipus complex argues that young boys, their first sexual attraction is toward their mothers,
but they realize that mothers are the sexual property of their fathers, and so there's a conflict that goes on between boys and their fathers over sexual access to the mother.
Now, Malinowski, writing against Freud, said that in Trobrian society, the conflict that we find is not between fathers and their biological sons, but between boys and their mother's brother.
And so Malinowski said, Freud got it wrong. Yeah, there are these tensions between fathers and sons in western society, but it's not about sex, it's about authority.
And the authority figure is going to be resisted. And in Trobrian society, the father figure, the authority figure, is the mother's brother, and so that is who is resisted.
The Trobrianders have elaborate ceremonies that go on after the death of an individual.
These are called lisa ladabu, which literally means releasing emotional energy, and it's releasing the emotional energy which surrounds death.
And women are considered to be the custodians of this emotional energy, and it's their responsibility to discharge it.
In the death rituals, in the mortuary rituals, funeral rituals of the Trobriand Islanders, they divide up relatives of the dead person,
and I'm going to speak about it today as if it were a man, the dead man, into two groups. There are the owners and the workers.
The owners are the dead man's matriclan, the dead man's real family, his matriclan.
The workers are the dead man's wife's family, the dead man's wife's matriclan, and the dead man's father's matriclan.
So it's relatives, it's the ophenal relatives of the workers, and the consanguinial, the blood relatives, the matrilineally related relatives, are the owners.
Now I'm going to come back to this in just a moment. Let me mention here that no death in Trobriand society is accidental.
No death is accidental. There are no deaths by natural causes.
They don't have a cultural model of dying from natural causes. It all comes from sorcery. There's always magic and sorcery involved.
People don't die of disease. The disease concept of illness and death really doesn't exist.
If you don't like somebody, if you're envious of somebody, if you have hard feelings, you can actually kill that person.
Now this comes into play into this distinction between owners and workers at the death ceremony.
The workers have to show that they didn't want the dead person killed. They're not of the dead man's family.
They're of his, there is a phenyl kin. They're his in-laws, if you will.
And since they're members of another competing lineage, they're automatically suspect of the death of an individual.
So did you not like this person? Did you think that they were taking resources from your lineage?
So the workers have to show the owners, the members of the dead man's matrilineage, that they're innocent of this death and that they're truly sorry that the dead man died.
So the workers bring gifts. They'll bring stone axes. They'll bring beetle nut, this nut that Trobriand Islanders chew that's a mild stimulant, widely chewed in the South Pacific.
They'll bring small gifts to give to the owners.
And with these gifts, they're saying, we didn't want this person to die.
We're as sorry as you are that this person died. We didn't do the sorcery. We didn't make this person die.
And they go through all of these ritualized wailings at certain times of the day.
They'll scream as a group to indicate how sorry they are for the death that has occurred.
Now, on the other hand, the members of the dead man's matrilineage, the owners of the body, are not allowed to touch the body.
They're only allowed to participate in certain ways in the funeral rituals.
They're not allowed to have anything to do with the preparation of the body itself.
They can't dress the dead man. They can't paint the person.
All of the things that would go ready for getting a body go into getting a body ready for burial.
The owners can't get involved because that would pollute them.
And so the workers have to do all of the work in the funeral ceremony.
They have to get the body ready and go through all of the physical preparations that actually involves touching the body.
Now, some months after the burial in the funeral ceremony, there is a series of gift exchanges that occur.
And what happens is the owners distribute gifts to the workers to compensate them.
So let's go over what happens here.
A man dies, the owners, his matrilineage, can't touch the body, and they suspect his other kin, his wife's matrilineage and his father's matrilineage, of committing sorcery.
Those kin, the workers, have to prove that they haven't done anything.
And so they do all of the work, all of the preparation, and give gifts to the owners to show how sorry they are for this death.
And then some months after the funeral ceremony, the owners of the body will then give gifts back to the workers.
They've accepted their explanation that they weren't involved in the death.
So they give gifts back.
And a lot of this involves women's wealth, which on the Turbine Islanders, yams are men's wealth, and women's wealth are grass skirts made out of banana leaf bundles, very beautiful dyed grass skirts.
And the women owners will give these to the workers to compensate them for all that they did.
There's also some exchange of men's wealth, yams, and so forth, but it's really the women's wealth that goes on in these final exchanges.
These mortuary ceremonies are very closely tied with the Turbine notions of spirituality.
They believe that every person has a spirit, and this is called Baloma.
And a person's spirit, what we would call the soul, at death the soul doesn't die, but it goes off to a mythical island that they call Tuma.
When a person dies, the soul, the spirit, Baloma, goes off to Tuma.
And there it gets old again and goes through a whole life cycle on this mythical island of Tuma.
And when the spirit gets old and dies, it comes back to the Turbine Islands, enters a woman's body, and gets reborn as a fetus, and is a member of the same matrilineage of the person who died.
So from death is rebirth of the matrilineage. It's a cycle that keeps going on and on, and is reborn again and again.
So they literally see death as being crucial to the rebirth of their culture.
Not just the spiritual rebirth, but actual rebirth.
Now famously, Malinowski said that the Trobriandres believed that a woman, that they didn't have a clear biological notion of procreation.
And that the Trobriandres believed that a woman got pregnant by wading into the water.
And when she waded into the water, these spirits, these Baloma, would enter her body and she would become pregnant.
Now Malinowski pointed out that they noted that sex was required, but this was sex to build up seminal fluids in the woman's body to form the bones and the brain and so forth.
Now Weiner points out that these days lots of Trobriandres share our biological notion of where babies come from.
But they continue to practice this idea of what Malinowski euphemistically called copulatory vigilance.
And it means that having sex one time isn't enough for the fetus to grow.
That a couple must have sex repeatedly in order to build up semen in the woman's body to form the brain and the bones and the other crucial parts of the body.
And these are cultural models of biology, cultural models that we talked about last time that don't have to correspond exactly with what we would call the objective truth.
Now all of this ties into kinship because when a person dies, that person's spirit is also a future member of their lineage.
You have all these rituals around you with the burial ceremony.
There are the workers who have to do the work, the owners who own the body and cannot work.
And the workers have to show that they were not responsible for the death of the body, that they didn't want this to happen.
And this is all made necessary because no death is accidental.
All death is caused by sorcery.
Not even death by old age is considered to be accidental.
So we have the Trobriandres and they illustrate a number of points that we've made in this class.
They illustrate the role of cultural models, cultural models of folk biology, the way in which people get pregnant, for example.
Cultural models of death that the spirits cause death.
The Trobriandres also illustrate the role of kinship in a matrilineal society, this complex relationship of a child to his or her father.
Not what we would consider to be a natural relationship of a child to their father, but for the Trobriandres, very natural.
And the relationship of children to their mother's brother, who is the authority figure in the society.
And this makes sense because a man's sister's children are going to be the ones who are going to carry on his lineage.
They're going to be the ones who reflect on him when they grow up.
So it's very important that he be the authority figure in their lives.
And so children have a joking relationship with their biological fathers and they have this authority, this more of a parent-child,
what we would consider to be a parent-child relationship with their mother's brother.
So the Trobriandres illustrate our earlier discussions of cultural models.
They illustrate our discussions of magic, their practice of love magic, of garden magic, their fear of illness and death through sorcery.
And while Weiner critiqued Malinowski for underplaying the role of women in Trobriand society, together their work really gives us an incredibly rich picture of this fascinating place.
And we will have an opportunity to come back and discuss the Trobriandres in later lectures.
