These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Peoples and Cultures of the World, Part 2.
Lecture 13, Gatherers and Hunters.
Having covered the basics of human culture, the way in which it's expressed through language
and cognitive models, how it's codified through social structures of marriage and kinship
and so forth, having done all of this in the first 12 lectures of the class, today we're
going to turn to the political and economic organization of different societies around
the world.
So we're going to begin with an influential typology that divides societies up into bands,
tribes, chieftains and states, and then we're going to focus today primarily on band-level
societies and in particular one named the Dobie Juwanze of Southern Africa.
So let's begin by looking at Elman Service's very influential 1962 book entitled Primitive
Social Organization, An Evolutionary Perspective, and in this work he proposes a scheme that
divides all societies in the world into these four types, bands, tribes, chieftains and
states.
Now before I get into this, let me add a couple of caveats.
First of all, this typology has been criticized for being ethnocentric.
In some ways it's just updating, critics would say, Lewis Henry Morgan's scheme of barbarian
savages and civilization.
And we as anthropologists spend a lot of our time breaking down typologies, showing the
great diversity of different cultures in the world.
Many would say that anthropology is a discipline of exceptions.
We always say, yes, but among the people that I work with, yes, but among the bororo, that's
not the case.
And so we're very skeptical toward typologies such as this.
But nonetheless, they can be useful.
And this typology, like all typologies, it's important to keep in mind, is one of ideal
types.
No one society perfectly fits into any of these categories.
But nonetheless, it can be useful in categorizing different levels of social complexity in social
organization.
A lot of this boils down to size.
In a country like the United States, with a population approaching 300 million, we need
very formal legal and political and economic structures in order to function.
But a nomadic society with a few hundred members doesn't need these same sorts of mechanisms.
So we're going to talk about bands, tribes, chieftains and states.
To keep in mind, this is not an evolutionary typology.
Bands are not inevitably moving toward becoming states.
As Franz Boas taught us, every society has its own historical trajectory, and all bands
or all tribes are not going to eventually become states.
States have been the most successful form of political organization and the most expansive
form of political organization in the world.
But it's not the apex of an evolutionary scheme.
Now size is an important distinction in these categories.
Bands are very small, generally between 25 and 50 individuals.
Tribes are larger, they generally have hundreds of individuals, chieftains larger still with
thousands, and states, nation states, millions, hundreds of millions of people.
They also differ in terms of their economic relations.
So band level societies, generally their economies are based on hunting and gathering, and they're
generally nomadic peoples.
In tribal level societies, we find hunting and gathering as well, but they combine this
with gardening and with shifting agriculture.
So they're a bit more sedentary as well.
They might move around every few years, but they'll stay in one place for a few years at
a time.
With chieftains, we find intensive agriculture, and we need intensive agriculture.
Chieftains need intensive agriculture to sustain the population densities that they have.
And finally in states, we find market economies, occupational specialization, market economies,
and more impersonal relations, more impersonal economic relations.
And finally in terms of political leadership, they're distinguished from one another.
In band level societies, we find situational authority.
A leader will emerge just in a particular context, on a hunting trip for example.
The best hunter will emerge as the leader of that hunting trip, but after the hunting
trip, he'll meld back into society and not retain that position of power.
In tribal level societies, we find headmen, people who have a formal position of power
that they will occupy, and yet this is what we call in anthropology, achieved status.
They have to constantly gain the support of the people that they're leading, and they
have to reify this constantly in order to keep their position of power as headmen.
In chiefdoms, we have chiefs, as Avi has given the name, and chiefs are denoted by having
ascribed authority.
So we have achieved authority in tribes, and we have ascribed authority in chiefdoms.
And ascribed authority is basically inherited authority.
One gains one's political position based on one's lineage, one's position in society,
and this is ascribed authority.
And finally in states, we have centralized authority.
In states can be kingdoms, they can be democracies, they can be dictatorships.
But one thing that's distinctive of all states is that they have a standing army or a police
force to enforce the social order in the political order.
Now in anthropology, we tend to avoid these days terms like primitive.
We even avoid tribal, except when we're using it in this very specific context of a tribe
level of social organization.
More often today, we talk about small scale societies or large scale societies, or ethnic
groups, and we'll return to ethnic groups in a later lecture.
And it's important to note that today all bands, all tribes, and all chiefdoms live
in nation states.
There's no independent band level society in the world.
They all live within modern nation states.
So to talk about bands for a bit, today about a quarter of a million people, about 250,000
people are primarily hunters and gatherers living in band level societies.
And this is out of a population of 6 billion in the world.
So a very small percentage of the world's population are today band level peoples.
However, they've been the object of an immense amount of anthropological investigation.
So why is this?
Well, partly the idea is that for most of human history, we all lived in band level
societies.
So if we go back and look, or if we go to band level societies and look at their adaptations
today, maybe it can tell us something about our own common heritage.
Also in band level societies, we find a lot of the basic patterns of human behavior that
we find in every society in the world.
Men and women pair off, they raise children together, we have an institution that we could
call marriage, they share food in the same way that societies around the world do.
And finally, they're rapidly vanishing.
So there's this a bit of salvage anthropology involved here.
We need to go out and collect this data and save this information before it gets lost
for all of humanity.
Now as I've said, hunters and gatherers live in bands of 25 to 50 people.
They're all related to one another by kinship or marriage.
The size of a band is limited by the carrying capacity of the environment in which they
live.
And most of the time, actually, bands stay below their carrying capacity.
And they do this by employing a number of birth control methods, primarily along postpartum
sex taboo.
It's taboo to have sex after a birth for a period of time, which may be one year or
two years or even longer in some societies.
In band level societies, the division of labor is based almost primarily on sex.
Women do certain work, men do other work, but there's no occupational specialization.
There are no full-time political specialists, no full-time religious specialists.
So today I would like to focus the lecture on a band level society, the Dobi Juwanzi.
They live in the Calahari, on the edges of the Calahari desert in southern Africa across
the border of Botswana and Namibia.
And for band level societies like the Dobi, these borders mean very little.
So they'll cross over the border into Namibia, and they'll cross back over into Botswana,
and there are no fences, there are no border guards, there's no way to distinguish what
is one side or the other.
Now there are only 50,000 Dobi people living in the world today.
They're also known as Bushmen, the Calahari Bushmen.
They were formerly known as the Khung, but this is a label that they don't use themselves.
They call themselves the Dobi Juwanzi, and this means the real people.
And interestingly enough, this is what lots of ethnic groups around the world call themselves.
We're just people.
We're the real people.
We're the only people that we know.
And the term Khung and the term Bushmen was given to them by neighboring groups.
Now they speak a San language, and the San language is a Klik language, as you can tell
from the name, the Dobi Juwanzi.
So they have a number of very particular Klik sounds.
And these are very hard for English speakers to say.
And you'll remember in some of the earlier, in one of the earlier lectures, we mentioned
that phonetic maps get laid down very early in life, and so it's very difficult for English
speakers to learn these dramatically different phonetic patterns.
Now the Dobi are one of the most studied people in the world.
We have more anthropological research done on the Dobi than just about any other group.
And this is primarily due to the efforts of a team of people led by Richard Lee and Irving
DeVore, who started working with the Dobi in 1963 as part of the Harvard-Kalahari project.
And they went on to publish a very important volume in 1968 called Man the Hunter, which
correlated the behavior of groups like the Dobi with ancient human ancestors.
I would also mention Richard Lee has gone on to write the Dobi Juwanzi text, which is
one of the best-selling texts for introductory anthropology classes in the country.
You may also know the Dobi from the film The Gods Must Be Crazy.
This was a feature film in the 1980s, which highlighted the Dobi and their encounter with
a Coke bottle that had fallen out of an airplane flying overhead.
So like any band-level society, the Dobi have only situational leadership.
Hunters are respected in the society.
Elder men, elder women as well, are more highly respected.
But for the most part, it's highly egalitarian.
And again, situational leadership, an especially good hunter, will lead a hunting party.
And he'll send one group around with a net, and he'll send another group around to push
the animals up into the net and allow them to capture them.
But then these hunting leaders will meld back into society and be just like everyone else.
Their standard of living is like everyone else's.
There's no chief, there's no headman, there's no other form of permanent leadership.
Now the Dobi are nomadic.
They move around.
They're living on the edges of the Kalahari Desert, and so water is very important.
And so they move around according to water holes, where there are water holes.
They practice polygyny.
A man may have more than one wife.
And they practice, there's marriage, obviously, if there's polygyny.
But divorce is very easy.
Marriage is much more casual than we would consider it to be in our own society.
And it's not uncommon for a man or a woman to have several spouses in their lifetime.
In terms of descent, they trace their descent cognitively.
And you'll remember that that means that they're not matrilineal and they're not patrilineal.
They're more like ourselves in tracing descent both through male lines and female lines.
And this is very adaptive for a group like the Dobi, who are living on the edge of the
Kalahari Desert, fairly harsh environmental conditions.
And so, cognitive descent gives them a larger web of kin that they can call upon in times
of need.
The division of labor, as I said, is based mostly upon sex, the women forage, and the
women that will gather fruits, nuts, berries, seeds, eggs, and so forth.
And this provides most of the Dobi's caloric intake.
Women hunt, and this is a less important source of calories, but it's a very important social
function, hunting.
And meat is very highly valued.
Sometimes females will hunt small animals, but mostly hunting is confined to men.
About 70% of caloric intake comes from foraging, comes from gathering.
And so it's really a misnomer.
We say hunters and gatherers, but that's really a misnomer.
We should probably say gatherers and hunters.
And it's women who are going out and getting most of this, 70% of the caloric intake from
foraging, which is mostly done by women.
And we find this among hunting and gathering groups, or gathering and hunting groups, if
you will, around the world.
One of the staples are mongongo nuts.
This is a staple of the Dobi diet.
They will eat these mongongo nuts raw, or they will roast them.
They also collect tubers, water tubers, and various sorts of fruits and nuts.
The men hunt giraffes, they hunt wildebeest, they hunt antelope, they hunt warthogs, and
they use poison arrows to hunt these.
And they will sometimes, they will shoot a giraffe, but the giraffe won't go to giraffes
or so big, it won't go down.
The poison isn't powerful enough to kill these animals right away.
And so they'll chase these animals for days at a time, sometimes two, three, four, or
five days, until the giraffe finally falls down, and they're able to butcher him and
bring the meat back to the camp.
So only about 30% of calories come from hunting.
There's an egalitarian ethic among hunting and gathering societies and among the Dobi.
No status distinctions, a bit of distinction by age, we have the situational leadership,
but everybody lives according to the same conditions.
And as part of this egalitarian ethic, they highly value meat, and when hunters come back
from a hunt, they divide up the meat and they share it with everyone in the band.
But when they do so, the people who receive the meat don't act grateful, and in fact they
have a custom called insulting the meat.
And so when they get the meat, they say, well, this is really scrawny, it's not very fatty,
this isn't really going to be enough to fill us up.
And this functions to keep the hunters in their place.
They highly value meat, this is a good thing.
But they don't want the hunters to get a big head, they don't want their ego to become
inflated, and so they insult the meat to keep them in their place.
Richard Lee, the anthropologist who's worked with the Dobi for most of his life, tells
an interesting story.
As he was preparing to leave the field one day, this was in the mid 1960s, it was in
December, and he wanted to do something nice for the Dobi, who had opened up their lives
to him for so long.
So he goes and finds a cow, he searches actually for several weeks, looking around among the
pastoralist groups who live around the Dobi, and finds just the right cow that he can get.
He gets the cow, he buys it, and he brings it back to the Dobi to butcher, and he's going
to throw a huge feast.
But when he brings the cow back into the band, everybody says, that's the scrawnyest cow
I've ever seen.
This is going to be a horrible feast, it's going to be a disaster.
What did you, why did you buy this cow?
This was awful, and he felt terrible, but it was the same function of putting him in
his place.
I know better than us.
So in Dobi society, this egalitarianism, and there's also very little specialization.
Everyone of the same sex does the same sorts of jobs.
All the women go out and gather, all the men go out and hunt.
There's very little specialization because everybody can do everything.
All the men know how to make bows, all the men know how to make arrows, all the men know
how to hunt.
And so there's very little occupational specialization.
No rich and poor, very little accumulation of stuff, of goods.
Now an interesting thing about the Dobi is that, is the notion of affluence.
And what is affluence?
We generally think that the Dobi would be the least affluent society in the world.
They're living on the margins of states of pastoralism.
They're living in this area of harsh ecological conditions.
Holding hand to mouth in some ways.
The anthropologist Marshall Solens, however, has suggested in a book called Stone Age Economics
that actually anthropology has been very poor, has done a poor job of representing band-level
societies because they've been viewed through the eyes of Western observers who are raised
in a market economy.
Solens says scarcity is a myth.
Scarcity is a product of civilization.
And he says that among primitive peoples like the Dobi, among primitive economies, economy
is art.
It's not science.
And it's fully integrated into society and culture.
People trade to make friends more than to accumulate stuff.
And Solens argues actually that the Dobi were the original, the Dobi and other hunting and
gathering societies were the original affluent societies.
And why does he argue this?
First of all, there's very little sense of private property.
This is a mobile group.
They will move around following game and following the harvest of nuts and tubers and so forth
throughout the year.
They set up temporary huts made out of wood and grass that they can break down very easily
and just build a new one when they move to their next waterhole where they'll live for
a few months.
So they accumulate very few possessions.
Lending a lot of possessions would actually be maladaptive in this context.
You've got to carry them around with you.
And so if you have a lot of stuff that's maladaptive for the environment, in addition, since everybody
can make everything that's available, there's very little sense of envy.
If I really like your spear, I'll go out and make one like yours.
So there's very little sense of private property and little attachment to things.
And in fact, there's fairly free lending and borrowing.
This is something that we'll come back to in a later lecture, but you don't even have
to ask if you go and borrow something from someone else in your band.
You can just go into their hut and borrow their spear or borrow their arrowheads or
borrow their ostrich shell water containers, for example.
So there's free lending and borrowing, very little sense of private property.
This mobility makes the accumulation of goods not very adaptive.
And in Dobie Society, nobody goes hungry.
Now this strikes a lot of Western observers as odd.
These are gatherers and hunters.
Surely, they're hungry all the time.
They're living from hand to mouth.
But in fact, that's not the case.
Hunger is very, very rare among the Dobie juke onesie.
And then finally, in terms of work, the Dobie work about 20 hours a week.
And this converts to about two and a half days a week, about half of our normal work week.
Now the Dobie don't distinguish between work and play in the same way that we do.
But nonetheless, if we just took into account their hunting activities and their gathering
activities, they only work about 20 hours a week, half of what we do.
And so what Solon says is that if we measure affluence in terms of leisure time rather
than in terms of the accumulation of goods, the Dobie are much more affluent than we are.
Mungongo nuts, these are the staple of the Dobie diet.
A person can go out and collect enough mungongo nuts in two hours to feed themselves for a
whole week.
And so in a worst case scenario, if there's no other food around, they can go out, spend
a couple of hours collecting these nuts, and live for a whole week off of that.
And so Solon says that people can be affluent in two ways.
You can either want a lot of stuff and produce a lot of stuff to satisfy those wants, or
you can want very little.
And the Dobie want very little.
Solon says that it's a myth that in traditional societies, people's wants are great and that
their means are limited.
The only hope is to produce enough to satisfy people's great desires.
People's wants in Dobie society can actually be satisfied very easily.
And scarcity is not at all common.
So hunting and gathering societies enjoyed the original affluent society, a world with
few wants and more material goods than necessary to satisfy these wants.
And Solon's calls this the Zen road to affluence, wanting very little and thus being able to
satisfy those wants without working a whole lot.
He also notes, interestingly enough, that as we move up the ladder of social complexity,
and again it's dangerous to think about bands, tribes, chiefdoms and states as on an evolutionary
scale.
But if we did take it that way, as we move up this ladder of social complexity, the more
evolved, the more complex civilizations get, we have a decrease in leisure time and a decrease
in the importance of kinship ties and tight social networks.
So as societies move from hunting and gathering to becoming industrial societies, the amount
of work per capita increases and the amount of leisure time decreases.
And this contradicts earlier thought, which held that societies develop complex culture
because of the leisure time that affords them.
And this is just as valid of a way of measuring affluence, leisure time.
The affluent have much more leisure time than we do.
We generally hold, although recent studies have shown that the more money you make, generally
the less leisure time you have, even in our own society.
Silence also points out that hunger increases relatively and absolutely as cultures evolve,
as cultures go up this ladder from band to tribe to chiefdom and states.
So evidence from the Dobie shows that even in the Kalahari Desert, one man's labor can
feed four or five people.
And this is more efficient than was French farming or U.S. farming in the mid 1940s and
1950s, for example.
In modern society, one third of the population goes to bed hungry at night.
One third of the population, according to World Bank figures, about half of the world's
population lives on less than $2 a day.
So a third of the world's population goes to bed hungry at night.
This is a condition that is unthinkable for hunters and gatherers.
Hunters and gatherers never go to bed hungry at night.
They don't store up food.
They can't store food.
Mungungo nuts don't store well.
It's not very adaptive to have to carry around large stores of food.
They don't store it up, but when they need food, they just go out and get it.
And if there's not any food around, they'll move to another watering hole where there is
game and there is food.
Or they can call on these kinship networks to supply them with food as well.
So if we look at a fluence in terms of leisure time, once again, the Dobie and other band
level societies come out ahead.
And this is the great irony of progress.
As we've progressed or as we've evolved to use the terminology of the 19th century thinkers,
as we've become more technologically advanced, a more complex society, we can produce more
commodities and more goods, but we have less leisure time to enjoy them.
And this raises questions about the origin of agriculture.
Why if all of our early human ancestors were hunters and gatherers, lived in band level
societies, why make this switch to agriculture?
And agriculture first arose about 8,000 years ago in the Fertile Crescent.
It arose independently in the New World about 5,000 years ago.
But why make this switch?
The conventional wisdom has been, of course, all hunters and gatherers would want to become
agriculturalists because they can produce more food and presumably have more leisure
time.
But in fact, as we've seen, they don't have more leisure time.
Some have suggested recently that stories of the Garden of Eden, for example, are collective
memories of this past in which food was much more abundant, in which we were all hunters
and gatherers.
Now the switch to agriculture allows for higher population densities.
And we've generally thought that people would switch to agriculture, they're able to produce
more food, they have higher population densities, and as a result, more complex forms of political
organization and social organization emerge.
But in fact, we've seen from this data that the switch to agriculture involves a decrease
in leisure time.
And archaeological evidence has also shown that early agricultural populations, health-wise,
were not as healthy as hunters and gatherers are, for example.
We can look at bones, and we see bone stress as indications of disease that emerged once
people began settling down.
And diseases were much more common because they were transmitted much easier.
When you had larger settlements of people living closely together, they were much more
vulnerable to diseases.
They were also much more vulnerable to food loss, crop loss, when they're planting the
same crop.
If there's a disaster, if there's a disease, they can lose the whole crop.
But if they're hunting and gathering and moving around, they don't have those same
sorts of problems.
So whereas we've traditionally seen the move from hunting and gathering to agriculture
as allowing for or necessitating these forms of permanent political leadership and authority,
or complex social control, perhaps in fact it was the opposite.
Since switching to agriculture didn't increase people's standard of living, then maybe it
was because of political leadership.
Political leaders banding people together, keeping them in the same place for long periods
of time, becoming sedentary, planting crops and becoming agriculturalists, which would
allow for permanent political leadership to emerge.
And so we could see this.
We can turn the normal evolutionary scheme on its head.
It's not population density that requires permanent political leadership, but perhaps
the drive for permanent political leadership led to agriculture and so forth.
So Stalin's argument of the Zen road to affluence is really revolutionary.
Band level societies aren't the impoverished people that we once thought they were.
And if we look at affluence in terms of other measures, and leisure time is just as valid
of a measure as the accumulation of material goods, if we look at it in this sense, the
Dobie are better off than we are.
So far from being an evolutionary scheme in which bands lead to more complex and better
in some way tribes leading to better chiefdoms leading to states, that's not the case.
In fact, the Dobie, who we would put at the bottom of this evolutionary hierarchy, are
better off in many ways than we are in our own society today.
