Lecture 14, Headmen and Horticulturists.
Last time we talked about band level societies, in the Dobie in particular, as part of Elmond
Services' Bands, Tribes, Chiefdoms and States typology.
So today we're going to look at a tribal level organization, that of the Yanomamu of
the Brazilian and Venezuelan rainforest.
We're going to look at their forms of political organization, in which headmen lead by example,
and how this is related to their kinship structure.
And we're going to also look at Yanomamu cosmology, and their cultural models of the
world.
Now, the Yanomamu live in the South American rainforest, what is generally called Amazonia,
but this requires a little bit of explanation.
What is Amazonia?
Amazonias is a state in Brazil.
We also call Amazonia the Amazon River Basin, drainage basin, which is an area the size
of Western Europe.
And we also call Amazonia a culture area.
And in the greater culture area of Amazonia, it includes not only the Amazon River, which
is one of the world's largest rivers, right up there with the Nile, 20% of the world's
river water is held in the Amazon River, quite amazing.
But it includes not only the Amazon River, but a number of other river systems as well,
the Orinoco, the Rio de la Plata, and the Shingu, among others.
Now conventional wisdom has held that no high civilization, no grand civilization ever arose
in the rainforest because of the poor ecology of the rainforest environment.
Now this is somewhat paradoxical, because we think of the rainforest as being the source
of the greatest biological diversity in the world, the richest eco zone that we can think
of.
But in fact, rainforest ecology is very fragile.
Most of the diversity is tied up in the biomass above ground.
The soils of the rainforest are actually very sandy and poor, and they leach out nutrients
very quickly.
And so conventional anthropological wisdom has held that no high civilization ever arose
in the rainforest, because they just couldn't sustain the population densities given this
fragile ecology.
Betty Meagher's calls civilizations that arise in the rainforest sandcastles that are inevitably
will dissolve over time.
Now recent research, some recent archaeological research, has looked at satellite photography
and has discovered what look like raised fields in the Amazon.
And this leads to the possibility that perhaps in fact there was intensive agriculture in
the rainforest thousands of years before the Portuguese or the Spanish arrived, but nonetheless
a very fragile environment.
Today we're going to talk about the Yanamamu.
The Yanamamu live in southern Venezuela in northern Brazil.
They live in the Orinoco River Basin, which drains out through Venezuela into the Atlantic.
There are about 20,000 Yanamamu people today, and these are divided into about 200 villages.
Yanamamu villages are called shabonos, and shabonos may have as few as 40 people, may
have as many as 300 people, but generally they're in the 100, 150 person range.
Now these shabonos are built in clearings in the forest.
The Yanamamu will come in, they'll clear out an area of forest, they will use that wood
to build up a round palisade, and then they'll build a thatched roof over that.
And in the center will be an open-air plaza.
And so if you look at a Yanamamu shabono from the air, a bird's eye view, it looks somewhat
like a doughnut.
You have the palisade on the outside, the thatched roof coming about 10 or 15 feet in, and then
a large open-air plaza in the middle.
Families set up their households in the shabono, they will hang their hammocks in an area,
they'll set up a little hearth to cook at, and each family will have its own place in
the shabono.
But there are no walls between one family's living area and the next.
And so all of life in the shabono is for everyone to see.
This would be very claustrophobic socially for Americans, but it's like living in a glass
house.
A Yanamamu person can lay in their hammock and look and see everyone else in their same
village.
And these would be the same 100 or 150 or 200 people that they've lived with throughout
their whole lives.
Very few secrets in Yanamamu society, very little privacy.
We know about the Yanamamu, the Yanamamu were a famous case study in anthropology based
mostly on the work of an anthropologist named Napoleon Shagnan.
And Shagnan began studying with the Yanamamu in 1964.
He's been going back year after year since then, and this has really been a lifelong
study of his to work with the Yanamamu.
His classic text on the Yanamamu, when it first came out, was titled, The Yanamamu,
The Fierce People.
But in subsequent editions, starting in the 1990s, he dropped the subtitle, The Fierce
People.
And there was criticism that Shagnan had mis-portrayed the Yanamamu, that he was there during a
particularly violent time in their history, and that his very presence had exacerbated
tensions and violence, and that he had overplayed the violence in his writing as a result.
Now we're going to talk more about this later, but bear in mind that the Yanamamu are a very
aggressive society.
They highly value aggressiveness.
And again, to Western observers, this seems very odd.
It's an in-your-face aggressiveness, and their body language and their spoken language are
very aggressive.
And this is combined with a fierce egalitarianism, not unlike what we found with the Dobie.
People are supposed to live in very similar circumstances.
So Shagnan, the best example of this is Shagnan, he goes down to the field in the early-mid-1960s.
A young graduate student doesn't know what to expect, heading out into the Amazonian
rainforest, and so he takes with him lots of food.
He takes sardines and peanut butter and crackers.
He doesn't know what he's going to eat.
He doesn't know how he's going to be received by the Yanamamu, so he takes the storehouse
of food to have just in case.
He is accepted, the Yanamamu, he winds up at a Shibono, Bishashitari is the name.
He sets up camp right outside of the Shibono, and whenever he eats, however, whenever he
breaks open his store of food, the group of Yanamamu appear and start demanding that he
give them some.
And he'll give them some crackers, give them some peanut butter, and give them some sardines,
but they don't stop there.
They demand more and more, and he can never eat in privacy.
He finds himself sneaking off, trying to have a little bit of food for himself, but the
Yanamamu won't let him do it, because he's not supposed to have, you're not supposed
to have something that nobody else can have.
By hoarding food, he is standing in the face of this fierce egalitarianism.
So he had problems adapting to Yanamamu life.
It took him a while to integrate himself into Yanamamu society.
One of the first things he started doing when he was working with the Yanamamu was collecting
kinship data.
And this is something we as anthropologists do, a standard part of our toolkit.
We go down to work with a new group of people, and we collect genealogical charts and kinship
data to figure out the social structure.
Now this is a problem with the Yanamamu, because the Yanamamu have a taboo against saying a
dead person's name.
And so if you're trying to reconstruct genealogies, it's very difficult.
And the Yanamamu name people very, very obscure names, so that they can avoid using that name
in the future.
So for example, a child might be named toenail of a sloth.
And once that child grew up and died, that name might never be used again, and it would
be taboo for his relatives to say.
So Shagnan, after some cajoling, finally gets people to start talking about their genealogies
and their kinship, and he records all of these elaborate kinship charts.
And he works on this for about five months.
And then one day he sets off from his own, the village where he was living, to a neighboring
village, where the Basashi Teri, who he lived with, had some relatives.
So he goes down to visit another Shabono to see what life is like there.
He meets the headman of this new Shabono, and he inquires about his wife, whose name
that he had learned from doing his genealogical charts.
But it turns out, when he inquired about his wife, he had been told that her name was...
Well, the translation would be quite obscene in English, but smelly vagina will do as a
translation.
So he comes to this headman, he says, so how's your wife smelly vagina doing today?
And he realizes right away, given the reaction of this headman, that he's been fooled and
that five months of field work had gone totally down the drain.
The Yanamama who had been tricking him this whole time to making up names and just tricking
him.
But so one day, so he's not fitting in, he's done five months of field work, but it amounts
to nothing.
But this all changes one day.
And what happens was, well, let me give you a little bit of background.
So the Yanamama use canoes, but they're handmade canoes and they leak fairly generously.
And Shagnan got tired of riding around in a canoe and getting his feet wet at the water
in the bottom of the canoe.
So he had hired some Yanamama men to cut planks and to put basically a floorboard in the bottom
of his canoe.
And he was very proud of this, he had just had this done.
And then he wakes up one morning and missionaries had come down the river and had set up camp
on the other side of the river.
And whenever the missionaries came, they brought with them trade goods, metal pots and axes
and so forth.
And the Yanamama, when they saw the missionaries set up camp across the river, they were very
eager to go across and to get some of these trade goods.
So they rushed down to the river and everybody wants to get across at the same time and they
don't have enough paddles.
So they take the floorboards that he had had painstakingly made with a machete from his
canoe and they use those as paddles to get across to the other side of the river.
Shagnon, the anthropologist of course always shows up a little late for these kinds of events,
shows up a little while later and realizes what has happened and he's furious.
This is the straw that's going to break the camel's back.
I can't believe that they did this.
And so he unties his own canoes, gets a makeshift paddle, paddles across and cuts loose all
of their canoes that they had tied up on the other side of the river and they all float
down the stream.
And he, very satisfied with himself, paddles back across and awaits what's going to happen.
He really doesn't know what is going to happen.
The Yanamama were fairly fierce, aggressive people.
He could be beaten, he could be killed, he could be expelled from the village.
He doesn't know what's going to happen.
But as it turns out, after this event, he became accepted in the Shabono, in the village.
The Yanamama said, OK, you're not as weak as we thought you were.
You're actually a real person just like we are and so we're going to finally accept you
into the village.
And this is his coming into the field story that one day to the next, he was finally accepted.
Now Shagnan worked in a village named Bishashi Teri.
It was actually divided into two parts.
There was the upper village, upper Bishashi and lower Bishashi.
Teri is a suffix which means place.
And so all Yanamama Shabonos are Bishashi Teri or Mahikoto Teri or Patanawa Teri and
so forth.
He became good friends with the head man of the village, Kabawa, and integrated himself
into daily life.
So the Yanamama are a tribal level society in Salon's, Bans tribes, chiefdoms and states
scheme.
As a tribal level society, they're led by a head man, what we call a head man.
This is a position of permanent leadership and it's recognized as such, a permanent leader.
And it's based on achieved status.
The Yanamama head men, they have some authority, they have a little bit of power, but they
have to constantly reify this power and authority by doing good things for the village as a
whole.
They have to constantly gain the support of people living in the village so that they
can continue to be the head man.
They're not guaranteed this position for life, for example.
So the Yanamama head men are consummate hosts.
They're the best hosts.
They're very good negotiators.
Most Yanamama men take great pride in being hunters, being skilled hunters, and gardening
is seen as being more of women's work.
But for the head men, interestingly enough, they spend more of their time gardening because
whenever there's a feast, the Yanamama head men has to be the most generous person, has
to give more than everybody else, has to prove his generosity and thus reify his position
of political power.
They don't have the power to order other people to do work, but rather they lead by example.
There's a film of the Yanamama and I remember vividly seeing the head men out in the middle
of the Shibono cleaning up the dirt, the ground plaza, the dirt plaza with his machete
and calling to everyone else saying, look, we need to clean up the Shibono and look at
me, I'm out here doing all of this work.
You need to come out and help as well.
And so they lead by example and by cajoling others into following along with what they're
doing.
In terms of subsistence, they have this head man level of achieved authority in Yanamama
societies.
In terms of their subsistence patterns, they practice what we call swidden agriculture.
This is also known as slash and burn agriculture.
And this is where a group will come in.
You cut down the forest, you cut down all of the underbrush, let it dry, burn it and
then you plant, then you work the ash into the soil and then you plant on that soil.
So it releases all of the nutrients and the biomass into this fairly poor soil and this
will be good for three, four, maybe five years and then you'll move on to another plot, cut
down the forest, burn it, work the ashes into the soil and do it all over again.
So this is swidden or slash and burn agriculture.
Now the conventional wisdom as I mentioned earlier is that the soils are so poor in the
Amazonian region that groups have to move their gardens every few years, about every
three years is the norm for the Yanamama.
Shagnan says that actually the reason they move their gardens every three years is not
because the nutrients in the soils get depleted, but because they get tired of weeding and
then all this thorny underbrush starts growing up after a few years and he says they could
actually farm on the same land for four, five, maybe even six years, but they get tired of
this tedious task of weeding and so they move their gardens about every three years.
In the gardens they grow plantains, they grow manioc, they grow taro, they grow tobacco
and interestingly enough for the Yanamama to be poor is to be without tobacco.
You call a poor man a man without tobacco.
Women do a lot of the gardening, the men will work in the garden as well especially in the
slash and burn phase of it, the women will tend the garden day to day.
The women also gather fruit, nuts and vegetables, wild nuts and vegetables and honey.
Honey is very important in the Yanamama diet and is very highly valued.
The men for their part, they hunt, they hunt pigs, they hunt deer, they hunt monkeys and
they make these poison-tipped arrows that they use to hunt with with a very powerful
or very potent poison they put on the end of the arrows.
They'll hunt some armadillas as well and they do a little bit of fishing.
Like the dobe, like band level societies, they actually only work a few hours a day
and also like the dobe that most of their subsistence comes from the gardens and comes
from gathering.
Meat is very highly valued but in terms of caloric intake it only provides a small portion
of their daily calories.
Now the Yanamama were interesting for a number of different reasons.
One is their kinship pattern.
The ideal marriage partner for a Yanamama is their cross cousin and you may remember
from earlier lectures there are two types of cousins.
Their parallel cousins and cross cousins.
Your parallel cousins are your mothers, sisters, children and your fathers, brothers, children.
Those are parallel cousins, children of same-sex siblings and then we have cross cousins, children
of opposite-sex siblings.
So your fathers, sisters, children and your mothers, brothers, children are your cross
cousins.
In many societies around the world, including among the Yanamama, the preferred marriage
partner is the cross cousin.
Your fathers, a boy's father, sister's daughter or his mother's brother's daughter, for example.
Parallel cousins among the Yanamama are called by the same, are called brother and sister
and it would be incestuous to marry or to have relations with one's brother or sister.
Even if they're not your biological brother and sister, you call them by those same terms
and it would still be incestuous.
Now what's interesting about the Yanamama system is that they prescribe cross cousin
marriage as the ideal pattern and if this is practiced over generations, a young man
can marry a woman who is simultaneously his father's sister's daughter and his mother's
brother's daughter, both forms of cross cousin and they can, so the perfect marriage partner
for a Yanamama man is this double cross cousin, we might call them and if they keep marrying
cross cousins in this fashion, it works out over generations that they can marry that
person.
Now in fact, a lot of times this doesn't work out.
Like most kinship prescriptions or marriage prescriptions, there might not be a girl of
the right age for a young man to marry, they might not like each other, maybe your father
didn't have a sister, maybe your mother didn't have a brother, there are all sorts of contingencies
that can come into play and the Yanamama were able to work around this, but nonetheless
the ideal marriage partner is the cross cousin.
The Yanamama practice polygyny, especially for head men, head men will have more than
one wife, sometimes as many as four or five or six wives and this provides extra hands
to help out in the garden and kinship ties with other families so that head men can solidify
their position.
There's an ideology of male superiority and as we'll talk about later, there are separate
origins for males and females, but there's not, they have very mild rights of passage
for young girls once they go into menstruation at Menarch, they will be isolated for a few
days and are not supposed to touch anyone or anything, but for young boys there's not
a clear right of passage.
The Yanamama male dress, traditional male dress consists solely of a string tied around
the waist that is linked to the foreskin of the penis and holds the penis up against
the body and this is, it seems very immodest to us, but for the Yanamama males it's very
important to always wear this penis string and they talk about if they go down to the
river and they're caught with their penis string off, it's incredibly embarrassing,
you know you should never be seen without your penis string.
But this is the right of passage for a young boy is simply getting the penis string, once
he starts wearing a penis string he becomes no longer a boy, but a man.
Now the Yanamama have a view of the cosmos that divides the world into different layers
and there are four main layers to the world.
The very top layer is uninhabited today, back in primordial times this is where the ancient
ancestors lived, but today no one lives at the very top layer of the world.
The next layer down is the sky layer and we can see the bottom of the sky layer and
on top of the sky layer are two main sections, above the sun is an area that's sort of like
a fiery hell and on the other side is an ideal Yanamama village, there are shabonos and hunting
grounds and gardens, an idealic Yanamama village, so in the sky layer we have this fiery hell
and an ideal Yanamama village.
So the top layer is uninhabited, the sky layer, the heavens and below that is the earth
where the Yanamama live today, the current earth and below the earth is the underworld
and the Yanamama say that way back when in primordial times a piece of the sky layer
broke off and came down and hit the earth layer and pushed it down and created the underworld
and it pushed down with it a shabono and some people but it didn't push down any hunting
grounds and so today the underworld is inhabited by spirits who are like the Yanamama but they
don't have hunting grounds and so what they have to do and the spirits are called Hekara,
these Hekara have to come back up to the earth layer to hunt and they become cannibalistic,
they will enter into people's bodies and eat a little bit of their liver and so people
have to be on the guard for these Hekara which can come up from the underworld and eat human
beings.
Now the shabono interestingly enough the shabono, the architecture of the shabono ties into
this four tiered layer of the universe and they believe that the shabonos connect the
sky layer with the earth layer and the underworld and so the roofs of the shabono go up and
at the top of the roof it said that it meets the sky layer where the sky layer comes down
and at the bottom of the shabono where the shabono comes down and meets the earth on
the outside, this is where some demons live here as well and some underworld demons, it's
a very dangerous place and in fact they have a story of Titiri and this is the giant penis
demon and he lives at this nexus of the shabono and the forest and the outside world and at
night when people are sleeping this penis demon will go around and sometimes rape people,
rape women as well as men and can steal part of the soul and this ties into a belief that
there's a sharp distinction between things of the village, the shabono, things of civilization,
Yanamamu culture and everything else that's outside the wilds of the jungle, the wilds
of the forest, the chaos of nature and at the shabono connects the upper world, the sky layer,
the earth layer and the underworld as well and when a person dies the Yanamamu conceive
of there being different kinds of souls and when a person dies one of the souls, the soul which
could gloss in English as being the will, the will to live, when a person dies this part of the soul
travels up the hammock strings to the top of the shabono and then goes up into the sky layer
and so it's very much like our heaven but it's our heaven and hell combined and when he gets to
the sky layer there's a god, a spirit person up there not unlike our saint Peter figure and he
asked the Yanamamu person have you been a good Yanamamu, have you been a good citizen,
have you been generous, have you treated your family well and so forth and if he has he will be
sent over to that idealic Yanamamu village in the sky and if he hasn't he'll be sent over to the
fiery hell which is the top of what we see as being the sun. Now the Yanamamu were very fierce,
they're very aggressive and so Shagnan would ask them but aren't you worried about the afterlife,
aren't you worried about having to go to this fiery hell and the Yanamamu would always answer him
well no we're just going to lie when this guy asks us if we've been good Yanamamu we're going to
say yes and we're going to go to the ideal village so it's really not an issue. So the Yanamamu have
different forms of souls, there's this one part of the soul the will to live which upon death
travels up the hammock strings to the to the overworld, another part of the soul is released
at cremation and it lives in the jungle and remember the jungles are this wild chaotic area
and it's they become these malevolent spirits in the jungle that you go out and they might
throw rocks at you or trip you as you're walking along and do just little tricks like that bugging
people. Another sort of soul is the liver soul and they believe that this is actually
located in the human liver and this is what these Hecarus spirits who come up from the underworld
will eat, these cannibalistic spirits will eat parts of the liver soul and if they do that
it's de-habilitating not only spiritually but physically a person who can literally start
wasting away and if that happens they call upon religious specialists so the Yanamamu have shamans
these religious specialists and what they are able to do is connect the upper world the earth
layer and the underworld they can act as a conduit for the forces that travel through these three
layers and to become a shaman and this is a very powerful calling they have to get spirits Hecarus
spirits to come and live inside their body and so they charm these Hecarus to come and live inside
their body and then they're able to use the force of those Hecarus to cure other people
and to call upon the Hecarus they use they ingest hallucinogenic snuff and this is called
ebony and they make this from natural plants that they find in the area they grind it up
and they make this snuff and the way in which they ingest it is they have a long hollow tube
and they'll pack it full of snuff and the person who is going to ingest this will put it
to their mouth or their nose or their nose more commonly and the other person will blow as hard
as they can and force all of this snuff up into their nasal passages and I've seen films of this
and it's just the green blue snot runs out of their nose and they get into the state they just
sort of walk around in a sort of trance but in this trance they're able to see the spirit world
they're able to see the Hecarus and they're able to see if a person is ill is ill from a spiritual
illness they can look inside them and see the spirits that are causing them this harm and call
them out or physically pull them out and so the shamans serve this this important and powerful
healing function. I should also mention that the Yanomumu have a final kind of soul a fourth
kind of soul which is a spirit double and the anthropological term is a nawal and this is a
very common belief throughout the Americas that when a person is born their future is
intimately tied with that of an animal and it could be a beaver it could be an eagle it could
be a jaguar whatever it might be and that is the person's spirit double and if anything ever happens
to that animal the same thing would happen to the person if the animal is killed the person would
die as well and people very often are prohibited they're not supposed to hunt their own nawal or
their own spirit double. So in many ways the Yanomumu are a classic tribal level society
they have head men this is achieved status the head men have to be more generous than everybody
else to solidify their their power and authority they practice horticulture or gardening this slash
and burn or shifting agriculture moving around their villages every two or three years or so
they live in the Shabonos with 100, 150, 200 people very open air living and knowing what
everyone else in in your village is doing in your Shabono is doing very few secrets
and they live in a world filled with malevolent spirits and in this way not unlike the full
bay who we mentioned in earlier lectures who also live in a world filled with malevolent spirits
but the Yanomumu have these shamans who are able to mediate between humans and the spirit world
now the Yanomumu also have a reputation as an especially violent society
and this is the topic that we're going to turn to in our next lecture
