In this lecture, we continue to talk about the Yanamamu who live in the rainforest in
southern Venezuela and northern Brazil, living in these shabonos of 100 or 200 people in
a world filled with spirits and demons.
But in this lecture, we're going to focus on two hot topics in anthropology, cannibalism
and violence, and use the Yanamamu to illustrate these two themes.
Now the Yanamamu, as I've mentioned before, are famous as being a violent society.
The first editions of Shagnan's classic book were the fierce people, Yanamamu, the fierce
people, and this fierceness goes back really to their origin myths.
The Yanamamu say that in the beginning of time, there were a people who look a lot like
the Yanamamu, but they were spirit people, they were spirit ancestors, and they lived
in shabonos.
And one day, this is the myth of moon blood, as it's called, one day the moon came down
into this primordial shabono with these spirit ancestors living there and stole the remains,
the bodily remains of a dead ancestor and took him off.
And for the Yanamamu men living in the shabono, these spirit ancestors, this was the ultimate
insult, stealing our relatives, stealing our ancestors.
And so they set off to catch the moon and to shoot the moon, they set off with their
bows and arrows, and they leave the shabono and the men are furiously shooting at the
moon up in the sky, trying to shoot the moon down, and they keep missing and their arrows
fall short, and the moon is slowly falling and falling, going down over the horizon,
and everybody's running out of arrows, and finally one young warrior who hasn't shot
yet so slowly pulls out an arrow, pulls back his bow and shoots at the moon and hits it
in the stomach, in the belly of the moon, and the moon bleeds on the earth, and where
the moon's blood puddled up formed the Yanamamu.
The deepest puddles of blood formed the Yanamamu, and in other areas where the blood just sprinkled
down or where it was diluted with water formed the other peoples who live around the Yanamamu.
Not quite real people, not quite fully humans, and it was this blood, the blood of the moon
that formed the fierceness of the Yanamamu, and in Yanamamu society in the language fierceness
is called watiri, and this is a highly venerated trait especially for men, an ethos of fierceness,
not ever letting anyone take advantage of you, always having your guard up to not be
taken advantage of by others.
So when the moon's blood spilled on the earth this created men, it created Yanamamu men,
they actually have a separate origin myth for the beginnings of women, and women are
said to have come from a fruit, a wabu fruit, which looks something like the female genitalia.
So the Yanamamu believe that they are the most fierce people because they are where
the moon's blood puddled up.
Now interestingly enough, when Shagnan first showed up in Yanamamu land, they were able
to integrate his origins into their own myth of moon blood, and they said, well this land
to the north, this United States that you talk about, the moon's blood must have really
puddled up there because you obviously come from a powerful society, you flew down an
airplane, and you have all of this technological, all of this stuff that you bring with you.
So they were able to, and people around the world are able to do this, incorporate new
data into their existing cultural models in some way.
They also asked Shagnan if his airplane hit the sky layer when he flew down to Venezuela
because they believed the sky layer comes so close to the earth.
Now I want to talk for a moment about cannibalism, and I use this tale of moon blood both as
an entree to talk about Yanamamu violence, but cannibalism as well.
Because there were the bones, there were the remains of an ancestor in one of the Shibonos.
This is what the moon stole, and this is what the big offense was about, and this ties into
a Yanamamu practice of cannibalism.
Now let me say a few things about cannibalism.
First of all, its practice today is extremely rare and extremely ritualized.
What we're going to describe as Yanamamu cannibalism is not your stereotypical cannibalism of eating
raw flesh for example.
Cannibalism is practiced in a number of cultures around the world, in New Guinea, in some of
the Pacific islands, in Amazonia, but it's not practiced as widely today as it once was.
It seems that early European explorers overplayed the importance of cannibalism in native societies
around the world.
There's some visceral reaction to cannibalism that seems especially savage, and so when
the European explorers set out and they were trying to portray the people they encountered
as savages, it was natural for them to call them cannibalisms and to play up this cannibalism.
And we can all probably conjure up images in our head of the white explorer in a pith
helmet in a khaki suit in a pot with the natives standing around rubbing their hands ready
to eat him.
But this kind of cannibalism is very rare.
Let me distinguish between a couple of types of cannibalism.
First of all, there's crisis cannibalism, and this is in extreme situations people will
eat human flesh to survive.
There was the case of the Paraguayan rugby team who's playing crashed in the Andes.
There was the Donner party crossing the Sierra Nevada.
In these extreme circumstances, when there's no other food around, people will resort to
cannibalism in order to survive, will overcome our natural aversion to it.
So that's one sort of cannibalism that's known in the modern world.
There's also aggressive cannibalism, which is sometimes called exocannibalism, and this
is eating people from another group, normally an enemy group.
You go out and you kill your enemy and you eat part of their body.
And this is the ultimate insult.
You not only defeat them in battle, but you eat them as well.
And we have a number of examples of this from groups around the world, including in modern
times in the Congo.
There are examples of this sort of cannibalism, this exocannibalism, this aggressive cannibalism,
as the ultimate insult, and is really a way of instilling terror in a population.
Because cannibalism really can terrorize people as well.
So we have exocannibalism, eating one's enemy, and this is what we generally think of as
being cannibalism.
But the far more common form of cannibalism is endocannibalism, eating one's own people
or one's own relatives.
And here we find endocannibalism, not uncommon in the Amazon region.
My colleague at Vanderbilt, Beth Conklin, has worked with a group called the Wari who
live in the Brazilian Amazon, and the Wari believe that cannibalism is really a form
of compassion.
And in fact, her book is called Compassionate Cannibalism.
They say the worst thing you can do to a relative of yours who dies is to plant them in the
earth and to let the worms and the maggots eat at them and to let their body decay.
This is really a fate worse than death, the Wari believe.
The thing that you can do to be nice to your dead relatives, to show respect for them,
is to cook their flesh and to eat it.
And in eating their flesh, you're able to regenerate your lineage, your kinship group,
physically regenerate it, and spiritually as well.
A person's soul will live on through the people who have eaten part of their flesh.
And so in many societies around the world cannibalism is tied to cultural beliefs about
death and rebirth, that ancestors can actually live on in current generations through the
process of cannibalism.
And this is the sort of cannibalism that the Yanamamu practice, Indo cannibalism.
Now the Wari, they will actually butcher up humans and eat large chunks of human flesh,
or they don't anymore actually, but they used to, and people remember the days where they
did this.
Among the Yanamamu, it's a much more sterile form of cannibalism, much more acceptable,
and is repulsive to our sensibilities.
So when a person dies in Yanamamu society, they burn the body, they take the bones, and
they crush the bones up into a powder, and then they'll save this powder in a gourd inside
the shabono.
And this is what the moon came down and stole in the primordial shabono, these ashes of ancestors.
And then they'll mix these ashes with a gruel, and then drink this ritually.
So it's not really as repulsive as many forms of cannibalism that we normally think about,
but it's very important in Yanamamu society to continue the regeneration of their lineage.
So, Yanamamu violence, a violent people, a fierce people.
When we talk about Yanamamu violence, we can talk about several different forms of violence,
and the first would be internal violence, internal to a shabono.
This may arise over disagreements over women, a person being stingy, insults that are thrown
from one person to another, and these sorts of internal tensions generally increase the
larger the size of a shabono.
So a shabono starts off with 100 people, let's say, and over time it grows 150, 200, 250
people, and the tensions grow and grow and grow, and eventually a portion of those people
will split off and form a separate shabono.
But in these internal disputes, which may be over women, over stinginess, over all these
sorts of things, they start off with verbally assaulting one another, and this can escalate
into chest-pounding duels, and it's not unlike grade school kids who will hit each other
on the shoulder as hard as they can until the other person says, Uncle, except these
are done with clubs, and they will actually hit their opponent in the chest as hard as
they can, and if they hit hard enough, it will force all of the air out of their lungs
and make the person pass out, and then their opponent has won.
So they start off arguing, if they can't settle their disputes through verbal arguments,
they will start with these chest-pounding duels, and if that doesn't settle it, they will
move on to club fights or axe fights, and they have these clubs, and they're about 10 or
15 feet long, and they'll hit each other with these long wooden poles, and if it doesn't
stop there, if they want to escalate the violence a little bit more, somebody will run and get
an axe, and they will fight with these axes.
Now they normally fight with the blunt side out, so it doesn't actually kill people.
Occasionally they'll turn it around, and if they kill someone, that raises the level
to a whole new stage of violence.
If a death occurs, it has to be avenged, but normally they'll fight with the blunt side
out, and again they will hit people until someone finally backs down.
There's a famous film by the filmmaker Timothy Ash, which looks at one of these axe fights.
So you have inter-ternal disputes within a shabono, and then you have external disputes
between shabonos, and these, they may be based on the same sorts of issues, fights over women,
raids to steal women from other shabonos, fights over garden lands and so forth, and
these can, they start off as raids usually, and they will raid another shabono and steal
some women, maybe steal some food, and then go back to their own shabono, and then this
raid will have to be reciprocated by the other shabono who will then in turn raid them, and
they will go back and forth with these raids, and if it gets bad enough they will escalate
this to killing wars, where one shabono will actually invade another, kick them out of
their land, kick them out of their shabono, and take over, and take over their land.
Now, in this context of violence and warfare, alliances are very important for Yanamamo
shabonos. Villages are constantly fissioning, section when they get too big, parts will
break off and establish a new shabono, and all of the shabonos in Yanamamo land are enmeshed
in this constantly shifting web of alliances, setting up alliances between the Bishashi Teri
and the Makoto Teri against the Patanawa Teri, for example, constantly setting up alliances,
which both serve as alliances during warfare, but also as a security net. An economic security
net, if you get kicked out of your shabono by an enemy village, you have somewhere to
go, you can go live with your allies for a while, use some of their land to grow your
crops on, and so forth, and as I said, as military allies in the field as well.
Now Shagnan describes, let me give you an example of a typical war that Napoleon Shagnan describes.
This took place in 1964, when Shagnan was just starting his field work, and men from
one village, Manauteri, came and they stole seven women from another shabono, another village,
Patanawa Teri. So the Manauteri come and they steal seven women and they take them back
to their own village. Stealing women is not uncommon in Yanamamo society, they would be
integrated into the new shabono, they would take on husbands there, and could live a pretty
normal life as members of this new shabono. But, such a raid cannot go unanswered, and
so the Patanawa Teri retaliate by going to Manauteri and taking back five of these women.
They raid, they go into the shabono, they raid the shabono, and they're able to get back
five of the women and leave, but they're not able to get the last two, and they're not
able to get the last two because they're not willing to escalate this into a killing fight.
And again, remember, if they kill someone, that raises things to a whole new level, and
every death has to be avenged by another death. And so the Patanawa Teri go to Manauteri,
they get five of these women back, but they're not willing to kill to get the other two women back.
And so the Manauteri realize that the Patanawa Teri are a little bit scared, they back down
here, so they take advantage of this, and then they raid and kill the head man of Patanawa Teri.
And then a death has occurred, and so the Patanawa Teri have to take vengeance on that death,
and so then they raid and kill the head man of Manauteri, and it goes back and forth,
and over a year, a period of a year, eight people end up getting killed in these raids and fights.
Now, in warfare, and working themselves up for warfare, the Yanamamu, they try and work themselves
into a frenzy to get themselves psyched up to go out and kill other people.
So they'll construct an effigy, for example, of the enemy, and they'll stab it with spears
and shoot it with arrows. They'll do dances until late at night, and they'll sing these chants.
One of my favorite chants is, I meet hungry, I meet hungry, like the carrion eating buzzard
and they hunger for flesh, and so they'll sing these chants and work themselves up into a frenzy
and then go out on these raids. When a person, when a man kills another man in Yanamamu society,
he takes on a special status, and this is called unokais, a killer.
A man who has killed another person is called an unokais.
And when they come back from a raiding expedition in which they've killed someone,
they have to go through a ritual cleansing process, and they come out of this cleansing process
with this honorific title of being an unokais.
And the unokais are very highly valued in Yanamamu society.
They have two and a half times more wives than the common Yanamamu man.
They have three times more children than an everyday Yanamamu person,
and they're venerated in daily society.
40% of adult Yanamamu men are unokais.
They've killed at least once, and the more often they've killed, the higher their status in Yanamamu society.
25% of adult male deaths in Yanamamu land are due to this sort of violence.
Now Shagnan argues that this violence reproduces itself.
Perhaps there's a genetic propensity for aggression,
and if so, these men have two and a half times more wives, three times more children.
This genetic propensity would get passed on in greater frequencies to the next generation.
Or even if there's not a genetic propensity, they're being raised.
Their father figure of young boys, the children of unokais, would be this especially fierce man,
and so they would learn to imitate that as well.
And so this fierceness plays upon itself and builds on itself and reproduces itself over time.
Now there's a controversy about why the Yanamamu are so fierce, why they go to war so often.
One argument is that it's about protein.
That protein is fairly scarce in this area.
They highly value meat, and thus they fight over hunting grounds, for example.
And the main proponent of this is an anthropologist named Michael, named Marvin Harris.
And Harris is, he's an arch materialist.
He always looks for a protein argument to explain religion in human society.
So for example, he has argued in the past that Muslim and Jewish taboos against eating pork
are related to the desertification of the Middle East,
and that raising pigs was no longer ecologically feasible,
and thus the religion developed a taboo to enforce this ecological necessity.
He's also argued for the Aztecs building on the archaeology of Michael Harner.
He's argued that the Aztecs had no big sources of protein.
There were no horses, there were no cows in the New World.
They had turkeys, they had dogs, they had ducks, but no big sources of protein.
And the Aztec empire at its height was enormous.
In the basin of Mexico, there were a million people.
And so Harris has argued that the Aztecs became cannibalistic to have a source of protein,
that they would go in these raiding expeditions, capture enemies, bring them back to their capital of Tenochtitlan,
sacrifice them, rip out their hearts, and then roll the bodies down these enormous pyramids
and neighborhood leaders would come and take these bodies and butcher them up
and distribute them to people in their neighborhoods to eat.
The evidence is debatable about how widespread cannibalism was in Aztec society.
But I bring it up to point out that Marvin Harris is always looking for a protein argument to explain the human condition.
So Harris, using Shagnan's own data, argues that the Yanamamu have chronic protein shortages
and that as a result, tensions arise between Shabonos.
And these tensions actually arise before the protein shortages become critical
and villages begin fighting one another over access to hunting grounds.
And Harris, this is really the neat part of his argument actually,
he says that what this does, it creates a virtual demilitarized zone between Shabonos, a no man's land.
And these no man's lands serve as game reserves, keeping up the supply of game of natural wildlife
that can supply protein to the Yanamamu.
So Harris says the Yanamamu go to war over protein, over access to meat.
Shagnan says no, that's not the case at all.
And he offers a couple of lines of evidence to support this.
He says, first of all, protein intake varies a lot from village to village among the Yanamamu.
But in every village, or at least the overall, between all villages,
the overall average is well above the minimum standards established by the food and agriculture organization, the UN body.
He also argues that it shows that high protein villages fight just as much as low protein villages.
And you would expect if they're really fighting over protein, the protein poor villages would be much more violent.
So Shagnan says no, actually it's not about protein, it's about women.
It's about access to women.
And remember a lot of these wars start over raids to steal women from neighboring Shabonos.
And his evidence, he uses what the Yanamamu themselves say.
And he's gone back and he's asked them, you know, why do you go to war?
Is it because you're fighting over access to game?
And the Yanamamu themselves say, well, we like meat, but we like women even better.
And that's the reason that we really go to war.
So Shagnan is a, he's a contrarian scholar.
He's always looking for the unusual answer, proposing unusual answers.
The Yanamamu don't shift their gardens because the soils have become depleted.
They shift their gardens because they don't like weeding the thorny underbrush.
The Yanamamu don't go to war over protein, they go to war over women.
So establishing himself as a contrarian in the field the way he has, he's opened himself up to a lot of criticism.
And recently this criticism came to a head with the publication of a book in 2000 by a journalist named Patrick Tierney.
And the title of the book was darkness in El Dorado.
And Tierney really takes, takes aim at Shagnan and Shagnan's ethical behavior in the field.
His most damning accusation was that Shagnan intentionally infected the Yanamamu with measles.
Now Shagnan had been involved in a measles eradication program.
Shagnan had brought down measles vaccine, a particular vaccine called Edmundson B, which has a live measles in it.
But no one's ever gotten measles from taking this vaccine.
But Tierney goes down and he starts observing, he tries to correlate where Shagnan was handing out the vaccine, delivering the vaccine and where measles broke out.
And he said, wherever Shagnan was vaccinating people, we had these outbreaks of measles.
But actually, researcher, we've gone back and looked at this after Tierney's accusations.
And it turns out that he's making a false correlation there.
Shagnan was following the measles to inoculate people against measles.
He wasn't causing the measles.
But Tierney paints a real conspiracy theory that Shagnan was working with a geneticist named James Neal, was receiving funds from the Atomic Energy Commission.
And he believes that they were involved in some secret research, a very conspiratorial theory here.
Some secret research trying to look at natural resistances to measles and the way in which measles are passed between individuals.
But this accusation has been effectively refuted.
However, Tierney's more troublesome accusations are much less inflammatory actually.
And they are that Shagnan stirred up rivalries.
Intentionally or unintentionally, but he stirred up rivalries by his very presence.
By introducing trade goods, for example, among the Yanamamu, he exacerbated tensions between villages.
Why should this Shabono get all of these metal pots and axes and all of these trade goods when we don't have anything?
And so Tierney argues that Shagnan's presence exacerbated tensions between Shabonos.
He even argues that perhaps Shagnan staged a feast and alliance between a couple of villages in order for a film crew to film some of his work.
A number of accusations like this.
So Tierney's accusations really get at the difficulties of doing field work, I think.
And Shagnan was in a difficult position.
He could have gone down and said, OK, I'm going to protect the Yanamamu from outside influence.
I'm not going to bring in any outside goods.
I'm not going to trade with them.
But yet this is what the Yanamamu wanted.
They wanted steel axes.
And you can think of the value that a metal machete and an axe would have if you're living in the jungle,
if your subsistence is based on chopping down trees and burning them.
They wanted metal pots.
They wanted these sorts of trade items.
And Shagnan was just trying to be a good human being.
He says, the Yanamamu have given me so much.
I've made my career studying the Yanamamu.
I want to give things back.
And so this is one way to do that, is to bring trade goods down.
And it's actually very paternalistic, I think, in a way for anthropologists to think
that they can protect the native people that they study from outside influences.
And it's really not our role to do that.
On the one hand, we're romantic.
And we do want to protect these native ways of life.
On the other hand, if they want trade goods,
if this would improve their lives in some material way,
who are we to say, no, that's just for us Westerners,
and you guys can't have any of it?
So the tyranny's accusations, the accusations of intentionally infecting the Yanamama with measles
have been proven to be false.
However, this difficulty of doing fieldwork,
the ethics of how you interact with a remote isolated native peoples is very troublesome.
I would also mention that we tend to romanticize native peoples in small scale societies
as being peaceful, as living in harmony with their environment.
And in some ways they are.
The Yanamama do have a much more unified spiritual view of man's relationship to nature, for example.
But they also have the necessity of going down and chopping down rainforests in order to plant their gardens
so that they can live, so they can put food on the table at night.
So we often think of less developed, less complex societies as being peaceful,
as living in harmony with nature.
But my colleague Bruce Noft actually has done a survey recently
looking at homicide rates in societies around the world,
and he's found that homicide rates are higher in small scale societies
even than they are in the United States.
In the United States we have a much higher homicide rate than anywhere else in the developed world.
So native peoples are not as peaceful perhaps as we once thought they were.
And the Yanamama in that sense are not as much of an anomaly as we might have thought they were.
So to sum up, today we've continued talking about the Yanamama, the fierce people.
They practice Indo cannibalism.
They eat the bones of their ancestors in a gruel.
They highly value fierceness and aggression.
Unokais, killers in society, have more wives, they have more children,
they have more social status than anyone else in Yanamama land.
And whatever the material reasons for Yanamama warfare,
whether they're fighting over protein or fighting over women,
it is a culture of fierceness that gets perpetuated from generation to generation
through these mechanisms of valuing unokais.
