Lecture 16, The Role of Reciprocity
In the last few lectures, we've been filling out the bans and tribes categories and services, bans, tribes, chiefdom, states, typology.
We've been looking particularly at subsistence and political organization in violence and cannibalism in the last lecture.
So today we're going to introduce two more typologies, typologies of economic relationships, and these fit into the service scheme very neatly.
In this lecture, we're going to focus on reciprocity and gift giving, but first I want to introduce the scheme introduced by the economic historian Carl Polanyi.
And he says that we can divide all economic transactions into three main types, and those are reciprocity or gift giving, the subject of the lecture today.
The second is redistribution, and the third is market exchange.
Now we're all familiar with market exchange, it's the system that we use in our own society.
A redistributive system is where the goods in society go to an individual or an entity and then are redistributed by that person back out to society, and we're going to talk about this more in the next lecture.
But today we're going to discuss reciprocity.
The Inuits say that gifts make friends just as whips make dogs.
And this is one of those rare cultural sayings that applies around the world, not only for the Inuit of the sub-Arctic region, but for the Trobri and Islanders of the Pacific,
for the Dobie Jute Wanzi, for the Yanamamu, and for our own culture as well.
Gifts are given with at least the vague expectation that they will be returned, perhaps not right away and probably not endowed to the penny equivalences, but returned nonetheless.
How long would you give Christmas presents or birthday gifts to someone if they never reciprocated?
Such reciprocity, giving of gifts with the expectation of receiving something in the future, creates powerful social bonds between individuals.
In some small-scale societies, as we'll see today, it's the basis of their entire economic system.
And in our own society, it often works in hidden ways, following largely unspoken rules that we probably have a hard time articulating.
The French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu one time noted that what goes without saying comes without saying.
And this is really true.
Often the most important aspects of a culture are so fundamental that they're taken for granted.
There's no need to discuss or debate these things, it's just the way the world operates.
And reciprocity in our own society falls into this category.
It's a bit rude to make explicit the expectations of gift giving.
It detracts from the ostensibly altruistic emotion underlying the act.
We like to think of giving gifts as being acts of love, of friendship, of kindness.
But calculation, economic calculation, political calculation, even emotional calculation certainly takes place.
I mean, think of the complex politics that goes into deciding what Christmas present to give someone,
or what birthday present to give someone, or the uncomfortable position of receiving an unexpected gift
and then scrambling to calculate what the appropriate return gift should be.
So to give something is to indent someone.
And we acknowledge this in phrases such as much indebted, much obliged.
There's always the idea that a gift has to be returned at some point in the future.
There's no free lunch, as we say.
With any gift, there are expectations, social ramifications, prices to pay down the road.
So in essence, a gift is an indirect delayed exchange of goods or services,
and one which creates a bond, a relationship between individuals.
Now in this, the period between a gift and a counter gift is crucial.
To return a gift immediately with an object of equal value is to reject the social relationship that's being offered.
And in turn, the longer the period before a counter gift is offered creates a stronger social bond.
If there's a long period between the initial gift and a counter gift, this period of indeterminacy,
not knowing if the gift is going to be returned or not, creates a strong social relationship between individuals.
Now the value of a gift, as we all know, is much more than the item's cost.
A gifted object holds sentimental value, cultural associations.
If someone gives you if your father gave you a watch, the value of that watch to you would not be what you could sell it on eBay for,
because there's all of these sentimental attachments tied up in that as well.
And generally, the larger the gift, the stronger the bond as well, at least to a point.
I remember one time when I was in college, my stereo was stolen, and a good friend of mine who came from a very wealthy family,
had a lot more money than I did, had just bought a new stereo, and he gave me his old stereo.
And I was incredibly indebted. I was, this is a wonderful gift, thank you so much.
And yet, it was too big of a gift. I couldn't repay him for that gift,
at least not easily or not right away. And so it created this tension in our relationship.
And he was never so rude as to bring it up, but whenever we went out deciding where to go to dinner,
how late to stay out at night, and things like this, it was always in the back of my mind,
yeah, but he gave me that stereo, can I say no?
And we gradually drifted apart, and I think it was because he gave a gift that was too large.
And so it's just as bad to give too big of a gift as it is to give no gift at all,
or to give too small of a gift.
Now the classic work on gift giving and reciprocity was written by a French sociologist, Marcel Maus.
He's actually the nephew of the father of sociology, Emile Durkheim.
And Maus wrote a little book in 1924 titled, Simply the Gift.
Maus was very much concerned with other cultures. He was an armchair anthropologist in many ways.
His research was conducted from the comfort of his Parisian study, reading travelogues and explorer accounts.
But his observations about gift giving in other cultures still rings true today.
Now Maus called gift giving a total social phenomenon.
He says that it serves legal functions, political functions, religious functions, domestic functions,
economic functions. All of this is tied up in gift giving.
He argues that in the great scheme of human history, the gift was the first social contract.
It was really what allowed alliances, communion and peace to emerge among societies.
Now Maus' most famous example comes from the Maori, the Maori peoples of New Zealand.
And the Maori have a concept called how. This is H-A-U, how.
And this is, we could translate this roughly as the spirit of the gift or the spirit of the forest.
And the Maori believe that everything ultimately comes from the forest.
And if someone, if I go into the forest and I cut down a tree and I make a spear or a club with that tree,
part of the how of the forest is going to live in that object.
And then if I give that object away, that spirit will go through me and through this object on to the next person.
But the thing about this how, the spirit is, it always wants to go back to the forest.
And so it always has to retrace its path back.
And so it's the spiritual way of conceiving of the idea that every gift has to be repaid.
And the idea, actually the how increases, the value of the good for the Maori increases as it passes through more hands.
If I make a spear and I give it to you and then you pass it on to someone else and he or she passes it on to someone else,
then the value of that item increases the more hands it travels through.
And that gift would have to follow its way back, eventually getting itself back to the forest.
So gifts, reciprocity, gift giving.
Marshall Solans, who we mentioned before, the anthropologist who wrote the book on the original affluent society,
Stone Age Economics, has also offered us a scheme of different sorts of reciprocity.
So recall, Carl Polania, the economic historian says that we have reciprocity, redistribution and market exchange.
Marshall Solans says we can in turn break down reciprocity into three different types.
And these are generalized, balanced and negative.
Now generalized reciprocity is seen best in our own society in the relationship between parents and children,
where gifts usually flow in one direction for a long period of time.
And when counter gifts do come, they may be of greater symbolic value than of material value.
The more closely related people are, the more likely they are to practice generalized reciprocity.
And within families, generalized reciprocity is normally the rule.
Now next we have balanced reciprocity.
And balanced reciprocity is the preferred form in our own society in most friendships, for example.
There's no immediate return on a gift, often a denial that any balance is being kept.
No, I'm just giving this out of friendship.
But there's also an implicit expectation that the value of goods exchanged will be roughly equivalent over time.
And this sort of reciprocity serves to establish and reinforce friendships and political alliances,
and generally oils the wheels of our daily interactions.
So we're not going to spend much time on negative reciprocity,
but let me just mention that negative reciprocity is taking advantage of the expectations of reciprocity.
Receiving a gift, and the implicit idea that you would return that gift at some point in the future,
but receiving a gift without reciprocating.
And this is negative reciprocity, taking advantage of the situation, acting in bad faith.
This can range from not adding someone to your Christmas card list,
to borrowing money from a friend, and not paying it back, all these kinds of things.
Today I would like to begin by focusing, by going through each of these three types of reciprocity.
But I'd like to begin with generalized reciprocity.
What we like to think of is true giving, pure altruism.
And this is the sort of giving for long periods of time with no clear expectation of a return,
at least not right away, and its characteristic of parent-child relationships.
Now, this is, again, for parent-child relationships, the generalized reciprocity lasts much longer today
than it probably ever has before.
It's very common for parents to support their children today until they're well into their 20s,
and sometimes even beyond.
In most societies around the world, this is for a shorter period of time,
and the return is much more clear cut.
In most societies around the world, you take care of your kids when they're young,
and then they take care of you when you get old.
Now, today we've sort of divorced this function from the family,
but nonetheless, there's still this expectation of doing something for your parents when they get old.
So in generalized reciprocity, the social value of the relationship generally outweighs the economic benefits.
And this is to say that the returns don't have to be in kind.
They can be symbolic as well as emotional.
And this really holds true for parent-child relationships in our own society, pride in one's children,
the comfort of their love, the vicarious prestige that you gain from seeing them do well.
Yes, my son's in college. He's at Harvard or Yale or at George Mason, wherever it may be,
this kind of vicarious pleasure that one gets.
Outside of families, the more status difference there is between individuals,
the higher the expectation that the higher status individual will engage in generalized reciprocity.
Now, this is, it's the notion of no bless oblige.
For example, if I go out to dinner with the dean of my college,
it would be rude of me to pick up the tab, to insist on picking up the tab.
Of course, I would make an initial pass for the check and then expect him to take it away.
And it would be rude for me to insist that I'm going to pick up the tab because he has to play the role of generous host.
This is part of our social, the social roles that we play.
And speaking of eating, food around the world is much more likely to be involved in generalized reciprocity,
be governed by rules of generalized reciprocity than any other item.
So, generalized reciprocity, I mentioned this because the doby,
the very basis of doby economics is generalized reciprocity.
You'll remember that the doby are gatherers and hunters.
They have very few personal possessions.
There's very little specialization in doby society.
And there's a free exchange of goods between individuals, very little sense of private property.
You can just walk into another person's hut and borrow whatever you need to borrow.
And so generalized reciprocity is really the everyday norm for doby society.
You don't even have to ask when you're borrowing something.
Now, the most common form of reciprocity around the world is balanced reciprocity.
And this is where there's an expectation of some sort of equivalence in which both parties will benefit economically or socially.
And the doby actually practice a form of balanced reciprocity with other bands,
and with relatives in other bands, especially in-laws.
And they call this kind of exchange, charo.
And they will exchange spears and arrows, knives, maybe dogs, even glass beads,
which are a highly valued trade item.
And these are traded on visits when one band will go and visit another band.
They will have this trade in these objects.
And it's used to strengthen and maintain a social security net that they can call upon in times of need.
But the best example from the ethnographic record of balanced reciprocity comes from the Yanamamu.
So going back for a moment to the Elman service scheme of bands, tribes, chiefdoms and states,
bands are characterized by generalized reciprocity.
Tribes, on the other hand, are characterized by a greater reliance on balanced reciprocity.
And thus the Yanamamu fit in here.
For the Yanamamu, as we talked about in the last lecture, maintaining alliances between Shabonos is incredibly important.
Important to their very survival.
They need to have allies in order to fight common enemies and as a social safety net for when they get attacked.
The way in which these alliances are initiated, the way in which they're maintained,
the way in which they're solidified is by throwing a feast, hosting a party.
And what better way to show friendship than inviting people over for dinner?
We do it in our own society.
This is a wonderful way to show intimacy and to demonstrate friendship.
And this is what the Yanamamu do.
They will show feast and these will be reciprocal feast.
One Shabono will give a feast and then after a period of time, the guest will invite them to their Shabono for a feast
and it will go back and forth this way.
In between the period between the first feast and the second feast, there's this period of indeterminacy.
You never know if the other people are going to betray you or going to be treacherous.
And so there's this period of indeterminacy which can act to solidify the bonds between these two Shabono.
We're tied together in this reciprocity and we haven't seen it through yet.
Now there was a film, Napoleon Shagnan, when he was working with the Yanamamu,
did a number of films in collaboration with a filmmaker named Timothy Ash.
Really some of the classic ethnographic films and these were made throughout the late 1960s and the early 1970s.
I bring this up because Ash made a film called The Feast and he says that in his own words,
he says that The Feast is really a visual representation of Marcel Mauss's book, The Gift.
And in this film, it describes a feast that took place in 1968 between two Yanamamu villages,
the Patanawateri and the Mahikotateri.
These villages had been fighting for quite a while.
Their dispute went back a number of years where one village had raided another and had stolen a woman
and for a number of years they had had periodic raids on each other in these tense relationships.
And in fact, before this feast, in the year before this feast, ten people had been killed between these two villages.
So they decide, well, this has gone on too long, we need to patch things up, we have a number of common enemies,
so let's throw this feast and come back together and create an alliance.
And this film is remarkable because it shows the whole feast from start to finish.
And the guests show up at the Shibono, they ritually enter the Shibono and they go around and they're dressed in their war garb.
They're dressed in war paint, they're carrying spears and they're doing war dances.
And the guests come in and they do these war dances all around the Shibono.
And at this point, if the guests were going to be treacherous, they could attack their host, but they don't.
This is all part of the ritual that goes along with the feast, showing we could attack you, but we're not.
We're really fierce, look and see how fierce we are, but we're not going to follow through and attack you.
And then in the next ritualized aspect of the same feast, the guests are shown to their hammocks where they'll stay and these feasts will last for two or three days.
And they lay in the hammocks and then the host go around, again, dressed in their war garb with their war paint on with their spears,
and they go around and they thrust their spears at the guests who were laying in their hammocks.
And the guests have to be totally stoic and not show any sign of fear at all.
And again, here, if the host were going to be treacherous, they could kill all of their guests fairly easily, but they don't.
They're showing we could do this if we wanted to, but we're not going to.
The heart of the feast, and again, these feasts last sometimes two or three days, last for a number of days.
And they involve lots of eating. Everybody is fed as much food as they can possibly eat.
They make plans for future raids that they will conduct together and so forth.
And then on the last day, there's a ritualized exchange of gifts.
And this isn't the sort of gift exchange that we would expect when guests come over to visit.
The host don't say, here we thought about you and we want to give you this small item.
The guests demand what they want from the host, and they've been scoping out what the host have the whole time during the feast.
So on this last day, and they may ask for some poison arrows.
They may ask for a spear. They might ask for a hammock.
But sometimes they ask for really nice stuff, a dog.
In the film The Feast, the headman, the host headman, has to give up his dog, and he doesn't want to.
He loves this dog, but the guests demand it.
They say, we came here. We're your guests. Give us that dog.
And he has to. He's obliged to fulfill this obligation.
So he gives his dog up, but always keeping it in the back of his mind.
When I go to their village for the next feast, I'm going to be sure and get something of equally good, of equally important value.
So you have this exchange, this giving of a feast, and then giving of gifts to the guests as well that creates this bond based on reciprocity.
And this is a bond on which is based a political alliance, a military alliance, an economic alliance, in the case of crop failures, for example,
that really forms the glue that holds Yanomamu society together.
Now, last time when we talked about the Yanomamu, we've mentioned Patrick Tierney,
and the criticisms that he raised in the book Darkness in El Dorado about Shagnon.
One of his accusations was that the film, The Feast, this very highly regarded ethnographic film done by Timothy Ash and Napoleon Shagnon,
was staged by Napoleon Shagnon, that he had convinced the Patanawateri to move from their village to a new village site,
closer to the Orinoco, where he was leading this measles vaccine campaign.
And that the Patanawateri were compensated by Shagnon with metal pots, with axes, and with other trade goods.
And that they created this alliance in order to film this, and had this feast in order to film this movie.
Now, as a result of this alliance, the custom is to go out and form and conduct a common raid after a feast.
And as a result of this feast, the two groups went out and conducted a raid and killed a woman in a third, a common enemy village.
And Tierney's accusation is that the blood of that woman is on Shagnon's hands, because he had convinced these two groups to have this feast and to solidify this alliance.
But this was without intent. I mean, Shagnon didn't know what was going to happen. This alliance could have happened without Shagnon,
but nonetheless, there is that accusation.
Another example of balanced reciprocity, so we have this example of balanced reciprocity, feeding into political and economic relationships.
Another example of balanced reciprocity comes to us from the Trobriand Islanders off the coast of Papua New Guinea, where Bronislav Malinowski and Annette Weiner worked,
and who we talked about in an earlier lecture in this series.
The Trobrianders are a chieftain level of organization, and we're going to talk about them more in the next lecture,
but they're known for a particular sort of trade called the Kula trade.
And the interesting thing about the Kula trade is they only trade two objects.
They trade armbands and necklaces. The armbands are known as Mwali, and the necklaces are known as Baggi.
They're both made out of shells, and they're both purely ornamental items. They're normally not even worn.
Sometimes they'll be worn, but they're normally just displayed.
And they're only traded in particular directions. The Mwali armbands only are traded counterclockwise among a chain of islands off the coast of Papua New Guinea.
The armbands travel clockwise, and the necklaces only travel counterclockwise, and the necklaces only travel clockwise, so they're constantly passing one another.
And the way in which this trade takes place is, a Trobriand man on one island will have trading partners on islands in either direction.
And from one of his trading partners, he will receive these Mwali armbands, and from another trading partner, he will receive the necklaces.
Each of these items has a history unto itself, and the history says who has owned this item in the past.
And the value of these items, it's based partly on the aesthetics, how they look, but more important, it's who's owned this in the past.
And the most valuable of the Kula trade items are the ones that have been owned by powerful and important chiefs.
And so we have this system, it's sort of like the Maori system of Howe, where the spirit of the gift follows the material object and creates social relationships between individuals.
So we have this highly unusual trade in purely symbolic goods going back and forth between islands in the Trobriand chain.
Marvin Harris, our arch materialist, you'll remember everything's about protein or everything's about material conditions.
Marvin Harris says that why the people actually conduct this Kula trade just to justify trading in subsistence items?
Because when they take these voyages between islands to trade the armbands and the necklaces, they also take along some salt, some axe blades, maybe some baby pigs, and they'll trade these items at the same time.
And so Harris says that this whole structure, this whole symbolic nature of the Kula trade is just used to justify trade in these subsistence items.
But what's really important here is building up fame, the fame that gets built up by trading these items.
And it can increase a chief's fame and a chief's status in his own society.
Now reciprocity is at work very much in our own society today.
We might deny that we keep balances when we trade gifts with our relatives or with our friends, but this sort of balance, this sort of accounting does take place.
We just normally don't talk about it. It's a bit rude to talk about. And it's been used by a number of companies to their own ends.
So my favorite example is of Amway, the very successful pyramid, not pyramid scheme, but multi-level marketing corporation, one of the most successful multi-level marketing corporations in the country, in the world.
Amway, when it first started out, was just getting by, but it wasn't very successful. But they latched onto a strategy.
And what they would do is they would give Amway agents a basket of goods, and this basket of goods they could loan to their friends and people that they wanted to sell items to.
So an Amway salesman would sell a friend here, take this basket, it has some dishwashing soap, it has some laundry detergent, and try these things out.
And I'll come by and pick it up in a week. If you don't like it, no problem. You know, you've tried it out. There's no obligation.
If you like anything, you can buy it. And Amway sales took off. They skyrocketed after they started doing this.
Now there are a couple of explanations. Perhaps Amway makes the best dishwashing detergent in the world.
Maybe it's just heads and tails above everything else. Or perhaps they were playing on the implicit bonds of reciprocity.
That I couldn't accept this gift, even though it was said not to be a gift, without doing something in return, without paying it back some way.
You may remember the Hare Krishna's, who used to be in all the airports. They had a very similar strategy.
They would hand out flowers and books, and they would give these away. And the people would try and give them back.
And they would say, no, it's a gift. It's a pure gift. We don't want it back.
And their donations took off after they started giving away these items, because people didn't want to feel indebted.
They would take the Holy Hare Krishna book. They couldn't give it back, so they would give the person $5, because I don't want to be in this social relationship with you.
And then they probably walked down and threw the book in the trash can anyway. But we're going to make this balance so that I don't feel any obligation to you.
My favorite example comes actually the first time I bought a car. It was in New Orleans. And it was a hot summer day in New Orleans.
My wife and I had test drove this car that we liked. We decided to buy it. And we go in with the salesman into the office.
And as we go in, he says, would you like a Coke? Would you like something to drink? I'm like, yeah, Coke would be really nice.
And so he walks over very conspicuously, walks over to a Coke machine and pulls out 50 cents or 75 cents, whatever it was, puts it in the machine and buys me a Coke and gives it to me.
Now they probably give out dozens or hundreds of Cokes at this car dealership every day.
So why not just have a big refrigerator where you can go get the Coke? But it was this act that he had given me something.
And it seems silly to think that I would buy a 10 or $15,000 car based on a 50 cent Coke.
But actually this sort of thing works because we feel indebted to a person who gives us something.
And it's these bonds of reciprocity that hold society together. And this is true not only for the Dobie Juwanzi, but for the Yanamamu and for ourselves as well.
Thank you.
