Lecture 17, Chiefdoms and Redistribution
So Carl Polanyi said that we can divide up all economic transactions into three main types.
Those are reciprocity and reciprocity is most characteristic of ban level societies and tribal level societies.
Although we find it in chiefdoms and states as well.
Redistribution, and this is going to be the focus of the lecture today,
and redistribution is characteristic of chiefdom level societies and market exchanges.
The examples that we're going to use in the lecture today to talk about redistribution are
the Trobriand Islanders, who we've talked about before, and the Kwakutl, who live in the northwest coast of North America.
So redistribution occurs in some degree in all societies.
At the most basic level, redistribution occurs within households.
Members of a household will pool their resources, and those resources will then be allocated to members of the household according to need.
All nations, all states also serve a redistributive function.
These vary along a continuum.
On the one hand, we could talk about the Soviet Union and the radical redistribution.
On the other hand, we could talk about countries like the United States, which are much less redistributive,
but nonetheless function to gather up resources from everyone and then redistribute it back out to the population.
But redistribution is especially prevalent among chiefdoms.
And for chiefdoms, it is a way of solidifying their political power, a means of fortifying political power,
and it's related in some important ways to the indebtedness of reciprocity that we discussed in the last lecture.
So in a chiefdom, for example, giving tribute to the chief is an obligation.
Among the Trobriand Islanders, for example, the chief nominally owns all of the coconuts and all of the wild pigs on the island.
And to give when you take coconuts or when you catch a wild pig, you give the chief some tribute,
and that is your obligation to give the chief his tribute.
However, when the chief redistributes what is given to him, that's generosity.
That's his generosity, which incurs all of these social debts, which can solidify his political position in society.
The same works with politicians in our own country.
Think about pork barrel politics, politicians coming back home to proclaim what they've brought,
what portion of the federal budget they've been able to allocate to their home districts, and then using that to get reelected.
It's the same mechanism that provides the basis of political power for chiefs.
Now, I'd like to start by discussing the Trobriand Islanders.
Again, off the coast of New Guinea, a chiefdom-level society, a matrilineal society,
and one based on horticulture, hunting and gathering, and fishing.
There's a little bit of pig raising that goes on, but not a whole lot.
Now, in terms of their subsistence basis, this is much more characteristic of a tribal-level society,
gardening, hunting and gathering, and chiefdoms are supposed to practice intensive agriculture.
But because of the relative abundance of natural resources in the Trobriand Islands, the aquatic resources,
plenty of fish, the soils are very fertile, they are able to maintain these population densities,
characteristic of a chiefdom, even though their subsistence basis is more like that of a tribe.
So, as chiefs, they have ascribed authority rather than achieved authority.
Trobriand chiefs inherit their position, and since they live in a matrilineal society,
they don't inherit their position from their father, but rather from their mother's brother,
who is the other male in their matrilineage.
All lineages in the Trobriand Islands are ranked.
Everybody, there are chiefly lineages, there are noble lineages, and there are commoner lineages.
One is born into a particular lineage, and this is going to determine in important ways the role that one will play in society.
Now, young men tapped to assume the role of the head of a matrilineage will go and live with his mother's brother,
and this is called a bunk you local residence.
Go and live with his uncle, with his mother's brother, because they're related, as we discussed in a lecture earlier in this course,
they're related matrilineally, and through these matrilineal ties, even in matrilineal societies,
it's men who hold the formal positions of power, and they get their position of power by being related through women,
but a young man will inherit the position from his mother's brother.
Now, given these kinship limits, a man inherits chiefly status, but within these limits,
there's still quite a bit of room for maneuvering and jockeying for power, and we're going to talk about those in just a moment.
So, chiefs in Trobrian society, materially, they live pretty much like everyone else.
Nobody really goes hungry, they eat the same things, yams are the staple of the diet,
so materially, their conditions are pretty much the same.
Chiefs do have a few prerogatives. They wear special decorations.
There are special sorts of necklaces that Trobrian chiefs will wear, special headdresses.
They have certain food taboos. They're not supposed to eat stingrays, or boned fish, or certain sorts of garden greens.
There's also a notion that chiefs have to be respected, so you're not supposed to look at chief directly in the eye.
Commoners always sit below a chief, physically below a chief, but beyond that, they live pretty much like everybody else.
In Trobrian society, yams are at the heart of the Trobrian diet and at the heart of Trobrian spiritual life and symbolic life.
They're symbolically and materially at the heart of Trobrian life.
If we had to make a comparison, we could say it's sort of like the bread of life, or like bread for our own culture,
but there's not really a good comparison for U.S. culture.
For Japan, we could say rice is the heart of the diet and symbolically at the heart of the meal as well.
For the Maya in Guatemala, we could say that corn and corn tortillas are materially and symbolically at the heart of their life.
And for the Trobrian islanders, it's yams.
Men spend a great deal of time cultivating yams to give away, and there are two main types of yam gardens.
There's one that a family will eat from, and one that a family will trade from.
So men spend a great deal of time cultivating yams, and they'll have several different garden plots.
And the garden plots that they eat from, they just use for the subsistence of their family.
And yams last a pretty long time, so they can store them for months at a time, and they can provide food throughout the year.
From the other plots, they have to give the yams away that they grow in these plots.
And the plots are the yams that are grown in these other plots are already destined to a particular person,
namely mostly his sister and his sister's family.
So remember that this is a matrilineal society, so a husband is always an outsider to the group.
And the yams, these exchanges of yams, tie him through reciprocal bonds to his wife's family.
Now, Trobrianters live in huts that are elevated off the ground.
They have thatched roof made from wooden sides.
And in front of their huts, chiefs will have a separate little house, and this is a yam house.
And what chiefs try and do, yams are a symbol of wealth and political power.
And they try and get as many of their relatives as they can to give them yams.
And they display these yams in the yam huts in front of their houses.
And the fuller the yam hut, the more prestige and the more power the chief will have.
The only equivalent I can think about in our own society would be if you put your annual salary and big letters out in front of your house,
for example, to sort of display to the world how much money you make.
But it's fundamental that a chief cannot fill up his own yam hut.
If he grows the yams and puts them in the yam hut himself, that doesn't count.
They have to be received as a gift to count.
And so politically ambitious men try and get their relatives to give them yams.
Because even if they come from a chiefly lineage, even if they're destined to take on the role of a chief,
they need to accumulate these yams so they can move up.
And maybe not just be head of their matrilineage, but head of their hamlet, or head of their village,
or head of the whole island, or paramount chief of all of the Trobriand Islands.
And to do that, they have to show their political power by having yams to display.
The most important source of yams for a man are his wife's brother and his wife's father.
Now, Malinowski, who was working in the Trobriand Islands in the 1910s,
said that a man receives yams from his wife's brother, his wife's father,
also from his sons sometimes, sometimes from his younger brothers,
sometimes from his sister's sons, so there are various different sources of yams.
But the most important are come from the wife's brother and the wife's father.
Now, Malinowski said the reason why a man will give his sister's husband yams
is to compensate that person for reproducing their lineage.
This is a matrilineal society.
A man's children are members of his wife's family, his wife's matrilineage,
in a way that they're related to his wife and his wife's matrilineage,
in a way that they're not related to him.
And so Malinowski said that the man receives yams from his wife's family as payoff.
Okay, thanks for reproducing the lineage.
Thanks for producing all of these kids.
Here are some yams, and this is your payment, and you should be happy with that.
A net whiner, a woman, went back and studied the Trebriand Islands in the 1970s,
and she noted an interesting aspect of this that Malinowski missed.
And she said that yams are not given directly by a woman's brother to her husband,
they're given to her, and then she gives them to her husband.
And this may seem like a fine line, a small semantic point, but it's actually very significant.
So a man will give yams to his sister, who then gives them to her husband.
Now, the significance of that is the woman is giving something to her husband.
And so debt, again, back to reciprocity, debt is being built up.
A man feels obligated to his wife because she's the source of most of his yams
that he needs to display in his yam hut to increase his political power
and his social standing in society.
And interestingly enough, the men have to pay this back, but they don't pay it back with yams.
There's a particular form of wealth that's unique to women, women's wealth.
And this is composed of banana leaf bundles and woven skirts made from banana leafs.
These elaborate, dyed, red, very beautiful skirts, banana leaf skirts.
And so a man has to keep his wife supplied with banana leaf bundles and banana leaf skirts,
which increases her prestige.
And so it's this cycle of circulating yams and banana leaf skirts that builds up prestige for everyone.
And here I would like to invoke a distinction made by the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu
who distinguishes between two main types of capital.
There's economic capital, which is money or machinery.
It's what Karl Marx would have called productive capital, capital that makes something else,
what we would generally call capital in our own society, and symbolic capital.
And symbolic capital can be Bourdieu divides into two main types, social capital and cultural capital.
And he says social capital are one's networks, one's family and friends and acquaintances and contacts.
And you can be born into a situation where you have a lot of social capital,
or you can go out and create networks of friendship, which you can provide you with social capital.
And cultural capital, Bourdieu says, is one's cultivation, your artistic knowledge, your educational credentials,
social graces, vocabulary, all of these things that can allow a person to prosper in society,
in the given the dominant culture of a society.
Now what Bourdieu shows is that we might think of these as being two very different kinds of capital.
We have economic capital, or real productive capital, and then these two forms of symbolic capital,
which are cultural and social.
And Bourdieu shows that these are convertible one into the other.
If a man in an agricultural society spends a lot of time building up social capital and cultural capital,
at some point in the future, that prestige that he's built up, he can convert that back into material capital.
In an agricultural society, you have very intense labor needs at certain points of the year,
and very low labor needs at other points of the year.
At harvest time and at planning, you need lots of hands out into the field to help you.
While the crops are growing, just to weed and fertilize and so forth, you don't need a lot of help.
And then at harvest, you need a lot of helping hands as well.
And so what Bourdieu argues is that by helping other people out, by incurring, by building up social debts
and building up social capital, you can then use this prestige when you need some help.
And it's like, OK, I helped you with your harvest.
I helped you do all of these things.
Now it's time for you to come and help me as well.
And so by using this distinction between economic and symbolic capital,
it helps us understand what motivates the Trobriand Islanders in these exchanges.
They're not trying to get more yams because they want to eat more than everybody else.
They're trying to get more yams because it builds up their social capital and their cultural capital,
and it displays to the world how other people think about them.
It also ties into the Kula trade that we talked about that the Trobrianders enter into.
Why do they trade bracelets and arm shells?
It's not the material value of those goods that is so important.
It's the symbolic value.
And by building up the symbolic capital, the social capital, this cultural capital,
they're able to elevate themselves in society and become greater and greater chiefs,
more and more important chiefs.
OK, so the Trobriand men spend quite a bit of time trading in pigs and trading in banana leaf skirts
in order to keep their wives happy so that their wives' families will give them yams
that they can display in their yam huts.
What do they then do with these yams?
They redistribute them back out to the commoners and use them to pay for common goods,
building trade canoes.
They use them to compensate religious specialists for conducting rituals and so forth.
So they redistribute this back out.
And in redistributing it back out, they build up debt from their subjects,
which then increases their power and it becomes the cycle of increasing power.
Now talking about yams, let me mention a couple of other things before we move to our next example.
A lot of this yam exchange takes place in the months of July and August.
And this is a period that the Trobrianders called Masawa.
And this is two months of play that follow the harvest period.
And during this period, they will trade yams and they also have yam competitions.
And so the chiefs will either grow themselves or have commissioned enormous yams.
And it's a special kind of yam called a kuvi yam that will grow to sometimes 10 or 12 or 15 feet long.
And they compare them. They have a yam length contest.
So all of the chiefs lay out their yams and they see who has the biggest yam of all.
And the chief with the largest yam wins the competition and gains all of this prestige.
I mean the Freudian connotations here are obvious,
but it's interesting the way in which they use this to build up symbolic capital.
It's also interesting that during these celebrations, during this Masawa months of play that the Trobrianders engage in after harvest every year,
it used to be a time of these incredibly lascivious dances, very sexual dances that would go on for hours and hours.
Men and women dancing together and then occasionally couples would pair off and go into the woods or to the forest for a trist.
When the English missionaries and colonial officials showed up, they were outraged by this.
It was scandalous. I can't believe you're having these dances.
We've got to stop this right away.
And what can we do to divert the Trobrianders' attentions away from having these lascivious dances, these yam competitions, this yam trading and all of this?
And they said, let's introduce cricket. What's a more stayed game than cricket?
And so they taught the Trobrianders cricket, the Trobrianders picked up cricket and began playing it, but they reinterpreted it.
So they would predetermine the outcome of these cricket games.
They would decide which chief's team was going to win based on which chief had the more prestige.
The more prestigious chief had to win.
And so they would determine the outcome of these games ahead of time.
And they would insert these dances in the middle of the cricket matches.
So they would still do their lascivious sexual dancing.
They would just interspersed it with playing cricket as well.
Not quite what the English had in mind.
But talking about redistribution and building up political power, I want to turn for a bit to the Quacutal.
And the Quacutal are a group, a chieftain living on the northwest coast of North America,
made famous by Franz Boaz, the father of American anthropology.
The Quacutal are best known for their totem poles, which are actually elaborate chiefly genealogies.
There's spectacular transformation masks that they have, really wonderful artwork.
Like the Trobriand Islanders, they're a chieftain, but they're not a chieftain that practices intensive agriculture.
And this points us again to the limitations of typologies, such as bans, tribes, chieftains and states.
Here we have a chieftain level of political organization, but it doesn't quite fit in that category.
And the reason why is they're gatherers. They're really hunters and gatherers.
But what they gather is salmon. They're on the northwest coast of North America.
They have seasonal abundance of salmon, enough salmon to catch when they're running to last them all year long.
And they'll smoke some of them, and they'll save some of them, eat some of it fresh.
But they have this abundance of natural resources that allows them to maintain these population densities
and the political organization of a chieftainship.
They're matrilineal, like the Trobriand Islanders are also.
Chiefs inherit their position as among the Trobriand Islands.
And there's jockeying for power between chiefs to determine who will be the better chief, the more powerful chief, the paramount chief of a region.
And the way in which chiefs compete among the quacutal people is through a custom called potlatch feasts.
And these potlatches are feasts given by chiefs, and they may require months and very often years of saving.
And chiefs will build up reserves in order to throw just the best potlatch that they've ever had.
And then they'll invite everyone from their own village and then people from neighboring villages to come for this feast that may last for several days.
And when they get there, they're plowed with food, all the salmon that you can eat, all the fish that you can eat.
Given as much food as they can eat, they're also given gifts.
They're given fish oil and blankets and berries.
And these things will last for days and days at a time.
And the chiefs will even to show how generous they are.
And again, they're showing their generosity to build up their political capital.
I deserve to be chief because I'm throwing this wonderful feast and giving you all of this good stuff.
To show how generous they are, they even get into what we could call conspicuous destruction.
They will take canoes out and sink them.
They will take pieces, they engrave copper pieces of art.
They're very famous for their coppers.
They'll chop these up and throw them into the water or give them to people.
During the early contact with Westerners, and particularly with the Hudson Bay Company in the 16th through the 19th centuries,
the quacutal became fairly affluent by trading skins for blankets, mainly.
Hudson Bay blankets, the famous Hudson Bay blankets.
And this led to an incredible period of inflation in the potlatch.
So successful potlatch chiefs would give everybody a mountain of blankets when they came to their potlatch.
But they would also build up these literal mountains of blankets and set them on fire and burn them.
And again, just showing, I'm so generous, I'm so incredibly wealthy that I'll just burn this stuff.
And it doesn't mean anything to me.
And by doing this, by destroying things and by giving things away, they're able to build up their political and their social capital.
So why potlatch? Why have these feasts?
Franz Boaz said that it's just the product of a particular historical tradition.
And Boaz, who was one of the first to work with a quacutal, was content just to document this tradition.
Boaz's student, Ruth Benedict, said that each culture has its own temperament, its own ethos.
It's sort of like a personality writ large.
And she says that the Northwest Coast Indians, like the quacutal, their cultural temperament, their cultural ethos, is deonition.
It's highly competitive. It's egocentric. It's almost megalomaniacal.
And that it is this personality writ large that produces the potlatch.
And interestingly enough, Benedict, in her book, Patterns of Culture, contrasted this with the Zuni living in the Southwest, the U.S. Southwest.
And she said was a very cooperative and Apollonian culture.
So she set up these two ideals, the Apollonian Zuni and the Deonition Quacutal living in the Northwest.
Now Marvin Harris, and you'll remember Marvin Harris from her earlier discussions, this arch materialist, says that it's not really about building up symbolic capital.
It does that.
The chiefs are able to show how powerful they are. They're able to buy the allegiance of their own villagers and of neighboring villages through these potlatch feasts.
But Marvin Harris says that what's really going on here is that it's a social safety net.
That sometimes when the salmon are running, there's abundance for everybody.
There's plenty of food to go around, plenty of food to last all year long if you smoke it.
But sometimes the salmon don't run.
And in those years, Northwest Coast Indians are in a hard position.
So he says that the potlatch serves a couple of functions.
First of all, by having this competitive feasting, it increases productivity all around.
All the chiefs want to have the most efficient, the most productive village of all so they can have the best potlatch feast.
And then secondly, it serves a social safety net function.
When one village has a rough year, when there's a bad year, there's always a potlatch coming up.
And they can go to this potlatch and not only will they be fed for two or three or four days,
but they'll be able to take home as much food as they can carry.
So it serves this important social safety net.
So redistribution, chiefdoms.
Chiefs depend on their political power by redistributing goods back out to their subjects.
This is based on the obligations that are entailed that we talked about with reciprocity.
The subjects have to give the chief tribute.
This is an obligation.
But when the chiefs in turn go back and redistribute these same goods that they've been given to the same subjects,
maybe not in the same proportions, but to the same subjects, they are being generous and incurring the social debt.
And so they're able to build on the obligations implicit in relationships of reciprocity to increase their political power.
And for chiefs, as in tribes, remember we said that the headmen of tribes, their material circumstances are the same as everybody else's.
This is mostly true for chiefs as well.
And it's this almost paradoxical function that actually the more they give away, the higher their prestige.
In our own society, it's the more that a person accumulates the higher their prestige.
But among chiefdoms, they have to demonstrate their generosity and continually re-demonstrate their generosity to maintain their position.
And they do this through redistribution.
