Lecture 19, Cultures of Capitalism
Last time we looked at the contact between state-level societies of the West and other
cultures.
And today we're going to turn our attention to another aspect of states, the market economy
and capitalism.
We're going to look at capitalism as a culturally specific model that developed in Western Europe
and expanded throughout the world.
And we're going to look at Marx's critiques of capitalism.
Now, discussing Karl Marx often invokes a negative reaction.
My father, for example, whenever I say Marx says, he sort of rolls his eyes and looks away.
It's this idea of how can we take Marx seriously after the failure of the great communist experiment
in the Soviet Union.
But I think it's useful to distinguish between Marx the scholar, who was a political economist,
a political philosopher, not unlike Adam Smith in many ways, and Marx the activist.
Now, social scientists are very poor at prediction, although economists, some economists in any
way, would like to think otherwise.
We're very poor at predicting the future.
We're very good at explaining what happened yesterday, last year, last decade or whatever
it may be, but we're poor at saying what's going to happen tomorrow.
Human behavior is just too variable to make those sorts of predictions.
But this is where Marx went astray, is when he moved from social analysis to political prediction
and his ideas about the inevitability of a communist revolution.
So in this lecture, we're going to focus on Marx the scholar.
And I'm going to show that you don't have to be a communist to find value in his analysis of early capitalism.
And indeed, as we're going to see in a later lecture, recent management theorists have taken a page
from Marx's writings about worker alienation to develop their theories of business management.
So we're going to start with a look at Marx's view of capitalism.
Then we're going to look at the Marxist literature on hegemony or state domination.
And we're going to conclude with the often subtle ways in which power is exercised and resisted in state-level societies.
Now, let me begin by saying that capitalism is neither good nor bad.
It's a system of production, and we have to treat it in a culturally relative sense,
just as we do hunting and gathering and other forms of production as well.
But capitalism, it's a system of production and an incredibly efficient one.
Capitalism has created more wealth in the world than any other system, and it's been incredibly successful.
We have global capitalism today. It is the basis of the world market.
Now, in Marx's defense and his critiques of capitalism, he was observing it in its cruelest infant stages.
You know, the infamous working conditions of the 19th century.
This move from bucolic village life to urban squalor and poverty and hunger and working in these early factories.
Now, Marx and his writings on capitalism distinguishes between different types of exchanges.
And he says the most basic sort of exchange is barter.
You take one good, and you trade it for another.
I've got a pound of rice, and I would like to have a pound of salt, and so we can trade these two items.
And Marx says that what's crucial here is that the end of the game is a use value.
I've got a pound of rice, but I need a pound of salt.
That's going to end so I will trade my rice for salt to get this material utility of salt.
The end of the game is use value.
Now, Marx, when he was writing about this, used a number of equations.
And so for barter, he would use the equation C converts into C prime.
One commodity is exchanged for another sort of commodity.
Now, he said markets began to be more efficient when they started to use money to mediate these exchanges.
I've got a pound of rice, and I need a pound of salt, but maybe I can't find anybody who has salt, who has extra salt, who needs rice.
And so it's much more efficient for me to sell my pound of rice for money and then go and use that money to buy a pound of salt.
And so we could represent this or Marx represented this in his equations as C, which stands for commodity, gets converted into M, which stands for money, which is then converted into C prime, which is another commodity.
Now, the end of this is likewise use value.
I'm looking to get the utility of a pound of salt or a pound of sugar or whatever it may be.
Now, Marx says that in the age of exploration, there was a fundamental shift and he calls this phase mercantilism, where people would start out with money and they would go abroad and buy a product.
Let's say ivory in India and then bring that back to England or Western Europe and sell it for a profit.
Now, he would represent this in his equations as starting with M for money, using that money to buy a commodity C, and then selling that commodity for more money, which would he represents as M prime.
So we have M to C to M prime.
Now, he says what's crucial about this is that the end of the game is not use value, but exchange value.
It's making more money.
Now, of course, the money that's going to be made can be converted into commodities that we can actually use that have some material utility.
But he says the crucial thing here is a mindset that is not trying to get a pound of salt because you need that for your food, but trying to get more money and to accumulate more money over time.
So I mentioned this to lead up to Marx's definition of capitalism.
Excuse me.
Marx says the capitalism occurs using the same sort of equation of M to C to M prime, money to commodity to money, more money.
When labor starts being treated as if it were a commodity, when people start selling their labor as if it were a commodity.
Now we take this to be the natural state of things.
We all sell our labor.
We might sell it by the hour.
We might sell it by the month given what our salary structure or whatever it may be.
But we sell our labor and this seems to be the natural state of things.
But Marx pointed out that this is very particular to capitalism and that it has far reaching social and cultural implications.
So once again, to emphasize this, this is an important point.
Marx defines capitalism when labor becomes a commodity, when labor can be bought and sold with money.
Now to give you a specific example about how this played out, let's look at textile production, cotton textile production in England.
Woolen textiles were long and important product of England and Ireland and Scotland and cotton was introduced in the 17th century.
At first, cotton cloth was produced along the same cottage industry model as woolen goods.
But the guilds were less restrictive with cotton.
They were really based around wool production and so the guilds were less proactive in terms of cotton production.
And this opened up a door to introduce labor-saving devices.
And throughout the 18th century, a number of labor-saving devices was introduced into the cotton textile production process.
And these include, let me just list a few, in 1733 John K. invents the Flying Shuttle, which allows a single weaver to do the work of two weavers,
increasing the demand, doubling the demand for cotton yarn.
In 1764, the spinning genie was invented, which has several spindles instead of just one.
And this allows one person to do the work of three or four people.
In 1769, water frame spinning machines were developed.
In 1790, steam-powered spinning machines were developed.
In 1793, Eli Whitney famously invented his cotton gin, which separated the cotton from the seeds.
Before Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin, one worker could produce one pound of cotton per day.
After the cotton gin, one worker could produce 50 pounds of cotton per day.
So these are incredible labor-saving advances, technological advances in the cotton production process.
And by 1820, power looms had taken over from hand loom weavers.
And all in all, over this 100-year period, cotton production became 200 times more productive than it had been before.
Now, this is a great success story of capitalism, producing more cloth much more cheaply,
bringing up everybody's standard of living.
This points to the fact that economics doesn't have to be a zero-sum game.
We can create entirely new wealth.
If one person's labor, a day's labor, can produce 200 times more than what they could produce before,
this is going to increase everybody's standard of living by lowering the prices.
Now, what happened in this process of technological advances in cotton cloth is that it forced women, women and men,
who had once worked in their homes as independent artisans, as independent workers, their own bosses.
It forced them to start migrating to cities to work in factories.
They just couldn't compete with the efficiencies of factory production.
Who's going to buy this expensive hand-woven cloth when cheaper and at the time, higher quality, cheaper, higher quality machine-made cloth is available?
Nobody's going to do it.
And so this really forced all of these artisans out of business.
So these former self-employed artisans begin having to sell their labor,
as a commodity, to the factories.
There's an analogy in society today.
The conflict between Walmart and these big box stores and mom and pop operations.
A lot of people romanticize the mom and pop hardware store,
but when push comes to shove and they go to buy their hammer and they want to save a dollar on it,
they go to Home Depot or to Lowe's or somewhere.
And it's the same process that was working that put all of these early cotton artisans out of business.
So people, these artisans begin having to sell their labor as a commodity.
And this resulted in really different cultural models, different ways of thinking about time, for example.
Before the Industrial Revolution, the calendar had really been the hallmark of time.
And then after the Industrial Revolution, it became the watch and the clock,
because time needed to be broken down into smaller units.
If you're selling your labor, how do you sell that?
It's by time, by the hour, for example.
And discipline began to be introduced in the workplace that was unknown before.
Coffee and sugar, coffee and tea and sugar, for example, in the European factories
and the early English factories, began to replace beer breaks.
And coffee and sugar and tea is the perfect proletarian food source.
It's high in calories, it's cheap, and it provides caffeine as well.
And so factory owners began rather than supplying their workers with beer,
supplying their workers with coffee and tea.
Now all of this played into a number of other developments that were going on at the time.
Iron production, the development of water-powered machinery,
then the development of the steam engine and steel.
And all of this came together to form England's Industrial Revolution in the 19th century.
But what I want to focus on here is the alienation, what Marx called alienation,
which is inherent in the capitalist production process.
Now Marx used free labor, always in an ironic sense.
He said that workers in a capitalist system are free to sell their labor to whomever they want.
But they're only free because they've been denied the form of production that they're used to,
being their own bosses, being independent entrepreneurs and artisans and so forth.
So they're free to sell their labor, but only within the system that denies them other alternatives.
Now Marx saw this as being a devastating shift in the cultural ethos,
whereas people before were independent artisans, they began selling their labor,
and that by not controlling their means of production,
and means of production are just what you need to make a living.
For a farmer it's hose and land and seeds, for a weaver it would be a loom and fabric and so forth.
Marx said that by removing this connection between workers and their means of production,
the workers become alienated.
Workers want to be their own bosses, Marx said.
They want to control their own destinies in some fundamental way,
and the early capitalist system removed that possibility.
They began having to work from others, for others.
Because it was factory-based labor that was realizing all of these efficiencies,
and individual artisans couldn't build these large textile factories.
Interestingly enough, as a sideline, I read recently a survey of Fortune 500 company executives,
and something like 75% of them said that one day they would like to set out on their own.
And I think this is echoes of Marx's idea of alienation,
that these executives, they're being very well compensated,
but they don't want to work for this large company.
In an ideal world, they would work for themselves.
They would control their own means of production,
and thus have control over their own destiny in some way.
So Marx said that capitalism involved two forms of alienation.
The first is alienation of workers from their means of production.
They have to work given technological advances,
and the inability of workers to buy or of artisans to buy these new technologies
that are forced to sell their labor.
The second is the alienation of workers from the fruits of their labor.
They're no longer artisans.
In pre-capitalist societies, there's usually a social relationship between the producer and the consumer.
The object that gets traded has all of these social meanings.
If you buy a piece of jewelry from a silversmith that you know,
it carries all sorts of different meanings that if you just went to a changed
or bought an industrially produced piece of jewelry, for example.
And so Marx says that workers get alienated from what they produce.
They're no longer vested in that product in the same way,
and the social relationships that used to be transmitted through products
get diminished as well.
So we're going to turn to Marxist notions of alienation in a later lecture,
but here I would like to continue by talking about hegemony and false consciousness.
Now, the idea of hegemony is often invoked in contemporary political discourse,
and it generally is used as a synonym for political domination.
In anthropology, however, it traces its origin back.
The word hegemony traces its origin back to the work of Antonio Gramsci and Karl Marx,
and particularly Marxist writings on hidden or false consciousness.
Now, Marx was a bit wary of the masses,
just as he called for a worker's revolution.
At the same time, he was a bit wary of the masses.
He believed, for example, that religion acted as an opiate of the masses very famously,
that people could be duped into buying into a system that exploited them,
and to actively supporting a system that exploited them.
Now, we see this most clearly in one of my favorite essay of Marx's,
which was published in 1852 in his title, The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.
In this essay, he's looking at the rise of Louis Bonaparte, Napoleon Bonaparte's nephew in France,
and Louis Bonaparte was trying to ride on the coattails of his uncle,
that I am the torchbearer of the Napoleonic tradition.
But what Marx said was that whereas Napoleon Bonaparte had protected the interest of peasants in many ways,
his nephew, Louis Bonaparte, was selling out the interest of peasants.
Louis Bonaparte was very much caught up in the interest of the emergent merchant class of his day,
and so Louis Bonaparte was encouraging what we would call today privatization of lands.
And this was sold to the French peasants as a good thing.
You can buy your own land, and then you don't have to work in these feudal conditions.
You don't have to have a lord lording over you.
You can buy your own land and be the master of your own destiny.
But people were buying their land with mortgages.
So they were taking out mortgages from this emerging class of merchant bankers
and really enriching this very small segment of society.
And so Marx saw this, and the French peasants supported Louis Bonaparte.
They said, yes, this is great. This is great for us.
This is we're going to own our own land.
This is really realizing the dream of Napoleon Bonaparte.
And Marx said that the French peasants were duped by the Napoleonic rhetoric into buying into this project.
And he writes famously, let me quote here from the 18th Bremer of Louis Bonaparte,
the mortgage debt burdening the soil of France imposes on the French peasantry
an amount of interest equal to the annual interest on the entire British national debt.
Small holding property in this enslavement by capital toward which its development pushes it unavoidably
has transformed the mass of the French nation into troglodytes.
Sixteen million peasants, including women and children, dwelling caves,
a large number of which have but one opening, others only two or three.
And as you know, windows are to a house what the five senses are to the head.
The bourgeois order, which at the beginning of the century set the state to stand guard
over this newly emerged small holdings and fertilize them with laurels,
has become a vampire which sucks the blood from their hearts and brains
and cast them into the alchemist's cauldron of capital.
The code Napoleon is now nothing but a codex of distraints, of for sales and compulsory auctions.
So Marx goes on to ponder why, and this is again quoting from him,
why a nation of 36 million can be surprised by these swindlers and taken to prison without resistance.
And he observes riley that a nation no more than a woman is excused for the unguarded hour
in which the first adventurer who comes along can do violence to her.
So Marx sees the French peasants as being duped by a political rhetoric
into supporting a program of privatization which acts against their best interest,
acts as an opiate of the masses, getting them to support a project which exploits them.
So why would people act against their own self-interest? It doesn't make much sense.
The Italian scholar Antonio Gramsci, who was a Marxist,
who actually went to prison for being a Marxist,
he was writing in the early part of the 20th century, in the 1920s and 1930s,
developed Marx's notion of false consciousness or hidden consciousness,
this idea of being duped by a dominant ideology into what we call today the hegemony,
this modern concept of hegemony.
Now let me mention that Gramsci, Antonio Gramsci,
he's very much invoked in social science literature these days,
but his writings, what we have of his writings were mostly smuggled out of this Italian jail cell
and on pieces, scraps of toilet paper and little pieces of paper and folded up,
so it's very telegraphic sort of writing, it's not a clear narrative.
But what Gramsci argues is that hegemony, false consciousness,
what he called hegemony, is a spontaneous consent given by the masses of a population
to the general direction imposed on social life by the dominant fundamental group.
Now this is to say that dominant classes in a society are able to leverage their privileged access
to mass media, to national discourse, to public education.
They're able to use their privileged access to these means of communicating with the public
to foster a system that continues to support them, continues to support them in their position of privilege.
So Gramsci argues that hegemony emerges when a particular ideology representing particular class interests
comes to be seen as natural or common sense, it's unquestioned.
And in this, Gramsci argues that, for example, war is a breakdown of hegemony.
Now we often hear hegemony invoked in the context of American expansion, for example,
American hegemony in the world.
In America, the United States is sending out its troops to impose its hegemony on Iraq,
you know, fill in the country of your choice there.
But Gramsci argued that this isn't hegemony at all.
War only emerges when hegemony breaks down.
A hegemonic system gets people to support that system willingly, actively support the system,
even if it is exploiting them.
And so hegemony really removes the need for bare-faced domination.
It co-ops opposition in this way.
Now hegemony is not unique to Western society.
Earlier in the course we talked about female circumcision in African societies, for example,
very often supported by women themselves.
Many would argue that this is a case of hegemony, of women buying into a patriarchal system
that exploits them, that does harm to their own bodies,
and actively supporting that system in some way.
Now, it's too easy to say that we're duped.
An anthropologist have a hard, have a complicated relationship with this concept of hegemony.
On the one hand, it can be liberating to uncover hegemonies and show how people are being duped.
On the other hand, as anthropologists, we place a lot of value in what people say and what people believe.
We go there to study them and to record what they say,
and we place a lot of value in people's views themselves.
So it puts us in a difficult position, an ethnocentric position to say,
yeah, okay, you guys, you're blinded by ideology, you're blinded by this opiate of the masses,
you're blinded by religion or political rhetoric, and we know better,
because we are anthropologists and we have some stranglehold on the objective truth
that we can take these blinders off of your eyes and show you how you're being exploited.
So anthropology has a complicated relationship with the concept of hegemony,
but the way in which we've explored it in recent years is looking at resistances to hegemonies,
the way in which people resist the order, an order which actively exploits them.
Now this is mostly associated, most clearly associated with the work of a political scientist,
James Scott, a political scientist, but a political scientist who has done ethnographic fieldwork,
a political scientist who we could really consider to be an anthropological brother in some ways.
And in 1987, he wrote a book called Weapons of the Week, Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance.
And he was working in a village that he calls Siddhaka in Malaysia, this is a pseudonym,
he calls Siddhaka in Malaysia and he was doing his fieldwork there in the 1970s,
following mechanization of agriculture, of the rice agriculture in this village.
And what he finds in this village is a tension between peasants who used to be farmers
and own their own land, who were then having to sell their land and work for people
who had enough money to buy the machinery for mechanized agriculture,
had enough money to buy fertilizer, had enough money to buy hybrid seeds and so forth.
And he found a lot of class tensions between these the haves and the have-nots,
the former peasant farmers who were having to work for this emergent class of agricultural capitalists.
So there were a lot of tensions there, but this was also in Malaysia a state with a history of severe state repression.
And so the peasants who were having to give up their farmlands were very unsatisfied with their situation,
but they didn't feel free to protest it, at least not overtly, because they would be thrown in prison,
perhaps tortured by the authorities and so forth.
And so what Scott argues is that they developed these techniques that he calls weapons of the weak.
And these are ways of getting back at authority without overtly resisting that authority.
And some of these examples would be foot-dragging, feigned ignorance,
you know, the plantation owner tells a peasant to go and fertilize the fields and the peasants.
You know, I'm just an ignorant peasant. I don't really know how to mix the fertilizer.
I'm not sure if I can do that.
And so by feigning ignorance is able to get back in a little way at his boss, or false compliance.
Yeah, I'm going to go do that, no problem at all, and then not carrying through.
And foot-dragging, just moving as slowly as one can.
Now these are techniques that are used today by workers in industrial settings and in commercial settings.
The best example of weapons of the weak of foot-dragging I can think of is actually the deli lady at my neighborhood grocery store,
who moves incredibly slow when I ask for a pound of sliced ham, for example.
And this is her way of getting back at the system.
I'm being paid minimum wage, I'm not appreciated in my job, and so I'm going to move as slowly as I can.
And this is a way for me, a disempowered person, to exercise authority over you, the consumer.
Now there are a number of ways in which people employ weapons of the weak.
We've mentioned foot-dragging, feigned ignorance, false compliance, gossip, telling gossip about other people, pilfering, petty sabotage,
ways in which workers are able to resist their bosses without seeming to resist.
Now an interesting aspect of this idea of hegemony, or part of the problem with this idea of hegemony for anthropologists,
boils down to the notion of can people be oppressed without realizing it?
Can people be oppressed without realizing it?
Or do people know who knows best about these things?
And one example to illustrate this is the case of breast implants in the United States.
So today about 200,000 women a year in the United States have breast augmentation surgery.
And this is something that's really just taken off since the late 1970s.
And the effect has been so dramatic that the bra sizes have gone up in the United States.
They jumped from a 34B to a 36B in 1991, and they jumped in the year 2000 to a 36C.
And this cannot be accounted for just with natural growth rates.
Yeah, we're all getting a little bit bigger, but the breasts are getting even larger, at least based on bra size.
So why do women get breast implant surgery?
We could look at this in one of two ways.
One is that it's a form of empowerment for women.
This technology has allowed women to take control over their bodies
and to actually change their bodies in a way in which they see fit, a very empowering thing.
Or it could be a case of hegemony.
It could be that women are duped into buying into a dominant male fantasy about breasts that exploits them, exploits them as objects.
Now the anthropologist Laura Nader has written on this, and she notes that in the late 1970s and early 1980s,
there was a glut of plastic surgeons in the United States.
And that these mostly male plastic surgeons made a conscious effort to expand their market.
And let me read here, this is from an article of her.
She's quoting from the past president of the American Society of Plastic and Reproductive Surgery.
Quote, there is a substantial and enlarging medical knowledge that these deformities,
and here he's referring to small breasts, that these deformities are really a disease
which results in the patient's feelings of inadequacy, lack of self-confidence, distortion of body image,
and a total lack of well-being due to a lack of self-perceived femininity.
Enlargement is therefore necessary to ensure the quality of life for the female patient.
So what is breast augmentation? Is it a form of female empowerment, or is it a form of hegemony?
It's hard to say, but it comes back to this notion of who knows better, the native person,
the person who is experiencing this reality that we're talking about, or the outside observer.
And sometimes there's wiggle room here, it doesn't have to be either or.
Each offers a unique perspective, and this is part of the value of anthropology.
Combining various perspectives on the same topic to get at some notion of truth,
or as close to truth as we can ever come.
