Lecture 20 is Economics Rational.
We concluded last time by talking about hegemony and this notion of outside views versus inside
views of culture and economic exploitation.
So today we're going to take an anthropological view of economics and from this perspective
it's very useful sometimes to have an outsider, an anthropologist look at this discipline
of economics and so we can combine an outsider's view with an insider's view of what's going
on and offer a cultural perspective of the discipline of economics.
Now this is going to critique some of the fundamental premises of economics and let
me say from the outset that I find value in the discipline of economics.
Some of my best friends are economists if I could say that and indeed after we critique
some of the assumptions of economic rationality and self-interest we're going to turn to
what I consider to be some of the most exciting work in the social sciences today which comes
from economics, experimental economics and behavioral economics, the sort of economics
that is taken a page from anthropology.
So let me begin by talking a bit about economics.
The term economics itself comes from the Greek roots oikos or household and nomos or
law and so economics really refers originally referred to the law of the household, managing
a household and considering a household as an economic unit.
In this sense it's more of an ethic than a science.
How can we take care of everybody in our household?
How can we provision our household with what it needs to survive?
But economics over the years has converted into a science in many ways, a social science
but a social science that stresses the scientific part of that equation over the social part
of the equation.
Now there's a beauty to mathematical models of the economy and mathematical models of
economics have really taken off since the mid 20th century to today and have become
the predominant paradigm in economics, mathematically modeling the economy.
But we have to recognize the limitations of these models as well.
We can appreciate their beauty, we can appreciate the parsimony of the models but we have to
realize their limitations at the same time.
So the study of economics an economist would say is allocating scarce resources toward
unlimited ends.
We have unlimited wants and we only have scarce resources and we have to figure out
how to allocate those.
But economics in some sense has moved beyond this even to become an ideology or a cultural
mindset, a cultural model, a way of looking at the world which very often seems to be
the natural state of things, free markets are the natural state of things, unfettered
markets are the way things are supposed to be.
So we're going to critique these notions of economics and to do that let me begin with
the distinction that's made by the economic historian Carl Polanyi who we've talked about
before in the class.
Polanyi says that we can break up views of economics into two main perspectives, substantivist
economics which we would call cultural economics, a cultural perspective and formal economics.
Now what he calls formal economics is the formal discipline of economics, what gets taught
in economics departments and universities around the country.
And formal economics as Polanyi points out and others as well have noted, formal economics
today is based on two assumptions, the assumption of rationality that humans are basically rational
and tend to act rationally and an assumption of self-interest that we act rationally in
our own self-interest.
And so in the move what used to be political economy which would unite Marx and Adam Smith
and Keynes and many others has really moved to econometrics, mathematical modeling of
the economy in the latter part of the 20th century.
Now the idea behind self-interest and rationality harkens back to the work of Adam Smith and
Smith's notion that when an individual pursues his or her own self-interest they're simultaneously
pursuing the best interest of the society as a whole.
And this is the moral justification that Adam Smith in 1776 and his classic wealth of nations
provided for the discipline.
Now Smith like Marx is often caricatured in popular perceptions.
He wasn't really the radical free trader, he saw a role for government and government
intervention in the economy.
But at the same time he pointed to this notion of pursuing one's self-interest works in the
self-interest of society as a whole and let me read a quote from the wealth of nations.
It's not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer or the baker that we expect our
dinner but from their regard for their own self-interest.
We address ourselves not to their humanity but to their self-love and never talk to them
of our own necessities but of their advantages.
Nobody but a beggar chooses to depend chiefly on the benevolence of his fellow citizens.
He goes on to say that every individual generally neither intends to promote the public interest
nor knows how much he is promoting it.
He intends only his own gain and he is led by an invisible hand to promote an end which
was no part of his intention.
And this is Adam Smith's famous invisible hand.
If we all pursue our own individual self-interest it's going to make the economy work more
efficiently and produce more wealth for society as a whole.
Now the assumption of rationality, the assumption that rationality is universal and that there
is some sort of universal rationality is obviously very problematic to anthropologists.
We show that different cultures have different cultural logics.
There are different rationalities at work in different societies around the world.
And so an economic assumption of there being a single rationality, a single self-interested
rationality is problematic at best.
Now humans are, the notion that humans are rational and that they act to maximize returns.
They act to maximize returns on their investment, their investment of time, their investment
of money, they act to maximize utility is the way the economists would talk about it.
But this is one of those nebulous concepts that encompasses so much, so much cultural
stuff that it really becomes useless.
Utility is the usefulness of an object to you or to you or to you.
But that utility is defined by you.
So a utility of a cup is apparent.
The utility of this cup is that it holds my water or it holds my coffee.
The utility of a pen is that I can write with it.
But what about the utility of a movie, for example?
That's going to vary substantially from person to person and cannot be boiled down to these
nice neat rational choices.
So utility is defined differently between cultures.
And this is really what substantivist or cultural economics points out.
So it's formal economics that rests on these two pillars, these two assumptions of rationality
and self-interest.
Substantivist economics, anthropological economics, holds that cultures, that economies
are culturally embedded, that economies arise from cultures.
The particular circumstances of economies differ from society to society, and we cannot
have universal rules that apply around the world.
Now we could look back to the work of the German sociologist Max Weber, who wrote a
classic text in 1904, The Protestant Ethic in the Spirit of Capitalism, in which he really
captured this notion of substantivist economics.
And what he did in The Protestant Ethic in the Spirit of Capitalism was compare the prosperous
Protestant northern Germany in which capitalism had taken off with the less developed Catholic
south of Germany.
And he says that the Protestant ethic of saving money, of living austerely, had led
to the development of people to save money and the development of capitalism, because
people had money that they could invest, whereas in the south of Germany, the Catholics were
always having festivals and they were spending their money on wine and having a good time
and capitalism couldn't develop in that context.
And so what Weber is arguing is that capitalism emerged from a particular social, religious,
cultural context.
Now we can think of a number of counter examples to the economic assumptions of rationality
and self-interest, things that we've talked about in this course so far.
The Dobie Ju-wansee, for example, the idea that there are unlimited wants and that we
have to allocate scarce resources to unlimited wants, it doesn't hold up for the Dobie.
They don't have unlimited wants.
And accumulating lots of stuff, as we discussed, would actually be maladaptive for the Dobie.
The Trobrianders, likewise, the Trobrianders spend a great deal of their time trading
in yams and even in these Ku-vee yams, those huge 10 or 12 foot long yams that can't be
eaten because they're too fibrous.
Their value is symbolic.
Or think about the Trobri and Kula trade, where they trade these shell necklaces and
armbands.
There's very little material utility to these objects.
Their utility is symbolic.
And so the economies of trade are embedded in those particular cultural systems.
And so it's important that we take into account not only economic capital, but what Pierre
Bourdieu calls symbolic capital, honor, prestige, these social debts that can be built up by
loaning someone something, for example, that can then get converted back into real capital,
as we discussed in lecture 16.
The anthropologist Marshall Solins has argued that really what anthropologists need to do
is turn economics on its head.
He argues that it's a symbolic logic that organizes demand and not the other way around.
And to illustrate this, he turns to the meat trade in the United States.
He says, why in the United States do we eat cattle and pigs and not horses and dogs,
for example?
He says it would make just as much economic sense for us to raise horses for meat.
In fact, it would probably be more efficient to raise horses for meat.
What do we use horse meat for in the States these days?
It's for dog food, cheap dog food.
So we could raise horse meat in the United States on the Great Plains incredibly cheaply.
But we don't do this because we have a symbolic system that places horses and dogs as being
somehow closer to humans.
It would be almost cannibalistic to eat a dog.
But of course, this is a culturally specific notion.
And other in many Asian cultures around the world is perfectly fine to eat a dog.
It would be more acceptable to eat a horse because they're not quite as human-like as
dogs, but nonetheless that would still be a bit taboo.
But even cultures as closely related to us as the French commonly eat horses.
And so there is a cultural logic that organizes the economic demand for these products.
He also, Solens, in the same work, also points out that this notion of distancing what we
eat, cows and pigs, from being cannibalistic, from eating humans or dogs or horses.
In doing this, we play these linguistic games.
So what is cow meat?
It's beef.
We have this synonym that removes it from the physicality of eating meat.
What do you call horse meat?
It's horse meat.
But we have separate words.
We have pork and beef for pigs and cattle.
But we don't have separate words for dog meat and horse meat, for example.
He also points out, just as another aside here, that if the laws of supply and demand
are universal and apply in all contexts, then why isn't tongue, for example, cow tongue,
more expensive than filet mignon?
There's much more filet.
There are much more stakes on a cow than there is tongue.
And yet tongue has been encoded culturally as being a food of poverty.
But there's much less of a supply of it.
So why aren't prices actually higher for tongue?
So we can think of these examples, and I could go on and on with examples of cultural exceptions
to these presumed laws of rationality and self-interest.
But what I would like to do now is turn to an emergent field in economics, or two interrelated
fields in economics, experimental economics and behavioral economics.
And this is the work of a group of economists, and among them are John Nash, who won the
Nobel Prize, Vernon Smith, Daniel Kahneman, and others who have decided to take a behavioral
approach.
Let's not construct these abstract models of how people should act if they were acting
rationally, how people should act if they were producing their own self-interest.
Let's see what people actually do and try and construct our models out of that.
A very anthropological approach to the study of economics.
Now, experimental economics, one of the classic cases in experimental economics, is a hypothetical
game called the prisoner's dilemma.
And this really raises the question, was Adam Smith right that acting in one's own self-interest
always works for the greater good?
So was Smith correct?
Pursuing your own self-interest also advances the self-interest of the group.
Now to answer this question, let's consider this prisoner's dilemma.
So pretend you, let's put yourself in this context, you have to sort of put yourself
in this mindset and consider what you would do in this circumstance.
So pretend that you're criminal, first of all, pretend that you and an accomplice have
committed some crime together, and that you've both been arrested, but the police don't have
enough evidence to convict both of you.
So they've arrested you, and they've put you in separate interrogation rooms.
You've not been able to talk with your accomplice, so you haven't been able to work out a common
story.
Your interrogator, the police officer walks in and offers both of you a deal.
If you refuse to talk to the police, and you know that they don't have enough evidence,
if you and your accomplice both refuse to talk to the police, you'll be convicted on
a lesser charge and serve two years each in prison, let's say.
So if you don't talk to the police, if you cooperate with your accomplice and keep your
mouth shut, you'll be convicted on a lesser charge and serve two years in prison.
If you confess and your accomplice does not confess, so if you turn on your accomplice,
if you defect in the language of this game, if you confess and your accomplice does not
confess, you will go free, and he or she will serve five years in prison.
Conversely, if you don't confess and your accomplice confesses, you will serve five years in prison
and the other person will go free.
And finally, if you both confess, you will each serve four years in prison.
So to review this very briefly, if both of you refuse to talk to the police, you'll be
convicted of a lesser charge and each serve two years.
If you confess and your accomplice does not, you will go free and he or she will serve
five years.
And if you both confess, you will each serve four years.
So what would you do?
It's always in an individual's best self-interest to confess.
And in the language of this game, that's called defecting because you're not cooperating with
your accomplice.
It's always in your best interest to defect.
And why is that?
Well, you're always going to serve less time in prison.
Your accomplice can do one of two things.
They can hold out or they can confess.
You can do one of those two things as well.
If you confess, if you defect, and the other person does not, you go free and that person
serves jail time.
If you both confess, then you're going to serve four years in prison versus five years
in prison.
The best solution for an individual is always to defect, always to confess, because you're
going to serve less time in prison given no matter what your accomplice does.
However, the best solution for both of you is not to confess, to cooperate with one another.
If you both cooperate and hold out, then you're going to serve a total of four years in jail,
whereas any of the other solutions, you would either serve five years or eight years in total
jail time between the two of you.
And so collectively, it's better for you to hold out, but individually, self-interestedly,
it's always better to confess.
So there's this disconnect between the two.
And what this proves is that sometimes self-interest can work against the common good.
And this was John Nash's great realization.
And this can be used to radically modify Adam Smith's notion of self-interest.
Now let's consider another hypothetical situation.
This one's called the tragedy of the commons.
There's a village that keeps a common pasture.
And this common pasture is big enough for every household to keep one, let's say, sheep
in the pasture without degrading, degrading the quality of the pasture land.
So everybody can keep one sheep on the pasture land, and it can be sustained forever.
But individuals may think, well, who's going to notice if there's just one extra sheep
up there?
So I can just put two sheep, and nobody will really notice, and I get to freeload off of
the goodwill of the whole village.
So I'll just put one extra sheep up there.
But then if everybody does this, if everybody thinks this, if everybody pursues their own
individual self-interest, the pasture land is going to become degraded and isn't going
to be able to support anyone.
So pursuing one's own individual self-interest, again, in this sort of situation, can produce
a common bad rather than a common good, if you will.
Now my own work in economic anthropology has pursued this line in recent years, and what
I've been doing is playing games with people, with Maya peoples in Guatemala.
I've also played these games with my students here in the United States and a little bit
in Germany.
And the game I've been using mostly is the ultimatum game.
This is a game that you play with real money, and the notion is to see how people react,
if people react rationally when they're playing a game with real money.
So let's, again, if you would, put yourself in this circumstance, I'm going to set up
this game and think about what you would do.
So I'm going to give you, in Guatemala, I play with just a few dollars, but to make
it more significant here in the States, let's say $100.
In this game, you have two players, player A and player B. They don't know each other.
They don't know who each other are, but they know that they're teamed up with another player.
You are going to be player A.
I go around and I give you $100, $100 in cash, your player A, and you have $100 in cash.
You're going to be able to make one move in this game, and your move is you have to offer
a percentage of that $100 to player B. You can offer $1, you can offer $20, you can
offer $50, you can offer $75, $80, whatever you would like, but you have to offer some
percentage of that $100 to the opposite player.
That's your one move in the game.
I will then take your offer over to player B, and I will say, player A has offered X
amount, $20, $50, $75, and then player B either accepts that offer or rejects it.
If player B accepts the offer, you divide up the money as it's been offered.
If player B rejects the offer, all of the money gets returned to the central pot and
neither player gets any money at all.
So how much would you offer?
What percentage of this $100 would you offer to an anonymous player B?
The most rational choice is to offer the smallest percentage possible, to offer $1 for example,
because you're going to maximize your returns, and if player B is acting rationally, player
B will accept $1, $1 is better than nothing, but in fact, and in this game, player B knows
how much money that player A has gotten.
In fact, when I play this game with my students, my university students for example, I get
a bipolar distribution, I get a lot of people, mostly economics majors, offering $1 or $2,
a very small percentage, but then I get another large number of people offering $50.
More people in fact offer $50 than any other amount.
Now this would seem irrational.
Why would people offer more than $50?
And if I interview these participants, they'll say, well, it just seems fair to offer half
of it, it's extra money that I'm getting, and I'm afraid the other person would turn
down an offer for less than $50.
And in fact, that is the case.
People turn down offers of $1 or $2 or even $10 or sometimes even $20.
Now why would they do that?
It doesn't make rational sense.
Why turn down $10?
You're either going to have $10 or you're not, but it's because it offends their sense
of equity, of fairness.
Why should the other person get $90 and I'm only going to get $10?
I'm going to reject that offer and neither one of us, and I'm going to show that person
how they should act.
So in economic terms, what player B, if player B, let's say rejects an offer of $10, what
they're doing is paying $10 to punish the other person.
In economic terms, if you reject an offer, it's called opportunity cost.
If you reject $10, it's just like paying $10.
So they're willing, player B is willing to pay $10 to punish player A for not being
fair.
And so these games, they really get at this notion that cultural ideas, cultural models
of equality and equity and fairness can trump pure economic rationality in these cases.
And interestingly enough, in the U.S., the average offers are about 30, 35%.
And I played this game with Maya peoples in Guatemala.
The average offers were about 51%.
They're hyper-generous offers.
And the idea is because there's a strict notion of economic equality among the Maya.
And when I would interview people, why would you offer more than half, for example?
And they would say, well, the other person probably needs it more than I do, and I just
want to help them out.
So a very different notion of economic rationality.
And this gets at the idea of, or gets at this notion of actual behavior differing significantly
from expected behavior.
Now let me give you a couple of other examples that come from the field of behavioral economics.
A psychologist by the name, a man by the name of Daniel Kahneman has come up with this idea
of bounded rationality.
And he says, well, in fact, all of these anomalous cases, yes, that's all true.
But we do act rationally sometimes.
But our rationality is bounded.
In certain contexts, we act rationally.
In other contexts, we do not.
And this is a very useful notion for understanding economics.
Sure, we are all rational.
At least we're all rational some of the time, but we're not rational all of the time.
Richard Thaler, the economist who has done more than anyone else probably to popularize
this field of behavioral economics, and has a wonderful collection of essays called The
Winner's Curse, looks at a variety of economic anomalies and tries to explain those in terms
of cultural conceptions of equality and fairness and a number of things.
One thing that he calls status quo bias.
This is the idea that people are not very willing to accept extra risks.
And to get at this notion, what he did was he offered people two alternatives.
And again, this is a hypothetical situation.
Put yourself in these circumstances.
You've come down with a disease.
You've just been diagnosed with this disease.
And your doctor says, I have a vaccine that can cure you.
And the disease, you have a 1 in 1,000 chance of dying a painless death in two weeks with
this disease.
A 1 in 1,000 chance of dying a painless death.
But we've got this vaccine.
So how much would you be willing to pay for a vaccine that would remove this 1 in 1,000
chance of dying a painless death in two weeks?
So just think about that.
How much would that be worth to you?
Now, consider an alternate scenario.
How much would you be willing to accept to participate in a study in which there was
a 1 in 1,000 chance that you would die a painless death?
What would that figure be?
For most people, the second figure is several times what the first figure would be.
You would have to pay me a whole lot to take on this extra risk.
But if I already have the risk, I would only be willing to pay so much to alleviate this
risk.
Thaler also points to the importance of proximate knowledge, that we act on knowledge that we've
learned recently, ways more heavily in our decision-making process, and that this can
cloud our pure rationality.
So for example, after there's a big win in a lottery, lottery ticket sales go up.
The pot's going to be smaller, so it's really not rational.
But people have it in their minds that I could actually win.
Somebody just won, so I'm going to buy a lottery ticket.
Or driving more safely after seeing an accident.
People tend to drive very carefully in the day, hours, days, and weeks after they've
seen a very bad accident.
Their chances of getting into an accident themselves is the same as it was before they
saw the other accident.
But we weigh proximate knowledge, knowledge that we've learned recently, more heavily
than we do other sorts of knowledge.
So in this way, all of these cultural elements, these quirks of behavior we might call them,
play upon our rationality and cloud our rationality.
So human beings, when we act economically, sometimes we act rationally.
When we buy toilet paper, for example, we probably act very rationally because we go
to the grocery store, we can very easily compare all of the different kinds of toilet paper,
the qualities of toilet paper, the price of each of those different toilet papers, and
make what economists would consider to be a very rational decision.
On the other hand, when we buy something really big, like a house, we often act irrationally.
Oh, what's another quarter percentage point of interest?
It's only going to add $25 a month to my mortgage bill or something.
And yet $25 a month for 30 years is a lot of money.
And so we act irrationally in these contexts where we have less information to play on.
Likewise, a person might be willing to drive all across town, drive for 45 minutes to save
$10 on a clock radio, let's say.
And yet that same person might not be willing to drive across town to save $10 on a big
screen television, for example, because the $10 seems like less in comparison to the sum
that's going to be paid.
So it's all relative in this sense.
How much, it's the same $10.
If you're going to save $10 on a clock radio, that's the equivalent of saving $10 on a big
screen TV.
But we don't see it that way because of the particular context in which it's set.
So what anthropologists have to offer to the study of economics is actually looking at
what people do.
It's very important to make these models of rational choice, and economists have been
very successful at doing that, but just as important are constructing new sorts of models
that reflect how people actually live and work in the world.
And this is what anthropology has to offer economics and something that in behavioral
and experimental economics they've picked up on in recent years.
