Lecture 22, The Maya, Ancient and Modern
In the last few lectures, we discussed the expansion of western societies,
the development of capitalism as a mode of production that's spread around the world,
and the interplay of culture and economy in our own society.
In this section of the course, we're going to turn to globalization.
Now we're constantly reminded by media pundits, academics, business leaders,
that the world is a much smaller place than it once was.
And as proof, we simply have to look around us.
Overnight delivery and email have accelerated the pace
and expanded the possibilities of social and commercial interaction.
The internet has spawned long-distance friendships and collaborations
that seamlessly span continents and time zones.
Much of our clothing and other consumer goods are assembled abroad.
We have a good idea about what all of this means to us,
but what does it mean to them, those people who live at the periphery of the globalized economy?
And what can we learn from anthropology about this rapidly changing world?
So today we turn to a particular case study, our last case study of the course,
and one that's very close to my heart, and that is of the Maya of Guatemala,
where I've done most of my fieldwork as a cultural anthropologist.
We're going to use the Maya to illustrate a number of topics that we've discussed in the class thus far,
from physical anthropology and archaeology to linguistics.
But more than anything else, the Maya case demonstrates the malleability and the resilience of culture.
Maya culture is certainly not the same as it was a thousand years ago.
Culture is constantly changing.
This is the one great rule of culture.
But through such change runs threads of continuity as well.
And that's what we're going to focus on today.
Now when you think about the Maya, the image that probably first comes to mind is of the ancient Maya,
the temples rising up out of the lowland rainforests of Central America,
these grand city-states, Tikal, Copan, Pelinque, Dos Pilas, and others.
And this is the Maya of the classic era.
And the classic era lasted from about AD 250 to about AD 900.
This was when Maya civilization really flourished, ancient Maya civilization really flourished.
And they demonstrated all of these grandiose elements that really capture the Western imagination.
Notably hieroglyphic writing.
And Maya civilization was the only civilization in the new world to develop a fully developed writing system.
And it was a mix of ideographic symbols and syllabic symbols.
The Maya also were adept astronomers.
They kept eclipse charts.
They knew the Saturn, they kept charts of Saturn's movement.
They were very well developed astronomers and also mathematicians.
The Maya developed the concept of zero before it was developed in the West, before it was developed in India.
And they also kept elaborate calendrical systems that were related to their religious beliefs.
And a couple of the important calendrical systems, first of all, is the long count system.
And this provides an absolute date.
An absolute date just as our own dating system does, the 5th of July 2004, for example.
And because we've been able to decipher Mayan hieroglyphs, and there's been an explosion of decipherment in the last few years,
because we've been able to decipher Mayan hieroglyphs and this calendrical system,
we've converted what was once a prehistoric civilization into a historic civilization.
Using Mayan calendrical systems, we can date when particular kings took the throne,
when city-states fought with each other.
And so this is one of those fascinating cases where a prehistoric civilization has become, for archaeologists and anthropologists,
a historic civilization.
So the Maya had the long count calendrical system.
They had another calendrical system that we call the calendar round.
And this is a 260-day calendar.
And 260 days, interestingly enough, approximates the human gestation period.
And this calendar round, this 260-day calendar, was used for divinational purposes.
Now the ancient Maya practiced blood sacrifice as part of their religious practices.
Not quite as bloody as ancient Aztec civilization,
but nonetheless blood sacrifice is an important part of Mayan religion.
Maya peoples thought that they had to offer blood to the gods in order to continue the cycle of creation.
Now some of the sacrifice occurred with enemies.
Soldiers would be captured from enemy city-states, taken back to temples, and then sacrificed to the gods.
But the best sort of blood sacrifice came not from enemy soldiers, but from the Maya royalty themselves.
The Maya believed that the kings were related to the gods, physically related to the gods.
And so the best sort of blood sacrifice would be this royal blood, this almost godly blood.
And there are images from ancient Mayan hieroglyphic texts of queens, for example,
Maya noble women running strings with spikes on them through their tongue
and collecting the blood below to offer as a sacrifice.
Now as gruesome as that sounds, the male nobility had it even worse.
Maya kings would perforate the foreskin of their penis with a stingray spine
and collect the blood that way and offer it to the gods.
And this is obviously symbolic of fertility.
The blood coming out of the penis and being collected and then offered up to the gods.
Now something happened around AD 900. We call it the Maya collapse.
Some anthropologists would say we should avoid the term collapse. It gives the wrong impression.
The Maya didn't disappear, but they did stop building these grand city-states.
They even stopped living in these city-states.
They stopped erecting monuments with hieroglyphic texts.
They stopped using the calendrical system.
So they stopped using a lot of these elements that we consider to be characteristic of classic Mayan civilization.
But the Maya didn't die out. They were still around.
And in fact, there was another flourishing of Mayan civilization in what we call the post-classic period.
And the post-classic period begins around AD 900, around the time of the Mayan collapse,
and ends around 1524 with the arrival of the Spaniards.
And post-classic Mayan civilization.
Classic Mayan civilization was concentrated in the lowland areas of Central America, Guatemala, and Mexico, and Belize.
Post-classic Mayan civilization was concentrated in the highland areas of this region.
And it was a very militaristic civilization with fortified city-states.
Now I'm going to jump over the 300 years of Spanish colonial rule of independence civilization
and move to the modern Maya of Guatemala, which is where I work today.
Today, over half of the population of Guatemala are Mayan Indians.
And this is a country about the size of Tennessee, about the size of the state of Tennessee,
with a population of about 12 million.
And half of the population are Mayan Indians.
It's a country of striking contrast, of geographic contrast, dramatic mountain peaks and valleys,
and a verdant area with volcanoes and mountains and so forth.
It's also a country of striking social contrast.
It's not a poor country, and yet it's rife with poverty.
Almost half of the population of Guatemala live in poverty.
And this is according to World Bank figures, which mark poverty at $2 a day, living at under $2 a day.
And this figure jumps even higher if we look only at the Mayan population in Guatemala,
only at the Indians.
About 68% of the Indians live in poverty, and about 20% live in extreme poverty,
meaning that they don't earn enough even to supply their basic subsistence needs.
Now a physical anthropologist, a colleague Barry Bogan, has looked at the height of the Maya.
And for a long time, the Maya were considered to be the pygmies of Central America.
And this was seen to be a genetic basis to their height.
However, Bogan has looked at Mayan immigrants to the United States and has found that once they arrive in the States,
their height goes up, and the height of their children goes up dramatically.
And so in fact, they're not the pygmies of Central America.
It's a function of poverty and not a function of their genetic heritage.
And it recalls the studies of Franz Boaz that we talked about in the early part of the class,
where he looked at Italian immigrants to the United States in the early 20th century
and proved that they were not inherently inferior to Native Americans.
They just didn't speak the language and they didn't have the nutritional resources that Native Americans have.
So Guatemala is a country, not a poor country, but a country divided by access to wealth
with some very rich people and lots of very poor people.
And this is related to access to land.
In Guatemala, 95% of landowners, and these are mostly peasants, mostly Mayan peasants,
95% of landowners own 28% of the land and 2% of landowners own about 69% of the land.
So there's a vast inequality in access to land, and this is an agricultural society.
And so this shows the extent of poverty.
Guatemala has one of the highest genie coefficients in the world,
and the genie coefficient is a measure of inequality.
It ranges from zero in hypothetical situations of perfect equality,
where everybody in a country or a society makes exactly the same amount of money,
to one in hypothetical situations of perfect inequality,
where one person earned all of the income in a country and everybody else earned nothing.
In Guatemala, this genie coefficient is 0.58,
and that places it right up there with Brazil and Sierra Leone with the most unequal countries in the world.
Now this inequality has ethnic correlations, and we have two main ethnic groups in Guatemala,
the Maya and who we call the Ladinos.
Now the Maya Indians, the Indians are descendants of the ancient Maya, the Native peoples,
and they're characterized by a number of different traits.
Maya peoples generally speak a Mayan language, and there are 21 different languages spoken in Guatemala.
Again, a country the size of Tennessee, 21 separate languages,
and this doesn't include the dialectical variations as well.
So there's quite a bit of linguistic diversity, which is related in part to the geographic diversity of the country.
So Maya speak a native language, they generally wear traditional dress, particularly the women.
Lots of men have stopped wearing their traditional dress, but women still wear traditional dress,
which you've probably seen before, these elaborately colored and hand-woven huipiles or blouses and skirts as well.
And the Maya generally practice a hybrid form of Catholicism and indigenous religious practices.
And this is something that we're going to come back to later in the lecture.
So in Guatemala, about half the population are Mayan Indians, speaking a native language,
wearing traditional dress, practicing this hybrid form of religion.
The other half of the population we characterize as Ladinos.
Now this is a word that they don't use themselves to characterize themselves.
We call themselves Guatemalans.
But Ladinos see themselves as being the bearers of the Spanish tradition.
And we define them generally negatively in relation to the Maya.
They don't speak a Mayan language, they speak Spanish.
They don't use traditional dress, they wear Western style clothes.
Generally Catholic, although there's a growing population of Protestants as well.
Now there are poor Ladinos and there are rich Ladinos,
but the richest people, the most powerful people in Guatemalan society are never Indians.
They're always Ladinos.
So Ladinos are associated with power and wealth in Guatemala,
even if there are a number of poor Ladinos.
In Guatemala, you often hear elites talk about the Indian problem of their country.
Now of course this is a problem not for the Indians, but for the Ladinos.
And the Ladinos see the Indians as being a bit backward, a bit stupid, a bit ignorant,
a barrier to development.
We could become a nation state like France or Spain in this model of Western Europe,
except we have this backward, ignorant, savage Indian population
that's holding us back from realizing our development potential.
And as a result we have a high level of discrimination in Guatemalan society.
Indians will walk into stores and be ignored.
In government offices they'll be called upon last when they're waiting in line, for example.
They're very often treated as children.
In Spanish we have two pronouns for the second person singular,
the formal pronoun instead and the informal pronoun too.
And very often Ladinos, even Ladino children, will call Mayas, even Mayan elders,
by the informal pronoun, whereas they expect to be referred to by the formal pronoun.
And this is a form of putting Indians in their place.
They're childlike. They can be treated with this two form, this informal pronoun form.
Now I've done most of my work as a cultural anthropologist in a town in Highland, Guatemala
called Tekpan, Tekpan, Guatemala.
It's a Cachiquel Maya speaking town.
Cachiquel is one of the 21 languages of Guatemala.
And it's located in the western highlands of the country, about 7,000 feet above sea level.
What they call Tierra Fría, the cold land, because it's eternally chilly at this altitude.
It was the site of the pre-contact Cachiquel Empire, which was located at the site of Ishimche,
right outside of the town of Tekpan.
And it was also the first Spanish capital of Guatemala, where Pedro de Alvarado,
Cortes's lieutenant who was sent down from central Mexico to conquer the Maya,
established his first capital at Ishimche.
Now, we've talked about the archaeology of the ancient Maya,
and for Tekpaneko's archaeology has a very personal meaning.
With Ishimche, the site of the pre-Columbian Cachiquel Empire is being a point of pride.
We were, we live in the home of the ancient Mayan Empire.
We were the site of the first Spanish capital.
And Tekpaneko farmers are always picking up pottery shards
and sometimes even complete vessels in their fields.
And they treat these with a form of reverence and respect,
even if they sometimes sell them too on the black market.
But there's this connection with their archaeological heritage,
and they feel like this is part of who they are.
Now, Tekpan is a fairly small town, about 10,000 residents, mostly Indian, 70% Indian.
And to the casual observer, it appears as a typical Mayan town.
However, in the region, it's known as a very affluent and progressive place.
I was struck when I first moved to Tekpan to do my field work in the early 1990s
by the fact that they had two beauty pageants.
And I should have expected this, knowing the history of discrimination in Guatemala
between Ladinos and Indians.
But being from the south, I'm very sensitive to racial segregation.
And I was surprised that in Tekpan, they have two annual beauty pageants.
One to elect a Ladina queen and one to elect a Maya queen.
And this just sort of gives you an idea of the extent of discrimination.
And having two beauty pageants is seen as being a very progressive thing.
We have a Maya queen. We let them have their own ceremony.
And so this is where we're being very open and progressive by doing that.
Now, Maya peoples, because they suffer discrimination,
sometimes pass as Ladinos.
And this is possible because there's been so much intermixing,
so much racial mixing over the centuries,
that physically lots of Maya could pass for being Ladinos, for being Spaniards.
And so if they learn Spanish really well,
if they drop their native language and learn Spanish,
if they stop wearing traditional dress and start wearing Western clothes,
and if they move from their natal communities, particularly if they move to a big city,
they can virtually pass as Ladinos,
and then not suffer this discrimination in the university, in the workplace,
or whatever it may be.
Now, there's still a glass ceiling.
They can't make it up to the very upper echelons of society.
But nonetheless, passing as a Ladino can provide them with some level of upward mobility.
Now, Guatemala suffered greatly from a period known as la violencia in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Guatemala had had a period of military dictators leading up to this time,
but repression had never been a fact of daily life.
However, in the late 1970s, Marxist guerrilla groups emerged in the Maya-dominated highlands of Guatemala,
and the army came out and decided that we have to stamp out these Marxist guerrillas at all costs.
And they were supported in this by the United States.
And of course, this was a period in which there were civil wars raging in Central America.
The Sandinistas had taken over in Nicaragua.
There was civil war going on in El Salvador.
And the fear was that if the Marxists are successful in Guatemala, if they take over Guatemala,
then they're right there in Mexico.
And Mexico has always been sort of leftist, suspiciously leftist anyway.
And then if it were able to move up to Mexico,
they would be right here at the border of the United States and pose an imminent threat to our own national security.
So in the late 1970s, a new general came to power, General Romeo Lucas Garcia,
and then he was followed by General Efraín Rios Mont.
And under their rule, the violence really stepped up.
And this was a period of kidnappings, of tortures, of secret jails,
of raised earth policy coming in and helicopters and destroying whole Mayan villages,
burning down houses, burning down crops, expelling people from their native communities, and so forth.
And the idea was that the Mayan Indians, being a little bit stupid, being a little bit ignorant,
were very vulnerable to the silver-tongued oratory of these Marxist guerrillas
who will come into their towns and try and convert them to their cause.
And also the Maya are by far the poorest members of Guatemalan society,
so they would be the natural constituency for a Marxist revolution.
And so the idea was what we need to do is drain the pond in order to catch the fish.
This is a great opportunity, this war against Marxist rebels to get rid of our Indian problem once and for all.
If we can wipe out the Indian population, then we will wipe out the base of support for Marxist guerrillas
and also create an ethnically homogenous society which will allow us to develop in the way in which we won't.
So Guatemala was extremely affected during the violence.
We speak a lot about terrorism these days, but this is a sort of terrorism that's hard for us to imagine.
I recall recently I was talking with a friend of mine from Tecpan,
and he was describing what it was like living there in the early 1980s,
laying in bed at night and hearing the soldiers walk by
and wondering if they were going to stop at his door and bust in and rip him out of bed
and take him down to the local garrison for questioning,
questioning from which people normally didn't emerge, at least not alive.
Their bodies might be found a few days later by the side of the road with cigarette burns
or missing limbs or fingers as a sign for what might happen if one was considered to be a subversive.
This period of violence, the UN Truth Commission, which was established after the Peace Accords,
which were signed in 1996, looked at the massacres that happened in Guatemala.
We're talking about tens of thousands of people being killed,
hundreds of thousands of people being kidnapped and tortured,
and hundreds of thousands, perhaps even millions of people being expelled from their home communities.
And this UN Truth Commission determined that this was actually a case of genocide,
that the Mayan population had been intentionally targeted to wipe them out.
So the Peace Accords were signed in 1996, formally ending this period of violence.
The violence had actually died down in the late 1980s,
although you would still have periodic guerrilla attacks plaguing Maya communities.
Today, as an aside, I would mention that there is a Guatemalan forensic anthropology team
doing some wonderful work digging up these massacre sites from Mayan villages
and trying to reconstruct what happened, this history that was never written,
that was hidden intentionally by the military of what they did.
And this is very important work in the way in which physical anthropologists
were able to use the techniques of physical anthropology and archaeology
to reconstruct very recent history in a politically important way.
Now, I would like to conclude the lecture today by talking about cultural resilience and hybridity.
I mentioned religion that most Mayan peoples and the Mayan peoples of Tecpan
practice a hybrid form of Catholicism and native religion.
Now, most people are nominally Roman Catholic, but this is a Roman Catholicism
that's been infused over the centuries with native religious beliefs and practices.
Much like the Fulbe, who we discussed earlier in the course with Islam,
the Maya have adopted Catholicism, but they've really made it their own,
and most still practice some form of native Mayan religion.
Now, Mayan religious practices were especially open to adopting new elements
when the Spaniards arrived.
The Spaniards said, you have to worship at the cross.
It turns out that a cross was very important icon in ancient Mayan religion.
So the Maya said, worship at a cross? That's fine, we can do that.
The Spaniards said, you have to participate in communion, this blood sacrifice.
And the Maya said, yeah, we can understand that,
sacrificing blood to continue the cycle of creation.
And so there was a melding in the early years of contact,
in the centuries of contact sense, between Roman Catholicism and native Mayan religions.
Now, in native Mayan religious beliefs, there's a blurry boundary
between the material world and the spiritual world.
They believe the two are intimately related in a way in which we see as being very separated
in the Western tradition.
They also believe that there's a covenant between humans and the gods,
a reciprocal relationship.
Humans have to give sacrifices and praises to the gods
in order to continue the cycle of regeneration.
Also very important in native Mayan beliefs is a notion of balance,
a physical balance and metaphysical balance.
They have various forms of the soul,
but they believe that the soul needs to be planted and centered.
And in fact, after a birth, they will plant the umbilical cord of the infant
in order to plant that infant's soul and ground them in the earth in what's important.
So a lot of Mayan religion revolves around maintaining this metaphysical balance
of forces acting on the human soul.
And this is related to conceptions of illness.
There are hot illnesses, for example, and cold illnesses.
If you suffer from a hot illness, you would drink cold fluids,
for example, to counteract that and bring your metabolism back into balance.
One woman told me a story at one time that she was pregnant
and she was walking out to the well in her garden
and she saw a poisonous snake crawl in front of her.
So she went back inside and she urinated in a cup
and she threw the urine on the snake.
Now, pregnancy is considered to be a very hot state
and by throwing this urine, this hot urine on the snake, it killed it instantly.
So interestingly enough, while pregnancy is considered to be a very hot state,
fetuses are considered to be cold
and there's a whole series of rituals that goes around heating up the fetus in the womb.
Now, we can conceive of Mayan religious practices
in terms of cultural models that we talked about earlier in the class.
And the Maya believe that there are various kinds of souls
but the most important soul is called kush, kush.
And this is the heart soul.
And they speak about people as in terms of how this heart soul is, this kush is,
one can have a hard heart or a happy heart.
And what everybody wants is a balanced and grounded heart.
But one's heart is shaped and molded through one's life experience,
through one's life experiences.
And this can change over time.
There's a story of a man I know in Tekpan
was shanghaied by the army some years ago during the violence and taken off
and put through this incredible basic training, this incredibly brutal basic training.
They were given a puppy when they started their basic training
that they had to carry with them all the time, feed them.
They couldn't leave this puppy at any point during the day.
And at the end of basic training, they had to slit the dog's throat
and ritually drink a little bit of the blood to inoculate them against the horrors of such violence.
Before he left, before he was shanghaied by the army,
this guy was a wonderful man, a wonderful father, a wonderful son,
an active participant in the politics of the local community.
But he comes back and he drinks a lot.
He started abusing his wife and his family.
They eventually left him and his life really disintegrated.
And the way in which Tekpanekos talk about this is that his heart, his kush, was changed.
It became un-centered through this horrible process that he suffered through basic training.
Now, the Maya have different sorts of religious specialists.
Their primary shamans are called akhi, and this literally means daykeepers.
And they maintain a sacred calendar.
And in fact, although the ancient Maya stopped practicing the long count, the absolute dating system,
they've continued to practice, up until this day,
continued to maintain the calendar round, the 260-day calendar that helps people divine spiritual illnesses.
And so these akhi, these shamans, these daykeepers will use this calendar to diagnose illnesses,
spiritual illnesses, and physical illnesses in people, and prescribe particular rituals to cure them.
There are also benevolent shamans who are called akhiits, benevolent witches.
And these are almost inevitably really anti-social people in town.
One man I know who's accused of being a witch in Tekpan, he doesn't shave, he's never gotten married,
he lives alone, he reads funny sorts of books and so forth, and he doesn't participate in the rituals of daily life.
And as a result, he's accused of being a witch.
And this is very common not only in Mayan society, but in other societies around the world, accusations of witchcraft.
Now, the staple of Mayan subsistence is maize agriculture, what we call milpa agriculture,
maize and beans grown together on staple crops.
And maize and beans are almost a perfect diet, actually, supplying when eaten together all of the essential amino acids.
Now, I'm going to talk more about Mayan agriculture in the last lecture of the course, but I wanted to mention here the fact that the Maya feel very tied to the land.
And it's related to this idea of souls having to be grounded, having to be centered in some way.
And even as Mayan society has been changing through the processes of modernization and globalization, this connection to the land has remained.
I remember one time some friends of mine from Tekpan, the town in which I work, had moved out of town and had started living in Guatemala City, the capital.
They had gone to the university, they had gotten good paying professional jobs, and they were raising their children in the capital.
Nonetheless, they maintained their milpa lands, their maize plots in Tekpan, and they would go back periodically to check on these, and they would use the maize that was harvested for their daily needs.
And in fact, they would say, it's not really filling to eat maize that's not from one's own land.
It doesn't taste the same, it doesn't physically nourish us in the same way.
So these people, this couple, Pacal and Rosa, would hire a person to cultivate their land for them, and they would split the crop at the end of the day, a sharecropping arrangement.
One day, when I was living in Tekpan, they came in from the capital and they said, let's go out to our fields, the harvest is just over, why don't we go out and check on the fields?
So we drive for about an hour, we walk for about another hour, and we finally reach their fields, which are located in a remote hamlet on the outskirts of town.
And we spend all day long going around and picking up the pieces of maize that had been left behind from the harvest.
And we end up filling about two nets, and they collect maize and nets, two nets full of maize.
And at the end of the day, we carry this back and put it in the truck and drive back into town.
And I start thinking, this is an incredible waste of time.
You guys make good money in the capital, and yet you've taken a day off to come here and to harvest the little bit of maize that you could have easily bought with just a few hours of your labor when you were selling it.
But that was missing the point, really, because what was important was not the material value of the corn that they had salvaged from the harvest, but the fact of not letting any of this sacred corn go to waste.
And the Maya origin myths say that humans are made from corn. They are men of corn, people of corn.
And so in this way, it was important for them to come back and salvage even a little corn kernel that was left on the ground was important not to be wasted.
And this was for spiritual reasons as much as material reasons.
So the Maya, to conclude, the Maya have this glorious history of the ancient Maya and developing calendrical systems and mathematical knowledge and astronomical knowledge.
They've suffered over the centuries from Spanish colonialism and more recently this period of violence in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
And yet nonetheless, they are able to retain these spiritual bases of Mayan culture that give their life meaning.
Thank you very much.
