Lecture 23, Maya Resurgence in Guatemala and Mexico.
There's been an explosion of ethnic identity movements around the world at the turn of
the 21st century.
And today we're going to continue discussing the Maya, the Maya of Guatemala, as well as
the Maya of southern Mexico, to look at the resurgence of ethnic identity and the practice
of identity politics in the modern world.
We're going to look first at the burgeoning Pan-Mayan movement in Guatemala and its culture-based
and non-violent approach to working for indigenous rights.
And then we're going to turn to the Maya Zapatista Revolution in Chiapas, Mexico, that emerged
in 1994.
But first let me say a few words about ethnicity.
Now ethnicity, I think, today is very often used as a code word for race.
We generally consider it, in anthropology, to be the expression or the presentation of
cultural differences.
And so it overlaps in some important ways with the social category of race.
But race has become a little bit impolite to invoke in conversations.
And so I think often today, where we would have, not that many years ago, talked about
race, today we talk about ethnicity.
A good definition of ethnicity is simply a system of social classification that creates
meaningful groups based around certain cultural features.
So a system of social classification that creates meaningful groups based around certain
cultural features.
And we call these cultural features ethnic markers.
And let me just go over a few ethnic markers to give you an idea of what they are.
Primarily language.
Language is an incredibly important ethnic marker.
It's not easily adopted.
It's not easily shed.
And so it can reflect very well one's cultural origins.
It can tell a lot about a person's heritage, at least to the extent that language and culture
overlap.
So we have language.
Dress is also an important ethnic marker.
And dress is more easily adopted.
And we can think of different sorts of dress ethnic markers, Afghan headdresses, Muslim
women's veils, and Mayan dress.
And Mayan dress has, it both marks people as being Indian as opposed to Ladino in Guatemala.
And it marks regional differences and even town specific differences.
In Guatemala, every town has its own particular style of native Mayan dress.
And you can look at a repeal, a blouse, and you can say, oh, that's from Tekpan, or that's
from Patsun, or that's from Komalapa.
So we have language.
We have dress.
And we also have phenotypic features, race, what we would generally consider to be race.
Now racial features are less useful as indicators of cultural heritage, especially in this day
and age in which we have people living in different parts of the world and so many immigrants
in our own country that race can often mislead us about one's cultural heritage.
So biologists would say that ethnicity is useful as a shorthand for determining or estimating
probable genetic relatedness and that we're more likely to help out people from our own
ethnic group because it would be helping our own gene pool.
But from a cultural standpoint, ethnicity is the presentation of one's cultural identity.
It's not much of an issue in small scale societies.
Among the Dobieju Wansi, ethnicity is not much of an issue because they're the only
people in their society.
But in multicultural societies, ethnicity becomes very important.
A crucial point about ethnicity, and this is something that was brought home by the anthropologist
Frederick Barth, is that what's more important than the cultural stuff of ethnicity, these
markers, are the boundaries that ethnicity creates.
And this is really the purpose of ethnicity, to create in groups and out groups and to distinguish
between the two.
Now ethnicity is always contextually defined.
It depends.
We can invoke different aspects of our identity in different circumstances, and this is true
with ethnicity as well.
And this is most clearly seen in immigrant populations.
So Mayan Indians in Guatemala, for example, are Indians, indigenous, indios.
When they come to the states, they become Latinos or Hispanics, given this different
sort of context.
And so ethnicity can change depending on the context.
And there are also two versions, whether ethnicity is imposed from the outside, Indians
coming up from Guatemala to the states, and we as a society say, OK, now you're Latinos,
for example, imposed from the outside, and versus self-identity, self-identity of ethnicity.
Now, ethnicity has become especially important in recent years as a vehicle for identity
politics.
In identity politics is just what the term implies.
It's the use of certain cultural elements, elements of identity, toward political ends.
And you'll recall, we discussed earlier in the course, the distinction that Pierre Bourdieu
makes between economic capital and symbolic capital, or cultural capital.
And identity politics is really using cultural capital, leveraging cultural capital for political
advantage.
So given this context, I would like to talk a little bit about Mayan resurgence in Guatemala.
Amazingly, out of the ashes of the Guatemalan Holocaust of the late 1970s and early 1980s,
emerged an ethnic revitalization movement among the Maya.
And they are promoting cultural revitalization that they hope will bring about a Pan-Mayan
unity.
Now, remember, the Maya are half the population in Guatemala, and yet they're divided by
language.
They speak 21 different languages.
Each community has its own different, its own particular dialect as well.
They're divided by dress, they're divided by geography, they're divided by local ties.
First, Guatemalan Maya primarily identified themselves with the town that they were born
in.
Who are you?
I'm a tekpaneko, I'm a patsunero, I'm a comalapeño, or whatever it may be.
What the Pan-Mayan activists, what these cultural activists want to do is unite the Mayan people
culturally, have them identify first and foremost as being Indians, and not being from a particular
town or being speakers of a particular language, but being Indians.
And if they're able to do that, since they make up half or more than half of the population,
they can exert their political influence through the democratic process and bring about changes
in society.
Now these Pan-Mayan activists very much glorify the ancient Mayan past.
They point to the literacy of classic Mayan civilization.
They point to the scientific advances of classic Mayan civilization.
And they say, we don't need to be embarrassed about being Maya, we don't need to be ashamed,
we are the, our ancestors created this wonderful glorious civilization that we should be proud
of rather than being ashamed of being modern Indians.
So they glorify the ancient Mayan past with a vision toward a more pluralistic future in
Guatemala.
And what they're really doing is seeking political power, socioeconomic equality through cultural
revitalization.
And they're looking for a peaceful solution to Guatemala's many ills, not an armed revolution.
And this is significant coming off of this history of violence.
They're not saying we want to overthrow the Guatemalan state, rather they're focusing
on cultural issues.
We want to preserve Mayan languages.
We want to record Mayan religious practices.
We want to encourage Maya people to wear traditional dress.
And these are our actions or requests or demands that are seen as being especially palatable
to the powers that be and not being threatening in a way that would get the leaders of this
movement killed.
And it wasn't that long ago, and even to this day, political assassinations are not out
of the question in Guatemala.
So the Maya have focused on these cultural issues, and specifically linguistics in the
early days of this Pan-Mayan movement in the 1980s and 1990s, focusing on linguistic
issues which are non-threatening to the powers that be, and in doing so combating entrenched
Ladino racism against Indians.
The Ladinos in Guatemala, for example, very often call Indian languages dialects.
It's just a dialect.
They don't really speak a language.
It's just a dialect.
But of course, they are real languages, and they're not lacking in contrast to Spanish.
And so by revaluing Mayan languages, they're able to promote cultural equality.
As part of this process, they've been developing new words, neologisms that are used to expand
the vocabulary of Mayan languages and so that they can express just as complex of ideas
as Spanish can.
And so, for example, whereas not too many years ago, there was just one word in Cachiquel
Maya for all things metal, a bicycle, a typewriter, whatever it may be, it was jeech.
This was just metal thing, and you would have to understand from the context what was being
referred to.
But today, they've expanded the vocabulary of this native Mayan language to include things
like computation.
And it's interesting in doing this, what they do is they call on salient cultural metaphors
from Mayan society, and then transpose these metaphors into new domains.
So for computing, for example, they call computers kematzib, which means weaver of writing, weaving
a very salient process in Mayan towns and culture.
And so they're able to take this model of what weaving is and then transpose it into
this new domain of computation.
And it's something that's very familiar to people, familiar and new at the same time.
So computers are weaving weavers of writing.
Computer programs are the warp of writing.
Computer archives are woven writing and so forth.
They've also been working to unify the alphabets used to write Mayan languages.
Now hieroglyphic writing died out centuries ago, but they've adopted Latin characters
to represent modern Mayan languages.
But in doing so, missionaries who did most of this work developed different alphabets
for each language group.
One missionary would go work with the Kachikel Maya, another missionary would go and work
with the Kiche Maya, and they would develop different alphabets for each of these languages.
And the Mayan activists see this as further dividing, dividing and conquering the Mayan
people.
And so these Mayan activists said, if we can come up with one alphabet to represent all
21 Mayan languages in Guatemala, this will increase literacy and also allow Mayan groups
from one language area to understand more or less what is being written about in another
Mayan area.
And so promote Pan-Mayan unity in the process.
They're also using a lot of symbols from ancient Mayan culture.
They've resurrected hieroglyphic writing actually and used this on book covers and pamphlet covers,
for example.
Most Mayan people in Guatemala are illiterate in the first place, so they don't even understand
Latin based Mayan writing.
But the power of the hieroglyphic symbols still means something to them.
It still represents this grandeur of ancient Mayan civilization.
I had mentioned that the long count calendar, this absolute dating system, had died out
centuries ago.
But again, Pan-Mayan activists in Guatemala have reactivated this.
They've learned from Western scholars, such as myself, how this ancient system worked,
and then reclaimed it as their own.
And they've started to use this long count dating system on the cover of books and pamphlets
once again.
And most people can't read it like the hieroglyphic writing, but it still makes an important symbolic
statement about the literacy and the grandeur of ancient Mayan civilization.
They've also been tweaking cultural elements such as dress.
I mentioned earlier that each town has its own specific dress.
But in recent years, Mayan women have begun to mix and match pieces from different towns.
It's part of a stylistic thing, fashionable.
Well, there's no reason why I have to just wear the dress from my own town.
I really like the blouses from the neighboring towns, so I'll wear those.
But it's also making a political statement.
It's saying, I'm not going to be confined to just being a person from my own town.
I am a Mayan woman, and so wearing any sort of Mayan dress is perfectly valid and reasonable.
So making a political statement through their dress.
Now these may seem like pretty mild reforms, introducing new words into a language, promoting
a unified alphabet, promoting new forms of dress, and so forth.
But through these incremental cultural changes, the Maya have been able to affect real political
changes as well.
In 1996, peace accords were signed between the Marxist guerrillas and the army.
And the Maya were at the negotiating table and were able to gain a number of concessions.
Concessions to protect their languages, concessions to protect sacred sites where they conduct
their religious rituals, and so forth.
Very important concessions.
And a number of important government posts have gone to Mayan peoples in recent years.
Dimitri Ocoti, a friend of mine from Tekpan, who had gotten a scholarship from a Belgian
priest who was stationed there to go and study at the university in Belgium, and ended
up getting his PhD in Belgium, has come back and was appointed the vice minister of education.
The minister of culture is a Mayan woman who is likewise educated abroad.
And so they've made significant gains in Guatemalan society.
Not instrumental, nothing dramatic, nothing revolutionary, but bit by bit changing the
attitude of Ladinos toward the Maya.
Now I'd like to contrast this with the case of the Zapatista movement in Chiapas, Mexico.
Now Chiapas is the southernmost state in Mexico.
It borders Guatemala.
And in many ways, it's culturally continuous with Guatemala.
It's a highland area.
There are mostly Mayan Indians living there.
It's the poorest state in Mexico.
In terms of poverty, it's very much like Guatemala.
They speak different Mayan languages there than they do in Guatemala.
But nonetheless, the basic cultural patterns are the same.
Now before I talk about the Zapatistas, let me mention one thing about the Mexican Revolution.
The Mexican Revolution is the defining moment in modern Mexican history.
And this happened from 1910 to 1917.
And you're probably familiar with that great hero of the Mexican Revolution, Emiliano Zapata.
And he was a leader of Indians and peasants.
And he said, we need to rise up and take over the government and break down this colonial
system and redistribute land to everyone in the country.
And his rallying cry was, Tierra y libertad, land and liberty.
And using this base of support from peasants and Indians, he marched into Mexico City and
was an instrumental figure in the Mexican Revolution, which established the government,
which lasts to this day, and the Constitution, which lasts to this day.
So Emiliano Zapata, we're going to come back to him in just a moment.
In 1994, January 1st of 1994, a movement occurred, broke onto the world stage rather
dramatically, in Chiapas, Mexico.
And this is the Zapatista movement.
The Zapatistas are the Zapatista Army of National Liberation.
On January 1st, 1994, this is also the date in which NAFTA, the North American Free Trade
Agreement, began its first implementations.
These rebels, these Mayan rebels, these Zapatista rebels, took over a number of towns in Chiapas,
including San Cristobal de las Casas, the colonial capital of Chiapas, and a minor tourist
center, and were able to control a large portion of the state of Chiapas and declared
a revolution against the Mexican state.
We're going to take over.
We're going to stand up for Indian rights.
We're going to stand up for peasant rights.
And we're going to fight globalization, especially NAFTA.
And the Zapatistas saw and see NAFTA as being a real threat to their way of life.
NAFTA enforces the privatization of communal lands, for example, which are very close to
the heart of many Mayan communities.
And the Zapatistas said, we have to fight NAFTA.
We have to fight these forces of globalization, which are eroding the economic bases of our
communities.
The rank and file of the Zapatista movement are overwhelmingly Mayan Indians from Chiapas.
Their leader is a man named Subcomandante Marcos.
Now it's interesting that he calls himself the sub-commander, Subcomandante.
He says, I'm not really the leader of this movement.
The Mayan Indians are the leader of this movement.
And I'm just following their lead.
I don't want to be the figurehead, so I'm going to be the sub-commander rather than
the commander of this movement.
Now Subcomandante Marcos is an interesting character.
He wears a ski mask.
He smokes a pipe.
He's generally pictured in army fatigues and wearing a uniform, and he's become a national
icon in Mexico, this black ski mask smoking a pipe and delivering really compelling speeches.
He never takes off his ski mask.
For a long time, nobody knew who Subcomandante Marcos is, but due to the work of the government
and some investigative journalist, it's been discovered that he's a man Rafael Guillen
Vicente.
He was born in 1957.
His parents were middle-class furniture store owners.
He studied philosophy in the National University in the 1970s, actually went to Paris for a
while and studied philosophy, and came back and became a philosophy professor.
And then in 1984, he gave it all up.
He gave up his life, his reasonably comfortable life as a philosophy professor.
He moved down to the jungle regions of Chiapas and bordering the highland areas of Chiapas
and started organizing a revolution.
He was very much inspired by Marxist ideology, and he went to the Mayan jungles hoping to
foment a Marxist revolution among the Maya.
Much to his credit, he was able to respond to the Maya concerns himself.
And they said, yes, these class-based revolutions, that's all well and good, but we're poor not
because we're of a poor class, we're poor because we're Indians, we're poor because
we suffer discrimination, we're poor because of our ethnicity.
And that's a battle that we need to fight.
Now a traditional Marxist ideology would say that ethnicity clouds the mind, it disguises
real class relations.
And you have to raise people's consciousness up so that they realize where they sit in the
class structure, and then they will be willing to lead a revolution.
But Marcos and his compatriots were open enough to revise this and say, OK, that's not working.
Let's lead an ethnic-based revolution.
Let's respond to what these Mayan people themselves want and lead this as a revolution.
And that's what he did.
And he spent 10 years in the jungle organizing this movement.
And then on January 1, 1994, they break into the world stage, take over a number of towns
in Highland Chiapas, and make this dramatic statement not only to the Mexican state, but
to the world as a whole.
Now since that time, they've lost a lot of this territory, although there are still dozens
of Zapatista Mayan villages, and they're in what is a detente with the Mexican army.
There's a demilitarized zone.
The army has set up a perimeter around the Zapatista zone, but they've been going for
more than 10 years maintaining their autonomy in Chiapas.
Now the subcomandante Marcos has become a pop icon in Mexico.
If you go to Mexico City, you can buy subcomandante Marcos t-shirts.
They look sort of like Che t-shirts.
You can buy little dolls of subcomandante Marcos.
You can buy Zapatista music from street vendors and so forth, and he's become a real sex symbol
as well.
Lots of young Mexican girls look up to Marcos as a beefcake figure.
And what he's able to do, Marcos, his miraculous quality is that he's able to blend Western
and Mexican and indigenous traditions into a political philosophy, which is palatable
not only to the Maya, but also to non-Mayan supporters in Mexico as well, and to supporters
abroad.
He's found quite a bit of support from Italy, especially from Southern Europe, but also
from Northern Europe as well, and a little bit from the States.
But he's not an Indian.
He's not a Maya.
And so in the early days of the revolution, this led the Mexican state and the Mexican
press to accuse him of just being an outside agitator, of someone coming in and trying
to stir up rebellion among the Maya when they wouldn't have rebelled on their own.
But Marcos, one of his geniuses is, he's able to resist easy categorization.
Using the mask, for example, he says, I don't want to personalize this movement.
I don't want to be the figurehead of this movement.
I'm just representing the Mayan people.
And so I'm always going to wear this mask.
At one point, there's been quite a bit of fascination with Marcos' sexuality.
And I think there's sort of a natural human tendency to be fascinated with the sexuality
of politically powerful people.
And at various times, he's said to have multiple wives in different towns that he visits periodically
or multiple lovers.
And at one point, he was accused in the press of being gay.
As a response, he wrote a poem.
And Marcos writes a lot of his political communiques and manifestos in poetry or in parables or
fiction.
And so he writes this poem to respond to accusations of being gay.
And let me read a little bit of this.
He writes about himself in The Third Person, usually.
Yes, Marcos is gay in San Francisco, a black in South Africa, an Asian in Europe, a Chicano
in San Asidrio, an anarchist in Spain, a Palestinian in Israel, an indigenous person
in the streets of San Cristóbal, a Jew in Germany, a sexist in the feminist movement,
a woman alone in the metro station at 10 at night, a retired person standing around in
a Zocalo, a peasant without land, a dissident against neoliberalism, a writer without books
or readers, and a Zapatista in the Mexican Southeast.
In other words, Marcos is a human being in this world.
Marcos is every untolerated, oppressed, exploited minority that is resisting and saying enough.
And enough is their symbol.
Basta, ya basta, enough already is the slogan of the Zapatista movement.
So Marcos here is able to turn this accusation, Marcos is gay, and turn this around and say,
yeah, I'm gay, and I'm black, and I'm Jewish, and I'm Palestinian, and I'm all of these
things.
Because I wear this mask, you can read into me your own political agendas.
And this has been the secret to his success, his popularity, not only in Mexico, but abroad
as well.
The environmentalists love him because he talks about the Indians living in harmony
with the environment.
The leftists love him because he's seen as a new form of leftist possibilities.
The Spanish anarchists love him because of this revolutionary potential.
And in doing so, in this poem about Marcos being all of these different people, he's
also able to combine a very Mayan sensibility about the multiplicity of the self.
We're not just one thing, we're multiple, we all encompass multiple selves.
And so he's able to represent that and also include a very fashionable these days, post-modern
theoretical concern, which says the same thing, that says that we cannot be reduced to any
one category.
I'm a white male, but I'm more than just a white male.
I'm also a father, I'm an anthropologist, I'm a southerner, and we all encompass thousands,
probably, of such identities that we have to juggle all of the time.
And probably more so today than ever before, given the wide range of cultural resources
that are at our disposal.
And by writing his political manifestos in poetry and sometimes in parables, he's able
to convey the complexity of his position, the ambivalence that's often lost in political
discourse that seems to break down into black and white and right and wrong.
So all of these people love him, the environmentalists, the Indian rights activists.
All of these people see in Marcos a project that they can project their own political
projects onto him, onto what he represents.
And he's also not anti-Mexican.
And this is part of his appeal as well.
He says, the name of the movement itself, the zapatistas, we're trying to get Mexico
to go back to its founding principles.
Tierra y libertad, just like Zapata said back in 1910, we're not against the Mexican state,
we're just against the corrupt Mexican government that we have right now.
And so he's very effective in playing this as well, that I'm not anti-patriotic, and
in fact I'm more patriotic than the congressmen who sit in parliament in Mexico City and pretend
to be a Mexican.
And if you'll indulge me, let me read a passage from one other poem that conveys this complex
patriotism that Marcos feels.
This is called, this is a communique of Marcos, it's called Problems.
This thing that is one's country is somewhat difficult to explain, but it's more difficult
to understand what it is to love one's country.
For example, they taught us that to love one's country is, for example, to salute the flag,
to rise upon hearing the national anthem, to get as drunk as we please when the national
soccer team loses, to get as drunk as we please when the national soccer team wins, and a
few other exeteras that change very little from one presidency to the next.
And for example, they didn't teach us that to love one's country can be, for example,
to whistle like one who is becoming ever more distant.
But behind that mountain, there's also part of our country where nobody sees us and where
we open our hearts because one always opens one's heart when no one is watching.
And we tell this country, for example, everything we hate about it and everything we love about
it and how it's always better to say it, for example, with gunshots and smiling.
So he's able to answer political attacks with this kind of poetry that subverts the attack
that was initially made.
He's saying, I'm not against Mexico, I love Mexico, I want Mexico to be the country that
it can be, to live up to the promise that's encoded in the Mexican Constitution.
So the Zapatistas have had quite a bit of success early on.
They were able to garner international support partially and ironically by using the internet.
They have their own internet sites, they have their own email system, and so they were able
to call international attention to their plight at the same time that they made demands against
the Mexican state.
And so the Mexican army is powerful enough they could have gone down and wiped out the
Zapatistas and that's not out of the realm of possibility.
But international attention was so focused on them at the time of the revolution that
that would have been politically untenable.
And so they've been able to, they were able early on to make a number of important political
gains, especially on the international stage.
And at one point in 2001, they marched on Mexico City and 100,000 people came out to
see Marcos and the others Zapatistas.
More people than came to see the Pope last time he was in Mexico.
This is the, he's a pop icon, he's like a pop rock star in Mexico City and all the young
women were out shouting Marcos, Marcos, and the young men as well.
But Marcos, during this march on Mexico City, wouldn't speak.
He ended up speaking a little bit because the crowd was calling for him.
But again, he was playing this, I want to stay in the background.
I'm subcomandante Marcos.
This is the Maya movement.
I'm just trying to support them.
And so I don't want to be the center of attention here.
So we've seen two very different forms of Mayan ethnic activism, both equally authentic,
both based on the realities of modern Mayan culture, but shaped by the particular histories
of Guatemala and its recent state violence, and Mexico in this revolutionary Zapatista
heritage.
Both are based on Mayan culture, but very different interpretations of Mayan culture.
The Zapatistas stress a millenarial future while the Pan-Mayanists stress the virtues
of a distant past, but both are able to leverage the cultural capital of being indigenous and
being Maya to fight for political gains today.
The Zapatistas are more grassroots and more revolutionary in many ways, but the Pan-Mayanists
have arguably achieved more sustainable results.
And these cases point us toward the malleability of culture and ethnicity, and the creative
ways that it can be employed in a globalized world.
And this is a topic we continue with in the next lecture.
Thank you.
