Lecture 24, The Janus Face of Globalization
In this last lecture of the course, we're going to turn to a topic that we've touched upon in the last few lectures, and that is globalization.
What is globalization exactly? It's so often invoked in the social sciences and the popular media.
What is it exactly, and what does it mean for theories of culture and human nature that we've put forth in this course in the series of lectures?
I will argue that globalization itself is neither good nor bad.
We're going to look back at the Yanomamu, we're going to return to the Maya, we're going to introduce the case study of the Kayapo of Brazil,
and we're going to use these to illustrate the various ways in which indigenous peoples interact with the global system and the multiple possibilities of globalization on indigenous peoples.
But first, what is globalization? What is it exactly? We can point to reduced communication and transportation costs.
What was, in 1930, a three-minute phone call from New York to London cost the equivalent in today's dollars of about $300.
Today, the cost of that same call approaches zero, is much less than ten cents if you look for a good deal.
The cost of transportation has likewise fallen in equally dramatically.
What was once the purview of the jet set is available to a wide swath of American society today.
And this results in a virtual collapsing of time-space distances.
It's not as far, of course we're not literally collapsing geographic distances, but the virtual distance in time and space because of these lowered communication and transportation costs is much greater.
We also see a reduction in tariff barriers and opening up of markets.
The establishment of free trade areas such as the European Union and the North American Free Trade Agreement.
And this has led some people to argue that in this age of globalization, national boundaries are less important than they once were.
That nation-states are less important than they once were, especially during the heydays of the late 1990s.
It was thought that the nation-state was going to end, the end of the nation-state, the demise of the nation-state.
And that hasn't turned out to be the case, but nonetheless the forces of globalization reduced the importance of nation-states in fundamental ways.
And it's not just their increasing flows of goods around the world, but also increasing flows of ideas.
Incredibly, some 85% of world box office receipts go to Hollywood movies.
So we're not just exporting goods, but we're exporting ideas and concepts and culture as well.
Now some people have set up a dichotomy of globalization, and we can call this the Macworld versus Jihad dichotomy.
And this comes from the book by the political scientist Benjamin Barber, who writes along the same lines as another political scientist, Samuel Huntington,
who's written The Clash of Civilization.
And the idea is that there are competing forces in globalization.
On the one hand, the world is becoming a much more culturally homogenous place.
You can go to McDonald's and Beijing or Paris or Kuala Lumpur.
You can go to Starbucks in any of those places.
As I just mentioned, 85% of world box office receipts go to Hollywood movies.
So the world is becoming a much more culturally homogenous place.
And yet, at the same time, the world is becoming more factionalized along ethnic and religious lines.
Religious fundamentalism in particular has been a source of division in the world in recent years.
So as goods travel around the world with increasing velocity, they touch people's lives and they change their social circumstances.
And one way to look at this change in culture is to trace particular goods as they flow around the world through this global economy.
So in this vein, I would like to start by discussing the case of Bluefin tuna.
And the anthropologist Ted Bester, who's at Harvard, has written a fascinating ethnography, Tracing the Commodity Chain of Bluefin tuna.
Now Atlantic Bluefin tuna, they're big fish.
They range from 200 to 600 pounds, sometimes as much as 1,000 pounds.
And they take a long time to reel in.
This is a battle to reel in these fish, sometimes four or five hours.
It'll take a fisherman to haul in one of these Bluefin tuna.
And this has developed a macho-esque culture among New England fishermen who fish for Bluefin tuna.
It's man against nature. It's us against the sea.
We have to go out and conquer the ocean and bring back in these huge tuna to sell.
And so there's this whole cultural complex that revolves around fishing for Bluefin tuna.
Now when these New England fishermen catch these Bluefin tuna and they bring them back to the dock,
they sell them more often than not to Japanese buyers.
And to the New England fishermen, the Japanese buyers are a bit inscrutable.
They don't really understand the criteria.
Weight is one and that's an obvious criteria.
But beyond that, the cosmetics of the fish are very important to these Japanese buyers.
And the New England fishermen talk about it in terms of the inscrutable Japanese
and what are their criteria really for buying these fish.
The Japanese buyers and the docks are on their cell phones talking back to Tokyo,
seeing what the latest market prices are for Bluefin tuna.
And then they'll offer a price.
They'll buy this tuna and they'll buy it for 3,000, sometimes as much as $10,000.
They ice them down, take them normally to JFK, take them to an international airport,
ship them to Tokyo and to the world's largest fish market, the Tajiki Fish Market in Tokyo,
where they will be sold mostly for sushi.
Now, the New England fishermen view the Japanese buyers as having these odd criteria.
The Japanese, however, see these Bluefin tuna, the cosmetics of this Bluefin tuna,
as very important because they see raw food, sushi, raw fish as being very,
as being natural and pure in some fundamental way.
And in this sense, the cosmetics are very important.
And so you have the Japanese buy these tuna, they ship them back to Tokyo,
they're sold at the fish market in Tokyo, and then they're shipped out to sushi bars
either in Japan or sometimes back in the States, particularly along the west coast.
The nicer sushi bars in San Francisco and Los Angeles are going to buy their Bluefin tuna from Tokyo.
And so we have this product that has all of these different cultural meanings.
It means one thing to New England fishermen who catch it and it ties into their culture of man against the ocean.
It means another thing to these Japanese buyers who are looking for a cosmetically perfect fish
that can be sold raw and embody this purity of raw food.
And then it means another thing to people eating sushi in Japan
and another thing still to people eating at the sushi bars in San Francisco
and all the cultural meanings that we've attached to eating sushi in this country.
And so this is a wonderful example of how transnational trade in products
links people together in very opaque ways and embodies all of these different sorts of cultural meanings.
And in this way, globalized products are always made local.
And this is a critique of the Macworld hypothesis that the whole world is becoming culturally homogenous.
And the best example comes from the work of an anthropologist James Watson and his colleagues
who have conducted studies of McDonald's experiences in Asia.
And they've published a book called Golden Arches East.
So American and Japanese notions they point out of mealtime behavior are very different.
The Japanese see, especially older Japanese, see rice as being fundamental to having a meal.
It's not a real meal unless you've eaten rice.
And so they view McDonald's not as a place to go for a meal, but as a place to go for a snack in between meals.
Very different than the way Americans view McDonald's.
They also believe that sharing food is fundamentally important as well.
And so they will put, group together all of their fries in the middle of the table, for example,
and then share that just as they would share a bowl of rice.
It's impolite in Japanese society to eat with one's hands, and so they'll cut up their hamburgers
and eat them with toothpicks, for example.
So this epitome of cultural homogeneity, exporting McDonald's around the world and making everybody the same,
it actually gets localized everywhere it opens.
McDonald's in Japan is different than McDonald's in Los Angeles, which is different than McDonald's in Beijing or elsewhere.
It's not the same.
Now, of course, this is making the world palatable to local cultures is not always possible.
And so I would like to give a couple of different examples of the effects of globalization
and the effects of modernization on modern peoples.
First, indigenous peoples.
First, I'd like to turn back to the Yanamamu, who we've talked about before,
live in southern Venezuela and northern Brazil, live in the Shabonos with 100 or 200 people.
Practiced traditional shamanistic religious practices are shifting agriculturalists,
practice swidden agriculture and hunters.
And in recent years, the Yanamamu have come into increasing contact with the outside world.
With missionaries, particularly Catholic-Silesian missionaries, have made inroads into Yanamamu land,
trying to convert them to Catholicism, some Protestant missionaries as well,
and government encroachings as well.
The Venezuelan government trying to incorporate this Amazonian part of their state
and the Yanamamu peoples into national society.
Now, the effects have been rather devastating for the Yanamamu of contact with the outside world.
When the missionaries set up a post, they encourage Yanamamu to move to around this post,
and they encourage them to do this by setting up health clinics, by giving away trade goods, and so forth.
And this has led the Yanamamu to abandon their Shabono style of living
with an open area in the front where you can see everybody that you live with,
everyone living together, and they've adopted what they call long houses,
but a really much more western style of houses.
They have walls, they're individual family units,
and they'll still group these houses around the plaza, so it looks a little bit like a Shabono.
But crucially, people can go into their home and close the door, and no one can see them.
And this has had dramatic impact on the way in which the Yanamamu interact with one another.
You'll recall their fierce egalitarianism, their envy.
If someone has something that other people don't have,
there's this envy that gets expressed through this fierce egalitarianism of give me that.
But now, if you can hide your stuff in your home,
then you can, it both allows people to accumulate things that they couldn't have accumulated before,
increase private property, and also increases suspicions of having more stuff,
and increases envy within these communities.
And it's broken down the social bonds within these communities in many ways,
the transparent way of life.
Grouping people together also increases the transmission of diseases,
and so the Yanamamu have suffered this way from malaria and measles and other things.
And as part of this process of civilizing the Yanamamu,
and civilization comes from Civitas of living in a city, right?
And so by bringing the Yanamamu together and creating these new sorts of cities,
this has also allowed the Venezuelan government to incorporate them more into the state.
And the way in which they do this is they look for the young Yanamamu who are learning Spanish,
and they appoint them to government posts, the equivalent of a policeman or the mayor of these towns.
And what this has done is turned upside down the Yanamamu system of political leadership,
which is based on elders being respected, which is based on headmen having to constantly reaffirm their authority
and giving stuff away back to the community.
But here we have young upstart Yanamamu who are appointed by the outside government to be the leaders of their community,
and the elders, who used to be the most venerated people in society, are pushed to the side.
So we've had these devastations, these ill effects of contact with the outside world in Yanamamu culture in Venezuela.
Brazil as well, and you'll recall the Yanamamu live both in southern Venezuela and northern Brazil,
and Brazil gold has been discovered in Yanamamu land.
And we've had this modern gold rush, illegal gold rush, because prospectors aren't supposed to enter onto Indian reservations,
and the Brazilian government has given the Yanamamu a reservation in northern Brazil.
However, this doesn't stop the prospectors, and they will come in,
they'll fly in first in helicopters, in scope out areas where they suspect there to be gold,
then they'll cut down an airstrip in the forest, start flying in small planes, set up a little village,
and start strip mining, this incredibly devastating, environmentally devastating form of mining.
They pump water up from the river and hose down cliffs, and then remove the gold from the wash off.
And it releases mercury into the environment. First of all, the helicopters and the airplanes scare off all of the game,
so the surrounding Yanamamu villagers don't have game that they can hunt like they used to.
Second, this releasing mercury into the environment kills fish, it destroys the natural environment,
and so a number of Yanamamu villages in Brazil have been reduced to begging from gold miners to make a living.
They can no longer hunt, they can no longer grow their crops on the fields that have been polluted,
and they've effectively become beggars.
So the Yanamamu present a case of the devastating potential effects of globalization on a native group.
To look at the other side of the coin, the flip side, the upside of globalization for native peoples,
I would like to turn to the Kayapo Indians who live in Brazil, who live in the heart of the Amazon River along the Shingu River in Brazil.
Now the Kayapo are a fairly small group, their population in the 1990s was about 4,000 individuals living in 14 different villages.
In the 1980s and 1990s they received huge reservations from the Brazilian government, semi-autonomous territories,
and this is the Kayapo today have lands equivalent to the size of Austria,
and this is a group of 4,000 people with this immense span of land.
They practice slash and burn agriculture as well as some hunting and gathering.
In many ways their subsistence practices are like the Yanamamu, and like the Yanamamu they are tribes, they have headmen,
they don't have chiefs in society, this is achieved status, no formal power gets passed down from generation to generation.
So in the late 1980s gold was discovered in Kayapo land,
and in fact one of the largest gold mines in the world is located very near to a Kayapo village, Gorotiri.
As a result the Kayapo have been able to claim royalties from this gold mining,
and some of these Kayapo villages, Gorotiri in particular, have become immensely wealthy.
They have money managers in Sao Paulo who control these trust funds to which the gold royalties flow.
And with some of this money they've been able to buy western technologies to fortify their own culture.
So for example they've bought shortwave radios that they put up in Kayapo villages.
So whereas before they might have to walk a day or even two from one village to the next,
now they have shortwave radios and can communicate with one another.
At one point the BBC came down to film a documentary about the Kayapo,
and the Kayapo became fascinated with their video technology.
So they bought video cameras and they bought VCRs and they bought televisions and they bought generators,
and now they send video postcards from one village to another village.
And they use this to create political unity among these disparate Kayapo villages as well.
They've also used some of these gold earnings to buy airplanes and to hire Brazilian pilots
to patrol their territory, to look for illegal loggers who are coming onto their reserve lands
and taking away trees, to look for illegal gold miners.
And when they find them they call the Brazilian federal police who come in and kick these people off of their land.
It's an indigenous air force in some ways and this is allowed through these gold earnings.
So the Kayapo have benefited from the earnings from the gold mines on their territory
and they've been able to employ these technologies, shortwave radios and video cameras and so forth.
They've also established relationships with the body shop.
Now the Kayapo have the distinct advantage of being very photogenic,
of being what we would consider to be real Amazonian Indians.
They wear face paint, they have elaborate headdresses and so forth,
and the body shop started buying Brazil nuts from the Kayapo
to use in a best selling line of hair conditioners that they have
and then using the Kayapo images to appeal to the target audience of the body shop
and saying we're able to save the Amazonian rainforest,
we're paying Kayapo to not cut down the forest and plant new things,
but to go around and harvest Brazil nuts which are already growing there.
And so the Kayapo have been able to play off of their indigenousness in this way.
Perhaps most famously the Kayapo have connected with the rock star Sting
and one Kayapo in particular who is called Chief Ropney and it's interesting called Chief.
Now they're a tribal level society in the anthropological typology.
They have head men and not chiefs,
but the whites who come and encounter these indigenous groups
always want to be taken to the chief, take me to your leader.
And so the Kayapo head men have begun calling themselves chiefs
and adopting this language of the outside world.
Sting was doing a tour of Brazil at one point
and became very much enamored with the cause of saving the Amazonian rainforest
and he visited the Kayapo and from one day to the next he says he was converted
and he saw that the rainforest is the patrimony of all of humanity that needs to be saved
and the way in which we can save it is by encouraging groups like the Kayapo
who live in harmony with their environment.
And albeit this is a romanticized view of how the indigenous peoples live with the environment
but Sting said and the Kayapo live in harmony with their environment
and so we have to help them out.
And he even took Chief Ropney on a world tour with him one time.
So the Kayapo have been able to use their indigenousness as leverage
to convert it to economic capital and to convert it into political capital as well.
At one point the World Bank was going to fund dams being built along the Shingu River
where they live and this would have flooded a number of Kayapo villages
and what they were able to do is they sent out video crews
to other dams that had been built in Brazil, videotaped what had happened,
interviewed native peoples who had been displaced by these dams, compiled all of this,
brought it back to the Kayapo villages, showed these films
and had community meetings to decide whether this is something that we should support
or something that we should oppose.
They decided to oppose it and they set up a meeting between World Bank officials,
Brazilian officials and themselves in Altamira, a town in the Amazon
and at this meeting they also called in the international press
and it was a real coup for the Kayapo because they entered in with their feathers,
their body paint, their spears and really presented themselves as being
the indigenous people who are protecting the environment
and the international press aided up
and they were able to stop this dam project from being built.
Public opinion changed so much after this
that the World Bank removed its funding and the dam was never built
so they were able to leverage their cultural capital of being Indian
and convert it into these political gains as well
and one has to wonder what would happen if the Kayapo weren't so photogenic?
Would they have been able to make these same sorts of gains?
Just being Indian isn't enough.
It has to be the sort of Indian that we white people westerners want to see.
It has to fit into our stereotypes.
So as a final example, I would like to come back to the Maya of Guatemala
and economic changes that have been going on in Maya land.
I mentioned last time that Milpa agriculture, maize and beans subsistence plots
are really at the heart of Tekpan and Mayan subsistence
and also at the heart of symbolic life.
Food serves as a powerful ethnic marker just like language and dress
and the Maya say that if we don't eat corn, we're not really full
and really if we don't eat corn from our own villages or our own plots
it doesn't really fill us up the same way that other food does.
About half of the adult males in Tekpan are full-time farmers
but they've suffered some changes in recent years particularly the opening up of markets
signing Guatemala signing trade agreements with the United States.
They've gotten rid of price controls on basic food stuffs, corn, beans and wheat
and they've been reducing their tariffs so that foreign goods come in
and before in Tekpan they would, Mayan farmers grew corn and beans
and they would shift this periodically with wheat
and wheat that they would sell in the national market in Guatemala.
However, with the dropping of tariff barriers in Guatemala
all of this really cheap US wheat has been flooding into the country
and it's totally wiped that market out.
Nobody in Tekpan for example grows wheat any more hardly
but the wheat has been replaced by other non-traditional crops.
So today in Tekpan and in the area around Tekpan in Highland, Guatemala
lots of Mayan farmers are growing broccoli and snow peas and blackberries and raspberries
and other exotic produce for export to the United States.
Now these are mostly grown by small holding Mayan farmers.
These are very labor intensive crops.
They don't grow well on plantations.
The plantation model of agriculture in Guatemala which is very exploitative
but these crops don't fit into that very well.
It's better grown by small holding Mayan farmers
who can bring the whole family out and apply the herbicides and the pesticides
and do the weeding, do all of this intensive care that these crops require.
So in an interesting way in adopting these crops which pay a pretty good price
the Maya have been able to continue with their traditional agrarian way of life
and yet make a bit of extra money in these crops that pay a bit more.
They still employ family labor.
At planting time the whole family goes out.
At harvest time it's not just the father of the family
but the wife and the children and the cousins go out as well
and they're able to fortify this communal form of labor
which has historically been very important to Mayan communities
but do so in a new way.
Do so growing broccoli instead of maize.
Do so growing cauliflower instead of corn and so forth.
And this is tied to an increase in broccoli consumption in the United States.
Broccoli consumption in the U.S. has increased about a thousand percent
over the 1980s and 1990s.
It's become a staple crop or a staple food, a cheap green food.
Going to the store you might think well I need to get some vegetables,
I need to get something green, I'll get some broccoli and I'll get some lettuce.
It's become a standard, a staple of the American diet
and an icon of healthy eating in many ways.
Now most people don't realize that a good portion of our broccoli comes from Guatemala.
That a good portion of our broccoli is grown by these impoverished small holding Mayan farmers.
So these are once again like the bluefin tuna,
they're opaque connections that connect Mayan farmers in Guatemala
with supermarket consumers in the United States.
Now the result has been an influx of money into Tecpan
and Tecpan has seen rapid development over the last ten years
because of the money coming in from broccoli and other sorts of exports.
Whereas before when I was living in Tecpan in the early 1990s
there were about three phones in town, three phones none of which hardly worked.
Today almost every house in town has a telephone
and lots of young men walk around town with cellular phones.
There's even an internet cafe that's opened up in this small Highland Mayan village.
They have an internet cafe and I have Mayan friends who have their own hotmail accounts
and they're able to communicate with relatives who have immigrated to the states
with me and with other friends in Guatemala.
Little movie houses have opened up selling and renting bootleg Hollywood action movies.
There's been a fascination with Pokemon and other symbols of global pop culture.
And so through this influx of money they've both been able to fortify traditional agricultural relations
but introduce all of these new cultural things as well into the local economy and the local culture.
Now it would be easy to lament the loss of culture in this way.
Isn't it a shame that the Tecpanekos are watching Hollywood action movies?
Isn't it a shame that their native culture is being deluded by all of these cultural imports from the United States?
And I feel that way myself to be honest in some ways and yet it's a patronistic point of view.
We can't protect the Maya from what they themselves want.
If they think it makes a better life for them to adopt elements of western culture
who are we to say no that's just for us, that's just for gringos, that's just for North Americans or westerners
and you can't have that. It's a very patronistic view to take.
Anthropology is a unique discipline in taking an inclusive view of the human condition.
It's an interdisciplinary discipline and we've seen the wide range of topics that anthropologists study in this class.
We started off by looking at the biological bases of human culture
and then we moved on at looking at language and the way in which language can encode cultural knowledge.
We've looked at cultural models and mental models, the way in which emotions are expressed, religion, cannibalism and even of economics.
We've looked at patterns of marriage and kinship, we've looked at political and economic organization
and then we wound up this course with an anthropological critique of economics, presumptions of rationality
and the effects of globalization on native peoples around the world.
Despite the vast differences of all of the case studies that we've looked at, the Maya, the Kayapo, the Yanamamu, the Trobrianders
despite the vast differences between each other and from us, they're as much like us as they are different from us.
Cultures are always changing, sometimes for the worse, sometimes for the better, but in the process of change itself
there's an element that we can celebrate and not lament.
A friend of mine in Tekpan told me recently that globalization is an economic current.
The fact is it's a worldwide economic torrent. Nobody can halt or stop this flood. It's like the Rio Grande, you can't stop it.
The problem is we don't understand the source of this river. Where's this river coming from? What purpose does it serve?
When we understand the source and causes of this river, we can use it to our own advantage.
And this is really the advantage of anthropology. It's a different way of looking at the world.
It forces us to reconsider things that we take for granted. We've looked at kinship terminologies.
We've looked at emotions. Is mother love natural or is it something that we've learned?
Is affluent something that's the same around the world or is it something that's unique to particular cultures?
By comparing other ways of looking at the world, other ways of doing things with our own ways,
it allows us to critically examine elements of our own culture that we take to be given or natural or inevitable.
This doesn't mean that we have to reject our own culture. It doesn't mean that native peoples are better than we are, or vice versa.
But it does help us make informed decisions and can even spur on creativity in ourselves by revealing the relativity of culture.
Thank you very much.
