Here's something to think about. What of all the differences among people on intelligence
were 100% genetic? If this were true, the best way to maximize your children's intelligence
would be to start by choosing the smartest mate you could find. But even that wouldn't
be a guarantee because gene expression depends on many factors. That's why identical twins
aren't completely 100% identical. And it's why even if intelligence was 100% genetic,
there would still be potential ways to influence it. Remember epigenetics? We'll get into
that in this lecture. In any case, no data support the 100% genetic model for intelligence.
Here do the data support a 0% contribution of genes to intelligence. The data do support
a strong genetic component and we'll talk about what that means in this lecture. But
before we begin, let's have just a brief recap of the course so far to establish the context
for discussing genetic data. In previous lectures, we've covered how intelligence is defined
in the central role of the G factor and different views about the importance of G compared to
other intelligence factors. We've now covered how intelligence can be measured and why test
scores matter. We've covered the research that shows the predictive value of intelligence
test scores over time and the important role of intelligence in everyday life. And we've
introduced controversies about intelligence and the surprisingly hard to demonstrate role
of early childhood education and experience. So now, let's see how genes fit into the intelligence
story. It may surprise you to know that the definition of a gene is not what it was a
few years ago. Prior to the Human Genome Project, genetic researchers expected to find about
100,000 genes because genes code proteins which are the basic building blocks of life.
Humans have at least 100,000 proteins and each gene was thought to code one protein.
But the Human Genome Project found fewer than 22,000 genes. This means that each gene can
express itself in many different ways and the mechanisms for controlling gene expression
are largely unknown. Gene expression is just a fancy way of saying that genes turn on and
genes turn off over the lifespan. What exactly are the switches that turn genes on and off?
The study of epigenetics is basically the search for environmental triggers for the switches.
Now why is a genetic component to any behavior or any psychological process so controversial?
It used to be that genes were regarded as completely deterministic. If something was
genetic, it couldn't be changed. So if schizophrenia, for example, was mainly a genetic disease,
therapists or psychoanalysts could have little of any treatment impact. So there was some
vested interest in showing that genes were not important. In fact, it wasn't until the
late 1960s and early 1970s that the rule of genes in schizophrenia became clear. This
came about when the first data analyses from the Danish adoption studies were reported.
The bottom line was that offspring of a biological parent with schizophrenia, the parent had
schizophrenia. When the offspring was adopted away from that parent early in life and raised
in a foster home, that offspring had a higher rate of higher chance of becoming schizophrenic
when the offspring grew up than other adoptees who did not have a biological parent with
schizophrenia. By the way, these studies were conducted in Denmark because the Danes keep
detailed records of adoption and mental illness and those records are the basis for this kind
of research. When the Denmark data were first presented at a scientific meeting, one psychiatrist
who had advocated an environmental theory of schizophrenia became so upset as he listened,
he had a heart attack. Fortunately, it wasn't fatal. But I tell you this to convey how controversial
genetics was at the time not so long ago. My first job after graduate school was at the
National Institute of Mental Health where I had the very good fortune to work with Dr.
David Rosenthal. He was one of the principal investigators of the Denmark studies. I learned
a lot from Dr. Rosenthal and this exposure to genetic data helped shape my later views
about intelligence. Now, when we talk about genes and intelligence, most people have two
main concerns. First, genetic endowment is seen as a limitation. And second, since people
differ in their genetic endowment, all people are not created equal at the biological level.
These concerns undercut a major American motto that we've mentioned before, quote, you can
be anything you want to be if you just work hard enough, end quote. We know this motto
is not likely true for sports where the genes of your physical endowment apparently constrain
if not limit athletic achievement, especially at the professional or Olympic levels. This
is probably why I'm not a pro basketball player. But in the field of education and life success,
certainly we have a tendency to not acknowledge any limitations, especially ones that may
be genetic. So what is the genetic story for intelligence? I need to point out that when
we talk about genes and intelligence, we're always talking about the influence of genes
and the differences in intelligence among people. Now, in this lecture, we'll talk
about twin data, adoption data, the search for specific genes, and gene environment interactions
in the context of the emerging field of epigenetics. And I'll show you some of the newest data,
some of the most exciting data, about brain genes and intelligence. Even before we had
the first concept of genes, thanks to Gregor Mendel and his P's, it was easily observed
that many traits, including intelligence, seemed to run in families. Early researchers
used two simple strategies to determine whether any trait had a genetic component or not.
They looked at twins and they looked at adoptees. Since monozygotic twins, that is, identical
twins have 100% of their genes in common, any trait that was found to be similar in
both twins was thought to have a genetic component. The more similar the twin pair, the stronger
the effect of genes was believed to be. Of course, identical twins also share both the
prenatal and the postnatal environment, so the fact that identical twins may have quite
similar intelligence test scores did not rule out that the similarity was due to having
similar environments. This problem was easily addressed by comparing the similarity of a
trait between pairs of identical twins, who have 100% of their genes in common, to pairs
of fraternal twins, that's dizygotic twins, who share only 50% of their genes. So any
similarities should not be as strong in the fraternal twins as they are in the identical
twins. Many twin studies show this, that is, intelligence is more similar in identical
twins than in fraternal twins. I'll give some detailed examples in a minute. Now, adoption
studies can separate genetic and environmental influence, but often biological and adoptive
environments are similar. Nonetheless, adoption research designs, like the Denmark studies
of schizophrenia, can be powerful in establishing whether genes are involved in a trait or not.
There are a number of adoption studies of intelligence. They vary considerably regarding
the ages at which tests are given, the exact tests used, sample sizes and so on. But they
typically show much higher correlations between the adopted child's IQ and the biological
parent's IQ than between the IQ of the adopted child and the IQ of the adopted parents. This
is consistent with a genetic component to intelligence. An even more powerful design
for research combines adoption and twins. Think about studying identical twins adopted
away from their biological parents early in life, and each one raised separately in
a different family, one twin often not even knowing of the existence of the other. Are
identical twins reared apart still very similar to each other? The first major studies of
intelligence in identical twins reared apart were done in the early 20th century in Britain
by Sir Cyril Burt. He was a major and highly respected figure in psychology and that's
how he got to be Sir Cyril. Burt gave intelligence tests to pairs of identical twins who had
been reared apart. He correlated the scores for each pair. Recall what a correlation is
from lecture four. For example, the scores for one pair of twins might be 100 and 109
respectively. The next pair might have scores of 98, 96 and so on. Burt found a correlation
in identical twins reared apart of 0.771 suggesting a strong genetic component to intelligence.
This correlation was nearly as high as the correlation he found for identical twins reared
together in the same household. Now, note the correlation coefficient he reported is
to three decimal places, 0.771. A major controversy arose about Burt's data based on the value
of 0.771. I want to explain this controversy because it's still often cited as an example
for why genetic data on intelligence cannot be trusted. In fact, the controversy about
Burt and 0.771 is an example of nothing. Let me explain. As you can imagine, finding
such rare cases of identical twins reared apart is difficult and it takes years to accumulate
enough pairs for statistical analysis. Burt reported three different sample sizes ranging
from 15 to 21 pairs over time as he continued to find new cases, but each new slightly larger
sample showed the same correlation of 0.771. Critics of the genetic view argued that the
same correlation value to three decimal places based on three different sample sizes was
statistically impossible. They concluded that Burt surely committed scientific fraud
and this example is still cited today to undermine the idea that genes are important for intelligence.
Most independent investigations of Burt's data doubt the claim of fraud. We may never
know for sure, but here's the main point. Subsequent twin studies done by different investigators
around the world with large samples arrive at an average value for the correlation of
intelligence scores among identical twins raised apart of 0.75. That's the average of
all these new studies, 0.75. Burt's value was 0.77. The average value for identical
twins raised together in the same household is about 0.86. These values compare to the
fraternal twin data that show average correlations for intelligence of about 0.6. Thus, the Burt
controversy ends with compelling data from independent researchers that are completely
consistent with Burt's analyses and his basic conclusion that genes play an important role
in intelligence. Today, there are very few critics left who completely dispute that genes
play any role at all in intelligence. Actually, there are some. We'll talk more about their
concerns later in the course. Now, the most famous modern study of intelligence in twins
comes from the Minnesota study of monozygotic twins reared apart. This study is the most
elaborate, so I want you to know about it. The researchers at the University of Minnesota
led by Professor Thomas Bouchard found 139 identical twin pairs reared apart. This took
21 years from 1979 to 2000 and included twins from around the world. All the twins completed
an elaborate test, an elaborate battery of tests at Minnesota for about 50 hours over
a week's time, so they brought all these, these identical twins to Minnesota. Now, this
included tests of intelligence, personality, attitudes, values, and many physical characteristics.
Genetic components were found for several personality traits like extroversion and surprisingly
even for some attitudes and values. Some twins who had had no contact with the other twin
until they were reunited in Minnesota had married women with the same names or they
drank the same brand of beer, they even used the same brand of toothpaste. Identical twins
reared apart, at least the ones in this study, were quite similar on many, many things, but
especially on intelligence test scores. These twins met accidentally when they were adults.
They hadn't known about each other. They were both firemen. They both had similar college
majors, and they both had similar work histories. The woman in this picture is one of the Minnesota
researchers. In the Minnesota study, heritability for the G factor was estimated at .70 or 70
percent, similar to the worldwide average of .75 from other studies. Often you may hear
that research like this shows a 50-50 split between genes and environment. There's variability
among studies and there's an interesting factor that accounts for much of this variability.
Can you guess what that factor is? Factor is age, the age when the twins were tested.
Look at the top line in this chart. It shows the genetic component to intelligence based
on the correlation of IQ scores between twin pairs of different ages. When the twins are
young, four to six years old, the heritability of intelligence differences is about 40 percent,
and the heritability rises to a high of about 85 percent when the twins are older adults.
This shows that the genetic influence on intelligence actually increases with age.
The other two lines on this chart show that two types of environmental influences on intelligence
decrease with age. I'll explain the difference in these two types of environment in a minute.
But first I want to point out that the data in this chart are cross-sectional. This means
different twin pairs participated in different studies at different times. Each point represents
an average of the studies that tested twins in the age ranges on the x-axis. Suppose we
followed the same twins and retested them periodically as they got older. Would we see
the same trend in such longitudinal data as we see in the cross-sectional data?
The answer is yes. In a Dutch twin study, the same individuals were given mental test
batteries repeatedly to assess general intelligence. The heritability of general intelligence was
26 percent at age 5, 39 percent at age 7, 54 percent at age 10, and 64 percent at age 12.
Most twin studies now report data by age, and this trend is well established. Genetic influence
on intelligence or the differences on intelligence among people increases with age. I also wanted
to mention that there are data that indicate the heritability of intelligence is stronger
in families with high social economic status and weaker in families with low social economic
status. This is an important observation that underscores the difficulty in assessing gene
environment interactions. Now, let's discuss the two types of environmental contributions
to intelligence I mentioned a few minutes ago. They're shared environment and non-shared
environment. Shared environment is what it sounds like. Twins or siblings grow up in
the same family. They live in the same neighborhood. They go to the same schools. There are many
shared general experiences that may influence intelligence. But of course, there are also
many experiences unique to each person. Different friends, different classes, different teachers.
These are unique influences. These unique influences are the non-shared environment. Shared and
non-shared environmental influences can be distinguished and estimated statistically by
comparing similarities among intelligence scores for identical twins and fraternal twins
and siblings reared apart, reared together. It's a complicated statistic. But let's look
at this previous chart again. Look at the bottom two lines. We see that the influence
of both shared and non-shared environment are fairly stable with a trend to decrease with
age. But note that the influence of shared environment, the middle line, decreases to
about zero in adulthood. These findings are difficult to explain if you're convinced that
genes are unimportant influences on intelligence. They also give pause to the idea that enriching
childhood family experiences have a lasting effect on adult intelligence. We'll talk
about this more in a later lecture. Now, statistically, genetic shared and non-shared
effects on intelligence can be estimated and added together to account for 100% of individual
differences in intelligence. Here's an interesting example of similar data from a study in the
Netherlands. This chart shows the influence of genetic and both shared and non-shared
environment on intelligence scores for people of different ages. Five-year-olds are shown
in the bar at the top. The black part of the bar shows genetic influence, the white part
of the bar shows shared environment, and the gray part shows non-shared environment influence.
Note that the black bars showing genetic influence increase with age down to the bottom bar where
at age 50, more than 80% is genes. Shared environment influences the white bars peak
at age 5 and then decrease to virtually zero by age 16. Non-shared environment has generally
greater influence in the early years, but some non-shared influence continues through
at least age 50. In the next chart, we see similar bars, but here each bar shows genetic
and environmental influences for different subtests on the WACE IQ test. For total IQ
score at the top, information and block design subtests, for those tests genetic influences
are greater than shared and non-shared environment combined. For digit span forward, the genetic
influence is less than the non-shared environment influence. Again, virtually no shared environment
influence at all.
To recap so far, consistent evidence for major genetic influences on intelligence differences
comes from around the world and is based largely on powerful twin and adoption research designs.
Some of the findings are counter-intuitive, especially that genetic influence increases
with age while shared environment influences decrease with age, but overall the case for
genetic influence on intelligence is overwhelming. Now please understand that any one study has
some problem or shortcoming that critics can use to undermine any specific conclusion,
but overall the weight of the evidence is really quite compelling. Genes are important
for understanding intelligence differences among people. Because genes always work through
biology, one implication is that there is a biological basis to intelligence and this
brings the study of intelligence into the realm of neuroscience. So, if genes are so
important, where are the intelligence genes? It's a simple question. The answer is also
simple. We don't know, at least not yet. But remember, epigenetics really complicates
the story. Genes turn on and genes turn off throughout the life cycle. What controls genes
turning on and off? Is this where environmental factors, especially in early childhood, get
their influence? Remember in the last lecture I showed you a hypothetical example of a genetic
disposition to have exploratory interests and how that might interact with environments
that encouraged or discouraged exploratory behavior. Here's another hypothetical example
of epigenetics. In this illustration we see three people represented as circles A, B,
and C in the middle. Let's say all three of these individuals have the same IQ as shown
in the single circle of the G factor at the top. In this example, each of the three people
has a different combination of brain factors that are the basis for the same IQ. These
are labeled PFIT Combo 1, PFIT Combo 2, and PFIT Combo 3. PFIT is a model of brain areas
related to intelligence that we'll be talking about in the next lectures. But for now, let's
just say that the same IQ can result from different combinations of brain factors. The
brain factors in turn depend on genes as we see in the bottom row. In this example, genes
1, 2, and 3 contribute to person A, and genes 3, 4, and 5 contribute to person B, and so
on. Each gene, however, differs according to how environmental factors may influence
it to switch on and off. The more a gene is shaded dark, the more epigenetics influences
that gene. In this example, person A has an IQ that's determined by a combination of
brain factors that's based on genes mostly influenced by environment, whereas person
C with the same IQ as person A has a different combination of brain factors determined by
genes that are not sensitive to environmental influences. If all three people in this illustration
had very high IQ, and if all three were participating in a research project trying to find the genes
involved in high IQ, what would the researchers conclude about whether any of the eight genes
were IQ genes? They wouldn't conclude very much. It's a very messy picture. The search
for specific intelligence genes has been underway for some time, but without much success. Intelligence
genes have been missing, that is until recently. Now that we've reviewed historical and recent
data on genes and intelligence and examined the concept of epigenetics, let's go to the
final part of this lecture and talk about the very latest genetic research that in my
view really seals the deal. The newest studies show that intelligence and brain structure
have genes in common. I'm going to briefly highlight results from just one study. It's
from a very large international collaborative effort that combines genetic and brain imaging
techniques. We'll be talking about the brain and imaging in the next lectures, but this
example will serve as a preview. This study was reported in 2009. It imaged white matter
fibers in the brains of twins and determined genetic and environmental influences on white
matter networks in the brain. Communication among brain areas is based on white matter
fibers. This chart shows that for each major lobe of the brain, both for the right and
left hemispheres, genetic influence on white matter is quite strong. Genetic influence
is the dark bar. Non-shared environment, the white bar, has some influence, especially
in the frontal lobe, but shared environment has virtually no influence on white matter.
You can see this same result dramatically in this brain picture of white matter networks
where the reds and yellows show the greatest effects on white matter for genes in the left
column and for shared and non-shared environment in the middle and right columns. Each row
is a different view of the brain. These researchers also correlated the similarity
of IQ scores in the twins with the white matter. Then they determined overlap between where
white matter was most influenced by genes and where intelligence, where IQ scores were
most correlated to white matter. This is seen in this picture of different views of white
matter networks. Collars show the overlap of where genes influence both white matter
and IQ. This example of combining DNA analysis, brain imaging, and IQ scores shows how far
we are advancing beyond the old arguments about whether genes are important for intelligence.
And even whether intelligence can be studied scientifically, we've certainly come a long
way from Sir Cyril Burt. So genes not only play a role in intelligence, but the new data
show common genes for intelligence and specific brain features like white matter. Is this
good news? Not so much if you believe genes are a limiting factor because anything strongly
genetic is essentially written in stone and not likely to change. However, as I have suggested,
both the opposite may be true. If something is strongly genetic, there must be a biological
mechanism involved because genes must work through biology. Any biological mechanism
is subject to measurement and research and potentially subject to manipulation. A number
of research groups around the world are using advanced genetic techniques to identify specific
genes for intelligence. This includes using DNA sequencing machines to compare high and
average IQ people to identify genes that are more frequent in the high IQ group. Although
as I illustrated earlier, this is a daunting challenge, but it's not impossible. DNA sequencers
cost about 1 to 2 million dollars each. Reportedly, a single researched institute in China has
128 of these DNA sequencing machines, along with supercomputers, and finding intelligence
genes is a high priority. Reportedly, they have over 4,000 scientists and technicians
working on this in just that one institute. And a poster on the wall reportedly says,
quote, genes build the future, end quote. Intelligence genes may not be missing for
long. In my view, the more genetics is responsible for intelligence, the more likely we'll understand
the underlying neurobiology, and the more likely we can find ways to improve intelligence.
What if all children started school with equal high intelligence? What if you really did
have the intellect to be anything you wanted to be? What if in vitro embryos were screened
and brought to term only if they had the highest proportion of intelligence genes? Ah, but
I'm getting ahead of our story. Before we enter the world of manipulating intelligence
and the interesting issues involved, we now turn to the next set of lectures and the profound
role of brain imaging technology in modern intelligence research. Not to be alarming,
but we can see your brain and what it, or you, may be thinking.
