Welcome back.
Remember way back in our very first lecture I said that no matter how you define intelligence
we know it has something to do with the brain.
Problem is that autopsy brains pretty much look the same whether the person had an IQ
of 70 or 140.
Well now we have technology to see inside the brains of living people and make measurements
about what the brain is doing and how it's working.
In the next two lectures we'll look at brain imaging studies of intelligence.
I'm going to base this lecture mostly on my own research because I was there at the beginning
when brain imaging was first used to investigate intelligence and I followed this field as closely
as anyone.
In the next lecture we'll see more of the worldwide brain imaging research on intelligence.
Brain imaging technology is really amazing and in my view using brain imaging to study
intelligence is the most important development in the field during my 40 year career and
that's why we need two lectures.
I promise you we won't get too technical and I also think that having background on how
brain imaging works may be beneficial for times in your life when you or someone you
may know might have a brain problem and need some imaging of some kind.
So I think this information may be helpful as background as part of your general knowledge
base and if you're ever on Jeopardy with a category of brain imaging you may even beat
Watson.
When I started working with precocious kids back in graduate school in the math talent
it was obvious that we needed to understand more about how brains function but at that
time in the early 1970s brain researchers who studied humans were limited to investigating
brain function indirectly by looking at blood and urine for byproducts of neurotransmitter
activity.
The only useful imaging technology was based on measuring the electrical activity of the
brain using EEG recordings from scalp electrodes.
Some progress was being made with EEG studies of intelligence and I worked with EEG when
I left the National Institute of Mental Health and went to Brown University.
But getting beyond the scalp through the skull and inside the living brain for research
was not really practical but then this came along.
This illustration shows a fundamental fact of physics.
Bear with me here for a minute.
This is about the most technical illustration I have and I'll explain it with little of
any jargon.
The concepts are straightforward and if nothing else they demonstrate very creative leaps
from basic physics to detailed pictures of the brain.
Now when a positron hits an electron they annihilate each other.
For you Star Trek fans this is what happens when matter and antimatter collide.
At the moment these particles are annihilated energy is given off in the form of two gamma
rays labeled here as photons.
And here's the critical point.
The two gamma rays are always released at a 180 degree angle to each other.
Now someone looked at this fact of physics and said gee I can make a picture of brain
function from this.
Here's how.
You make a special radioactive sugar and inject it into a person.
The sugar is special because each molecule of the sugar is attached to a positron emitting
isotope.
Since sugar also called glucose is the energy supply of the brain the harder any area of
the brain is working the more radioactive sugar is taken up and metabolically fixed in
that part of the brain and the more positrons are emitted from that part of the brain that's
been working the hardest.
The positrons hit electrons which are naturally plentiful everywhere and millions of gamma
rays at 180 degree angles are emitted from the head.
Then put the head inside a ring of gamma ray detectors called a PET scanner and presto
you use mathematics to make a picture showing where the most gamma rays originated inside
the brain.
This is called positron emission tomography or PET PET.
PET scans show brain function because the radioactive glucose accumulates in brain areas working
the hardest.
By contrast a CAT scan shows only brain structure as X-rays pass through the head.
You can see a beautiful detailed CAT scan of a person's brain but you cannot tell from
the scan if the person is awake or asleep or even if they're alive or dead.
CAT scans show structure but not function.
A PET scan looks different in the same person depending on what the brain is doing.
So if you inject the radioactive glucose while a person is solving reasoning problems
for example you can see the brain areas that are work for reasoning and you can measure
just how hard those areas are working.
By the way the radioactive glucose used in PET is within the normal limits for medical
radiation exposure.
So do you see the potential here for intelligence research?
I did and that's why I moved to UC Irvine because they were getting a PET scanner.
So here's a PET scanner.
The person lies down and the head goes into the center of the ring of gamma ray detectors
and here's a PET scan.
The colors are showing the distribution of glucose uptake in this case while the person
was resting with their eyes closed.
The red areas show where there was the most glucose activity and the blue areas and the
blacks show the least activity.
This image is a horizontal slice of the brain just as if I took a knife and sliced right
through my head from front to back and then looked down.
So the frontal lobes are at the top of the image, the occipital lobes are at the bottom
of the image.
You can see that even during rest some brain areas are more active than others.
One thing about this kind of glucose PET scan is that brain activity is summed over
about 32 minutes for technical reasons related to glucose metabolism.
So the time resolution here in this image is very long, it's 32 minutes.
You can't see how the brain activity changes from second to second.
Other imaging techniques that we'll see later have time resolutions of about one millisecond.
So using them you can see thousands of changes per second.
Just to show how dramatic PET scans can be, here's a scan of a person with Huntington's
disease, a kind of dementia.
Large areas of the brain in this person have very low function, although amazingly this
patient could still carry on a conversation.
The red areas, the visual cortex at the back part of the brain, this is the last part of
the brain affected by this disease in this person.
Now here's one more PET example of functional brain damage around the site of a stroke.
So what about using PET to study intelligence?
The first PET scanners became available about 1980, but only a few were put into service.
They were quite expensive and the manufacture of the radioactive tracer required an expensive
cyclotron and a hot lab nearby the scanner because the half-life of the radioactive glucose
is only 110 minutes.
The whole operation was extremely complex and the first scan done at a PET facility cost
a few million dollars.
MRI, now so familiar, was not yet available.
The first MRI scanners came to research centers around 1995.
More about MRI studies of intelligence in the next lecture.
In the early 1980s, most of the PET research was on schizophrenia and psychiatric disorders.
Most research scans were charged at about $2,500 each.
PET scans for psychological studies were rare, but as I mentioned earlier I came to the University
of California at Irvine in 1985 just as a PET center was starting up there, mostly with
private funding.
I was able to get eight free scans as a reward for helping with a major donor and that's
how things at universities work.
I used those eight scans to ask a simple question.
Where in the brain is intelligence?
As it turned out, the answer is not so simple and we'll see in this lecture, in the next
lecture, examples.
So in 1988 we published the first PET study of intelligence and that study started with
a problem like this from an intelligence test.
Remember this from our earlier lectures.
These symbols are arranged in a pattern but one is missing from the lower right corner.
Once you infer the pattern, which of the eight multiple choices fills in the empty box in
the lower right corner?
For this item the answer can be found by adding the top row to the middle row or by adding
the left column to the middle column and the answer you may recall is number seven.
This is actually regarded as a fairly easy item on this test.
Now we had volunteers take the Ravens Advanced Progressive Matrices test with 36 items like
this including some very hard items.
Remember this is a nonverbal test of abstract reasoning and it's one of the best measures
of the G factor.
Now as they began working on the items on this test, we injected the radioactive sugar
used to label the parts of the brain working the hardest while the person was solving the
problems.
After 32 minutes of working on the items, we moved the person into the PET scanner to
see where in the brain there was increased activity compared to controls doing a simple
test of attention that required no problem solving.
I showed you this picture in lecture one.
The image on the right is from one person and the image on the left is from another person.
Both images are shown with the same scale of glucose metabolism so you can compare them
easily.
Which scan was from the person with a high test score?
The person on the left has a PET scan that shows much more activity, you see that in
red, than the person on the right.
But the surprise is that the person on the left with the very active brain actually had
the lowest Ravens test score, 11 out of 36.
The person on the right had the highest score of 33.
Now no one saw this coming, it seems backwards.
We did find brain areas that were more active while problem solving, but what could it mean
that more brain activity went with worse performance?
To us at the time, this counterintuitive result suggested that it's not how hard your brain
works to make you smart, rather it's how efficiently your brain works.
Now based on this result, we proposed the brain efficiency hypothesis of intelligence.
Higher intelligence requires less brain work.
Since this surprising finding in 1988, many researchers have been trying to understand
how exactly brain efficiency might relate to intelligence.
We started thinking about how learning might make the brain more efficient.
When you learn something like driving a car for example, doesn't your brain get more efficient
so you can now drive and have a conversation at the same time?
Something not possible that very first day you were driving back and forth in a big empty
parking lot?
So we decided to do one of the first pet studies of learning and we turned to Tetris, a computer
game just out at the time and now one of the most popular games of all time.
We scanned a small number of volunteers before and after 50 days of practice on the original
Tetris version.
The volunteers, they were all college males, used my office computer because almost no
one had computers at home in the early 1990s.
In case you don't know Tetris, here's how it works.
Different shapes appear at the top of the screen and slowly fall to the bottom.
You can move them right or left or rotate them or drop them immediately by pressing buttons
like the arrow keys on the keyboard.
The object is to place each shape so they form perfect rows with no gaps at the bottom
of the screen.
When you complete a row, it disappears and all the shapes above drop down.
The better you do, the faster the shapes drop so with practice the game is faster and harder.
The game is over when shapes not in rows stack up to the top.
Here's the learning curve for the group we studied.
On day zero, the first time any of the students ever played Tetris, they completed 10 rows
per game on average while the radioactive sugar was labeling their brains during the
first PET scan.
This score, this number of rows increased to nearly 100 rows per game during their second
scan after the practice period.
At the end of 50 days of practice, some of these games were moving so fast you could
scarcely believe a human being could make an execute decision so quickly.
Now here's what we found for the group.
The image on the left shows the scan of a person's first Tetris session.
Notice all the high activity in red.
The scan on the right is the same person after 50 days of practice.
There's less brain activity after practice even though the game was faster and harder.
We concluded that the brain learned what areas not to use and became more efficient with
practice.
We also noticed a trend in this study for the people with the highest intelligence test
scores to show the greatest decreases in brain activity after practice.
In other words, the smartest people became the most brain efficient after practice.
Now other subsequent studies have shown inconsistent results on this, so the jury is still out
on this point.
Many other studies, however, have replicated decreased brain activity after learning consistent
with the brain efficiency hypothesis.
Efficiency could result from activity within neurons or in the synapses or in white matter
fibers that transmit signals around the brain or in some combination.
We had the idea that neural pruning may be a factor as shown here.
Neural pruning refers to the normal course of brain development from birth to about
age five years old.
There's a dramatic increase in the number of synapses and then there's a dramatic decrease.
The decrease is called neural pruning.
In this illustration, curve A shows the normal course of neural pruning from birth to old
age.
We think that some brains may prune more than others.
Curve B might result if there was a failure of the pruning mechanism, this would lead
to an inefficient brain, more activity, and possibly lower intelligence.
Curve C represents too much pruning, perhaps an overactive pruning mechanism, but the result
might be an efficient, more intelligent brain.
Curve D might result with too much pruning and brain damage and also low IQ.
The pruning mechanisms are still not clear.
For example, the rate of neural pruning may be largely under genetic control, but could
stimulating brain areas by learning increase pruning and influence intelligence.
We don't know.
All this time I was trying to get federal grant money to fund a brain imaging program
to study possible influences on intelligence, but brain research was viewed with some suspicion
if it involved intelligence and my applications were going nowhere.
So I decided to shift emphasis a bit and I was able to get a grant to study Down syndrome,
a genetic disorder typically associated with low IQ.
Federal agencies are more inclined to fund research on diseases and back at that time,
especially if the grant applications barely mentioned IQ.
So we had been wondering if low IQ individuals might have inefficient brains, possibly due
to a failure of neural pruning.
We were interested in scanning people with Down syndrome who had IQs less than 75 and
of course control groups of people without Down syndrome who also had IQs below 75 for
no apparent reason.
We also had other controls with IQs in the average range.
At the time, most researchers predicted that pet scans of low IQ individuals, especially
those with known brain abnormalities like those found in Down syndrome, would show
lower activity because some kind of brain damage was assumed to be responsible for low IQ.
Based on the efficiency hypothesis and a possible lack of neural pruning, we were open to the
possibility that we might see higher activity in the low IQ groups.
Here's what we found.
The two images on the left show more activity, more red, throughout the brain in both low
IQ groups compared to normal controls on the right.
We saw this as more evidence for the efficiency hypothesis.
By this time, I had negotiated for one free pet scan for every pet scan I paid for with
grant money.
This is the way universities work.
So we turned to a different way to investigate the efficiency hypothesis.
Remember, in an earlier lecture, I talked about the Hopkins study of mathematically
precocious students that started in the 1970s.
You may recall that the early talent searches found many more young boys than girls with
high SAT math scores.
Well in 1995, I decided to use pet to see if men and women both showed equal brain efficiency
in the same brain areas while they solved mathematical reasoning problems.
I worked on this project with Professor Camilla Benbow, another former Hopkins grad student
who at this time was planning the follow-up studies of the first precocious kids that
I described in the previous lecture on long-term studies.
We recruited male and female college students from my university based on their SAT math
scores at admission.
We selected four groups, men with high SAT math scores over 700, women with equally
high SAT scores over 700, men with average SAT math scores in the 500 range, and women
with average scores in the same 500 range.
There were 11 students in each of these four groups.
Each person completed a PET scan while they solved actual SAT math reasoning problems.
Now we expected to see lower brain activity in both the high SAT math men and in the high
SAT math women compared to the average groups, consistent with brain efficiency.
We also thought that the men and women in the high group might show efficiency in different
brain areas because there are sex differences in brain size and structure.
Here's what the basic data looked like.
These images are the averaged PET scans in each group.
So each of these images is the average of 11 people.
They really don't look all that different, do they?
In the men, statistical analysis showed that the high math ability scores went with greater
activity in the temporal lobes, the side parts of the brain during the problem solving, just
the opposite of what we would expect from brain efficiency.
You see this by comparing the amount of red in the high and average groups of men, especially
in the side areas.
In the women, we found no statistical relationship at all between math ability and brain activity,
anywhere in the brain.
So how the brains in the high SAT math women were working while they solved the same problems
as the men is a mystery.
And the men showed the opposite of what we expected.
Now actually this finding was one of the first clear indications from imaging data that men
and women may process information and problem solve with different brain networks.
Remember in this study the men and women were equally matched on SAT math score and they
solved the problems during the scan equally well.
Their brains however showed really different patterns of activity.
To us this meant that not all brains work the same way.
This may seem obvious and even trite to you, but at the time most cognitive researchers
were interested in discovering how brains work in general, assuming that all brains
basically work the same way.
A focus on individual differences and the idea that not all brains work the same way
was really not so popular.
Now in a later lecture we'll talk in some detail about sex differences related to intelligence
factors.
Also remember math ability is a specific factor.
It's not the general G factor.
Brain efficiency may be related to G, but for specific abilities like math, better performance
may require more brain activity.
Confused?
Well, this is what actual data really look like.
My purpose here is to give you a feel for how researchers go about their work.
No story about the brain is simple and it takes many studies and many years to sort
things out.
We'll see more in the next lecture.
But before we end this lecture I want to talk about one more PET study we did.
Around the year 2000 it was still the case that very few other intelligence researchers
were using PET or any other kind of imaging.
We were still interested in brain efficiency, but we also started to wonder about whether
efficiency would be related to intelligence even when the brain was not solving problems.
In other words, could a smart brain be distinguished even when it was not working to be smart?
Our next PET study looked at COWID students while they passively watched videos with no
problem solving required.
We correlated brain activity during this non-problem solving condition to IQ scores.
This picture shows what we found.
The correlations shown here in red are in several areas, none in the frontal lobes, and
most of these areas are in the back of the brain.
This indicates that people with higher IQ scores seem to be viewing these videos with
different brain activity than the people in the study with the lower IQ scores.
And this was especially true in the back of the brain where basic information is perceived.
We think this means that smarter people may be more engaged and actively processing the
video information differently.
In other words, the smarter brains were not so passive.
This is more evidence that not all brains work the same way.
The PET studies we've covered in this lecture represent the first attempts to use high-tech
brain imaging to investigate intelligence.
Here's a summary of five key observations that emerged from these early functional imaging
studies.
1.
Intelligence test scores are related to brain glucose metabolism.
This helps validate that the test scores were not meaningless numbers representing a
statistical artifact.
In fact, as brain imaging studies of intelligence continue to increase, the old criticisms about
intelligence test scores are less and less meaningful.
2.
Finally on, we had the unexpected and counterintuitive finding that higher intelligence test scores
were associated with less brain activity.
The resulting efficiency hypothesis encouraged many subsequent studies, and it's still
viable although the story gets more complex as more studies are done, just like in all
science.
3.
Brain is associated with the brain becoming more efficient as indicated by lower brain
activity after practice.
This raises the question of whether intelligence can be enhanced by mental training, and we'll
be discussing this in detail in a later lecture.
4.
PET scan differences between men and women solving problems and PET differences between
high and average intelligence video watchers indicate that not all brains work the same
way.
This is another concept that we'll be discussing more, and whether imaging data may have implications
for education in a later lecture.
There's another inference, number 5, based on something we didn't see.
These data did not show any one area could be called an intelligence center.
Some researchers had felt that intelligence was a function of just the frontal lobes,
but we found many areas distributed throughout the brain were associated with intelligence
test scores, and we'll have more on this point in the very next lecture.
The overall point is that brain imaging studies helped shift intelligence research away from
predominantly psychometric approaches and the controversies about those approaches to
a more neuroscience perspective because imaging provided a way to determine how psychometric
test scores were related to measurable brain characteristics like glucose metabolism.
So now you know about positron emission tomography and how it was used to study intelligence
over nearly two decades.
Today there are even more amazing imaging technologies, and they show the brain in even
greater detail than PET.
In the next lecture, we'll see some stunning images of the intelligent brain, and we'll
see emerging models of brain function and brain structure that may be the keys to answering
where in the brain is intelligence.
