Here's a question for you. If you went back in time to 1812 with a test of intelligence
and found a person with an IQ of 100, would that person in 1812 have the same intelligence
as a person in 2012 who also had an IQ score of 100? It's really a trick question because
there were no norms for any intelligence test back in 1812. So the only way you could score
a test taken in 1812 would be to use modern norms. Now remember IQ scores have meaning
and only relative to other people. IQ points are not like measures of pints of liquid.
So in terms of the G factor, are people today any more intelligent than they were 200 years
ago? What about 2,000 years ago? This question may bring to mind Mark Twain's novel of Connecticut
Yankee and King Arthur's Court, a story about a modern mechanic transported back in time
to ancient Britain and how he influences the Knights of the Round Table. He certainly knew
more about many things than anyone else, but do you think he was as smart as Merlin? Well
we don't have any data from medieval Britain, but we do have data for the last 100 years
and it looks like people are actually getting smarter. Let's look at this graph. This illustrates
what the average IQ score would be for each year when the norms from 1918 are used to calculate
the scores for all subsequent years. The IQs based on 1918 norms are seen on the scale
on the right side of this graph. Now note in 1918 the mean is 100, but the mean is 125
and 1995 if we use the old 1918 norms. In other words, it looks like people are getting
smarter from generation to generation. Now let's look closer at the scale on the left
side of this graph. It shows scores based on 1995 norms. If 1995 norms are used, the
1995 mean is 100, but the 1918 mean IQ for the population would have been 75 if these
1995 norms had been used. In other words, the average IQ in 1918 would have been in the
mentally retarded range by the 1995 standard, where most people in 1918 mentally retarded,
obviously not. So this illustrates a serious problem with IQ scores if norms are not updated
periodically. But when the same norms are used, it looks like IQ is increasing from decade
to decade. A large number of data sets from around the world going back decades show that
this is a clear trend of increasing intelligence scores just like what this chart shows. This
phenomenon is called the Flynn effect, and it presents a challenge to the standard G
model that we've been talking about up to this point in the course. Here's the main
issue. If intelligence scores are fairly stable over a person's lifetime, and I've showed
you evidence that they are, and if genetics is so important for intelligence, and I've
showed you evidence about that, how can scores be increasing so much over just 100 years?
James Flynn, a professor of political philosophy of all things in New Zealand, is the person
who has written most about this. He details many of the issues that we'll be raising in
this course, in this lecture specifically, in his 2007 book called What is Intelligence?
As a brief historical note, the same observation of increasing scores had been made earlier
by other researchers, including Richard Lynn. Some researchers now refer to the worldwide
rising IQ scores as the Lynn Flynn effect, but with apologies to Lynn, we'll use the
abbreviated, simpler, and more widely used term of the Flynn effect. Now, Flynn's story
starts back in 1984 when he became interested in the stability of IQ scores. Over time,
Flynn has reviewed IQ data from many studies going back to the turn of the 20th century
when intelligence testing records began. He found a very clear trend of increasing scores.
Here's a figure from Flynn's book. Let's look at this carefully. The six lines show
average scores for American children on six different intelligence tests starting in 1947
on the left and going to 2002 on the right. Please note that these are different groups
of children tested at these different years. They're not the same children tested repeatedly
at intervals, so this is cross-sectional, not longitudinal data. Clearly, all six measures
show the same upward trend. The top two lines show the greatest increases. The very top
line shows scores on the Raven's matrices test that we've talked about before. It's
a test of nonverbal abstract reasoning. Remember this item? Now, let's go back to the graph
and look at the other top line, which is for the similarities subtest of the Wexler intelligence
scale for children. The similarities subtest ask questions like, how are a car and a truck
alike? Or how are a cow and a duck alike? Now, the middle two lines on this chart show
the trend for the full-scale WISC IQ based on all subtests and just for the nonverbal
performance subtest. The two bottom lines show the comprehension subtest score, questions
like why does a policeman wear a badge? And at the very bottom line shows the combination
of information, arithmetic, and vocabulary subtest scores. Now, before we go on, as you're
looking at this graph, there's one important question you should be asking yourself. And
take a moment here and read my mind and see if you and I are on the same wavelength. It'll
make me very proud if you're asking yourself, are the tests with the highest G-loadings
the ones that show the greatest gains? In this chart, the high G-ravens matrices test
shows the greatest gain, but the next greatest gain is on the similarities subtest, a test
with a relatively low G-loading. The rest of the picture is actually quite mixed. Now,
we'll come back to this issue later, but I wanted to see if you were thinking along
these lines. One more thing about the data in this graph. The gains on the Ravens matrices
and on full-scale IQ are really large. Full-scale IQ during this 60-year period increased about
a full standard deviation. That's 15 points. Now, this may remind you of the gaps we discussed
in the last lecture, and we'll discuss this again shortly. Flynn has accumulated similar
data sets from around the world, and they generally show the same trend of increasing scores both
in Western countries and even in some developing countries. Here's another example. All 18-year-old
men in Denmark take the Ravens test when they register for military service. These data show
average scores from 1958 to 1998. The middle line shows the average group mean for all men
tested. The other lines show the same groups divided by percentile, so the top line shows the
trend over time for men in the top 10% of Ravens score, and the bottom line shows the men in the
bottom 10%. These data indicate the Flynn effect is greater in the bottom 10%, and the effect looks
much weaker in the top 10%. Let's look at another data set for students in the top 5% of scores.
This is the right tail of the normal distribution. Let's look at the chart of composite SAT scores.
This is total SAT scores for more than a million boys and girls in the 7th grade in 16 states across
the Midwest and South. These students had been identified previously to be in the top 5% on
another standardized test. The years between 1981 and 2010 are shown on the x-axis. This 30-year
period corresponds to a generation. Older scores were converted using more modern normative data,
so the scores are comparable across the years. Scores are on the y-axis. Remember, all these
students were only in 7th grade when they were tested on the SAT, about five years before most
students take the SAT. The top line shows data for boys and the bottom line shows girls. Similar
data are shown for the ACT. ACT stands for American College Testing, and it's another standardized
test of abilities similar to the SATs. The ACT data are from a different sample of over 400,000
students. In both of these graphs, there's a slight trend of higher scores over time for both boys
and girls. But the next set of graphs is from the same study, and these show the math and science
sections separately. Again, the top lines are for boys and the bottom lines show the girls. There
are much stronger upward trends over time for math scores for both boys and girls, but not for the
science scores. The last set of graphs from this study show verbal English and reading scores for
boys and girls. These trends are more flat over time. Now altogether, these data show a Flynn
effect even for top students. That's the point. Even for the top students, we see the Flynn effect,
and the effect is apparent for boys and for girls, but the effect is limited mostly to just math
scores. Well, you can see from all these examples data about the Flynn effect raise many questions.
There are many, many data sets, and now there are many researchers looking at them. As you can
imagine, there are disagreements about how to interpret the same data. This of course happens
all the time in science. Here's what most researchers agree on. Intelligence test scores have
been rising from generation to generation since they were first introduced. There is broad agreement
among researchers that the Flynn effect is a real phenomenon, but many questions remain to be
answered. For example, should we expect to see a greater Flynn effect in G or in non-G tests? Many
critics of IQ testing and the G concept immediately and enthusiastically embrace the idea that IQ
scores are increasing from generation to generation. So why is the Flynn effect so popular among
critics of G? Well, because critics reasoned that such a large increase could not occur so quickly
if IQ was mostly genetic. Genes are subject to evolution over very long periods of time. Three
or four generations are far too short to see genetic changes. Therefore, for many critics, the Flynn
effect was proof that environmental factors must have considerably more influence on intelligence
than the genetic data indicated. However, if the gains are mostly for low G loaded tests, there
can be explanations that do not challenge the concept of G or the importance of genetics. You
might think the Ravens data clearly show a strong G effect, but it's really not that simple. Various
research studies show mixed and inconsistent findings about whether the Flynn effect is mostly a G
effect or not. A key issue is whether increased test scores reflect better test taking skills or an
actual increase in the G factor. Disentangling these two possibilities in research studies is really
quite difficult. And as I see it, the evidence so far is not clear one way or the other. Now, here
are some other important unresolved issues about the Flynn effect. Is the effect greater for people
with lower scores? Is the effect the same size in different countries? Is the effect still operating
now as strongly as it apparently did 100 years ago? Will the Flynn effect continue in the future? And
if so, what will be the practical implications of generally increasing IQ? Will we become better
problem solvers? And most importantly, are there things we can or should do to enhance the Flynn
effect? All these issues depend, of course, on what may be causing the basic Flynn effect.
There are many changes in societies over the last 100 years that may be causing the increase in
intelligence test scores. You have probably already thought about some of these. Here are four main
ones. One, as the world has become more industrialized, children are exposed to more problems that
require reasoning. So there's more familiarity with problems like those found in the Ravens
matrices test. More experiences with such problems in childhood could influence brain
development. Two, as mass communication spreads, children have more exposure to general
information and more visual spatial experiences. Think television and now computer games. Even
toys have gotten more complicated. I know this from watching Antiques Roadshow. These experiences
could stimulate brain development. In fact, I'll be showing you some research about computer games
in later lectures. But for now, think about Sesame Street and how many children see and hear new
things at earlier ages than pre-television generations. Think about children involved in the
complexities of the Super Mario Brothers. Practicing these cognitive skills more than
pre-computer game generations could influence intelligence test scores. Reason three, there's a
general improvement in nutrition, including prenatal nutrition, that could result in healthier
brains and higher IQ. And four, there's a general increase of education for more people
allowing for better scores, at least on some tests that are information based. Of course,
more than one factor is likely to be involved. The common thread among all these possibilities
is that largely because of science and technology and mass media, people are much more experienced
with abstract rather than concrete approaches to problem solving. And this experience could
affect brain development in ways that increase intelligence. The general idea is certainly
reasonable and it gives rise to many testable hypotheses. There's a large body of data, but
so far the data do not present a uniformly consistent picture. But the bottom line is, we
still do not know specifically what causes the Flynn effect. If we did, we should be able
to design ways to use those causal factors to increase intelligence even faster or more
broadly. Nonetheless, Flynn himself has a number of ideas about these issues and I want to mention
some of his views. First, it's important to understand that Flynn is not anti-G, although
he does sometimes refer to G theorists and G researchers as the G men. In fact, Flynn writes
in his 2007 book, quote, virtually everything I have done in psychology has been a response to
problems and challenges posed by Jensen. His theory has a great beauty, end quote. Flynn
clearly acknowledges that the G model explains much data accumulated from thousands of studies
and the G model has provided an important framework for testing many hypotheses over the
years. However, he sees the Flynn effect as data that is not easily explained by the G model.
Now, when such novel data appear in science, it's usually a good thing because it results in
either important modification to the prevailing model or to a new model entirely. Flynn regards the
G factor as a snapshot at any given time extracted from a battery of mental ability tests. But he
argues that the individual mental abilities can change independently of G and they depend on
social context and trends. So while a person's G may be stable, the elements that contribute to G
may change. This is an interesting idea. And in fact, some tests show a much larger
Flynn effect than other tests. Let's consider the example of the Raven's matrices and the
similarities test. Both show the Flynn effect. But according to Flynn, that's because they both
require flexible thinking and flexible thinking is due to a common causal factor, namely,
minds influenced by exposure to more scientific thinking will do well on both tests. And exposure
to scientific thinking is a strong social trend during the last century through better education
in mass media. Now, Flynn offers an alternative model to the G model. He calls it the bis, the BIS.
The B stands for brain, the I stands for individual differences, and the S stands for social trends.
All three work together to influence intelligence. Now, Flynn takes the view that social and cultural
factors are the most important influences on brain development and on individual differences in
intelligence. He is less convinced that genes are involved in the racial gaps and he's optimistic
that the gaps will close as social and cultural disadvantages are minimized. He's particularly
concerned with poor language skills in early life, a factor that we've discussed previously.
In one of his lectures, for example, Flynn noted that some poor mothers say they see no need to,
they see no reason to even talk to infants because infants can't talk back. Remember,
in lecture 10, we discussed the research about how important hearing language is for infants
and their brain development. So, Flynn's focus on this particular difficulty in some disadvantaged
children may be on the right track. There are many critics of Flynn's model and his interpretation of
various study results and many issues too technical to address here, but I think it's fair to say that
Flynn has helped rethink our ideas about intelligence. So, how would I summarize where things stand?
In my view, it's an overreach to argue that the Flynn effect disproves a major role for genetics,
as some critics like to argue. It's fair to say that many, if not most researchers,
take an explicit or an implicit view of intelligence based on epigenetic concepts.
Whatever the environmental and social cultural factors of the Flynn effect may be,
they must act through the neurobiology of the brain with whatever the genetic factors may be.
In other words, genes provide basic brain parameters for intelligence and IQ and the G
factor, but other factors influence how the genetic potential unfolds. The Flynn effect
indicates that those factors include social and cultural factors, but whether these factors
influence G is not yet clear. Remember our concentric circles of intelligence from the first
lecture? It's certainly possible that the Flynn effect is based on changes in the larger circles
with little or any effect on G. Now, Professor Earl Hunt, a pioneer of intelligence research
and the author of a very comprehensive book in 2011 called Human Intelligence,
has pointed out that the Flynn effect presents a parallel to genetic studies in this way.
Genetic studies demonstrate an effect without identifying specific genes,
and the Flynn effect identifies an environmental effect without identifying specific environmental
factors. Some researchers also have argued that the Flynn effect proves that IQ can be improved
if we just knew the factors that are responsible. This may be true, but we need to know if the
Flynn effect holds for G and that's not yet clear. In any case, the Flynn effect clearly gives hope to
the idea that intelligence may be more changeable than many researchers believe. Flynn and his
colleague Professor William Dickens have also argued that the black-white IQ gap has actually
been decreasing over time by about five and a half points. Other researchers, however,
hotly contest this conclusion, and believe it or not, one key disagreement among researchers
is what studies to include or exclude in the statistical analyses. These issues become quite
technical and they're beyond what we can discuss here. The bottom line, the Flynn effect has caused
a constructive re-examination of some basic views about intelligence. For the most part,
the parameters of the Flynn effect are still a puzzle and the causes are still a mystery.
Whether the factors that underlie the Flynn effect can be used to influence an individual's
intelligence within a single lifespan remains to be seen. It may also be the case that we'll never
understand the Flynn effect because of the limitations of intelligence tests to measure the G
factor in a true quantitative way, like we measure temperature or liquids. There are some
potential new approaches to measuring intelligence that may avoid the problems with current tests
and we'll see those in the next lecture. But before we end this lecture, I want to draw your
attention to a new brain imaging study about changing IQ scores in the teenage years.
This study was done in London and published in 2011. Fluctuations in IQ scores within individuals
have been observed for many years, but whether they were related to brain changes was not clear.
In the London study, 33 adolescents completed IQ testing between the ages of 12 and 16 and then
they were tested again about three or four years later. They also completed structural and functional
MRIs during each IQ testing session. The first finding was that there were fluctuations in IQ
scores between the two testing times. Some individuals changed more than others, some had increased
scores, but others showed decreased scores. The second finding was that there were brain changes
between the two sessions. Again, some individuals changed more than others and the third finding
was the IQ score changes correlated to the brain changes. Fluctuations for verbal scores were related
to gray matter changes in brain areas related to speech. Fluctuations for non-verbal scores
were related to gray matter changes in brain areas related to motor movement.
So you can see that the idea that intelligence is fairly stable over a lifetime has some important
caveats, especially in the teenage years. Like the Flynn effect, however, the factors that cause
these fluctuations are not clear. They could be related to schooling or many other concurrent
social factors. And of course, there are also many biological changes during these years.
If intelligence is less stable than has been believed, we need to identify the things that
influence change, perhaps better nutrition, increase in exposure to television, computer games,
and other complexities of the modern world. And then we can investigate the biological
mechanisms for how they influence the brain. This could lead to ways of enhancing intelligence
by tinkering with the brain itself. Some people find this scary. I don't, and we'll discuss this
further later in the course. But before we talk about enhancement of intelligence, in the next
lecture, we'll explore some completely different ways to measure intelligence that avoid the critical
problem of IQ points not being like temperature degrees or liters of liquid. It turns out that
we can actually measure the mind in real units and we can do it in the blink of an eye, literally.
