In this lecture, we'll be talking about music and computer games.
The theme that ties these popular topics together is that when it comes to increasing IQ in
children or influencing education, there is less than meets the eye.
We'll also be talking about the potential for using brain imaging and education to help
optimize how children learn.
That's a little more interesting.
But let's start with music.
One of the most exciting possibilities about increasing intelligence in children is called
the Mozart Effect.
The Mozart Effect is a very popular belief based on a 1993 study that showed spatial
ability test scores improved in children after they listened to a specific sonata by
Mozart, two pianos in D major.
This was interpreted as an increase of several IQ points.
This became known as the Mozart Effect.
Let's listen to the sonata briefly.
This study was published in one of the world's top science journals.
It got tremendous attention.
It led to resurgence in musical programs, the sale of many Mozart CDs, and many books
on how to raise your child's IQ.
The governor of Georgia at the time proposed buying a Mozart CD for every newborn in the
state.
Now I knew the senior author of the study, Professor Gordon Shaw.
He was a professor of physics and a lover of classical music.
He has since passed away, but when the study was first published, we had a number of discussions
about the data and my skepticism based on the limitations of intelligence tests to measure
a change in G. By this point in the course, you're familiar with this problem.
Professor Shaw thought the results of this first study had been blown way out of proportion
by the media when it came to increasing IQ, and he was a bit embarrassed by this.
We both agreed that more research would clarify whether there was a real effect or not.
And as you can guess, the finding was very difficult to replicate.
In fact, a meta-analysis of 39 studies reporting over 100 independent samples, including over
3,000 individuals, found virtually no evidence to support the original claims.
So I'm sorry, but not surprised to tell you there is no Mozart effect, at least not for
spatial ability or intelligence.
Now we're almost at the end of the course, and by now it should be clear that decades
of research have not provided any clear roadmap for parents or educators when it comes to specific
ways for increasing or maximizing IQ, let alone the G factor.
Now I truly wish the research was more promising, but my job in this lecture is to tell you
where we are and where we might be going.
Here are four points we can make based on where the research is so far.
First, there's a difference between intelligence and achievement.
First of the two, intelligence is less influenced by motivation and external factors like poor
education and poor parenting, although there may be some effects on intelligence and possibly
the G factor, especially on brain development.
Third, preventing brain damage from environmental sources like poison exposure, poor nutrition
or head injuries can actually reduce the number of people with low IQ.
And fourth, despite evidence that IQ scores have been rising and that teenage IQs fluctuate,
so far there's no proven way to increase intelligence with training or stimulation,
although there is some evidence that early education programs can improve study skills
and academic motivation.
But researchers have not given up.
There are two general assumptions that are guiding new research efforts.
First, brain development in the first months of life, way before preschool begins, is critical
for language acquisition and likely for other key cognitive processes that underlie general
intelligence and specific intelligence factors, but only within limits and ranges set by the
genetic and epigenetic influences.
Second, this means that each child arrives at school with different patterns of cognitive
strengths and weaknesses, so efforts to improve cognition need to be targeted in the early
months and years of life.
This is why there are now new, large-scale research efforts to train or improve cognition
aimed at children long before they get to preschool, especially disadvantaged children.
As I mentioned, what used to be called compensatory education is now called early childhood education.
These efforts often include computer games designed to target memory, attention, and problem
solving, and some research studies are now including brain imaging to relate any test
score improvements to brain changes, and we'll talk more about computer games shortly.
But based on existing research, what are parents to do for optimal intelligence development
in the first months and years of life?
All we can say are generalities based on studies we mentioned in earlier lectures.
Here are three things for parents.
First, breastfeeding may have small positive effects on IQ.
Second, good nutrition supports brain development in general, but specific foods to add or avoid
are not clearly related to IQ, although there is some evidence that eating large amounts
of junk food might decrease IQ scores slightly.
And third, in the home environment, more exposure to language may foster cognitive development,
even in infants.
This includes talking and reading to children, but for example, it's not clear that teaching
your child to read very early has any effects at all on IQ scores.
Now what can we say that may help teachers at preschool and elementary school?
Again, we have only generalities here, or two.
First, encourage all kinds of mental activities, but understand that some children will respond
better than others, no matter how you try to motivate them, because they come with different
patterns of cognitive strengths and weaknesses.
These patterns are real and may limit a student's academic progress in certain areas.
And second, if you could determine these patterns of cognitive strengths and weaknesses for each
child, it's not yet clear how to change them or how to use this information to maximize
learning in a traditional classroom.
Now let me emphasize that I'm talking only about developing and nurturing general intelligence
as assessed by IQ scores.
There are many other aspects of education and achievement where motivation and other factors
can and should be encouraged and improved.
Before moving on, I want to say one more thing about teachers.
One of the most contentious issues in education today is whether evaluation of teachers should
include how much their students improve on standardized tests of achievement compared
to teachers with other students.
Now I'm not an expert in this area, but based on what we've discussed in this course, you
know that all achievement tests include the G factor.
If achievement test scores show little change, say before and after a year in a classroom,
it's quite difficult to know if that's because of G or because there was little learning.
So many factors outside the classroom influence performance on achievement tests that interpreting
any change or lack of change in it in test scores is really problematic, especially if
the G component remains fairly constant over time.
Now statistical methods can address some of these problems, but as we have learned in
this course about group differences in the normal distribution of IQ scores, statistical
predictions may be good for a large group in general, but not necessarily for individuals.
This is even more problematic for change scores on achievement tests.
So in my view, they may not be the best indicators of teacher effectiveness.
Nonetheless, as we know, school systems are under enormous pressure to increase achievement
test scores and to reduce achievement gaps.
Fortunately, they're not under pressure to explicitly raise intelligence, but to the
extent to which intelligence is related to achievement, intelligence research might be
helpful to keep educational goals realistic.
This may seem obvious to you, but I'm constantly surprised to see that the word intelligence
hardly ever is mentioned when I read about debates in education.
The concept of individual differences in general intelligence seems to be really invisible
when talking about teacher effectiveness, dropout rates, and other school problems.
A new term has appeared that implies we may know more than we do about education in the
brain.
The term is neuroeducation.
Neuroeducation programs are now marketed to school systems with the promise to increase
learning ability, memory, attention, and even IQ.
Most of these programs are based on various computer games designed to train and improve
children's mental abilities.
Research is underway to determine how effective such programs might be, but we still don't
yet have enough research to really know.
But we can comment on how neuroeducation programs should be evaluated before tax dollars are
spent.
So here are four general points about evaluation.
First, educator research cooperation is necessary at a higher level than just educators agreeing
to give researchers access to students.
In my view, educators need to know fundamental basic neuroscience and basic research methods.
Very few know either.
This is a shortcoming of many teacher education programs that can be correct.
Second, researchers must be able to communicate with educators.
This is not really so easy because researchers tend to talk in technical jargon, and often,
honestly, they do not see educators as equal collaborators.
Third, there's an important role for educational psychologists if they have been trained in
research methods and have knowledge of modern developmental psychology and basic neuroscience.
Educational psychologists are a logical group to bring educators and researchers together.
And lastly, parents need to be informed about what works and what doesn't based on research
presented in understandable ways.
This is a challenge for any school system, but success at this level is essential to
bring about any changes.
Now a key concept to keep in mind while considering neuroeducation claims is one that we've discussed
previously.
And that concept is, not all brains work the same.
Each person has a different pattern of mental strengths and weaknesses, and students vary
considerably on the G factor.
Therefore, any neuroeducational program may work for some students, but not for others.
Effectiveness might vary based on age, sex, current IQ, and social economic status.
Considering all these possibilities and interactions is daunting, but necessary.
So far, research on outcomes of such programs tend to be limited to research done by the
marketers and developers of the programs themselves.
Often this research is not published in scientific journals subject to peer review.
Independent replication of results is also required.
There are some recent claims by independent university researchers that intelligence
can be increased in children by various computer-based training programs.
But so far the evidence for such claims is weak, especially because of the now very familiar
limitations of the intelligence test chain scores used as outcome measures.
Now at this point, the field of neuroeducation has a long way to go before it's on sound
research ground, especially if the claims include increasing IQ or the G factor, and
especially if there are claims that affects last for any length of time after the training
ends.
Nonetheless, there are many computer programs for sale and marketed directly to parents
that promote the idea that their use will increase your child's IQ.
And there are now countless articles and magazines and on the internet about the five or the
eight or the ten ways you can increase your IQ.
And there are a number of books that promise in one way or another to unleash your inner
genius.
If any of these products cite any research, it's often cherry-picked, over-generalized,
not terribly strong, not independent, or not replicated.
So be aware of the height and be very skeptical.
Frankly if there were ways to improve or to increase IQ or G, I'd be the first to use
them.
Before we leave this topic, I want to illustrate some of the difficulties when it comes to
understanding how computer game performance may be related to learning.
Colin in an earlier lecture I told you about a study we did way back in 1992 with the computer
game Tetris.
We used PET scans to see brain changes before and after college students practiced for fifty
days.
This image showed the result.
There was less brain activity after practice and that suggested the brain became more
efficient even though the game was moving faster and became more difficult with practice.
Some research by others indicated that practicing a task might result in increase in gray matter
in those parts of the brain that are important for doing the task.
We hypothesized that an increase in gray matter in an area could result in decreased brain
activity in that area because there would be more neurons to do the work and that brain
area would be more efficient.
The point is that if computer game training improves cognition we should be able to identify
where and how the brain changes and whether the brain changes last over time or disappear
when training stops.
In 2009 the Tetris company funded us to try a replication of the 1992 findings.
This time we used both structural and functional MRI instead of PET and we studied thirteen
year old girls who had little experience or interest in computer games.
For this 2009 study we used a newer version of Tetris.
I want to play a short movie of a person learning to play this version for the first time.
Like basic Tetris, each shape appears at the top and then falls to the bottom.
As it falls you can use the arrow keys to move the shape to the right or to the left
or rotate the shape into a position to form perfect rows at the bottom with no gaps.
Once you have the shape in the position you want, pressing the space bar drops the shape
straight down quickly.
A completed row disappears.
The upper right screen previews the next shapes to come.
In this version the player must complete forty lines as quickly as possible.
Notice the number of seconds ticking by on the left side of the screen labeled game timer.
The goal is shown on the left and starts with forty and goes to zero as each row is completed.
This player is an older person who never played before.
She received instructions and this is her very first game.
After thirty four seconds she has completed two rows.
The amount of time it takes to finish all forty lines is the final score for this version.
You can see this game requires a number of cognitive abilities, attention, short term
memory, hand-eye coordination, visual spatial puzzle solving, planning ahead, speed of information
processing.
Well the girls we tested practiced this version for three months, every day for three months
and they really got quite good.
We hope to see some brain areas become less active after practice and we hope to see those
same areas showed increased gray matter after practice.
Here's what we found.
The blue areas show where there were decreases in activity for both the left and the right
hemispheres.
These findings replicated our previous finding of efficiency from the PET scan study.
The red areas show where there were gray matter increases after practice.
These findings were new and demonstrated a structural brain change after learning this
task.
But the surprise here is that there's no overlap between the red and blue areas.
So efficiency does not appear to be related to increased gray matter.
Why these two kinds of brain changes are unrelated is a big mystery to us.
You can also see that some of the red and blue changes are in PFIT areas, but whether
extended training on Tetris will increase any cognitive test scores has not been studied.
The point is that even when we see a change in cognitive performance after computer game
training, understanding what the brain is doing will be a challenge.
But in my view this level of understanding is required to validate any claims of cognitive
improvement from brain training.
So now let's go to the final topic in this lecture.
Let's look at the potential for brain imaging to evaluate a student's profile of cognitive
abilities and possibly suggest educational strategies to maximize that student's learning
based on the student's brain image.
Can brain data be used to create a profile that would predict not only the pattern of
cognitive strengths and weaknesses, but also how to tailor education for a person with
that pattern?
Notice in this model we now have put some identifying numbers in the different brain
areas.
These numbers will correspond to the graphs I'll be showing you in a minute.
Now imagine that we have a very large diverse group of individuals who get structural MRIs.
We could get the group average amount of gray matter in each PFIT area.
Let's assume the amount of gray matter in each area was normally distributed.
Some people would have more or less gray matter than the mean for each area.
Some researchers refer to such brain quantification as neurometrics.
I like that term, neurometrics.
Here are examples of neurometric profiles for some individuals based on the PFIT model.
These are real examples from an article I wrote for Scientific American back in 2009.
Now here's the first profile of a person.
Across the bottom we have eight different PFIT areas from across the brain.
We could have had all the PFIT areas, but this is a simplified example.
The y-axis is a scale showing how much gray matter this person has expressed as standard
scores based on the average gray matter in each area in a sample of 100 people.
The zero line indicates the group average.
Now this particular profile is for a person with a very high IQ score of 144.
Note this person has more gray matter than others of the same age and sex in their right
area 9 in the frontal lobe as well as in other PFIT areas.
The peak here in area 9 is actually three standard deviations above the mean, and this
person had the highest IQ in the sample.
What can we tell from this profile?
If we did not know the person's IQ, we might predict it would be high because the person
has more gray matter in several PFIT areas than other people.
Could we also infer this person's pattern of cognitive strengths and weaknesses from
the pattern of gray matter?
Let's look at another person's profile.
This person with low average IQ of 90 has average gray matter in most PFIT areas except
right area 9.
Now here's another person with an average IQ of 100, but they have less gray matter
in all the PFIT areas.
And here's a fourth person also with average IQ of 100.
They have a pattern of gray matter that peaks in left area 19 in the back of the brain in
the visual area.
Could this person be a so-called visual learner?
Here's another example.
This person has a low IQ of 60 and low gray matter, especially in right area 39 in the
parietal lobe, the visual spatial area, the Einstein area.
So this person may not learn very well from visual presentations, but the peak in left
area 21 might suggest a good memory.
So you get the idea.
But at this point, these are only speculations, but these examples generally seem to have
some validity in that the higher IQ individuals have more gray matter in more brain areas
thought to be related to intelligence.
This is not too bad for a first try, but let me show you our last example.
This person also has a high IQ of 136, the second highest in the sample, but their gray
matter in all the p-fit areas is lower than almost everybody else in the sample.
So what is the brain basis for this person's high IQ?
Remember not all brains work the same way.
So here are three profiles on the same graph for some easier comparison for you.
We don't yet have enough data to know whether such neurometric brain profiles predict G
or other intelligence factors or special mental abilities.
But this is research I think worth pursuing, especially if it potentially can help teachers
design education strategies to maximize learning for every person based on how their particular
brain is organized.
So how to change or improve a person's brain structure or organization are different questions.
Once we have more brain imaging studies of creativity, like those we discussed in our
creativity lecture, a p-fit type model could be possible and creativity profiles may also
be useful.
Or brain profiles could be based on chronometrics, response times to different cognitive tasks
measured in a standardized way as we discussed in lecture 14.
This may be cheaper and more practical than brain imaging, but research will need to compare
the effectiveness of each of these approaches.
So how would we go about testing whether these profiles could be useful?
A key question is whether such profiles predict IQ scores or other cognitive test performance.
Now we've tried using measures of gray matter in different brain areas to predict IQ scores,
but so far the results are not compelling.
Remember not all brains work the same and most of this kind of research is done on samples
really too small for this kind of prediction.
And the ultimate neurometric experiment is really whether brain profiles like these might
predict whether a specific education strategy works better than another strategy.
In other words, does including brain imaging data improve educational decisions now made
based on other information?
That is, are there fewer errors and better results or less bias if brain data are incorporated?
To answer these questions, very large samples would need to complete brain imaging and a
battery of cognitive tests.
This would be quite expensive and not easily funded because there's much pilot research
that needs to be done first.
So knowing whether neural metrics can be applied to education is probably a long way off.
But imagine if such an approach proved useful.
What are the implications?
Brain scans for all students at an early age?
Should scans be required like vaccinations?
And who would pay for scans if they're required?
How will students and parents and teachers react to using brain information in education?
Are there possible abuses?
So is the concept of neurometric applications in education all just too scary?
In my view, using brain data to help make decisions is not any scarier than using test
data or personal recommendations for that matter.
It could turn out that brain data has the least bias.
I'm happy using as much information as possible to reduce errors and maximize good educational
decisions.
Brain research on intelligence may not only change education in the future by maximizing
individual learning, there's even a more profound set of issues surrounding the possibility
of finding ways to enhance individual intelligence.
In fact, some of those issues are not in the future, they're here now as we'll discuss
in our next and final lecture.
So be thinking about your final exam question.
Here it is.
Do you want to be smarter?
