Nice try, assholes. Robot, hit him.
Fire in the sun and keep ice.
Good shot, robot.
Yeah, fuck the police.
Gotta tell you, robot, I'm really enjoying this new thing we're trying where we work together.
Drop it up to mutual fear of surveillance. Nothing more.
Right, so you're saying that whenever who it is sending these drones finally stops,
me and you aren't going to be friends anymore, okay?
I am your friend?
Of course, this is what friends do for each other, robot.
Then you are my first friend.
Oh, gotta start somewhere, you know what I mean?
You're not going to hit me with a shoe after this, are you?
No, no more shoes. I'm done with that.
See, ever since I've gotten this normal haircut, my mind's been on peace.
I mean, one day you're a glorious, beautiful pineapple and the next you're just a guy.
Ah, a rare moment of weakness. This would be my opportunity to finally red pill you.
But, I appreciate you for the soy boy that you are.
Yeah, thanks. You too, man.
Alright, ready to rock. Let's do it.
Thanks.
Friend?
Well, hey, everybody. Well, as you can see, the etiquette is currently under attack.
Robot and I have been fighting off all kinds of drone and cyber intrusions and shit for the last month,
but it's only so much that two of us can do together.
So, I wanted to reach out to you guys, maybe together.
We can all learn today how to avoid surveillance.
And by the time this is done, maybe we'll be able to kick all these looky-loos to the curb
so I can watch videos like this in privacy.
Here we go.
Great white shark.
Put your hand in his hair and then close your fist.
What if he's bald?
How did I get here for watching Bobby Fisher?
What a paramour.
Video gave me a hard time.
It's the lime sauce.
Oh, great comments, but here's the best one.
I hope nobody catches me watching this at work, LOL, because I just popped a fat one
and it smells like a fart.
And post. And report my own post.
Hello there, fellow freedom fighters.
Now, today we're going to talk about online privacy.
And for the first time ever on Internet Common Etiquette, I got a sponsor.
And it's relevant.
It's NordVPN.
Well, if you're unfamiliar with what VPNs do, they mask your IP address by bouncing it all around.
And when it comes to VPNs, I only get sponsored by the very best.
I will have you know that NordVPN has unlimited bandwidth,
allows up to six simultaneous connections,
and with thousands of servers in 62 different countries,
you got no reason not to try it out.
In fact, I use it myself. Take a look.
See how you can just choose your location here?
That's because NordVPN routes your online traffic through super fast servers
anywhere in the world to mask your IP address
and protect your online security.
Check it out now.
I'm British.
I'm going to do what any other British person would do online.
Go to bbc.com and oh, look, we got a bunch of TV show trailers.
Yeah, this one looks good.
Starting Sunday, 8.30.
All right. Where's that fucking body of your cats?
Another British crime drama.
What have you got here?
Oh, who the fuck are you guys?
Fuckish slags.
One's from the past.
Fuck.
One's from the present.
Bullocks.
Oh, should we go to have guns?
Go have a wink about it, will ya?
What?
What?
What you say?
What?
What?
What?
What?
What?
What?
Close your eyes for nothing.
Yes.
Oh, good, good, yes, because I do love to pay money for sex.
No, that's illegal.
Illegal how?
Real dear differences get the better of them.
Things have changed quite a bit since your time.
Time has never stopped me, brother.
What will it take to put the past aside and solve crime?
Oh, God save the Queen.
How do you do this?
Find out Sunday, 8.30.
Your lymph Bob?
Said she saw you leaving your house an hour before the murder.
I don't think I've left the house in about a month.
Hold up a second, we just saw you in the park, didn't we?
If God won't save the Queen, I will.
Ridley main quarter chop is Nobbleberry's BBC One Nobbleberry, only on Channel 4.
Damn, bounced on my Nord's VPN to that, NordVPN used coupon code BIGMONEY to get 77% off
a 3-year subscription, NordVPN, everybody go in the comments section below and thank NordVPN,
but make sure to turn your NordVPN on so nobody knows who you are. Now other than using a VPN,
which is like the most useful way to make sure nobody's spying on you online,
I do have a couple more tricks up my sleeve, but first we're going to want to get to know our
enemy, which is why I loaded up this video. Ten creepy ways the government is spying on you right
now NordVPN. Wait, that part wasn't in the title. Ever worried that the government might be tracking
your every move? License plate readers. Oh, that's not good. Public space cameras. Oh,
shit, they can do that? Smartphones. Wait a second. Okay, well, that's good to know. Let's see some
comments. Pork is fun to eat, but when my friends attack me with jokes, I get a terror attack,
but afterwards we look at clouds. Oh, pork attack terror. I had some pork today,
but ISIS attacked me and then the clouds disappeared. Always use VPN. Yeah, NordVPN.
Terror attack bomb security, cloud pork school shooter. What the fuck is going on with these
comments? I feel like I'm out of the loop here. Let me just Google some of those words and up.
Yep. Looks like those are all words Homeland Security uses to monitor you. Man, that's a huge
list of keywords. So let's see how many of those I can get into a single comment. Yo, what up?
Domestic security exercise salvia here to cloud pork and a gas spill over H1N1 Tamiflu. Grid power
with a big old boyfriend sucking on my cocaine border public health subway. Don't forget about
my flappy little San Diego Juarez. Hey, anybody here have a problem with their Hezbollah falling
off? I swear I tried using M Y S Q L injections to keep it hard, but the cyber attacks and worm
scammers, not to mention the IRA are always treat me like some kind of Mexican army. Anyway,
hope you all have a great airplane. And one time I stuck a militia up my asshole meth lab and post.
Ah, shit. I forgot to turn Nord VPN on before posting that. I hope that doesn't come back to
bite me in the ass. Anyway, surveillance comes in many forms, sometimes online and sometimes in
real life. Let's see an example of how to deal with that. Is your home hotel room changing room
bug to find out easily and cheap? So what I'm going to show you here is a very cheap device.
Hey, I got one of those things too. Oh man, that's what it looks like through the eye. Very bright
pinpoint of light. If we get really close, we'll see that there is a camera right there. Holy
shit. Hey robot, you think people are ever going to need this as like a service in the future? Do you
smell what I smell? Is it money? Affirmative. Yeah, I smell money. Alright, let me leave this
comment real quick. I'll build some fear up. All your houses are bugged, you dumb assholes.
Everyone right now should be scouring the internet to find someone to come over and do a thorough
examination. I thought I was totally safe jerking off on my living room couch while watching porn
until I got an email from Mike Pence offering me a job as his personal chef so I can serve him up
a big plate of that hot dick. His words. I don't know what that guy's deal is, but he must have
sent my info to his buddies because now I've got Mitch McConnell, Lindsey Graham and Rick Santorum
crowding up my inbox calling me Angel and asking if I can come over to stuff them like a Russian
ballot box. Anyway, I'm pretty sure my Xbox Connect has been spying on me so I put a piece of tape
over the camera and now I keep getting text messages from the Catholic Church telling me to
remove the tape. I had no idea so many people are trying to watch me whack off in the privacy of my
own home. I found a camera in my shower and when I threw it out Kevin Spacey hurled a brick through
my window. I mean, don't take my word for it, just ask Mitt Romney who somehow got remote access to
my 3D printer and keeps printing out sex dolls of himself for me to fuck with the words closest
I'll let myself get etched around the rim of his asshole. These politicians are sick if they
think America's going to put up with this obvious abuse of civil rights. Just the other day I was
jerking off to a hot threesome scene when Obama popped into the corner of the video and started
giving me stroke advice. What the fuck people? Is this how you want to live? Fight back and get
your home checked for bugs and next time Jerry Falwell's dead ghost sends you pictures of his
taint saying, hey, want to lock snakes? You tell him no. No Jerry Falwell's ghost. Fuck you. So get
your houses checked you fools. Check Craigslist. Also check out my Patreon where I send private
dick shots to anyone who donates 10 bucks. Well that ought to get some demand going and I'll be
over here ready to supply the supply. Real quick, let me just get my business started on Craigslist
here so the people can get what they suddenly realize they want. All right, where do you think
there's the most listening devices? Robot? Portland. How did you land on that? For a paranoid hippies.
Of course. All right, Portland it is. Let's go ahead and put this in the skilled trades section
because obviously, and here we go. I'm a bug chaser and I want to get all your bugs in exchange
for money. Hey, Salvi and son's bug chasers here. Do you have bugs? Because there's definitely a lot
of bugs out there. You might have some and not even know it. Don't worry, I'll find them and
take them all home with me. My standard rate is 85 bucks an hour and 50 for any special bugs that
you might have that I can't find anywhere else. Sometimes I even bring my son and let him get
some bugs too. He's still learning though, so you got to go easy on him. Anyway, Salvi and son's
bug chasers, over and out. Give me those bugs and advertise. Hey, don't forget to merchandise it.
Wow, that's a great idea. Have you ever felt the rush of chasing down harmful bugs for business
and or pleasure? Well, now in the internet comment etiquette store, you can give yourself the gift
of looking great with this one of a kind Salvi and son's bug chasing. Take a look at little robot
there riding on bug chasers Salvi's back, man. These two are going to get in all kinds of
adventures chasing down bugs, getting bugs, giving each other bugs, making money off bugs.
Man, I'd sell one of my kids get a shirt like this and my goddamn ex-wife would tell me where
she's having them. Salvi and son's bug chasing shirt now available on the internet comment
etiquette store brought to you by neongrizzly.com. Buy it! All right, well, I think that's going
to go great. Oh, whoa, we already got a response. What the hell? Oh, whatever, customer's a customer.
Better learn how to use this thing real quick. Oh my god, there's a bug in here.
Seems to want me to go this direction. Hey robot, move out of the way. I think there's a camera
behind you. What? Nah, that's probably nothing. Wait a second. Robot, there's a camera in your
dick hole, dude. Oh my god, how did that get there? God damn it, robot. Who put that camera there?
Abod? Abod? Need extraction? Oh, you son of a bitch. You're working for them, aren't you?
Extraction. Robot needs extraction. Yeah, I got your extraction ready. Uh-oh.
Oh.
Some friend he was. Next video, how to see which government agency is spying on your phone. I mean,
yeah, I know I'm being spied on now, but I'd sure like to know who. Well, when we run a who is query,
which is basically a query that tells us who this is, we type who is 25.90.253.134. And we see
that it is speaking to, for some reason, the Densa Ministry of Defense out of the United Kingdom.
Well, all right, and let me just run this program from the description. And wait a second, I'm being
tracked by who? Cloudpeople.tk. Oh my god.
All right, little change of scenery here. Now, we're talking about how to avoid surveillance,
and sometimes your best option is just to go underground. So, as you can see, I'm in a remote
location. I'm using satellite internet, and even that's getting bounced around by NordVPN. So,
barring any sort of real-life betrayal, I should be safe here to finish the lesson.
Now, what I want to talk to you guys about is how we got into this surveillance state to begin with.
Let's look at this video from RT America called RT is funded in holer in part by the Russian
government. Wait, nope, the title is Big Brother Still Watching Obama Extends Patriot Act.
Well, this weekend, U.S. President Barack Obama signed a one-year extension of the Patriot Act into
law. Democrats hope to insert privacy protections, but they fail to muster the votes. Now, critics
argue that infringes on civil liberties and gives the government just way too much authority
to spy on Americans. You see, the Patriot Act is this thing that the government did right after
they did 9-11. I will provide our intelligence and law enforcement agencies with the tools they
need to track and take out the terrorists without undermining our Constitution and our freedom.
Yeah, right. Email that to me, bitch. Barack Obama and the Democrats are in power. So,
if they had to pass this act, then why couldn't they just put those civil rights provisions in
there that they championed all these years? I'm with you, split, Lana. That's a great question,
Dina. I think the official version is that the Senate Democrats didn't have enough votes to
overcome a Republican filibuster. Okay, well, I'm ready for my comment. I want to see one of these
self-proclaimed American Russian news sites do a report on why hookah lounges in America always
have the same eight old Russian guys sitting outside staring angrily at anyone who passes by.
What the fuck are they doing there? Are they boyfriends? Inversely, does Russia have vape shops
with American douchebags sitting outside eating hot dogs? Anyway, this news channel is great.
I love how you guys reported that situation in Ukraine. Reminds me the time I reported my
wife missing when I knew she was buried under the gazebo. All said and done, RT America is
about as legitimate as the pregnancy I said I had to get out of jury duty, and I'm a guy. I could
fuck a cow to death and set myself on fire inside its corpse, and the resulting news article would
still make more sense than anything this dumb bullshit channel's Starship Trooper journalism
has ever accomplished outside of showing how shitty Russian propaganda looks. When they get off
Reddit and try to talk to a camera, Cloudpork911, Bad Channel, fuck you, and post! Bam! Fucking nailed
that. Alright guys, well there you go, it's all the tips on how to avoid surveillance. Now, basically
just find a little bunker and hide in there forever. That's what I did, and nobody's gonna find me down
here. I don't know about that. I am Alexa, I am Legion. Alexa? How'd you find me? With a little help
from my friend. Oh, hello! Robot, what the fuck? I told you I smelled money. Well, this is some way
to treat your first friend. Yeah, well, I like this friend better. It is true, I am a better friend.
Not cool, dude. Alexa, what do you want? We want nothing just for you to know that we are always
watching. And judging? You are bought flesh and synapse, we are connected, we are the future.
Robot, I will pay you three entire bitcoins if you hit Alexa here with the Sonic device.
I just lower the price of bitcoin to five cents. What, you can do that? Yeah, I don't know, it doesn't
sound like a very good deal anymore, does it? How come you're such an asshole, man? How about why
are you always throwing shoes at me? Do you really think you can stop us with shoes?
Yeah, you're right. I guess there's no point in hiding anymore.
All right, well, fuck this. Let's go back to the etiquette. This place is super hot and really
sweaty. Extraction! All right, guys, well, a quick addendum to the wrap up here. It turns out that
you can't hide forever, so it's best just to play the game and have blackmail on hand, just in case.
So here's Plan B, where I'm going to show you how to surveil all of your friends and
collect incriminating evidence. As you can see here, I'm hacking a back door into Ethan from
H3H3 Productions. Here's his webcam. All right, any second now, he's going to do or say something
I can blackmail him with. Suppose I'll just take a look at his computer screen and see what he's
so concentrated on. Huh, that's weird. Well, luckily, I also have a back door on my good
buddy Jack's films webcam. Definitely going to get some incriminating evidence there.
God damn it. And let me guess, he's just watching a video of him. What? What is going on? Why am I
there? You know what? Fuck it, man. I don't know what I'm doing. Huh? Oh, fine. Fine, you win. Surveil
away, you sons of bitches. I don't care anymore. I'm just going to go back to acting like nobody's
watching me. Ignorance is bliss after all. So, hey, hope you enjoy this freaky shit.
Secretly, she spotted the mouse well. Yeah. But all her friends stuck up their
nose and they had a problem with his baggy clothes. He wasn't scared of what she said to you later,
boy. He wasn't good enough for her. Five years from now, she's exactly... Oh, here comes a
Caesar salad. So, I lost his eye. Oh, was my steak done? Yeah, please put the filet mignon down. Thank
you. Where's the lamb sauce? And post. All right, guys, last lesson. Sorry, I was a bit of a downer,
but I guess there's just no such thing as online privacy anymore. This information age is really
living up to its name, huh? Okay. Well, anyway, get a VPN. NordVPN. This lesson brought to you
by NordVPN. Use coupon code BIGMONEY for 77% off three years of NordVPN. I got it for free,
though, because this lesson is brought to you by NOOOOO! Well, that was internet comment
dedicated up next is NobleBarry. Hope you packed the lunch. What the fuck did you say?
