The following are special complementary lectures from the teaching company.
In these specially commissioned lectures, Professor Jeremy McInerney takes us on a journey
back to the Olympics of the ancient Greek world.
Professor McInerney is an associate professor in the Department of Classical Studies at
the University of Pennsylvania.
He is also Chair of the Graduate Group in the Art and Archaeology of the Mediterranean
World and one of our most popular professors.
Please feel free to send the link to this lecture to any of your friends who might also
enjoy it.
Lecture 1, The Olympics, from Ancient Greece to Athens, 2004, Part 1
Hello and welcome to our two lecture mini-series on the Olympics.
The Olympics are going to be held in Athens and it seems a good time to look at the original
Olympics from the ancient world and to make a bit of a comparison between the ancient
Olympics and their modern counterpart.
So in the course of the next two lectures, I want to discuss how the ancient Olympics
came about and how they were run and what the events were, and then to talk a little
bit about the significance of the ancient Olympics from the point of view of the Greeks.
And if we have time, we'll talk a little bit about the origins of the modern Olympic
movement and the relationship between the two.
You might find it interesting as we explore this because it transpires that in fact there's
a great deal more difference between the ancient and modern Olympics than similarities.
But let's go back to the origins of the Olympics.
From about 776 BC onwards, the greatest champions among the Greeks began assembling every four
years at Olympia in western Greece to assert their strength and their physical prowess.
These men thought of themselves as the living embodiment of the Homeric Code.
But where Homer's heroes, men like Achilles and Ajax, displayed their prowess on the battlefield,
the athletes of the 8th century BC used sport as the medium of their contests.
These men would run, jump, wrestle, box and drive chariots to demonstrate their arete
or valour and to win kleos afteton or undying glory.
Their models were Homeric and the Olympic games were a manifestation of the degree to
which Homeric values supplied the dominant ideology of early Greece.
And really, whether we call it the Homeric Code, the aristocratic ideal or the Olympic
spirit, it boils down to the same thing, proving one's manhood in competition.
So to understand the origins of the Olympics, we really need to begin with Homer.
Five hundred years before the first Olympics, the Greeks had witnessed the growth and the
decline of a powerful civilisation we call Mycenaean.
Excavations at places like Mycenae and Tyrans have unearthed the massive walls and the cobbled
tombs fashioned by this warrior culture.
When that civilisation collapsed, its fortresses abandoned or occupied by squatters in the
11th century BC, Greek societies suffered terrible dislocation.
Civil authority evaporated, many people took to the hills and the complex network of trade
connecting Greece to the rest of the Eastern Mediterranean for a time broke down.
Ironically, this material and physical decline was compensated for by a brilliant poetic
flowering.
Travelling poets told the story of a golden age of heroes, the men who fought at Troy,
who placed personal honour above all other considerations, and who looked on war as the
truest test of manhood.
It was a dream, it was a fantasy.
It was no more real than the Hollywood version of Troy.
In fact, the Homeric poems were the Hollywood of their day, shaping the dreams of men who,
in the 9th and 8th century, wanted to be as brave as Achilles, as wily as Odysseus, as
powerful as Agamemnon, or even as buff as Brad Pitt.
But war, as Homer certainly understood, is fatally destructive.
And what makes a man a truly great warrior, the capacity to kill, isn't necessarily a
helpful social skill.
And so brilliantly, the Greeks found a way of celebrating physical strength and speed
divorced from its military setting.
The Olympics were, if you will, warfare displaced.
The specific connection between Homeric poetry and the Olympics comes about in the habit
of Homer's heroes of celebrating the death of a prince with funeral games.
In the world of the golden age heroes, the death of a great man is celebrated by a competition
in which his peers compete for prizes, honouring their dead comrade by their performance.
Here's a good example.
In Book 23 of the Iliad, Achilles lays out prizes for the Greek heroes so that they
will compete in the funeral games honouring their dead friend, Petroclas.
One of the events is wrestling, and here is Homer's account of the match between Ajax
and Odysseus.
Upstewed mighty Ajax, son of Telemon, and wily Odysseus, full of cunning, rose also.
The two girded themselves and went into the middle of the ring.
They gripped each other in their strong hands like the rafters, which some master builder
frames for the roof of a high house to keep the wind out.
Their backbones cracked as they tugged at one another with their mighty arms, and sweat
rained down from them in torrents.
Many a bloody bruise sprang up on their sides and shoulders, but they kept on striving with
might and main for victory and to win the tripod.
That match ended in a draw.
Ajax and Odysseus then go and have a running race, which will also end badly when Ajax
slips on a cowpat, not very heroic.
Another contest, a chariot race, ends up with an appeal to the judges, a touch that looks
distinctly modern when you read it.
We have to imagine, in other words, a world in the 8th century where chieftains and aristocrats
were hearing these tales of might and competition in the poetry that they absolutely adored.
But we also know that they were meeting in real places like Olympia and Delphi in order
to perform in actual competitions that grew out of the myths that they heard about in
the Homeric poems.
There's another passage that helps us to understand the Olympic spirit in early Greece.
In the course of his wanderings, the hero Odysseus is shipwrecked on the island of
the Phaeacians.
Being Odysseus, the master of cunning, he of course conceals his identity from his hosts.
He doesn't want yet to let them know that he's one of the great princes who has fought
at Troy.
He doesn't want to reveal his heroic status.
Until, at one point in the proceedings, he is challenged by some of the young Phaeacians.
Leodomas looks at Odysseus and he says to his friends,
Come, let's ask the stranger whether he's skewed in any contests.
His build is strong enough, look at his thighs and his calves, his two arms, his stout neck.
He's as strong as a bull.
Clearly, the Homeric hero, like the Olympic athlete, is meant to look larger than life.
And so they approach Odysseus and one of them says,
Come sir, and take part in our athletic competition if you have the skill, as by the look of you
you do, for there is no greater glory for a man as long as he lives than that which
he wins with his own hands and his feet.
Come, make trial, and ease your heart's care.
Now Odysseus tries to avoid the challenge.
He's been hearing stories about the Trojan War and it's brought back to him all of the
nightmares about his experience and his longing for home.
So he really doesn't want to rise to the challenge.
And he says, Leodomas, why do you mock me with this challenge?
Sorrow is in my mind far more than athletic contests.
I've suffered much and toiled much and now I sit in the midst of your assembly longing
for home and making my prayer to the king and to all the people.
Well, this milia noise, the phiation youngbloods, and Urielus in his annoyance says,
Well yes, stranger, for I see that you have no experience with competition, you're probably
the captain of some rickety merchant ship, someone who cares more about his freight and
the trip home and the profit to be made.
No, you are no athlete.
And so, of course, Odysseus picks up a discus and he holds it farther than anyone else,
thus demonstrating his prowess.
And that really is what the Olympic spirit is all about for the Greeks, performing beyond
the level of an ordinary human, proving your excellence, which is demonstrated in competition
and winning glory, just like a Homeric hero.
The Olympic hero, like the Homeric hero, was supposed to be larger than life.
And you might want to consider the story of Milo of Croton in the sixth century as an
illustration of what a truly gargantuan character the Olympic hero could be.
This is a man who, as I said in the sixth century, won six victories at Olympia in wrestling
and six at the Pythian Games, which were held at Delphi.
So that's a career that spans 24 years since the Olympics were held then as now once every
four years.
This is a man who clearly had the staying power of someone like Cal Ripken.
But he didn't just have staying power, he had privado as well as brawn.
To celebrate one victory, he killed a sacrificial heifer with one blow of his own fist.
He then hauled the beast onto his shoulders and ran the length of the stadium with it.
And then after that, he had the beast cooked for him on the altar and sat down in the middle
of the stadium to eat the entire animal in the course of one day.
Milo was a real character.
Pausanias tells us more about him, including the fact that he even carried his own statue
into the sanctuary in order to dedicate it to Zeus in commemoration of his victories.
That would be a little bit like an athlete awarding himself the gold medal at an Olympic
ceremony these days.
And Pausanias continues with more stories about this wonderful character Milo.
He would grasp a pomegranate so firmly that nobody could rest it from him by force and
yet he did not do it any damage with the pressure of his fist.
He would stand upon a greased coit, says Pausanias, and make fools of those who charged him and
tried to push him off.
He used to perform also the following exhibition feet.
He would tie a cord around his forehead as though it were a ribbon or a crown.
And then holding his breath and filling with blood the veins on his head, he would break
the cord by the strength of these veins.
That's quite a showstopper.
So the next time you see a gold medal winner at the Olympics posing for the cameras like
Mr. Olympia, as say the US sprint team did four years ago, be grateful.
It could be a lot uglier if our modern athletes really wanted to identify with their ancient
counterparts like Milo of Croton.
The Olympians were supposed to train hard and to practice a regime of diet and exercise.
Starting at Olympia one month before the Games were scheduled to start, they exercised
daily in the various training facilities such as the gymnasium and the polystra or the wrestling
ground.
If you go to Olympia today you can still see versions of these buildings.
Most of the athletic facilities that you see at Olympia now are from the Roman period
when the sanctuary was very famous and very wealthy, but there were undoubtedly earlier
versions of these same sorts of buildings and facilities going right back into the fifth
and sixth and probably seventh centuries BC.
So the athletes would meet there on a daily basis to do their training in these facilities
that were very close to the Temple of Zeus which lay at the heart of the sanctuary.
One of my fondest memories of visiting Olympia involves just these training facilities rather
than the Great Temple of Zeus.
I was there a couple of years ago sitting in the training grounds to the west of the
sanctuary with a modern-day Olympian, a member of the U.S. swim team from 1960.
And as I listened to him he reminisced about what it was like to be preparing for the swim
that he was about to undertake and in fact he went on to win the gold medal.
And as he was talking about getting into the zone as athletes say these days, it was very
easy to imagine the thousands of ancient athletes who congregated at this same place during
the Olympiad for a month before the Games and then while the Games were on in preparation
for their event.
Athletes there stretching their muscles, being massaged with oil by their attendants, no
doubt praying to the gods for their success and doing this all under the watchful eye
of the men who were called the Halano Dikai, a name that means literally the judges of
the Greeks.
And these men, the officials who were in charge of the running of the Olympic Games, were
judges whose job it was to ensure that only Greeks participated and that the athletes
who did participate were up to the standards of the Games, in other words that they qualified.
And they were also there to make sure that nobody cheated.
And unfortunately we do know of instances from antiquity where various athletes were
found to be cheating.
A row of statues right in the middle of the sanctuary commemorated those who had been
found guilty of cheating and so their shame was immortalised just as truly as the fame
of those who were victorious.
The athletes trained and they competed naked, as was customary for the Greeks when it came
to any aspect of their exercise.
And this was a feature that the Greeks thought of as distinguishing them from the barbarians.
Many Vasas depict athletes running, wrestling and boxing and the figures are always naked,
but a little known reference in Thucydides suggests that this wasn't always the case.
The line in the chapter in Thucydides, excuse me, says, the Spartans were the first who
in their athletic exercises stripped naked and rubbed themselves all over with oil.
But this was not the ancient custom.
Athletes formally, says Thucydides, even when they were contending at Olympia wore loincloths,
a practice that lasted until quite lately and still prevails among barbarians, especially
those of Asia, where the combatants at boxing and wrestling matches wear loincloths.
So if Thucydides is to be believed, it was the Spartans who were looking for that slight
edge.
Perhaps they thought that by wrestling naked, it would be harder for their opponents to grab
hold of them.
A little bit like athletes today, always looking for that little edge in their equipment.
After their month at Olympia preparing for the Games, the athletes were then led to a
statue of Zeus that was housed inside the council chamber located on the southern side
of the sanctuary just beyond the Temple of Zeus.
This council chamber was the official meeting hall used by the Olympic officials and in
it there was a statue of Zeus.
Now this is not the very famous statue of Zeus that was made by Phidias, the great Athenian
sculptor, the statue that stood inside the Temple of Zeus and which was regarded as one
of the wonders of the ancient world.
The statue that I'm talking about, the one inside the council chamber, was a statue
that showed Zeus standing and holding a thunderbolt.
And apparently it was a very scary statue and it was designed to scare the athletes.
The reason for this was that it was a statue of Zeus Horkios, Zeus the god of oaths.
And Porcenius describes for us the ceremony that took place in the council chamber in
front of this statue.
Porcenius says, beside this image it is the custom for athletes, their fathers and their
brothers as well as their trainers, to swear an oath upon slices of boar's flesh that
in no way will they sin against the Olympic Games.
The athletes take this further oath also that for ten successive months they have strictly
followed the regulations for training.
An oath is also taken by those who examine the boys or the foals entering the horse
races that they will decide fairly and without taking bribes and that they will keep secret
what they learn about a candidate whether he is accepted or not.
So they took this matter seriously swearing an oath by the father of the gods that they
had trained for ten months beforehand and of course they've been observed for one month
before the Games to make sure that they really are good enough to qualify.
Well, the oaths have been sworn, the athletes have qualified, the judges have certified
them.
Let the Games begin.
And what Games they were, here's a list of the events that formed the core of the Ancient
Olympics.
First came the Stadeon, a sprint race.
Now Stadeon is the word that refers to a distance of 600 feet which is the distance of the race.
But it's also the Greek name for the venue for where the race was held and we still use
that word although we give it its Latin pronunciation of stadium.
So when I use the term stadium I'm referring to the place where the event occurred but
when I say Stadeon I'm referring to the distance of 600 feet and the race of that distance.
So the Stadeon was a race that was a sprint down the full length of the stadium, a distance
as I said of 600 feet or 192 metres.
So we should think of that race as being quite comparable to our own 200 metres sprint but
done straight rather than on a curved track.
Some ancient writers maintain that this was the original event of the Games and that for
the first few Olympiads in the course of the 8th century this was the only event.
There's really no way of checking this accurately.
There's still debate about it today.
We don't know for sure whether there were other events at the very beginning of the
Olympics but it is certainly true that many religious festivals in Greece that didn't
have athletic games formally attached to them did include a run, often a torch race,
that was held in honour of the God.
So it makes sense to think of the sprint as being the original event.
Next after the 200 metre sprint came an event called the Diaoulos which was a sprint to
the end of the stadium and back, a distance of 384 metres so again almost equivalent to
our own modern 400 metre race but as it was a sprint to the end and back and not around
a circular track the times would probably have been a little slower than they are today.
The next event was the Dali Kos which was a long distance race.
It comprised 12 laps of the stadium or 24 times the length of the stadium putting it
closest in distance to the modern 5000 metre race.
There was always, excuse me, there was also a pentathlon and that term means in fact
five contests, the pentamining five, the athlon, the word from which we get athletic meaning
a competition.
And so there were five events in this and the ancient pentathlon consisted of the long
jump, the 200 metre sprint, discus, javelin and wrestling.
Long jumpers began from a standing start but they were permitted to hold heavy stone weights
which they thrust out in front so as to propel their bodies forward.
We've got pictures of these on Vasa so we know exactly what it looked like.
The discus favoured balance as well as strength just as does the modern sport and again statues
that show ancient discus throwers make it clear that that event was very much like its modern
counterpart in terms of the way that the discus was held and the athlete twisted his body
before hurling the discus off.
And the javelin also was like the modern incarnation using a simple wooden javelin with a metal
point.
In addition to the pentathlon there were competitions in boxing, in pancrotion and in chariot races.
Boxing was even more brutal than the modern version of the sport.
Boxers wore leather strips that were called himantes bound around their hands but they
had no protective headgear and they fought until one man conceded defeat.
There were no weight divisions although there were age divisions, there was a separate competition
for boys probably up to about the age of 18 and then there was a men's division.
But since there were no weight divisions it was simply open to any man.
The sport clearly favoured the biggest men and the statues that we have of ancient boxes
from antiquity as well as the vases showing these boxes reveal men who today would clearly
fight as heavyweights, massive muscles, flattened noses, cauliflower ears.
In one famous statue that survives from the Hellenistic period we see a boxer who appears
to be sitting in the corner waiting to go out to fight and his face is bruised and battered
and he looks already exhausted from the many fights that he seems to have fought over the
course of his career.
One was another boxing style event, it's sometimes called all in fighting and it was a modified
form of boxing that did not use himantes, in other words it was bare knuckle fighting
and it also allowed kicking, in fact it allowed everything except gouging and biting so it
probably looked a little bit like tie boxing or kick boxing but with very large men involved.
Perhaps the most dramatic difference between the ancient sports and their modern equivalents
simply from the point of view now of athletic competition was in the equestrian events.
These were held in a hippodrome which of course was much larger than the sanctuary itself,
this horse track and so it was built outside of the sanctuary of Zeus located southeast
of the current sanctuary by the banks of the river so that sand could be used as the basic
surface for the horse racing track.
There were races for younger as well as fully grown horses, the word used in Greek for the
younger horses is often translated as foals but it probably should be taken to refer to
yearlings or perhaps even two year olds.
They raced over four and a half miles, there were also chariot races both for teams of
two horses and teams of four horses and there were also chariot races for teams of mules.
The chariot races were longer than the horse races lasting up to nine miles and they must
have been a truly amazing spectacle, these would have been some of the most astonishing
events to watch at the ancient Olympics because you often had as many as 40 chariots vying wildly
for position on the race track.
If these were four horse teams do the math you would have had 160 horses and their chariots
and drivers trying to get into position on the track.
We have an eyewitness description of the staggered start that was employed in order to try and
create some order out of this chaos. Here's the description, when you've passed beyond the stadium
which is where of course the running races would have been held at the point where the umpires
sit there is a place set apart for the horse races, here's the description then of the hippodrome.
The starting line is in the shape of the prow of a ship so you have to imagine it as a triangle
coming to an apex and its prow is turned towards the course. Each side of the starting line is
more than 400 feet in length and the sides are and in the sides excuse me are built stalls.
These stalls are assigned by lot to those who enter for the races. Before the chariots or horse
races is stretched a rope as a barrier, an altar sits as near as possible to the center of the prow
and a bronze eagle stands on the altar with its wings stretched out to the fullest extent.
The man appointed to start the race sets in motion the mechanism in the altar and when the eagle has
been made to jump upwards so as to become visible to the spectators a bronze dolphin attached to the
starting rope falls to the ground, the barriers drop in sequence. As the first team starts they
reach those at the second station and those barriers drop. The same thing happens to all the
horses in turn until at the ram of the prow in other words at the apex of the pyramid they're all
abreast. After this says Porcinius it is left to the charioteers to display their skill and the
horses their speed. Porcinius goes on to describe a spectacle in which many of the chariots crash
and the charioteers are wounded. It was incredibly dangerous and if you've ever seen the chariot
race filmed for the movie Ben Hur and I believe a man was actually killed in the filming of that
you might have some idea of just how chaotic these events would be. The great irony however
of the equestrian events is that for all the skill and the bravery shown by the horses and their
jockeys or the chariot drivers it was the owners who received all the glory. Horses and mules were
luxury items in ancient Greece and this was a rich man's event.
Alcibiades the brilliant and reckless Athenian leader at the end of the fifth century was famous
or perhaps infamous would be a better word for being the only man ever to send seven chariot
teams to the olympic games at once and winning in one race first second and third place. Only in
the equestrian events did the owner not the athlete win the victor's wreath. Euripides celebrated
Alcibiades success composing a hymn for him that said victory is noble to do more than any Greek
has ever done before to obtain in the great chariot race the first the second and the third place
with easy step advanced to fame to bid the herald three times claim the olive for one victor's
name. So Alcibiades won a great deal over a noun for this extraordinary olympic accomplishment
although he didn't actually do any of the racing himself. Still while most people were as crazy
about their athletic heroes in ancient times as we are today there were still some like Xanophon
who thought that the veneration went too far and he actually has a passage in which he says
if one should win if one should win a victory thanks to the swiftness of his feet or when
competing in the pentathlon there in the sanctuary of Zeus at Olympia or if one should gain the prize
in wrestling or painful boxing or in that fearful contest people call pancreation to his fellow
citizens he would be thought more glorious to look on than ever and he would gain from his city
all sorts of rights and yet says Xanophon a city would gain little joy if someone should win
in competition at Olympia for that victory would still not fill its storehouses so there were
voices in antiquity as today that thought that perhaps the veneration of the Olympic athlete
had gone a little bit too far in our next lecture we'll see why it was that the olympics retained
their stranglehold on the imagination of the Greeks we hope you've enjoyed these free lectures on
the ancient olympics see the list of professor McInerney's courses on this free lecture web page
or visit our website for more courses on the arts history religion science philosophy and literature
available on audio tape videotape cd and dvd it is our pleasure at the teaching company to provide
you with the joy of lifelong learning every day with great professors great courses and a lifetime
guarantee of your satisfaction visit our website at www teach12.com or call us at 1 800 teach12
thank you from all of us at the teaching company
