The title of this one is The Marketplace.
It's axiomatic that the central defining feature of cities has often been thought to
be the marketplace that cities were established the centers of trade and they
still either are vital or languishing partly in keeping with their
marketplace activities. It's a long history that went to try to get there and
I'm neither interested in doing it or capable really of doing the full scale of
it. I do want to focus however on a particular moment in the city as a
marketplace by taking London in the 18th century and looking at the work of
two very great artists the writer Daniel Defoe and the painter who is in some
strange way a kind of really brother figure to him William Hogarth. London in
the 18th century by the middle of the century it has a population of 750,000
people and it's the largest city in Europe at this point and this is more
than double the population of what it had a century earlier so within one
century it doubles its entire population and that's why one looks at art
and because that is such a thin statistic to tell you that and what the
artists help us do is translate those numbers into what it meant for a city to
double in a century. We know that by expressions such as the influx of the
migration of people from the country to the city well that's what Hogarth and
Defoe are working on. They're writing about the city when it really begins to
become the modern city when people from the country are flocking to it. Now we're
still a century before the industrial revolution it's not yet the city of
Dickens but financially London is already a center of great international
trade and a great power. There's a development of overseas trade. They're
large-scale investment firms that work with overseas companies. There's a rise
of a mercantile class. There's a very discernible rise of financiers and one
sort of pertinent to me at least emblem of this orientation towards business
marketplace as the heart of the city is that after the fire of 1666 when a great
deal of London burned the architect who rebuilt it Sir Christopher Wren built the
city around the Royal Stock Exchange as if this is very new this is a kind of
aggressively sected or moved instead of being around the court or around the
church it's around the Royal Stock Exchange as if to sort of signal that
this is the heart of the metropolis and there's a wonderful letter by the
French philosopher Voltaire when he more or less escaped from pursuit in France
and went to England and wrote a series of letters called the Leprosophilus of
Thécote. There's sometimes called the Leto Anglès about his experiences in
England which we find much to admire and much to be puzzled about. He's very
puzzled about Shakespeare. Shakespeare just doesn't write according to the
norms of neoclassical French literature and it blows his mind. But he has a letter
about the Royal Stock Exchange which is really quite interesting and quite
quite nice. He gives us a kind of portrait of people coming in and going out at
the exchange and what he does is he presents the Royal Stock Exchange as a
kind of epitome of modern civilization and modern culture. He talks about the
fact that people of different skins, different nationalities, different
backgrounds, people who in the course of history up until then would have been on
opposite sides of a war or all in some sense united through the agency of
business and international trade. He sees the Stock Exchange as a kind of
archetypically peaceful institution that trade with nations is precisely a
route towards international understanding, towards peace, towards what
you know we might have been called in a new world order. And of course he's
coming from an environment where there has been a great deal of persecution. He
knows something about the religious wars in France and so he I think in a very
prophetic way seizes on trade as a kind of civilizing activity as a way in
which people enter into peaceable and rewarding in all senses, rewarding
relationships with one another. London itself is a very special place for
non-Englishmen or for people in the country in England in the 18th century.
It's a place where for the first time goods are on display in a kind of
unprecedented fashion. Plate glass is introduced in the 18th century so that
shopkeepers can now expose their wares for all the people who walk up and down
the streets. Whether or not those people have money, whether or not those people
can afford these items. And I think I could be wrong here but I'd be willing to
hazard that this is the moment when something that as much by this today is
born which is shopping. I think that people have always bought and sold. We
know that but they haven't always shopped. Shopping means that window shopping,
looking, spending a day, checking out various kinds of items that you might or
might not purchase, looking at the displays of goods. Visitors who came to
London in the 18th century commented on the kind of spectacular dimension of
goods on display. There was a German visitor in 1775 who wrote a letter about
this and he talked about how strange the shops were. They looked like they were
built entirely out of glass and all of the lights that eliminated the silverware,
the engravings, the books, watches, the glass, the pewter, the ladies clothing in
primary. All of this kind of seductively, irresistibly on display so that the city
tends to become something of a materialist spectacle in the 18th century.
It's a great emphasis or a great experience that one has in walking in the streets of
things, things in some sense visible almost within reach, enhanced, illuminated,
beckoning in some way at this point. And one of the great plots in a lot of urban
fiction is the irresistible desire to steal those things. And if they're right
there, you either buy them or you take them. Now that's part of the kind of
atmosphere in London that I just wanted to thumbnail sketch for another part which
everybody's familiar with is the heightened intellectual activity in the
18th century in the sense that there are now really institutions where this is
located and one of those is a well-known coffee house. Coffee itself is part of
international trade that comes to London. Coffee is a rage. It's hard for us to
realize that there was a long time when people had never heard of coffee.
Well, the English discovered it with a vengeance. And the coffee houses are
known as places where intellectuals and artists, sometimes even bohemians, come
together and chit chat. They talk, they talk about the theater, they talk about
the events of the day. There's something astonishingly democratic and egalitarian
about it as well. That is to say people of different social order, we're talking
well before the French Revolution. People of very different rank and station,
nonetheless, and the guys are in the confines of the coffee house are able to
come together and exchange ideas. Now, if a population doubles over a period of a
century, then you've got lots of hungry, hustling people coming to the city to
make their fortune. And there's always interest riders. And one of the
activities that's going to be very focused on in a lot of urban art in the
18th century, whether it's fielding or pope or swift, not just to vote, is
the spectacle of people trying to pass, trying to present themselves as other
than what they are. People who don't have credentials, who are not well-born, who
want to look successful, want con artists in some sense. Affectation is one of the
great terms that English writers use in the period. They use it usually as a
term of satire to make fun of people who are trying to reach beyond their
station, put on airs, assume manners that are not proper to them. This, by the
way, is a staple item in traditional comedy. You can go back to the Greeks and
you'll see comedies about servants imitating their masters. But in the
traditional art, there's a fixity to it. It's a comic model. It will always be
found out. They will do a ludicrous job of it. That's what the comedy is about.
In the 18th century, it gets to be more complicated, because in some ways, it
gets to be more feasible that someone could imitate another, particularly in
an anonymous urban setting, that there is a possibility socially, and I think
existentially, that you could produce yourself as different from where you came
from, that you could get away with it, perhaps. And so the hump for
affectation, the desire to catch who is the pretender and who's genuine, sort of
runs like a filigree through 18th century British culture. And it makes the
city a place of really vivid operations, a lot of hustling, a lot of
wheeling and dealing, a lot of jockeying for position, and it makes a client, I
think, to look at those materials. And it's in that life that I want to talk
about my writer here, Defoe, who is a really very great novelist, and one who,
I think, continues to intrigue us today as much as he did earlier. He's often
credited to being the father of the English novel, and the novel that is
most famous of his, written, published in 1720, or about 1720, was an
international bestseller even then. It just was an absolute great success
throughout Europe, and it's a story that you all know of a man who was
shipwrecked on an island. What does he do on that island? He spends most of his
time making lists, training activities, colonizing his environment, coping with
material hardship, developing routines. Now, I put it that way because this
could have been an existential nightmare. I mean, a person shipwrecked, marooned
on an island, could be the subject of a text about loneliness, alienation,
misery, a way of going utterly berserk, the anxiety that could result from
those conditions, but not in the hands of Defoe. In the hands of Defoe, you're
marooned on an island, so why don't you start a factory? There's something you
can do. There's something you can do to convert this into something productive.
And the reason I say he intrigues us is that we don't know today whether to
call this wisdom or madness, that he gives us a portrait, really, of the work
ethos, of the kind of productivity, mania. And a lot of the kind of manias that
we still have, of writing lists, making charts, making designs, of the things
that we're going to achieve, of taking empty time, which is terrifying, and
domesticating it by transforming it into a potential list of achievements in
production. The novel I want to talk about, of course, is not Robinson Crusoe,
no matter what I could say about it. I can't convert it into an urban text.
It's Miles Landers, Miles Landers, which I think is as great. And that's the
story of an orphan girl who comes from the country to London. She's part of that
doubling of the population at the end of the 17th century, even though it's
written in the 1720s, and how she makes good on a career of feeding and of
marrying. Marrying becomes a career for her and how she copes with the adverse
conditions of London. She makes good on this career. She does a stent at New
Gate, at the prison, and she's transported as a felon to the new world. But
nonetheless, she ends up rich, happy, married, and back in England at the end.
And to throw, this is a worrisome way of presenting. I mean, after all, the novel
at this time is a very suspicious genre. It's not very, it's not like
epic. It's not like tragedy. It's not very serious. So writers of novels in the
18th century always outdid their novels with pious prefaces, explaining that
you may think this is frivolous, but what you've really got here is a moral
tale. It's a cautionary thing. It's a way of somehow lessening and serving a
didactic purpose. So the novel is written in the first person.
Miles tells her own story. In fact, interviewed prisoners at New Gate,
women who had had careers like Miles. Many people think that the phone never
even wrote the book, that the photo just simply put down and wrote. He is the
first journalist really in modern modern times. That the phone writes the book in
the first person, but he gives his own preface. Miles speaks, but in the
preface, he explains, this is really a more serious book than it looks like.
And it is true. He says, I'm obliged to paint all of these things advice. But
don't forget, there is a stern moral lesson here to be learned. It's sort of, I
think, double game that most ancient writers are doing. That the phone
himself was a real hustler. He was an entrepreneur. He went bankrupt. He was a
spy. He was one of the great journalists. He was a historian. He read
upniversely. He wrote pamphlets on every conceivable topic from insurance to
dueling to the works. He was always sort of on the run on the land. He hit out
in the latter part of his life because he was the police were on the lookout
for him. There's something incredibly vigorous and unstoppable about this man.
And because he's such an entrepreneur, I find it hard to read that book and not
think that his heart, at least morally, isn't the wrong place. He is supposed
to be coming down against Miles. He cannot resist her. She is a portrait
really of the working class of the hustler of getting ahead. And there's a
play of animal vitality, animal spirits, natural cunning, liveness and
intelligence in that book that is simply irresistible. Even though it's
punctuated periodically with rather hard to believe confessions of guilt,
remorse. This is the wrong way to live, et cetera. And in that light, the reason
I like this text is it illustrates the famous thesis that's been put forth
about Protestantism, the Protestant work ethic and capitalism, the rise of
capitalism. People have made that conjunction before, as far as a textbook
example for it. And he shows us how problematic it is, how problematic it
is to fatten your purse and save your soul at the same time. Now, I think
Miles Landers is a great city text because it depends entirely on the
possibilities of freedom that London offers her. She arrives as orphaned
without papers, without any claims to legitimacy or station. So what avenues
are open to her? Well, they tell her as a child, you could be a seamstress at
best, probably a servant girl. Well, again, the pluckiness of this text is
that that's not remotely sufficient for her. She doesn't want that. She says
early on in the book, what I wanted to be was a gentle woman. And they all laugh.
And of course, the book's been approved all of them wrong in her right. She
says that by gentle woman, they thought I met some woman with with grand, you
know, finery and a great house. This is all I really meant was being
independent, not having to sign up for work for others to be an independent
person. And I'm going to try to argue that she succeeds in that. She lives by
her wits. She is a successful professional. It's a successful career in
crime, but it's a successful career. She lives by her wits by feeding in
disguise as part of what she does. And I want to stress disguise as a kind of
major feature. You remember deadless who transforms pacify into a cow himself
into a bird disguise the people who are trying to pass in the 18th century to
look like what they're not. Miles Landers is a splendid exemplar of the
disguise ethos. If there's something almost dizzying and vertiginous about
the way she invents herself, she feels dressed up in countless different
ways. Sometimes she feels as a man and really it's today we would be reading
that today would say this is about crossdressing. We would look underneath
that and say what kinds of appetites and energies are being talked about here in
this text. The phone has an extraordinary spectrum. Well, the city because it's
anonymous, you recall that was my first characteristic of the city and a city art
anonymity because no one really knows you. You were free to go about sort of
like a chameleon. And that's how she does. And she also, of course, manages with
her husband along so much similar lines. She doesn't marry men dressed as women,
but she presents herself totally differently to each of the men that she
meets. Now that's part of the London dimension of the story. Another part has
to do with what I said about the invention of the plate glass window and of
the goods that are on display. This is the most materialist novel that I think
I've ever read. It's a novel that is utterly focused, unswervingly focused on
things. It's a novel that has more numbers in it than any novel you've ever
read. It has numbers of pounds. It has numbers of yards of lace. It has, it
has, it's kind of like a, it looks really like an almanac in some ways. And it is
fixated on plate, crystal, lace, clothing, all the things that are now visible in
the London streets and that Maul makes it her purpose to steal. This has gotten
to foe in a great deal of trouble with moral critics. Maul Flanders goes
through that life in London utterly concentrating on money and material
success. When she has children, she just drops them. They disappear. They never
reappear, reappear on the tax except for one who comes up at the end. That her
relationships with men, she's married six times. She sleeps with numerous other
people out of sight, out of mind. And this is considered unforgettable by
critics to the big heart. They say, well, wait a minute. This woman, this character
is utterly callous. Where is the moral life? Where's the introspective life?
Where's the life of consciousness? Life is nothing but a shopping risk for this
woman. Life is nothing but a bank account. You're either in the black or you're in
the red. Whereas in fact, morally, and what art should be showing is that life
is more complex than that. Now, I want to link that to urban theory as well.
There's a critic, a German critic, Georg Simmel, very influential theorist of
the city, sociologist, philosopher, and he's influenced a lot of urban
thinking in the 20th century. He wrote a very important, widely reprinted,
anthologized essay called The Metropolis and Mental Life. And he argues that the
central role of money is absolutely constitutive of city life. And that
money is the great leveler. That money defines, if you think about it, he wrote
a whole book about money called The Philosophy of Money. He really thought
about this. Money defines goods and people exclusively in terms of how
much. I'm going to quote Simmel. Money, with its colorlessness and indifference,
becomes the common denominator of values. Irreparably, it hollows out the core of
things, their individuality, their specific value, and their incomparability.
All things is a very beautiful metaphor. All things float with equal specific
gravity in the constantly moving stream of money. That money is sort of
egalitarian. It only asks what things are worth. Of course, we think that's
only one facet of the things that we deal with. Well, it's as if Maul Flanders
lives out this ethos. Simmel really contextualizes this. He says that
cities are places where we do not have primary relations with people, unlike in
villages. In the village, when you go to buy a loaf of bread, you know the name
of the person you're buying it from. They know who you are. You know their
parents. They know yours. You know their children, et cetera. In the city, you
have incessant dealings with people. Do you know the name of your tax account
problem? You might because it's right up there, but you probably don't know a
lot about his background. Do you know the name of your grocer? Do you have a
grocer? People run in and out of various kinds of stores. In other words, this
is written early, too. It's changing even more now. Simmel is already pointing
to the fact that impersonality, that secondary relations, functional
relations, define the character of our interactions in the city. That's why
Maul Flanders is so intriguing. It's as if almost 200 years earlier, the
novelist got there first and said, I will write the story of how people
interact in the city. Now, things are not merely shown in their thing material
status. They are reduced to that as well, I think. So that the silver and the
lace that Maul Flanders steals is only worth so much by the pound or the
yard. And in this book, houses burn down. People rush out with their heirlooms.
They're trying to save what they can. They're most precious things. She, she's
smart. She always happens to be right on the spot. She says, I knew of this. I
was called to come and help. I'll set these aside for you. And she takes these
precious things off people's hands and back to her stash. Being robbed is a
great urban phenomenon. I won't ask how many people in this room have
experienced it. I have. And one of the things that I want to mark here, because
it's related to the argument that I'm trying to make, is that the things that
people rush out of burning houses with are things that are not necessarily
valuable in terms of money, but they are terribly valuable sentimentally,
emotionally. They are the physical emblems of our lives or the pictures of
our children. They're the things that show that we have had a life. Their
jewelry that we may have received from our parents if they're death or
something. They are not replaceable. One of the great ironies of this book is
that Maul, her whole career is predicated on only seeing the thinness of
things, only the monetary value of it. Never the time-drenched, emotionally
drenched nature of material things as they acquire a kind of aura in our own
private lives. That, as I said, is also a formula for her success in the book.
She lives exclusively in the here and now, and the city is the appropriate
stage where she applies her trade. She moves successfully with consummate
ease through men and through accomplices because she moves sequentially the way
most of us do. So, lover B cannot know that she is carrying lover A's child as
long as she's not yet showing it. And, lover C appears when B is dead, no
reason to tell him, he can't see that. She is enjoying a kind of prodigious
freedom in this book, which is that your past does not show. Nor does your
inside life show. Just the things that the critic said she's short on. Where's
that consciousness? Whatever it is, consciousness doesn't show. No one knows
our motives when we smile to people, when we despise, etc. I mean, that's the
reason we can get away with that, is it's not on show, inner motive. And this
book really, it seems to me, plums this because her freedom is this capacity not
to be traced, not to be tracked, not to be held accountable, and not to be
tracked. And I think it's an urban freedom. I don't think it's just a
foe's wild game. The people are scandalously free walking city streets,
sitting in city parks, and we know of stores where people are taking advantage
of that. It's part of the freedom that city streets offer, it seems to me. In
Miles Landers, it's really a case of self-creation. She calls herself the
greatest artist of my time, and she goes on to feed some great cunning, great
urban intelligence, it seems to me. She lives by her wits, she's got nimble
fingers, she knows how to pick pockets, she knows how to look at a situation and
know where the soft touch is, where the quick move is. She happens to be there
when the fire is going on. In Defoe's hands, she gets away with that. And
that's why I want to contrast her as well as compare her with the figure of
Hogarth, whose slides, or work I'd like to look at now. Hogarth tells largely the
same story, a story of urban migration, of the flow to the city, of the kinds of
shenanigans that are possible in London. But his view on these matters is much
more conservative, much more satirical, much more punitive. Hogarth is like Defoe
in the sense that he's a man, really, a self-invented artist. He doesn't fit with
any of the accepted painterly styles of the period. If you compare him to
Rubens and Van Dyke, who are doing sort of mythological motifs and sublime
painting, he doesn't fit with that. He's not like the French, the Fragonard-Boucher
sort of material. He is writing about the modern setting, and he wants to write
about it as history painting. He had a kind of uncanny sense that the light he
was living, the city around him, was making history. He didn't have to look
back into the past and talk about the gods and goddesses or about the recent
wars. It was urban life itself. And as I said, he's more conservative than Defoe,
so he's not going to give us a success story. He's going to give us, instead,
cautionary fables of people who try to pass, try to overreach, try to take
advantage of their city freedoms and fail. His husters are always exposed, but
they never go amok alone. Invariably, we see in his work the whole
sort of entourage of people that the city produces who pander to this, who
offer the services in sex, in religion even, in law, to bail out his people, to
abet the needs of his people. And there's a strange pathos in a lot of his work that
despite his conservative feeling that you are what you were born, you were not
supposed to leap over the boundaries of socialization, there's a kind of
precariousness. Many of his paintings have things falling from tables, things
that are standing at a tilt. You really get a visceral sense when you look at his
work, rigs that are falling off, that nothing is quite stable. It's a kind of
existential availability, kind of frightened look in the eyes of some of
his figures that we'll see. I want to look at two sequences of paintings. The
first was called, they were both incredibly popular because he produced them
as paintings and then made engravings of them. This is really urban art, art that
should be distributed all over the city. You didn't have to go to museums or to
private patrons who had the great painting. These were inexpensive engravings
that everyone could purchase. The first one is called the Harlett's Progress,
which is really a retelling of the Miles Clander story. And it's about a woman
who comes to London, who gets in with the wrong people, who goes progressively
astray, who ends up pretty bad. What we've got in this is, Miles Hackabout is her
name. She arrives in London and she meets this woman, who is a recognizable figure
for deposed contemporaries, and who is a bard. And what we've got in this is, it's
hard to see in this image, but we've got her father, this person who's busy
looking the wrong way, and we've got this man who is coming to Great Harry
standing under a building with some sort of cross lines, which indicates that
it's a tavern. And he is a very notorious figure of the times. His name is
Sir Francis Charteris, and he was called the Rape Master of the Kingdom. He is a
man who is known for taking young girls from the country and turning them into
prostitutes with the lure of easy money. He was such a hated figure that after he
died, people actually threw garbage and dead dogs into his grave. That's how much
we like him. And we see here in this image, really a story of urban migration
that we're not going to get, I think, in urban history. It's what the path of
painter sees it, and it's going to be a progressive story. So the next one I'm
giving you is further down the sequence. This is the harlot's death. What has
happened in between is that we have seen her as a kept woman. We have seen her
also in lodgings in Drury Lane, where her boyfriend is none other than Mack
Heap, of Freepinny Opera fame. And then we see her in prisons in Bridewell, and
then this is the fifth sequence, where we see her dying. We see the doctors who
are arguing with each other about which kind of medicine is the right kind. We
see her, she's dying of syphilis, by the way, of disease that she's caught while
plying her trade. She's, meanwhile, it's hard to see in this picture, but she's had
a son who's sitting there with a top and doesn't know what's going on. Now we've
got, no he doesn't have the top of this one, I can't have to say it either. I wanted
to show you this one because the next one is the last one, and it is the funeral
of the harlot. We can't see her anymore, she's inside the coffin, but what Hogarth
shows us, you can see why this is a cautionary fable, what he shows us is the
kind of incessant comedy that is going on. Death really stops nothing in this. That
we see the son now sitting underneath the coffin, sort of utterly lost, not really
aware of what's going on. And we have this rather glazed-eyed parson on the left of
this canvas who is sitting there, and it's hard to see in this light, but he's got
his hand where you can't see it because the woman is covering it with her hat, but
he's got his hand on her thigh, and she's covering up that. And then on the other side
of it, we have the man who is sort of ogling and feeling up the woman as she picks
his pocket. And it's this kind of parade, this kind of social parade that Hogarth
wants to show. These are six slides that I've shown you, six engravings. We don't
ordinarily think of painting as sequential. Painting is a one-time thing,
painting is a spatial art, but Hogarth has done it, it's very, very special, and
done this under the influence of Bunyan and Pilgrim's progress, he called it the
harlot's progress, is that he has wanted to show a story over time. He's wanted to
show the unfolding of a life. He's wanted really to convert city experience into a
narrative. He's wanted to show what can happen to you, what must happen to you if
you run astray in the city. And it's very rare for a pictorial artist to even
undertake something like that. And I want to give you another sequence that is
called the rake's progress. This is because your term rakewell is his name. He has
just inherited money from his rich, scrooge-like father. So money is pouring
out everywhere here. They're finding money that's been sewed up in the wall.
They're finding all kinds of places where this miser has kept it. And what is the
first thing that a man who has just inherited money do? He brings in the
tailor. He wants to be dressed for success. So the tailor is there, fitting
out clothes. Meanwhile, he's handing out money to the mother of the woman whom he
has impregnated. She's crying there on the side of the picture. This too is what
he can now do since he has come into funds. He has those kinds of eyes that
I'm talking about that are a little bit available. We don't quite know what this
man could be. He's crying on these clothes to become somebody else in some
ways. And this sequence is really about a certain kind of psychic mobility. Let's
go to the next one. This is the livet, the rising of the rake. And we see him
surrounded by all the people who are going to pander or cater to his needs,
the dancing master, the fencing master, etc., the harling man of arms. Here's the
rake in Drury Lane at Rose Tavern. It's a recognized spot in London. He's having a
big time. He's totally smashed, so he can't tell the way they're picking his
pocket. We have the woman spitting at another woman across the table, and we
have the woman in the front of this table who is taking her clothes off, and
there's a big platter there. She is going to do a very special kind of dance. They
called her a posture woman. She's going to squat naked and spin around on that
platter as a kind of 18th century striptease. It's a very familiar form of
activity in places like Drury Lane, the Rose Tavern. This is obviously part of
the rake's undoing of the kinds of vices that the city holds to him. This is the
rake being stopped in a recognizable London intersection for payment of
debt and being bailed out, again, by the young woman. Sarah Young is her name,
who's a seamstress. We now know that because she's dropping her bag with all
of her sewing articles in it, she's going to pay his debts. He exploits her in
every way he can, and in the painting version of this, we see how exquisitely
dressed up he is in all of his finery in this scene. I'm skipping over a few. The
rake also gets married to some very wealthy old, old woman because he's
losing his funds. We see the rake losing his money in gambling, and here's
the rake in prison. He doesn't look too happy there, and all of his schemes have
come to naught. This is part of the punitive fable that Hogarth has in
mind, and Sarah Young also visits him there. She wants to help comfort him,
give him solace of some sort, and this is a place that has people with crazy
schemes about how to save the world, but I'll save that for the last one, which is
one of my favorites, and it's a poor image that we've got. This is the rake
in Bedlam. Bedlam is, it's called Bedlam. They shortened it to Bedlam. It's the, not
the prison now, but the insane asylum, and that's where he has ended up, and this is
really a kind of surrealist picture. You can't miss the fact that the rake is
lying in a very recognizable posture. It's the posture of a Pieta of Christ coming
down from the cross. He is naked this time, and this painting is larded with mad
figures, figures who have tried to solve the problems of the world. It's an
astrologer, it's a mad tailor, it's a crazy musician. I think that all of Peter
Wyce's famous play, Marat Sad, comes out of this painting, and the reason I say
that is, and this is particularly wonderful in the painting rather than the
engraving, is that in the middle of this piece are two women dressed up in
elegant, beautiful city clothes, and they are doing what well-to-do Londoners did
in the mid-18th century, which is when you had some time on your hands, why not
go and take a look at the loonies? Go out to Bedlam and have some fun, and it's
wear-elegant clothing that is so beautifully contrasted with his naked
condition. You've come completely full circle on dressed for success, the way
that this sequence started. It's a kind of splendid existential critique of the
whole way of life that consists of material belongings, clothes that are
fine, etc. Now, that sequence finishes what I wanted to say about 18th century
London. When you move beyond the 18th century, a lot of things happen, of
course. One of them is the French Revolution, another one is the Industrial
Revolution, and by the time you get into Dickens and Balzac, whom I will talk
about in the next lecture, you get a much different critique, a harsher critique
even, of the marketplace London. And by the time you get to the 20th century with
texts like Zola, or Dreiser's Sister Carrie, or Alfred Dublin's Berlin
Alexanderplatz, you get really a picture of the city as a huge, brutal
sort of industrial machine that is systematically grinding up individuals.
Toulouse-Lautrec does a lot of paintings about an area that all of you know about,
Montmartre in Paris, and in particular, some of his most famous paintings are at
the Moulin Rouge, which is a kind of cabaret, a kind of concert hall, a
dancing hall. It's one of the first great pleasure spots. And it's really the
beginnings of international tourism. Americans, Germans, people went to Paris
then in the 1890s to go to the Moulin Rouge and to see the can can and to see
the spectacular things that happened there. And it has a wonderful cast of
characters. It has this woman, La Goulure, who has one of his very prominent
dancing figures. She's the one who's on the posters of the Moulin Rouge with
this sort of spidery rubbery man who was called Valentin Ledezo, so they're
Valentin the Man Without Bones. And in his best paintings of the Moulin Rouge,
we see really a society of keepers and of kept. We see the kind of marketplace
when human beings have become the ingredients of it rather than the
people who use it, and in particular, a place of kept women. And you probably
all know that Lautrec lived many of his years in a bravo. He lived in a bravo
and got to know the prostitutes in a very, very domestic sense. They trusted
him. He was around all the time, and we have absolutely splendid paintings that
he does of women asleep, women asleep in the same bed, and it's not, I think,
lesbian. It's simply that sleeping with a woman is at least safe because you
spend the rest of your day working with men. There's a sense here of being a
24-hour-a-day prostitute. One of his great paintings that I had hoped to show
you is a painting called Salon de Rue des Moulins, done in 1895, and it is
R the Whorehouse, a very elegant, well-known whorehouse, and it's a big
shock when he painted it. And what he shows us in that is the ennui, the
routine, the fatigue, and the sisterhood of these women in this place. It's a
kind of extraordinary, moral painting that breathes with a kind of
humanism and a kind of compassion and tenderness that I think shed an
interesting light on what the great pleasure haunts are really like if you
live there. No one's having fun anymore. These are exhausted people working for a
living with their bodies, and I think he gives a suspended entry into that. The
last figure whom I'd mentioned as a kind of 20th-century version of Marketplace
Cities is the greatest Marxist dramatist of the century, and that's
Brecht. I mentioned MacHeath in one of the Hogarth paintings. Brecht's Three
Penny Opera is based on an 18th-century text, Beggar's Opera, and Brecht wrote a
play, a really splendid play, called The Jungle of Cities, and he thought he was
inventing that term, and I think he did, in the early 1920s. And it's his version of
the Marketplace City that I want to close this lecture with. This is a play that's
an absurdist play. It's not yet, Brecht hasn't discovered Marx yet, so he doesn't
have a kind of systematic economic theory yet. But he does have a great sense of
Chicago. Europe was fascinated with Chicago in the 20th century. Chicago became
known as a kind of American miracle. Out on the plains where there was nothing, at
the edge of the water, human beings built a city of skyscrapers, Louis Sullivan
being the great skyscraper designer. And there's a myth of what the Germans
called the Gross Stop, the big city myth that runs through a great deal of German
literature in the 20s. And so Chicago is the setting for this. Brecht had never
said, what's Chicago? It's the myth of Chicago that he's interested in. The
opening of this play is in a lending library in Chicago. And it goes like
this. This man, Garga, is behind the counter. He's selling the book. Two people
come in, Slink and Skinny. Skinny. If we read that sound right, this is a lending
library, correct? Well, lend us a book, Garga. What kind of book, sir? Skinny, a
big fat one. Garga, for yourself, sir? Skinny, who looks at Slink every time he
speaks. No, it's not for me, for this gentleman here. Garga, your name, sir?
Skinny. Slink, lumber dealer, number six, Mulberry Street. Garga writes down the
name. Five cents a book for a week. You take your choice, sir. Skinny, no. We
want you to pick one for us, Garga. That's a crime story. It isn't a good
book. That one there is better. It's a travel book. Skinny. So you're saying
it's a bad book, just like that? Slink now steps forward. Is that an opinion of
yours? I'd like to buy it off you. Would ten dollars be enough? Garga, you can
have it for free, sir. Slink. Does that mean you're changing your opinion to say
that it is a good book, after all? Garga, no, sir. Skinny, you could buy
yourself some clean linen for that money. Garga, I'm only here to wrap up
the books people take out. That's all. Skinny, it isn't good for business,
you know. Garga, now, what do you want of me? I don't know you. I never saw
you before. Slink, I'm offering you 40 bucks for your opinion on this book. I
don't know the book. It could be any damn book. Garga, I'll set you the
opinions of Mr. V. Jensen and Mr. Arthur Rambeau, but I won't set you my own
opinion. Slink, your opinion is immaterial, except that I want to buy it. Garga,
I think I can afford having and keeping my own opinion. Skinny, you're the son of
a transatlantic millionaire? I'll stop with it there. That, I think, tells us
something about the way Brooke is going to see buying and selling, how we are on
the block, at the marketplace, commoditized, trading things that we think
are out there, and it turns out, all too soon, that it's inside of us what's for
sale, and we don't know if we can really afford to let go of it.
