Lecture 4 The Family Plot or Municipal Bonds
Alright, the topic that I want to work with this time, I'm calling the family plot.
And the other title I'm giving it is a fairly stupid joke of mine.
Municipal Bonds, which we know obviously in one form, and I'm obviously suggesting something else about them.
Municipal Bonds as the bonds between people and cities.
I want to talk about plot, what a plot is, what a plot means.
Frank Kermode once wrote in the book that the simplest plot that we know of is the noise that the clock makes, tick-tock.
And he said that that's probably the most elemental organization that sounds into a beginning and an ending that we could imagine.
And if you think about it, time doesn't really have beginnings and endings.
Just like human, we don't choose our beginning and we don't choose our exit, except in some cases.
That the experience of life is that we are always in the middle, in the midst, in the murk.
And one of the activities of human intelligence is to mark out beginnings, middles and endings.
We know this is true in literature.
Aristotle used this as one of the characteristics of tragedy in the poetics where he said that that is the form of tragedy.
It has this kind of clear, coherent sequence.
But I think in our living experience it's much harder to assign those beginnings and middles and endings in human relationships and marriages and things like that.
We're not always sure when endings are beginnings and things like that.
So that it's something of a human fiction to delineate things in that sort, in that way.
Causality is frequently something that we assign back to the fact.
We say this happened, that happened, therefore a caused b.
Linkage relating discrete parts.
One of the books that I've written is called The Fiction of Relationship. It's also a pun.
It's that relationships themselves are fictions, that we see discrete things, discrete people in the world.
And the human adventure is to posit connections.
It's a moral adventure, it's an emotional adventure, it's a sexual adventure.
That the connection of things, making bonds, etc., is operative on every level of human life.
And it is almost always a made thing instead of just a given thing.
So municipal bonds, not with the city issues and you buy from your stockbroker,
but the living bonds that connect people in the city.
And to see those bonds is one of the major objectives of a great deal of city art.
Bonds, of course, quickly can turn into bondage. You all know that.
And so we're back to the notions of alienation and isolation and anonymity as well.
One can find oneself paired instead of choosing to be paired.
So it can be token on the one hand a loss of freedom, a loss of autonomy, a loss of maneuvering room
to find that you were connected in ways that you hadn't wanted.
And it can be a very hard lesson to learn.
And I think it's a particularly hard lesson in this culture with the American ethos of unbridled individualism.
That the American culture seems to have spawned the notion of a kind of atomic individual.
I feel this way about many of my students, that they feel like their life is a projectile,
it is like a missile aimed out at the world.
And that the world is largely a kind of setting to make that trajectory successful.
There's a sense in which, and after all, our own experience, our senses tell us this.
We are one person, one body, we have contours, we have an end to ourselves.
We know we are individuals.
I mean, it's not just a construct, it's not just a guess for individuals.
But I think that American individuals are particularly stubborn about facing the world that way
and being frequently a bit resistant about the notion that there's a collective world out there.
And that sort of has a moral going to it.
Let me put it in a different way.
Resistant to the idea that there's an ecology out there, that there is a global setting,
has nothing to do with generosity being a nice person because you know that there's a larger system.
It's really a recognition that maybe the world comes as an ecosystem and that the individual is only a part.
Even though with your eyes you see that you are by yourself and you go through life
and you know that you're lonely, you know that you are an individual, nobody can tell you that's not true.
What's hard to understand is the ways that it must be.
The ways that you might be part of something larger.
I'm going to read you what I think is a very strong piece of writing.
It comes from the 19th century, from the mid-century, written by Thomas Carlyle.
It goes like this.
One of Dr. Allison's scotch facts struck us much.
A poor Irish widow, her husband having died in one of the lanes of Edinburgh,
went forth with her three children, bare of all resource, to solicit help from the charitable establishments of the city.
At this charitable establishment, invented that, she was refused, referred from one to the other, helped by none,
till she had exhausted them all, till her strength and heart failed her.
She sank down in typhus fever, died, and infected her lane with fever,
so that 17 other persons died of fever there in consequence.
The humane physician asked thereupon, as with a heart too full for speaking,
would it not have been economy to help this poor widow?
She took typhus fever and killed 17 of you.
Very curious.
The forlorn Irish widow applies to her fellow creatures as if saying,
behold, I am sinking, bear of help, ye must help me, I am your sister,
bone of your bone, one God made us, ye must help me.
And they answer, no, impossible.
No art, no sister of ours, but she proved her sister to me.
Her type of fever, her type of fever, killed them.
They actually were her brothers, though denying it, had man ever to go lower for a proof.
Filled with moral indignation, but it's also haunting story about connectedness.
Actually, I told you that plague itself frequently reappears in city art.
That plague is a kind of language for saying you can't see it, or you're connected.
Epidemiologists know all about this. These are things that break out in cities.
This is it. So your eyes and ears, you're all by yourself, you're an atomic individual,
but you are linked in so many ways, virally, bacterially, in terms of the ways that sound,
so many ways that make us somehow porous, permeable, penetrable, part of one another,
often in ways that we don't see, that we don't expect, and that are often very, very frightening.
I said it can be a terrible loss of freedom, loss of autonomy, loss of maneuvering room.
City art and city life, I think, initiate people into that sense of ecosystem of collective thinking.
It records very frequently the discovery of this connectedness.
It shows that our seeming separateness, our seeming integrity, intactness, may be illusory.
One genre that frequently deals with the unsuspected tie and links between people is the detective story,
that the story of a hidden crime, and then what makes it happen, the story, what makes it written, I think,
of the community need to have the crime solved.
Now, we can think of detective stories as stories of highly skilled analysts,
and that's how the genre starts.
From Sherlock Holmes to F.Q. Poirot, the detective is a figure of great rational faculties,
a man who takes what, to us, looked like details, and he turns them into clues,
a tremendous shift from a detail to a clue, but the tale is a random detail.
We don't know what it's part of.
The clue says it fits into a pattern.
There is a plot here that the detective is a person for whom the environment becomes transparent, readable, legible,
and I think the detective novel is a kind of triumph of rationality.
In that sense, it posits motivated crimes, that's what the genre always tells us,
a world that may be evil, but is at least coherent.
And I think one reason that people read detective stories and watch detective films on television and in movies
is because of that victory of reason that is celebrated.
It's reassuring to think that murder and mayhem are susceptible to reason,
and it indirectly flatters our own powers of mind, particularly as one reads many detective stories.
We try to anticipate the detective to solve the crime on our own.
That's one of the great challenges of reading detective fiction.
But there are other, less cerebral, more ecological reasons,
ecological in the sense that the city is a collective for reading detective fiction.
It speaks to something, I think, deep inside of us.
I don't think that detective fiction could ever really be popular in a genuinely rural community,
even though sometimes detective stories are by villagers.
I don't think villagers would want to read it.
The detective story is profoundly urban because it gives a satisfying form to some of the deepest fears of urban life,
the basic one that we do not know the other person.
That the person whom we encounter could be a killer or a rapist,
that the mystery on the streets could destroy us, that we do not control the terrain.
Poe wrote stories about the murders of the Rue Morgue,
or we think about the kind of collective hysteria at the time of Jack the Ripper.
People didn't go out in that whole part of London because anybody might be a candidate for this monster.
And again, the reason that these stories please us, that they soothe us,
is because the convention is that the monster will be found out, the criminal will be found out,
put away, incarcerated, removed from the community, and that is cathartic for us.
That gives us an image of solvable problems, of the evil somehow being recognizable and then erratical.
And we all know that it's not that easy at all.
That I think of our 20th century experiences with Boston Stranger.
I can still remember all of that.
I can remember in particular when I was in graduate school, in Cambridge during that time,
and my wife had a job where she was out during the evenings at the very time they were looking for the Stranger.
And it was harrowing.
You felt something of the danger of being in a city, the kind of vulnerability and liability of walking those streets.
But more recently, the son of Sam, the crazed snipers and gunmen who seem now almost routinely to go into McDonald's or post offices and shoot up people.
You could be at the wrong place in the wrong time.
Or you could have neighbors that you think you know, and your neighbor could be this guy from Milwaukee, it was Jeffrey Dahmer.
He carbs up his friends.
This all rests on the kind of mystery of urban life that ultimately we don't know much about.
The people who live next to us, whom we see, whom we encounter.
And I think that there is a kind of venomous ambience to city life in that sense.
It's a kind of rain of terror that is absolutely scripted.
That is to say, we could imagine in all the gory details how we're going to be violated.
To me, it is a script that sits right under the consciousness of most city dwellers.
It's what informs what they tell their children, when they tell them not to go out at night, not to walk certain kinds of streets.
It's what informs our puny code of being street smart.
What to do when we think we're going to be mugged.
How to look when we exit a bank.
All of these, these are facts of urban life.
All of these I think have to do with scenarios that are utterly literary, that are already totally worked out of what it could be like.
How we could be undone.
And of course, in arenas that are unpoliceable, such as the human mind,
we replay these in our sleep, in our dreams, and in our nightmares.
That's why I think again, the data of art is so special.
The statistics for the number of rapes and muggings is nothing in comparison to the fears that people have of it.
To the people who may never have actually been molested,
but who've gone through their whole lives in some sense threatened, or at worst since it's crippled by it.
The people who do not exit their houses, they will never figure on charts.
And yet they are living internally, experientially, with these, this drama, this kind of scenario.
This is what the connectedness of cities bodes in its most threatening sense.
A fear of the kind of terrible liability of exposure.
That the city is a place of strangers.
That, in its best sense, is great, exciting, it's tonic, it's bracing.
And in its worst sense, it's connected to all the things I've just been talking about.
The city is an epistemological nightmare. We don't know anyone.
The example of Moll Flanders that I just talked about, let's play with that for a minute.
Moll goes through the city marrying and stealing, and that we are able to smile at.
We wouldn't if we were robbed, probably, or if we had been one of her husbands.
But nonetheless, that's not ultimately threatening. Let's reimagine Moll Flanders as a killer.
As someone who uses that same intelligence, that same wit, to recast herself.
Someone who takes the same advantage of her urban freedoms and does people in.
To altogether more gruesome story.
The folk could not have imagined, I think, writing that story.
But our vulnerability increases.
If you think about what we hear on the radio routinely when we turn on the city radio.
It's the countless numbers of people at the wrong place at the wrong time.
I live in a city that's pretty much a mafia city, and a lot of the killings there are...
You know that they're coherent, they're planned.
But what happens in the big cities, it seems to me, is that people simply walk into stray bullets.
Children are looking at windows.
Baby carriages are being taken across the street.
And these people are done in.
Just because by accident, there's been a way that no one could have predicted,
who could be street smart enough for all of this, they walk into murder or into death.
Almost at random.
As if there was a kind of ambulatory death that stalks the city streets.
And it seems totally routineized.
It's the facts that are given every 30 minutes on the news when they report it.
But of course it's never routineized if it happens to you or if it happens to someone that you love.
So the cardinal rule from that point of view in the city is a reign of terror in which no one is safe.
And there can be no bulletproof armor.
That's why Carlisle's story that I read to you about Types of Sivir and Edinburgh,
is a kind of really resonant story.
It's not people shooting others.
But it's walking into death when you least anticipate it.
You're not our sister and she proves it by infecting you.
Fever and plague are virtually classic Greek indices of kinship and of connectedness.
Plague is the sickness that joins us that wipes out just as it proves community.
That's how it proves it.
It proves that we are together because our liability is such that because we are together, it will kill me.
Infection is an invisible linkage between you and me.
Aristotle talked about pity and terror as the prime ingredients of Greek tragedy.
Pity and terror as the ingredients of catharsis.
What the audience feels when it responds to the events on the stage.
And we think of one of probably the archetypal Greek tragedy,
Oedipus the King.
And we think of what the audience felt when Oedipus, who in fact is the first, I think,
the first detective in literature, Oedipus unravels a crime.
He is told that it's a city crime.
Thebes is dying of plague.
You've got to solve this crime.
There's a hidden transgression.
And like a sleuth, he works his way backwards to his own origins and discovers bondage.
He discovers connectedness.
He discovers that the man that he killed in anger at a crossroads was his father.
He discovers that the woman who's dead he shares is his mother.
Aristotle said pity and terror.
Pity because something so awful could happen in terror because it might be able to happen to us.
The detective who solves these things, who eradicates the crime,
is really performing a kind of pro bono work in a sense.
Proving that evil is discoverable, erratically.
And as I've been suggesting, it's a myth, it's a fiction.
Something we want to believe.
That's why we're drawn to the genre.
Now that's a fairly grizzly picture of connection.
I want to talk about a slightly different view of it.
Freud, and I mentioned this when I was talking about Blake,
has said that civilization itself rests on our internalized police state.
That's a shorthand for repression.
Mine forged manacles.
And it follows that polite literature, civilized literature,
very frequently spends time exposing what is concealed.
This too is a kind of psychological detective work.
And if you've read anything of Henry James and Marcel Poest,
these are great works of fiction where almost all of the activity is starting out hidden motive.
Usually unavailable motive because it deals with appetites or instincts that are not available, as Freud said.
I want to go beyond James and Poest and refer to Dickens for a few minutes now.
As an even more interesting, a more vital example in some way of city bonds, municipal bonds.
Much of Dickens' best work consists in solving London mysteries.
And many of his most affecting protagonists, like Pip and Great Expectations,
are obliged to unravel the mystery that surrounds their own origins.
But not just that mystery, Pip has got to learn to discover the true identity of his benefactor.
You remember, he thinks it's Miss Havisham.
He also therefore thinks that a spell is destined for him.
And he has to come to understand that it's the man who appears at the beginning of the book.
He appears at the cemetery where he's looking at his father's grave.
It's this man who is going to be his figurative father, Magwitch, the convict.
And Pip is part of that when he first learns that.
And Magwitch makes his way into the place where he's living and says,
I'm the man, Pip, I'm the person who gave you your Great Expectations.
And the beauty and the maturity of this book is that he comes in to understand that the rest was a sham.
Miss Havisham was not his benefactor.
Estella is a cold figure.
He's missed on Betty because he has banked on Estella.
And then he understands that Magwitch is his true benefactor, is the man who has loved him in some way.
And so one of the most arresting scenes in the book, for me, is the courthouse scene where Magwitch had
and Pip is sitting there holding his hand.
And Dickens writes, even though they were not blood kin, he's holding his hand.
This is a fable of municipal bonds.
This is what I meant earlier when I said the city stories frequently about the making of family.
Not the blood ties, but the creation by love of ties between people.
In what is conceivably his great masterpiece on city life, as much as I love Great Expectations,
I'd like to say a word about Bleakhouse because in its richness and its variety and its kind of sprawling character,
it almost replicates city experience.
When I make students read it, the best way to tell them to do it is imagine that you're exploring a city
and you have to explore all different kinds of populations and groups.
Each chapter seems to be about somebody different.
It has all of that kind of teaming variety that great cities like London have.
You may remember that the first page is rather famous page in the English novel.
It's all about London fog.
It's all about not being able to see clear.
He writes a whole paragraph where the word fog is used two or three times in each line.
I won't read it all to you, but it goes like this.
Fog everywhere.
Fog up the river where it flows among green apes and meadows.
Fog down the river where it flows to follow among the tears of shipping and the water side pollutions of a great and dirty city.
Fog on the Essex marshes.
It goes on and talks about each of the areas of London covered in fog.
Well, that fog reaches all the way back, I think, to Sophocles, to Oedipus, to the blindness.
It is at the heart of that play.
You remember that Terecius is blind.
He's the oracle, the soupsayer.
He's the one who was blind, and he tells Oedipus, you have eyes that you cannot see.
Seeing and blindness are obviously polar issues in Sophocles' story, and Dickens is translating them literally.
London is a place where you cannot see clear.
I'm going to come back to this.
You cannot see clear.
You don't know who is who.
That's what cities are like.
You don't know who is who, but of course in Dickens, everyone will turn out to be related.
At the heart of this rather sprawling novel, to revert to one of my earlier lectures at the core of its labyrinth,
because I think that's what's intended here, is a slum.
A slum that Dickens outfits with a name.
He calls it Tom All Alone.
And it's a slum that the MPs, the politicos, talk about endlessly, but do nothing about.
I want to read you a passage that is called Stop Him, and it's about the revenge of the slum.
And I want you to think about the structure of a city, the connectedness between its parts.
Even though you think that ghettos are possible, you think that slums have not exactly fixes around them,
but you know at what avenue they start.
Well, that's going to be an illusion here.
Much mighty speechmaking there has been, both in and out of parliament concerning Tom, Tom All Alone.
And much wrathful disputation, how Tom shall be got right.
Whether he shall be put into the main road by constables, or by Beatles, or by bell ringing,
or by force of figures, or by correct principles of taste, or by high church, or by low church, or by no church,
whether he shall be set to splitting trusses of political straws with the crooked knife of his mind,
or whether he shall be put to stone breaking instead.
In the midst of which, dust and noise, there is but one thing perfectly clear, to wit,
that Tom only may, and can, or shall, and will be reclaimed according to somebody else's theory, but nobody's practice.
And in the hopeful meantime, Tom goes to perdition head foremost, pardon me,
goes to perdition head foremost in his old determined spirit.
But he has his revenge.
Even the winds are his messengers.
And they serve him in these hours of darkness.
There is not a drop of Tom's corrupted blood, but propagates infection and contagion somewhere.
It shall pollute this very night the choice stream in which Kenneth's analysis would find the genuine nobility of a Norman house,
and his grace shall not be able to say nay to the infamous alliance.
There is not an atom of Tom's slime, not a cubic inch of any pestilential gas in which he lives,
not one obscenity or degradation about him, not an ignorance, not a wickedness, not a brutality of his committing,
but shall work its retribution through every order of society, up to the proudest of the proud and to the highest of the high.
Verily, what with tainting, plundering and spoiling, Tom has his revenge.
It's a brilliant passage.
It gets across once again the biological language, the viral language of plague and disease as human connectedness.
And if you don't think that's part of our world today, let's just call it AIDS instead.
Let's think about other kinds of scourges which people are very superstitious about.
They know that it's gotten through certain kinds of particular ways, but you ask people whose children are in school and have other aged children in school.
We know something about the terror, the paranoia that comes about when this kind of viral or bacterial death sentence is possible.
Certainly Dickens is telling a story of economics and politics as well.
He is saying that the slums are everybody's business, that the figures who think they live clear of it are deluding themselves.
An ecological fiction says that there is no way, ultimately, to separate the poor from the rich.
Ghettoes are an illusion. The slums are part of everybody.
I'd like to cross the channel and talk for a minute about Dickens' great sort of French counterpart, Bozac, whose work is, I think, sadly unread in America,
he's a writer of the same stature as Dickens, a shrewder, tougher writer, I think, and a writer who had a much greater sense of the political issues of his time, I think, than Dickens.
Dickens is maybe a more powerful imaginative writer. Bozac writes more like a man who understands what makes that society tick.
And the story I want to refer to is his most famous novel called Old Gorio in English, or Père Gorio in French, Father Gorio.
And it, too, is very much like great expectations. It's a story of urban connectedness, and it's an educational story, just like Dickens writes of Bildungsroman, which is the term they use in English studies about, even though it's a German term, about formation, about education.
It's about a young man from the provinces. His name is Rustin Yeck, who comes to Paris. He's a young man on the make. He's a likable young man.
And he has to learn that Paris is only apparently divided into the rich and the poor, that they are terribly linked, he's going to find out.
And the whole plot of the book gets across the ways in which they're linked. He's living in the squalid boarding house, and the novel starts with Bozac situating that boarding house and saying there's some places in Paris that no one knows about.
They are so peculiar. They have everything that happens in them. It's only understandable if you've been into them, and he goes about to explain that.
And this story is going to be located there in that boarding house in this very squalid area. It turns out that the old man in that boarding house, Goryeux, is the father of two of the most elegant society ladies in Paris.
So there's the link between high and low. And that's the story, the detective story, that has to be unraveled. The law student, Rustin Yeck, has got to come to understand what these links are.
And these links are more than just parentage. Bozac said to himself, and we know this, I want to write King Lear in the 19th century. I want to write a story about a man who was abandoned by his children, whose children devour him.
And this is the one he wrote. And so we see his daughters married each one very well, one to a nobleman, one to a very successful businessman, entrepreneur.
We see them become increasingly ashamed of the old man. Now that they've gotten his money, they sucked him dry, they repudiate him. And that's the background of the story that has to be brought forth, sluised out.
That's what Rustin Yeck finally uncovers. That's the King Lear part of it. What is quite splendid in this novel, there are many, many splendid things in this novel.
One of the things that's great in it is that as we uncover the story of a failed family, of a man whose daughters have rejected him, what we see in the very operation of uncovering that is a story of a growing family.
We see the boy, the student, develop a paternal or let's say a son-like relationship to Goryeo. That's why the title has to be Pair Goryeo and not Old Goryeo.
We see that this is a story about making a family between a boy and an older man. And when this old man dies at the end of this book, only the law student and his friend and medical student are there.
And in one of these scenes that only Balzac could do, Goryeo, he has the most protracted death agony almost in literature, takes Page's family dog.
At the end, he can't see straight or anything and he puts his hands out and touches the heads of these two boys, these two medical students.
And it's totally domestic to see. They've been staying up writing letters to their families and he just reached in domesticity and he says, my daughters.
He thinks that his daughters have come to see him. Finally, it is death. And it is the poetic truth of the novel that the boys have become the girls in some sense. They've become a family.
And I can't help but think that this is what great city texts show us. They show us that there's no blood tie here. This isn't that old community that people once lived in.
This is a community where we are making it in front of us, where we're meeting people. And it's a splendid family paradigm that's actualized in the novel.
I was asked why there's been so little reference to film. And I'd like to refer to one in particular. The film, in my courses, I show this film at the same time I had them read Goryeo.
And the film is Midnight Cowboy. I hope some of you know that. It's a very wonderful film. And it's a film where the Dustin Hoffman character, Enrico Ritzo, who's half lame and sort of really derelict in his own way, kind of hustling derelict in the city.
And then the John Boyd character, Joe Buck, who comes from Texas and wants to make it as a stud and ends up on 42nd Street as a Midnight Cowboy. It's a brilliant film.
It's about their friendship as they discover how totally brutal and impersonal and uncaring the city is. And it's a marketplace film.
Joe Buck ends up hustling, selling his body. That's the only way they can manage. But what develops, the way it does in Balzac's novel, what emerges as you watch that film is an incredibly tender story of brotherhood between these two young men.
That they become each other's family. And you see them place their arms around each other. And at the end, it's classic. They exit New York. You can't live in New York is what it seems to say.
On their way to Florida, which has been Ritzo's great dream. And you see him cradling. You see John Boyd cradling Dustin Hoffman with this sort of frightened look that he knows that this isn't going to last.
But it's really about making it to that kinship. And it's in its own way. It's an exact replay, it seems to me, of Balzac. Or in a totally different vein that has much less emotional richness.
A novel in a film that's played much more recently. It's a bonfire of advantages. That's pure Dickinson Balzac. It's the same story. You make a million dollars on Wall Street. You're untouchable.
You're on top the king of the hill. And you make one wrong turn on the expressway. And not only is your life over, you discover that you are no longer separable from all those other parts of the city that have just been way out there.
Safely kept away from you in the dark. It's an urban story. And Wolf meant to write an urban story. And he knew that he was writing a story that's not as good as Dickinson Balzac.
Because I think the characters in my mind are a bit two-dimensional. But it's a story certainly about warring cities, isn't it? It's all the characters that have them recognizable anyway. We know who some of these people are.
About the various factions that are all sort of vying with each other, jockeying with each other in the city. And its plot is absolutely classic. It's a plot about connectedness that you aren't free. You find that you are part of something else.
The artist, I think, revels in the connectedness plot. I'm going to mention two more figures. Poets this time. The first one is certainly the greatest French poet of the 19th century.
And I think the greatest poet ever to have written on the city. And that's a man whose name was Charles Baudelaire. Wrote in the middle of the century. And if you don't know anything about French literature, he's an absolutely essential figure.
He is a fascinating figure because unlike, let's say, the English Romantics, Coleridge Wordsworth and people like that, he writes about cities. The English Romantics, more or less, because of the industrial revolution that had been going on in England for a while, they fled the city. They sought the country.
They can't imaginatively empathize the city life. Even when Wordsworth talks about, in the prelude, talks about the fairies. It's something that sort of frightens him. It's unreadable to him. Baudelaire has the modern discovery that most of us don't in the country anymore. We live in the city.
Moreover, he adds to that something which is quite splendid. He says he experiences a rivalry with nature. He finds that there's something affronting about nature's endless regeneration. He thinks that things that are natural made are nothing to take pride in.
So he celebrates, for example, all of the man-made things. He writes a whole essay about makeup, maquillage, about the fact that what is modern in life today is that women don't have to settle for what nature gave them. They can construct their faces. That's what he thinks is exciting. And you can well imagine that the city is the human settlement that represents exactly that.
He loves the fact that this is a man-made environment. And in the city, what he most celebrates are the crowds. He's the first writer to talk about modernity as such, and he's the first writer to really write about crowds.
Poe had done it a little bit before, but Baudelaire, I think, knows the most interesting things with it. This is how one of his passages goes, and you will see how the crowd, which is certainly an urban phenomenon, par excellence, how the crowd impacts on his imagination.
He says, this has been prose that he wrote. He wrote these prose poems called The Splene de Paris. The poet enjoys this incomparable privilege that he can, when he wants, be himself and others. Like those wandering souls in search of a body, he enters, when he wants, into the personality of everyone.
For him alone, everything is vacant, and in certain places, seen closed for him, it's because in his eyes, they're not worth a visit.
There is a kind of imaginative version almost of plague. It's a viral picture of the imagination. You're everywhere. You permeate people. You enter into people. It's invasive in its own way. It's a theory of imagination. It's a theory of poetry. Many of his most wonderful poems are about seeing people and imagining their lives.
He doesn't actually go up and touch them and say, tell me what it's like. But he writes very haunting poems about their past. He sees little old women. That's the title of one of his poems. And he imagines them in their youth, and in their beauty, and in their glamour.
And he says that no one today knows any of that. He's restoring a whole lost dimension to their lives.
He goes on to say that the solitary walker in the city experiences a kind of unique thrill. It really is a kind of jolly, it's a kind of sexual high. Here's what he calls it. A holy, this is when you interact with, when he interacts with crowds, a holy prostitution of the soul, which gives itself entirely its poetry and its charity to the unexpected that comes along, the stranger who passes.
A holy prostitution. We've come a long way from Blake and the youthful Charlotte. We are now using a figure of exchange that has been, in a sense, revalorized. A holy prostitution to kind of vampirish, give and take that the imagination experiences in the city.
And it's at the cost of losing one sense of self. He composes himself by taking in what's around him. It's a very heady theory, and there's not a little exploitation in it. He uses people to feel excited. There's no doubt about it. I don't know how much charity there is in this, but there's something wonderfully collective in it. Others count for him. He exploits them perhaps, but he sees them, and he thinks about them.
The American pair, I'm working a lot in pairs, you can tell that, Dick and the Balzac. Well, the pair, certainly, is the Baudelaire, is Whitman. Whitman does the same thing for American poetry that Baudelaire does, for French.
Whitman is the great urban poet. Unlike the transcendentalists, who are talking about trees and oversold and the set and the other, and writing very, very classical kinds of rhyme verse, Whitman writes about the city.
Whitman himself was a journalist. He writes about, he calls it the blab of the pave, tires of carts, sloth of boot soles, talk of the promenaders, the heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating thumb, the clank of the shot horses on the granite floor.
That doesn't sound like anything in prior American poetry. It doesn't rhyme. It's just a list of what you see out there in New York.
His most famous city poem is a much-involved piece called Crossin' Brooklyn Ferry. It's a very grandiose poem where he captures all of the varieties of encounter in the city, the people on the ferry, the site of Manhattan, the hills of Brooklyn, the gaze of the poet who interrogates his fellow passengers, and then the voice of the poet who speaks directly to us, his readers.
He speaks to the people who will read him when he is dead. All of these are forms of encounter that have a sort of intersection in the poem. The poem becomes the means of all of this exchange.
But that's not the piece I want to read to you. I want to read to you a poem that no one really ever reads in Whitman.
And I'd like to finish this lecture on the note of this poem, which is a much less sensationalist and much less kind of accentuated piece of work. It's called Sparkles from the Wheel.
Where the city sees this crowd moves on the love-long day, withdrawn, I join a group of children watching. I pause aside with them.
By the curb toward the edge of the flagging, a knife grinder works at his wheel, sharpening a great knife.
Bending over, he carefully holds it to the stone by foot and knee. With measured tread, he turns rapidly as he presses with light but firm hand.
Fourth issue then in copious golden jets, Sparkles from the Wheel.
The scene and all its belongings, how they seize and affect me.
The sad, sharp-chinned old man. Listen to the specificity here. This is a journalist. Stop missing one detail.
The sad, sharp-chinned old man. It's almost monosomatic. With worn clothes and broad shoulder band of leather.
That's the hardness of the detail. And listen to Whitman himself.
Myself, effusing and fluid, a phantom, curiously floating. Now here, absorbed and arrested.
The group, an unminded point, set in a vast surrounding.
The attentive, quiet children. The loud, proud, restive base of the streets.
The low, coarse purr of the whirling stone. The light-pressed blade.
Diffusing, dropping, sideways darting, in tiny showers of gold, Sparkles from the Wheel.
It's a gentle Whitman. It's not the oracted or fellow who makes enormous pronouncements about life and death.
And it's the man writing about a scene that is comparable to something that everyone has ever lived in a city he has experienced.
A kind of momentary piece of order. A knife grinder. Children gathered around him.
The poet who stumbles on and watches this and sees for a moment its crystallization.
That this is a moment of beauty. It's literally making them gold. It's almost alchemy.
Sparkles from the Wheel. Encopious golden jets. And it's a moment of civic order.
These people do not know each other. And yet they're gathered at the almost a form of concentric circles, an unminded point in a vast surrounding.
It strikes me that we've all experienced it in ways that have nothing to do with knife grinders.
You've walked the streets, and maybe there's a sporting event that's important that's going on, or an election.
And you cross in front of a store that has a television set that's on, and maybe ten people stand there.
And they stand next to you, and they watch that particular event through the same window.
No one says anything to anybody. And there's a yet tiny kind of connectedness, a tiny group formation, and then people don't disperse and go their way.
That's the kind of sharpened vision that I think Whitman is displaying here.
It's that moment where the discrete kind of anonymous cityscape all of a sudden crystallizes, becomes harmonious.
People are bonded just for a second. I'm not going to call this a family, but they're bonded just for a second in a shared experience, and then they go their way.
It's wonderful. It's very, very splendid. It's certainly about the making of community, and you can't miss the fact that it's about the making of art.
So that's where I'd like to close with this, is that image of community now seen just as a kind of heightened perception that any of us is capable of,
where things and people come together at least momentarily.
