Lecture 5 Urban Apocalypse
The title I want to give to this lecture is Urban Apocalypse, another sweet, gentle title.
But I would like to start it with something sweet and gentle and it's something that you all know I think.
It goes like this.
We willy-winky runs through the town, upstairs, downstairs, in his nightgown,
wrapping at the window, crying through the lock of the children all in bed for now it's 8 o'clock.
That's a nursery rhyme that we used to tell our kids.
It's in a number of children's books.
And my daughter, who's grown up now, tells me that it always used to frighten her,
particularly the drawings that she saw with it,
that when this was told to her at bedtime, someone read it to her.
She had the sense of something fearful taking place.
Not just, it's time to go to bed, but if you don't, something terrible can happen to you.
This figure of we willy-winky who sort of goes through the town and enters all the homes
and cries out some sort of muffled warning, indicates that after 8 o'clock,
terrible things might start to happen.
And I'm sort of alluding here to that notion of a kind of substratum of terror
that sort of stalks human life in the city, or a bogeyman, somebody that might gobble up children.
And that struck me as a very sort of somber, macabre, but nonetheless credible sense of that,
what I had always thought rather sweet rhyme.
Then my wife, who was part of this discussion, said that there's still another meaning of that rhyme,
that it's not really about the terror that might be in the city,
it's rather about a different kind of bedding down and turning out the lights in the city
as a kind of urban protection, a kind of urban insurance policy even,
because we willy-winky is making sure that the houses are dark in the sense of an 8 o'clock curfew,
turning out the lights, putting out the fire.
Curfew itself, she pointed out, derives from the French term couvre-le-feuille,
which means literally put out the fire, cover the fire.
And curfew for us implies a martial notion, the idea that a government might impose a curfew
in times of war or violent civic unrest, getting people off the streets.
But its original meaning did have to do with putting out fires because of the risk of an entire city burning down.
And that's what they did.
Lots and lots of cities in the past burned down, lots of cities that still stand,
large chunks of them have burned down.
Sometimes these fires were set in warfare, but often just by accident, by failed curfews,
by fires uncovered or never put out.
And we tend to think of the city as a huge colossus that's composed of durable buildings and permanent structures,
but in fact, at least historically, the city is surprisingly fragile,
at least it was in the days of wooden structures and open fires.
And if I can use that we willy-winky story as a kind of transition from the notion of urban terror
to a rather more daunting topic, this lecture here of urban apocalypse,
I'd like to move into that, of cities in their entirety being destroyed, wiped out.
And with that in mind, it's probably a good idea to try to open up our optics still further
and think further back about the way the city has been treated as a topos in history.
The thrust of these lectures are on representations of the city and the character of urban life
from the 18th to the 20th century, that's already a large chunk of time.
And I've warned you that it's not really a history course here,
we're rather picking and choosing selected moments in selected cities to try to illustrate certain themes.
And part of my logic as well is that if we have a larger historical overview,
plus a larger artistic overview of how people have lived in the past and how artists have shaped those experiences,
that it will help us to appreciate, in the literal sense, the etymological sense,
and we appreciate to affix the price to our own urban settings and our own city lives.
But if we look further back from this sort of bunch of centuries that I'm working with,
when we go back to the Old Testament, I've already mentioned, as you well know,
that the first city that is referred to as Babel is the city of confusion and of noise,
of people divided by rather than connected by languages.
And I've mentioned too that the archetypal of the biblical founder of cities is Cain,
marked by God, Fratricide, Exile, Wanderer.
And we all know in the Old Testament that the city is rather routinely punished and routinely destroyed.
This can be carried out by warring tribes and nations.
Often God seems to be abetting one side or the other.
In Judges 9, for example, and it's one of many examples we can read,
and Abolimic fought against the city all that day and he took the city
and slew the people that was therein and beat down the city and sowed it with salt.
How many different ways you could knock out the city?
Or sometimes the annihilation is performed by God himself as the primary agent
who doesn't seem to like what he sees in cities, as happens in the treatment,
the most famous treatment we have of Sodom and Gomorrah from Genesis.
Then the Lord reigned upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven,
and he overthrew those cities and all the plain and all the inhabitants of the cities
and that which grew upon the ground.
The city then, in the Old Testament, often appears as a kind of den of iniquity,
as a purely and therefore problematically secular place where men flout the laws of God.
And the New Testament is not much softer on cities.
Once Jesus subsets the money changers, he is really in a very obvious kind of way
pronouncing judgment on the entire marketplace city.
So it's not an accident that Augustine will write about the city of God
as utterly different from the vicious metropolis of men.
And Babylon, as I've indicated in his Blake uses in his poem about London,
Babylon becomes the archetypal city of secular corruption,
imaged person, personified in the figure of the whore of Babylon,
the whole city seen as kind of monstrously engaged in selling itself.
Now the dying city or the city that is destroyed,
the city that totally is eclipsed and goes out, is a formidable notion.
The city of God, the New Jerusalem, may be a kind of radiant spiritual analog
to the actual buildings of stone and the men and women of flesh and blood,
but for a lot of us, in a more secular age, we find something very hard to take,
something rather unsettling in the specter of utterly destroyed cities.
Cities where nothing is going to come back or where the ruin will never be forgotten.
So events like the sacking of Troy have a kind of terrible permanence
or the destruction of Pompeii and Herculaneum, buried forever,
people buried in the full flower of life.
And no amount of archaeological reconstruction or knowledge on our part
really fully offsets or makes us, permits us to ignore the brutality of an event like that.
That we know that flesh dies, we know that it's mortal, it's subject to biological law, to disease and decay.
For some strange reason, it's not so strange actually,
we think that stones and streets which are inanimate are fashioned for permanency.
They don't seem to have a lifetime of the same sort.
And it's shocking to watch buildings collapse.
One of the reasons that earthquakes are so frightening is that not only does the ground move,
and of course that's bad enough,
but that other structures move which are on the ground,
structures that should be immovable, that were built to house us, to protect us.
They too move, they break us under.
And in doing so, they seem to be telling us about our own hubris, our arrogance,
to think that anything might stand.
It's as if it were the story of chicken little, that the sky can always fall in.
Now with a huge leap, I'd like to talk for a moment about a moment in history
where the people must have thought the sky was falling in.
And that's when the black plague hit Europe in the mid-14th century.
Whole towns were destroyed then.
So much destroyed that only now are archaeologists in many places in Europe
discovering that those towns even existed.
They were completely wiped out.
It wasn't burning in this case, it was just mass destruction nonetheless.
And how would people respond to that?
After all, we're talking about not just cities, but artistic representation.
How could you respond to that?
And one of the great challenges when an entire city is beset with destruction
is response, interpretation.
And you may know that in the issue of the black plague,
it was a time when obviously the people of science and the people of the church
were very, very much exercised to come up with a credible explanation.
Certainly in Catholic Europe of those days,
it was understood that this was God's punishment,
that He was finally meeting out His punishment for the evil that men and women do.
There was a famous meeting of the doctors of the University of Paris
at the time of the plague where they formally pronounced
that it had to do with the conjunction of the planets.
That was their explanation as to what was causing this plague.
People did not, of course, understand infection.
They did not understand the transmission of disease in those days.
One of the most famous early texts that we have is Boccaccio's Decameron.
And it posits in ways that I'm going to return to later in this lecture
a very, I think, provocative connection between storytelling itself
and the creeping death, or the invading death,
that these people, you remember, flee to this particular place
and then they tell their particular stories.
And it's a way of passing the time, of course, after all,
if you're quarantined somewhere, that's one thing to do.
But I think one could go further and suggest that maybe
it seems to have a causal relationship with, not a causal relationship,
but it is related in some more than accidental way to the operation of the plague.
Perhaps a rival relationship would be better putting it.
There's a very famous 19th century story by Edgar Allan Poe called The Mask of Red Death,
which is his way of writing about the black plague
and about the effort to close up ranks and to keep it out.
That effort to quarantine yourself, which Boccaccio has shown in his own story,
but then take into a kind of fantastic dimension in Poe's work
where the plague itself is personified as the sort of red invader
who is going to make his way into the castle and does.
Can't be kept out.
And in our century, in changing media,
one of the great films of our time is Ingmar Bergman's Seventh Seal,
which is also about the black death, the black plague,
and he tries to grapple with the kind of total death sentence that that sickness represented.
You may know that that film was made in 1957,
and that time should alert us to something.
Bergman, we know, was thinking about nuclear war.
It was when people first began to think about the possibility of total destruction.
And he thought to himself, how could one do a filmic version of that?
And I think there's something brilliant in his realization
that the best way to do it is to move back in time
to the one moment in history where people must have experienced something like that,
and so he moves back to the Middle Ages.
There's a very well-known modern novel by Albert Camus,
his third novel, precisely called La Peste, or The Plague,
and it's a contemporary story.
It's published about the same time that Bergman did his film in the 50s.
And it deals with the outbreak of pestilence, a plague, in Oran, Oja, in Algeria.
We know that Camus was writing allegory at the time,
and for him, and if you've read this book, you know this,
that the plague seems to symbolize a great deal.
It symbolizes the presence of evil and suffering,
and the characters in the novel are constantly brooding on this.
Why have we been singled out for this?
What could the meaning possibly be of small children dying in great pain, etc.?
And we also know that Camus is writing a kind of allegory about the German occupation as well,
that he's thinking about that this is his way of telling that story too, from World War II.
I think beyond that, and more suited to our purposes,
what we see in Camus' novel as well is something of the urban dimension of plague,
and what might mean when you see a dead rat on your doorstep,
and what kind of paranoia that can cause.
Camus, you may know, was inspired by a book that really, I think, should be better known,
and it's a book written by the man whom I talked about yesterday in one of the earlier lectures,
and that's Daniel Defoe, who wrote a rather remarkable text called The Journal of the Plague Gear,
which is his fictional account, because it's written in the 1720s.
It's his fictional account of another plague that struck London in 1665.
It was not as severe a plague as the Black Death, but it was much as severe.
And all of Defoe's arsenal of techniques, his plain style, he does not use,
he's not bellatristic in the way that Fielding and other writers of the 18th century are.
You can see that this is a journalist who's writing.
His journalistic approach to history itself, his fixation with statistics, with numbers, with graphs.
He actually has graphs in this 18th century text, graphs where he can record the beginning
and then the rising and then the falling of the numbers of deaths,
and he also records in graphs and maps where the plague is,
because the plague is moving through the particular quarters of the city and around the city.
And so it's as if he was precisely trying to map this kind of mass death that is striking London at this time.
And his narrator treks all over the city and its environs, keeping score,
watching the Scourge, as I said, take shape, move from inception to fury to waning,
and watching the really puny efforts of the Londoners as they try to cope with these events.
And he too captures something of the urban breakdown that has to accompany this kind of mass destruction.
In his text we read about mothers who become mad with the plague and kill their own children.
We read about civic authorities that have to enforce the quarantines
and kill people who try to break them or arrest them, the martial law that sets in.
And we see the heroic efforts, frequently unsuccessful, to dispose of bodies
to prevent still further disease spread.
And none of this is imagined.
I mean, Defoe did homework, did research, found out about it, documented his tax and wrote it.
It's an astounding kind of documentary that comes to us in 200 years ago.
There's a very remarkable film that is not much talked about today.
It was very much talked about when I was a graduate student in the 60s.
And it's Peter Watkins' film, which was made as a BBC documentary, called The War Game.
And it was made by BBC, but it was so graphic and so unsettling
that BBC took it out of circulation much to Watkins and dismay.
It's a film in which Watkins stages a mock nuclear attack on England.
A very minor attack in terms of what nuclear exchange would really be.
This is way back in the 60s.
It's not like the day after, a rather melodramatic thing that we've risen years ago and have been treated to.
And it's a documentary in the sense that he interviews people on the streets that are real interviews.
They do not know that they're part of a film.
And he asks them, what would you recommend that we should do
if, in fact, the Russians sent an exchange of nuclear warheads our direction?
And invariably, these people say, we have to return the attack.
That's it.
At the beginning of war, there's no one who says, this is the end of civilization.
Let's not continue this. Let's try to figure our way out of this.
And what he shows in this, in addition to these documentary type interviews,
is he has some very amateur actors playing out what would happen.
And he too, I think, is much inspired from Defoe.
We actually see what people might do.
We see policemen shooting people who were stealing food because there was no food after several days.
And in the most unforgettable scene in this film, we see women, a horde of women,
come and kill with their hands the policemen in order to get food, to get it to their children.
It's a perfect image, it seems to me, of the kind of anarchy,
of the kind of madness that would happen when destruction hits the city.
Now, one of my purposes in general in this course is to try to shed light on the spectrum of reactions
and possibilities and perspectives that are available even in dire subjects like this.
And one might think that art really can't measure up to a scenario like that.
I mean, after all, what artists could match what's in the book of revelations?
If you really want to read about what nuclear destruction is, just read the book of revelations in the Bible.
But one artist who I think does try to measure up in his own way,
and in a kind of disturbing, at least to me disturbing way,
suggests that plague, not nuclear war this time,
but plague, mass destruction, could be of use to the artist, could be exciting to the artist,
could be something that, in fact, could be appropriated.
And the man that I'm referring to is an extremely bizarre figure, but a rather influential figure.
His name is Antonin Arctot, A-R-T-A-U-D, Arctot.
He is a Frenchman who was a, I hate to use a dry term like theorist,
because he was really a madman and a poet, I think, and not a theorist.
Nonetheless, he wrote one of the most influential books on theater in the 1930s that we have in this century,
and it influenced all kinds of people.
Peter Brooks, the living theater in this country, a lot of modern theater has come from Arctot's book,
which was titled La Théâtre Son Double, The Theater and its Double.
And one of its major essays is precisely called The Theater and the Plague.
This is a connection that most people would not have thought of.
Now, Arctot has a program. He wants to revitalize western theater,
which he thinks has become rather sterile.
He thinks that theater has become just another literary form.
And he also thinks rather shrewdly, it seems to me, that theater has become altogether too verbal a form,
that we go to the theater and what happens on the stage? People talk.
They just exchange language.
And he goes on to say that that's not what theater ever really was meant to be.
That language, human language, what I say to you, the sort of ripartee and dialogue
that most of us think as the heart of theater, is for Arctot only one,
and not necessarily the most powerful, language of the theater.
There are other languages, light, dance, song, mime, backdrop.
The theater is a kind of splendid physical setting, a material setting.
And in a sense, language is the most abstract language that it has.
It also has much more immediate ones like what I just suggested.
So he wants to read all of his essays, or about revitalizing the theater,
making it once again a kind of potent experience, the way he feels that it was in ancient Greece,
but also the way that he knows it was in other non-western societies.
He writes essays on the Balinese Theater. He's interested in puppet theater.
He thinks of the theater as a place where the actual regnant forces in a culture,
and the forces that in a sense undergird our own lives, are brought into play.
And they're brought into play. It's not just a question of verbalizing them.
So with this kind of notion of what an ideal theater might be,
he wants to suggest that the plague could serve as a very appropriate model.
And for you to see that, I want to quote how he describes what would happen
if a plague struck the city, how the city dwellers respond.
I quote, when there is plague in the city, ordinary structures collapse.
There is no longer any street or traffic services, any army, any police, any municipality.
Pires are lit to burn the dead with the help of available passes by.
So far so good. You'd expect that. And that's what Defoe has done.
But this man wants to make theater of this, and he's going to show you that it never remains this common sense.
Each family wants its own. Then as wood, space, and fire become more rare, families fight around the pyres.
Soon there's a general route, since the corpses are so numerous.
The dead fill up the streets in flowing pyramids, which dogs nibble and laugh at the edges.
The stench rises in the air like flames. Whole streets are blocked by the piles of dead.
And this is when, here's a wonderfully dramatic imagination, the streets are blocked,
and this is when the houses open up, you close here, you open there.
This is when the houses open up, and when the delirious victims,
their minds filled with frightful visions, spread howling through the streets.
So this is the kind of liberation theater that he wants.
These are these kind of raw, inchoate forces of terror and of madness and of disease.
These people have been afflicted by the plague.
The ordinary avenues that are supposed to permit Congress in the streets and commerce,
those are blocked, obstructed, and instead the mad people break out of their own doors
and sort of flow through the streets.
And this, for him, is when the great revelations come.
This is when people show their true stuff, their unsuspected colors.
So the virtuous son, these are the scenarios that he writes out,
the virtuous son kills his father.
The abstinent one commits sexual crimes.
The voluptuary becomes pure.
The miser throws his gold through the windows.
The hero who has saved the city in the past sets fire to it.
He is utterly fixated on the sort of eruption of libido and the falling of taboos.
And we can see here too how crucially urban and collective this setting is,
that the normative rules of how we govern our lives together simply go up in smoke in a scenario like that.
Now, I'd like to show you a rather different image.
It's not a plague this time, but a different image in a different medium,
in a different age of the death of the city or the city coming apart.
And I want to return to the figure whom I talked about in an earlier lecture,
Hogarth, and show you a very famous slide of Hogarth, which is called Jen Lane.
Now Jen Lane is a slide that in fact, believe it or not, was done as a promotion.
He did this, he was commissioned to do two slides, two engravings,
and they were commissioned by the people who were producing beer.
The first one he did was called Beer Street, and it's a very sort of happy scene of stalwart workers
just swilling as much beer as they can.
And the purpose of that is to promote beer as a kind of healthy beverage in comparison to Jen.
Now, Jen in the 18th century is phenomenally inexpensive,
and it's what people can always afford, even the poorest workers,
can afford Jen to relieve the kinds of distresses of their lives.
It was notoriously the case that women would give Jen to their babies in order to shut them up or make them sleep,
and many died from Jen, and there was a kind of public program to diminish the consumption of Jen.
So Hogarth does this painting, or this engraving, that really strikes me as quite different in kind
from the scenes that I showed you earlier, the harlot's progress and the rake's progress.
And I think of it as a kind of apocalyptic engraving.
It's what happens to the city when it is beset by some kind of scourge.
Here on Jen Lane, only the distiller and the undertaker and the pawnbroker are doing well.
If we look in one corner of this painting, we see that the barber has hanged himself.
We see someone else taking in, ripe as his name, taking in his carpenter's tools to have them pawned.
We see another woman wanting to pawn a kettle and a saucepan and her tongs.
And we see at the bottom of this painting a kind of unforgettable figure who is the ballad singer who has died of starvation.
He is a living skeleton there, sitting there.
We see the kind of precariousness that is so obvious in many of Hogarth's paintings.
We see a building that is just beginning to tumble down.
We see that the pawnbroker's cross is over the cross of the church, that too signaling a kind of terrible reversal of values.
And then the central figure and the most unforgettable figure in this portrait of a city that is in some sense condemned is the woman sitting on the steps.
She is filled with syphilitic sores.
She is also utterly besotted with gin and she is unknowingly letting her baby fall to death.
There's a total demoralization of the city. You see those sores and the legs and the body.
There's a kind of surrealist quality to this depiction of the city.
I think of different kinds of painters, painters like Goya in his scenes of war, or painters like Picasso in canvases like Guernica.
To conjure up that sense of a kind of enormous force of destruction striking a human community.
Death stalking the city.
So far I've kept myself to earlier times, talked about the plague, one in the Middle Ages, the one in 1665.
We don't have to go to either art or to the remote past or to specters of nuclear war in the future to think about urban apocalypse.
That Dresden and Hiroshima for the contemporary world stand as unforgettable images of destroyed cities, of destructions of buildings and of human life on an unprecedented scale.
Both firebombing, as was the case with Dresden, and the atomic bomb with Nagasaki and Hiroshima were technological versions of the black plague.
A visiting of destruction in one fell swoop on an entire urban metropolis.
Dresden could not ever be rebuilt in the way that it was.
And in Hiroshima and Nagasaki people are still feeling the impact in their genes and in their proclivity for disease of what happened a long time ago, 46 years ago.
Or more recently, not now in terms of atomic war, one thinks of the recent photographs of Kuwait City, not quite on that scale, but a city that has been more or less destroyed, looted, vandalized against, and a very dramatic backdrop,
flaming oil fields, etc.
One wonders what Akto would have done had he been privy to that, been allowed to walk through the streets of Kuwait City with the Iraqi invader,
and try to imagine the kinds of street trauma that were possible there, the urban drama that one could have done with it.
Or precisely at our time, the leveling of Vukovar or the guns poised on Dubrovnik, the systematic destruction in Dubrovnik of the fort and the old town,
done by Serbs against Croats, replaying on a grand ethnic and militarily high-tech scale the fratricidal kind of war that attends the city's birth with Romulus and Remus.
It attends the city's birth and it reminds us over and over that it can foretell the city's death.
And these are fairly grandiose things that I've been talking about, deaths on the grand scale.
But destruction and ruin in the city are in fact quotidian things, they're everyday occurrences as well, they're business as usual.
Everybody in this room has grown up in cities that are no longer the same as they were then.
You carry in your minds images of places that do not exist in stone or brick anymore, and it's not because they were burned down necessarily.
What would La Fonse, if he came back to Washington today and took a look at this city, how it has changed, altered over time, what was here, what is here?
Now this is a commonplace, it sounds a bit like a cliché, and yet I'm going to be suggesting in this lecture that it's more than that, that it's something rather fascinating and hard to get hold of in the way that time alters cities.
It's hard to get hold of because it's hard to represent this.
No city has probably changed more over time than Rome.
And I'm going to read a passage to you about Rome, which absolutely focalizes the question I'm talking about.
It's a rather famous passage, and it's written by Freud in Civilization and its Discontents.
And it's when Freud is talking about memory traces and about mental preservation, and he gives this as an extended metaphor and extended analogy as a way to explain what he means by memory traces in the brain.
Historians tell us that the oldest Rome was the Roma Quadrata, a fenced settlement on the Palatine, then followed the phase of the Septimontium, a federation of the settlements on the different hills.
After that came the city bounded by the Servian Wall, and later still, after all the transformations during the periods of the Republic and the early Caesars, the city which the Emperor Aurelian surrounded with his walls.
We will not follow the changes which the city went through any further, but we will ask ourselves how much a visitor, whom we will suppose to be equipped with the most complete historical and topographical knowledge,
may still find left of these early stages in the Rome of today, except for a few gaps he will see the Wall of Aurelian almost unchanged.
In some places he will be able to find sections of the Servian Wall where they have been excavated and brought to light.
If he knows enough, more than present-day archaeology does, he may perhaps be able to trace out in the plan of the city the whole course of that wall and the outline of the Roma Quadrata.
Of the buildings which once occupied this ancient area, he will find nothing, or only scanty remains, for they exist no longer.
The best information about Rome in the Republican era would only enable him, at the most, to point out the sites where the temples and public buildings of that period stood.
Their place is now taken by ruins, but not by ruins of themselves, but of later restorations made after fires or destruction.
It is hardly necessary to remark that all these remains of ancient Rome are found dovetailed into the jumble of a great metropolis which has grown up in the last few centuries since the Renaissance.
There is certainly not a little that is ancient still buried in the soil of the city or beneath its modern buildings.
This is the manner in which the past was preserved in historical sites like Rome.
Now, let us, by slight of imagination, suppose that Rome is not a human habitation, but a psychical entity with a similarly long and copious past, an entity that is to say in which nothing that has come into existence will have passed away.
And all the earlier phases of development continue to exist alongside the latest one.
This would mean that in Rome, the palaces of the Caesars and the Septizonium acceptomus severus would still be rising to their old height on the Palatine, and that the castle of St. Angelo would still be carrying on its battlements the beautiful statues which graced it until the seeds by the Goths and so on.
But more than this, in the place occupied by the Palazzo Caffarelli would once more stand without the Palazzo having to be removed, the Temple of Jupiter Capitalinus.
And this not only in its latest shape as the Romans of the Empire sought, but also in its earliest one when it still showed its trust in forms and was ornamented with terracotta antifixes.
Where the Colosseum now stands, we could at the same time admire Nero's vanished Golden House.
On the piazza of the Pantheon, we should find not only the Pantheon of today as it was bequeathed to us by Hadrian, but on the same site, the original edifice erected by Agrippa.
Indeed, the same piece of ground would be supporting the Church of Santa Maria Sopra Minerva and the ancient temple over which it was built.
And the observer would perhaps only have to change the direction of his glance or his position in order to call up the one view or the other.
There is clearly no point in spinning our fantasy any further, for it leads to things that are unimaginable and even absurd.
If we want to represent historical sequence in spatial terms, we can only do it by juxtaposition in space.
The same space cannot have two different contents.
So much for Freud.
Now, that passage is quite fascinating, because what it is doing is showing us, Freud intends by it, to show us something of the capacity of the mind to retain the things that have passed that are buried, that are also in ruins, perhaps, but are retrievable by dental memory, by dental thinking.
What Freud does not emphasize, but what, in my opinion, absolutely jumps out of this passage, is that the human mind is also the great archaeologist.
It is the great retriever that the human mind is operating here, really, in a kind of adventure in retrieval.
That description of Rome gives the city a kind of fourth dimensional reality, where we see all of its buildings superimposed on each other at the same time.
And we have a kind of remarkable picture of the fullness of time, of the plenitude of history, and we, of course, bypass the price the time exacts, which is death and destruction as the cost of rebirth and rebuilding.
That's how things happen in history.
But with the image, the vista that Freud reconstructs for us there, we are privileged and privy to this rather total view of it.
Now, Rome, of course, was particularly appealing to Freud for this, because Rome, for the initiative, and Freud was, for the person who read a lot of history, the here and now city is absolutely wistfully saturated, drenched
with the then and there city.
And it reminds me of a very well-known term that medieval scholars use, which is a palimpsest.
A palimpsest is a kind of script, a kind of writing that people find from the earliest times, from the Middle Ages, as soon as script was being used.
And they find, as they subject it to scientific analysis, that there are several layers of script and that there is an earlier one underneath the surface one.
And what I'm trying to say is it's not a question of getting to the earlier one and scrapping the surface one.
I want you to think literally, dimensionally, seeing all of these scripts at the same time, somehow possessing them all.
That's really what Freud has achieved there.
It is a plenary vision.
It retains the layers and the reaches that, in fact, exist in the unfurling of time.
The human mind then becomes a kind of artificer, a kind of archaeologist that reverses the entropic role of time, so that the ruins of the city and the ruins of the mind are, in fact,
retrievable, restoreable, not in reality.
Freud says this is absurd in reality.
Spatially, two buildings cannot occupy the same area, but it is imaginable and it is, I think, achievable in language and in art and in memory.
That these are forms of recuperation, forms of retrieval, forms of plenitude, of acquiring the kind of fullness that is, in some sense, our estate,
but which we have been despoiled on simply by the entropy of time, by the accidents of forgetting, by the destruction that time meets out.
Now that's going to be a central trope for me in looking at city art and thinking about the city.
And with that in mind, I'm going to return us briefly to a story that I've mentioned before, and it's a story that everyone knows.
It's a story of Oedipus.
And I've already suggested that it's a fundamental kind of city story.
On the one hand, it's a story of occulted or concealed connections.
Oedipus is obliged to learn that he is horribly connected in ways he had not expected.
And in that light, Sophocles is, I think, exposing his arrogance, or what they would have called his hubris, at thinking he knows who he is.
That's the traditional reading of the play.
The anthropologists have also told us that there is a different kind of phenomenon being played out here of the scapegoat.
But Oedipus, in some sense, and here you could see a whole line of it, because Christ could be seen in the same way.
Oedipus, in some sense, saves the community by dents of his own suffering and by dents of his own, the bonding that he inflicts on himself.
You remember that Thereseus says the whole city is struck with plague.
There is a concealed crime.
We must solve this crime.
Now how did he solve the crime?
I've suggested that he proceeds like a traditional detective, but I want you to think a little further about that.
What he does is he uncovers the coordinates of his own life, which were either erroneously thought of or in the dark.
He uncovers his origins.
He plots his graph.
He makes his map.
He positions himself.
He discovers where he comes from.
There's something utterly prodigious here.
He creates the story of his life.
He creates the narrative of his life.
And what I want to suggest is that that is crucially related, I think, to the saving of the city.
It is not that he becomes the antidote that would get rid of the plague, but if you look at the poetic action of the play, that's what happens.
This man recovers the full story of his life, not merely that he blondes himself.
He recovers the full story of his life, and that, in a sense, removes the plague from the city.
And what I want to suggest is that there is a very fascinating parallel here between narrative action, understanding and graphing the coordinates of one's life, that act of possession.
What that really means is to retrieve your own estate, to understand and to possess the fullness of your own life.
That's what memory makes possible.
And that is persistently equated with the saving of the city, with the measuring and graphing also of the plenitude of the city.
And with that model in mind, I'd like to refer to a couple of texts, I think you probably know them.
They're both films, and they're very well-known films, that in some, to me, strange ways, play out this model.
One of them is the very harrowing film made by Marguerite Duras and Anna Rene in the 60s called Hiroshima Mon Amour, the French film.
And it's a film that actually thrusts shots of the destroyed city, Anna.
We see people crawling out of the ruins. It's almost unbearable.
The film was made in the 50s, too, and Hiroshima was much, much closer to us than it is today.
But the narrative action of the film are two lovers, a French woman and a Japanese man.
And what has to happen in the course of that film is that the French woman has to recover her painful past.
And this is what sort of gets dredged up. It's like Freudian psychoanalysis. It's rememoration.
She has to dredge up this story of loving in the wrong direction, of having an affair with a German soldier, of having been punished, having had her head shaved,
having to live like an animal in the cellar of her parents' home.
All of this painfully comes to the surface against the backdrop of this city that has been destroyed.
It's a kind of remarkable image of how rebirth is possible, how getting past the plague is possible.
And the last instance that I'll remind you of briefly is the great film Chinatown.
Plague threatens Los Angeles. There is a hidden crime. It threatens it in the form of drought.
And there, too, we have to uncover incest. And the detective does the work, narrative as recovery. Thank you.
