Welcome to the Veritas Forum, engaging university students and faculty in
discussions about life's hardest questions and the relevance of Jesus
Christ to all of life.
A lot of things have happened in resurrection studies in the last 30
years. When I went to graduate school, middle ages, it was 1970s. If you talked
about, I'll pick a topic, if you talk about the empty tomb, there'd be a lot of
snickering and nobody but evangelicals who'd published in that area would
accept it. If you talked about resurrection appearances of Jesus,
Rudolf Boltman died in 1976. He probably dominated, he and Karl Barth dominated
a century of theology. Boltman was a skeptic and people were still in his
shadow when I was in grad school. If you mentioned appearances, everybody would
laugh. Seriously. Today, the majority of New Testament scholars, theologians,
historians and philosophers who publish in the area believe in the empty tomb,
almost two-thirds. And where in the 70s, if you talked about bodily appearances of
Jesus, they'd say, yeah, that's nice. Go back to your church and talk about it, but
don't do it on the university campus. Today, bodily resurrection is the
predominant view in the academy. Something has happened in 30, 40 years. What's
going on? What caused the switch? Well, a lot of things, as we know, views
change. But I was telling Keith coming in today that some of the latest folks who
publish under the self-defined title of agnostic, skeptic, and their friends with
the skeptical community, they're often cited by skeptics. These are quote-unquote
their fellows. Here's one, a prominent New Testament scholar called himself a
skeptic. And he says, yeah, I don't know what I do with this stuff. He said, but one
thing I'm sure of, the risen Jesus appeared to his followers after his death. Is that
where skepticism is? How many skeptics have moved over from here? I mean, on a
grading scale from like A to F, you know, we'll have the believers be the A's and
the skeptics be the D's and F's. What's happened to move the D's to C's and C
pluses and B minuses? You know, what's going on? Raymond Brown shortly before his
death, probably the most prominent New Testament scholar in America, said that
the majority of contemporary theologians in all the state universities and
everywhere else, the majority of theologians are conservative today. Again,
what's going on? What I'm going to do is share some data with you. Let me introduce
my methodology here at the outset. When I was at Michigan State, I did my
dissertation on the resurrection. Now, I was, I was 24 when I started doing this
and I was really wet behind the ears, as they say. And I just kind of walked in
where angels threw the thread and I had my committee here and there was a Jewish
agnostic member of the history department on my committee, a philosopher on my
committee. The chair of this particular program was on my committee and a Greek
Orthodox priest with two doctor's degrees and an agnostic that the dean
assigns to your committee from a totally different area, in his words, to make
sure four friends aren't giving another friend a PhD. So I had a mixed committee
of people who were open to the resurrection and who was, those who
weren't. And when the committee was over, they approved the topic. And then as I
was walking away, the chair from the religion department said to me, we don't
care if you do this topic. I mean, we're a classically liberal campus, so you
could do anything you can evidence. But don't try telling us the resurrection
happened because the Bible says so. Don't try that. Like, I hope you couldn't see
me, but I sort of felt like, like that. And then I said to him, as I said, wet
behind the ears, I said to him, how long does this thing have to be again? And he
said, at least 200 pages. He said, maybe we'll take 180, but we can't, we can't
bend on that. Well, it turned out to be 350 pages long. And I developed a method
to get around his objection. Don't tell us it happened because the Bible said so.
And I've since come to call this the minimal facts method. By the way, my
my website is GaryHabermas.com. You can find lectures on this and on the method
and all over. Nothing's for sale there. Anything you can use, you're welcome to
do it. And what I did was try to work in an area that says this. This little New
Testament. If, if this book is inspired word of God, like a lot of Christians
claim, well then Jesus is raised from the dead. If the book is not inspired, but
it's reliable. Jesus has been raised from the dead. But what if the skeptics are
right? And it's neither. It's neither inspired nor reliable. And it's a book of
ancient literature on the level with Homer or Plato. I love Tom Wright who
makes the comment, if you had lived a couple hundred years before Christ, Homer
would have been your Old Testament and Plato would have been your New Testament.
All right, so let's say this is another book from that genre of Homer and Plato
and it's not inspired. It's not even reliable. My argument is Jesus is still
raised from the dead. We have enough data in an unreliable book, if it is, to argue
that Jesus is raised from the dead. Well, okay, great. Go for it. How do you pull
that off? Okay, what I'm going to do in this lecture is talk about the data that
moved the F's and the D pluses over to C plus and B minus. But talk about what has
happened in the last 30 years to make people just to pick one thing. How we
gotten from the empty tomb as a joke to the empty tomb is highly reliable. What
makes an historian like Michael Grant say that by normal historical methods, the
tomb was empty. By normal historical methods, not employing any religious
chicanery. What makes people say that the appearances of Jesus, that they're a
joke or he appeared in some non-bodily way to he appeared in a bodily way? What
gets most scholars over here today? There are even a number of skeptics. I mean,
all-out skeptics, they're probably atheists. They don't believe in God. They
don't believe in resurrections. But they believe the earliest Christian community
taught bodily resurrection of Jesus. You couldn't even get that out of people in
the 70s. All right, so what I'm going to do is I'm going to introduce a couple
passages, tell you why skeptics are happy with these passages, and go from
there and use some of the data. Now, one of the most misunderstood things about
contemporary scholarship, what do my professor mean when he said, that's great.
Do your dissertation, but don't tell us it happened because the Bible said it
happened. But if I were talking to him, or if he were to publish something on the
resurrection, he would use the New Testament. Okay, that's with my grad
students. There are very few things that are more difficult to get across than
this difference. They think Christians, they think non-Christians think the
Bible's prejudice book don't use a period, and that's not what skeptics
think. If you don't use the text, they will use the text. Why? They have
different presuppositions, but they will only use passages that are well
received on critical grounds for critical reasons. They're historical the
same way we do history. New Testament scholars will employ those reasons and
apply them to the text, and they'll say, the book as a whole is this or that, but
these passages are reliable. Why? Well, one reason is, in this book right here,
New Testament, in this book, there are 13 books that bear Paul's name. No matter
how far you are to the left, skeptics will allow six to seven of those books as
authentic writings. What's an authentic writing mean? Well, it doesn't mean it's
inspired, but what it does mean is we really think Paul wrote those six or
seven, not the other six or seven. Paul really wrote those, and who was Paul? The
skeptics, today Paul is the skeptics, darling, and they think, here's what Paul's
got going for him. He's one of the only authors in the New Testament who we know
who he is. He's a convert. Something had to go on in his life to change him,
because he wasn't always like this. He's a scholar. How do you know he's a
scholar? There's different ways to know he's a scholar. You can say, well, he
studied under Gamaliel, and he went to grad school, and under Gamaliel, the
number one teacher, and he was the one chosen to root out Christianity. He had
to be an up-and-coming young scholar, sort of a scholar-athlete. I mean,
somebody who really knows the stuff but can go out and do it. Go round up all
these Christians, but they also know that simply from reading his works,
Anthony Flew, when he was an atheist, used to say, read Romans, and you'll know
that Paul is a first-rate philosophical mind. And then he'd say, read the
Sermon on the Mount, and you know that Jesus is a first-rate ethicist. So just
read their writings, and you'll know he's a scholar. Just read how he puts
arguments together. So, which of these books do they accept by Paul? Well, almost
unanimously, they will always accept the same books. They're not like some half,
except one half, and somebody else accepts the other half. They will always
accept Romans, 1st and 2nd Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, 1st
Thessalonians, and of course Philemon, but that's a one-chapter, non-theological
book, not terribly helpful. But the other ones, Romans, 1st and 2nd Corinthians,
Galatians, Philippians, 1st Thessalonians. Bart Ehrman, probably the best-known
skeptic in America, he calls himself an agnostic leading toward atheism, and the
foremost skeptical New Testament scholar in this country says, these are the
authentic Pauline epistles. No one's going to give you problems if you use this
material. Now, does that mean everything Paul wrote was true? No. Does that mean
Paul was inspired? No. What does it mean? It means he was in the right place at the
right time. We know who he was. He's a scholar. He was changed by this message,
so there are some dynamics there that are worthwhile. He's just somebody who knew
what was going on at that time, and very importantly, as you'll see in this
lecture, he knew the other people who knew what was going on. He knew the other
eyewitnesses. So that's what authoritative means. Not always right, but
scholarly and in a position to be right, and we know who he is. So I'm going to
use just two texts today in this sense, in this watered-down definition of
authoritative, watered-down in the sense that it's not inspired. But Paul's the
author, 1st Corinthians chapter 15, and I'm going to use another text that's the
end of Galatians 1, beginning of Galatians 2. There are no chapter
dividing in the original text, so these are just two texts. End of Galatians 1,
beginning of Galatians 2, and 1st Corinthians 15, just the first 20
verses. Now Paul, in 1st Corinthians 15, begins like this. He tells the Corinthians.
He says, when I came to Corinth, I preached the gospel message to you, and
basically, now I'm paraphrasing them, but he basically says, what you do with this
message determines where you spend eternity. That's the first two verses. I
preached the gospel, where are you? Well, how did you respond to my message? Did
you say yeah or nay? And then in the third verse, he said, this is the message
that I preached when I came to Corinth. He said, I gave you what I was given. It's
extremely important in the recent discussions. I gave you what I was given.
Paul was basically saying, I'm doing what any good professor does. I'm passing
material on to you that I was taught as reliable material. Is it reliable? Well,
we'll have to see, but Paul thought it was reliable. And Paul said, I gave you what
I was given. Okay? And what is it? Well, then he talks like this. Verse 3, I gave
you what I was given, how the Jesus Christ died first and as according to
the scriptures, was buried and rose again the third day according to the
scriptures and appeared. And then Paul gives a list of appearances, three to
individuals. He adds himself to the end of the list. So there's Peter who
starts the list, James the brother of Jesus, and Paul says, last of all, me. And
three groups, a group called the twelve, a group of five hundred, and it says five
hundred of the brothers. There's a lot of discussion about this, but Paul could
mean five hundred men, just like the feeding of the five thousands, five
thousand men, there could have been ten thousand people there. So when Jesus
appears to five hundred brothers, if he means to only count them, there could
have been a thousand people there. And the last group, a group called to all the
apostles. Three groups, three individuals, Paul says he appeared. But that
phrase, I gave you what I was given as a first importance. This is the center of
our faith. I gave this to you as a first importance. That's an extremely crucial
phrase because if there's an unanimous conclusion in the New Testament today,
and 1 Corinthians 15 may be the most discussed passage in the New Testament,
it could be. Here's an inclusion that virtually every scholar who writes, I
don't care how far to the right, I don't care how far to the left, I don't care
where they teach, what their credentials, virtually everyone will agree with this
phrase. We can tell that this passage, 1 Corinthians 15, 3 and following, is an
early creedal tradition. Now there are synonyms for creed, tradition, confession.
It's an early creedal report. There are dozens of them in the New Testament. This
is one of the most important things that's emerged in the last 40 years. That
in the New Testament there is, there are a number of these early reports and what
they reflect is the earliest preaching of the apostolic community. Bart Ehrman,
again, best known skeptic in America, a specialist, Bart Ehrman says, we can
trace this material to one year after the cross. Now if you do history, and again
I had to satisfy some members of the history department at Michigan State
too, if you're going to do history, there are certain criteria for, for
historical accuracy. Paul claims to have gotten this for somebody else and it
really, really helps if he, by any chance, got this material from eyewitnesses,
that'd be huge, because almost nothing in the ancient world is, and if he got it
at a very early date. Well, how's one year after the cross? Is that early enough
for you? You go, yeah, you're gonna have to, you're gonna have to prove that one.
Wasn't that book written in 55 AD? Yeah, 1 Corinthians written about 55. Okay,
I'm, you know, I'm all ears. Make your case. I'm gonna sit back and listen. How
do you get back from 55 AD to 31 AD? Alright, let me stop right there. I'm gonna
do two things for the rest of the lecture. First of all, I'm gonna argue the typical
argument that Christian apologists use. Then, then I'm gonna, I'll tell you at
what point I'm doing this. I'm gonna flip-flop to the minimal facts argument
that's, that's changed the generation of scholars. Here's the old way folks would
argue. Many New Testament scholars still argue like this, and you can still pull,
pull this off. It's still, as you're seeing in a moment, there are reasons that
it's a good argument. So if you ask the average scholar, I'm gonna start doing a
timeline for the rest of my lecture. Let's, let's call this ground zero. Okay,
this is the death of Jesus. We're gonna be working that way. That's creation.
That's 2012. This ground zero. What year is it? Usually 30 AD, pretty popular.
Second most popular date, 33. And, but we're just called ground zero because we
want to move before, I'm sorry, after this point and see how far, how we can get
back to this. All right. Now if you ask the average person, you say, Paul writes
1 Corinthians about here 25 years away. How do you know that's reliable material
in 1 Corinthians 15? Here's the old method. This is not the minimal facts
argument. The old method, which I think also works. You have to be careful, but
it works. Here's the way a lot of Christians would argue. Well, let's go
to Mark and I'll use critical dates. Okay. I'll use critically ascertained dates.
So they'll say, you want to know what happened back there? Let's check Mark
out at just 70 AD. So we're plus 40, right? Plus 40. Matthew 80 AD or plus 50.
Luke 85 AD or plus 55. And everybody puts John at about 95 or plus 65. And the
argument is, you know, in spite of what you might hear, these are reliably
early text in terms of distance to have major sources from plus 40, plus 50,
plus 55, and plus 60 to 65 at 90 to 95 AD. And this is great in the ancient
world. So really? I don't do ancient history. I don't know, but is that
really good? Because you're a lot of skeptics say, oh, that's too way too
late afterwards. Okay, let's do some comparisons. I was in a debate recently.
And it was an odd debate. Two of us had the primary debate. The debate went on
for two days. And then we each were allowed to bring two guys in to in
effect have our back to two additional people. So the next day of the debate,
six people were dialoguing. And one of the backup guys for the atheist fellow
was a physicist. And the guy said, he said, Christians are going to want to tell
you, this guy's an atheist. He says, Christians are going to want to tell you
that 40 to 60 years later is plenty close. I want to tell you, it's not.
That's really, really late. So I got up there and there were two platforms
because each of us dialogued the other one. And so I said to this guy,
I said, do we know a lot about Alexander the Great? He said, yeah, we know a lot
about Alexander the Great. Really? Yeah, I mean, he's about 33 when he dies.
He's the youngest, maybe the most brilliant military general anybody's ever seen after
that point. His armies conquer, they move east. They take everything from Macedonia
over past India. Yeah, his group, the phalanx, it was the most devastating army ever.
Wipes out a lot of the armies of the Middle East that came up against it. Yeah, we know a
fair amount about him. I said, when do those things, when do those reports date relative to
Alexander's life? He said, I don't know, I'm a physicist. It's okay.
Here's Alexander's death, about 330 BC. By the way, he was a private tutor.
Alexander, he was privately tutored by Aristotle. So about 330 BC. And there's a number of people
who wrote things about his life that were contemporary with him. Whoa, now that's good,
but we don't have any of them. They may show up someday, but we don't have any of them.
Our earliest source for Alexander on this timeline, our earliest source for Alexander.
Now, I told Art I wouldn't go off the platform here. I have to go out that exit door.
Earliest source for Alexander, plus 300. Oh yeah, yeah, we knew a lot about Alexander 300 years later.
Well, they had earlier sources. That's what the argument is. Well, so did the Gospel writers.
Best sources for Alexander. Plutarch and Arian. They wrote four and a quarter to four fifty
after Alexander died.
What's not? All right, pick a different example.
He's an odd one, so we don't have good historical sources.
All right, how about Tiberius Caesar? He was on the throne in Rome when Jesus died.
Tiberius lives, he dies just a few years after Jesus does. I think 37 AD.
So he's on the throne. Certain early writers linked Jesus to Pilate and Tiberius.
All right, and we have about the same number of major sources for Tiberius that we do for Jesus.
Okay, good comparison.
Let's compare the Gospels to Tiberius real fast. What's earliest source for Tiberius?
Contemporary, and we have it.
Ooh, you think to yourself, I'm not going to say anything, but the New Testament is not looking so good here because
we don't have a contemporary argument. I'm a contemporary source.
There is an early source for Tiberius, a general, a Roman general, but it's the least usable of the four sources.
It's the least valuable of the four sources. The next best source for Tiberius, next best source.
I mean, the next source, period, it's the best one. Next source, out there. Tacitus at plus 80,
15 years later than John. Next best source, Suetonius, Roman historian, plus 85.
And the fourth source for Tiberius, Dio Cassius, plus 180.
Yeah, but skeptics say, yeah, but you can't compare Gospels,
prejudice, religious writings to Greco-Roman histories. Really?
That's something else that's changed in recent scholarship. About 1990,
a prominent classical scholar at the University of London
wrote a book comparing the Gospels to Greco-Roman biographies, or BO, is this sometimes pronounced?
And he argued, the Gospels have all the earmarks of Greco-Roman biographies, and they should be
considered biographies. It's, maybe you can think in your own fields about how a major work has
changed thought, and that has held the day since 1990. And today, most detestment scholars, critical
detestment scholars, believe that the Gospels are Greco-Roman biographies, so they are the same
genre. Well, then you go, yeah, but they got miracles in them. So do all the Greco-Roman
historians. Oh, you're kidding. No, they do. Virtually every Greco-Roman writer. Now Thucydides
is an exception. He says he doesn't believe in that stuff and he doesn't do it. But I mean Herodotus,
the so-called father of history. Tacitus, although he has fewer than Suetonius.
Suetonius has a lot. Pretty normal. You go, wow, then they're all whatever. Okay, really?
They're all junk because they report miracles, right? We were talking back there before this
started. And let me refer to you a two-volume work that's just come out a year ago. It's called
Miracles. It's by Craig Keener, PhD from Duke, New Testament, minor in classics. So he's a Greco-Roman
scholar. And he's done a two-volume work, 1200 pages, part one and part two, on contemporary
miracle claims. He's got pre and post CAT scans, pre and post MRIs, pre and post X-rays. And somebody
thinks these things, when you read them, you're going to say, how come I've never heard this?
I don't know. But you can't put these things down. These two books are just incredible.
He's got hundreds of cases from all over the world. He's got so many of them that the table of
contents reads like this. Cases in Asia, cases in Central America, cases in South America, cases
in Western Europe, cases in North America. That's how they're arranged. And then under each section
he's got little things like those with cooperation, those with heavy evidence. And his main argument,
and two volumes is this, don't call the New Testament naive because it records miracles.
And don't call Greco-Roman writers, which is his second area, don't call Greco-Roman writers naive
because they record miracles. Everybody in the world knows about these things, except the
Western university community, and they're coming around. That's his claim. So that does not make
these guys naive. Because if you're going to call John naive, you call Herodotus naive. If you call
Mark naive, you call Tacitus naive. And maybe they're the right ones or we're the wrong ones.
Just maybe. Okay. I'm going to drop this second argument that says the New Testament is in the
right place, right time, fulfills the criteria for historiography. Now from this point on,
I'm going to be doing my minimal facts argument. I'm going to be citing only data. Probably 95%
of what I say from now on will be accepted across the critical spectrum from conservative scholars
to atheist scholars who study these disciplines. They're all going to agree with almost everything
I'm saying here. What makes Bar-Roman say that we can get Paul's report from just plus 25?
What makes Bar-Roman say that we've got plenty of material from one to two years after the cross?
How in the world can a guy who is, quote, an agnostic leaning toward atheism?
How can he say we can get this material back to plus one or plus two? All right.
So Paul is writing here. First Corinthians 15. There's no difference on the date. Some people
might say 53. Some people might say 57, but it's not determined by whether you're conservative or
liberal or whatever. About 55. That's a nice round 25 years. But Paul says, verse two verses,
when I came to you Corinthians, this is the message I gave you. In other words, when he came to them,
he said it, and now he's writing it down. When did he come to Corinth? Some people think that this
is the most ascertainable debate date in the entire New Testament. 51 AD. 51 to 52. How do we
know that? Well, because the New Testament mentions a city leader who was in control of Corinth when
Paul came to Corinth, and inscription has been found in stone with this guy's name on it and how
convenient these city leaders, city states, remember Greece, they were chosen for one year terms.
And it's known that he ruled the city from 51 to 52 AD. And when Paul came, he was in control.
All right. So Paul says, I'm writing to you here what I said to you here at plus 21.
And he says in verse three, again, I gave you what I was given as a first importance. We're
talking about the heart of Christianity right now, he says, and I'm telling you what I was told.
Okay, interesting. Here's the question. When and from whom did he receive this material? Do we have
a clue? When and from whom did he receive this material? All right, we talk about the arguments
if you want to, I'm not sure how long I'm here afterwards till I get started off to do something
else. But if you want to talk about reasons, we can talk about them. But let me give you the
scholarly, the critical conclusion. Bartolome's going to agree to this. People who don't even think
Jesus lived, which are like not on the Bartolome just wrote a whole book against them saying,
you guys don't have credentials, you're out of your field, stay in your own field.
That's a skeptic writing to the skeptics. It's kind of a fun read. You have to tell you about
their arguments, but virtually everybody, virtually everybody, Richard Bach from Cambridge
University says this is a consensus position among scholarship. They believe Paul received this
material about 35 AD. You go, what, plus five? Yeah, plus five. How in the world would they know
that? Let's do the math. Here's the cross. We're calling it, for a nice round number, we're calling
it 30 AD. When did Paul have his Damascus road experience or for skeptics? When did Paul think
Jesus appeared to him on road to Damascus? It was either plus two or plus three.
Plus two or plus three. Paul says Galatians chapter one, an authoritative book, according to the
definition I gave you earlier of authoritative. Galatians chapter one, Paul says, Galatians 116,
I met Jesus. And then he said, I didn't go running up to Jerusalem to meet those who were apostles
before me. I went out into Arabia by myself for three years. Now some people think he was preaching
and all kinds of other stuff, but we really don't know. He said, I went off for three years and
then I went up to Jerusalem. All right, again, let's do the math. Here's the cross. When does Paul
come to the Lord? Plus two. You say, well, I think it's plus three. Great, plus three. Three years
later, he goes up to Jerusalem. Three plus three, six, 30 AD. Oh, I think it was converted to 32 AD.
Okay, great. Two plus three, 35. In Galatians chapter one, Paul says, I went up to Jerusalem
after three years, so we're plus five or plus six after the cross. And Paul says, I spent 15 days
with Peter that had a apostle. He said, I saw no others, no other apostles, except James the brother
of Jesus. I spent 15 days with Peter and James the brother of Jesus. Now, what were they discussing
during that time? Well, the theme of the short book called Galatians is the nature of the gospel.
I guess maybe we could say this is a theme of Galatians. Here's the gospel. Get it right.
Don't change it. If you change it, your anathema. Preach the right thing. Go try to get there some
other way. It's by grace through faith. All right, you got it? Don't mess up the gospel. That's the
bottom line. So when he goes to Jerusalem at plus five or plus six, if they weren't talking about the
gospel centrally, at least had to come up. Now, you know, as a guy who studied the resurrection on
my life, and I tell people the resurrection rescued me from 10 years of skepticism, I told my mother
from back in those days that I was this close to becoming a Buddhist. I really was. In fact,
some days I think I was like we were talking about the car, you know, what side of the fence
am I on? I don't know. You know, you're in grad school and you're going through this stuff and
a lot of things are going on and the resurrection kind of rescued me from this guy. I could see
that this argument wins the day. Seriously. All right, so what's going on here? I know what I would
ask Peter and James first. This would be my first question to them from the apostle Paul.
I'll tell you what I saw on the way to Damascus if you tell me what you saw a few days after the
crucifixion. How did he look? Come on, guys. Give it to me. What did you guys see? Now, I'll tell you
what I saw. And then I might say this if I'm Paul, depending on how bold Paul is, and you know,
Paul was pretty bold from his epistles. I might have said this. Hey, guys, the three of us have
something in common here. I'm not trying to dog you guys, but you know, we all have a point in
our life. We weren't exactly exemplary followers of the Lord. I was on my way to kill or imprison
men, women and children who named the name of Christ. I'm not proud of that.
James, you grew up in the house with the Messiah and you were an unbeliever.
Somebody told me you used to think your brother was insane. That's what Mark 3 says,
that his family thought he was beside himself.
And James might have hung his head and say, I didn't know any better. Peter,
you have an exalted position. It's a had apostle not trying to dog you,
but you denied your Lord three times. Now, if I'm writing a book here, I'm going to put an
informational footnote. I'm going to say a pastoral note. I'm going to say, look what God does with
people who've made a lot of mistakes and he uses them later. Just a little side note.
But if I'm Paul, I'm going to say, guys, tell me, James, dude, you thought he was crazy.
What did you think when you saw your crucified and risen brother?
And Jesus says to you, bro, it's me.
What was the first thought that came into your head? Peter,
you must have thought it was wasted. You blew it. You're going back fishing.
What did you think when he appeared to you and, guys, let me tell you what it was like for me
in the Lord of Damascus. I mean, what were those 15 days like? There's a little Greek word.
Well, actually, it's a long Greek word, but it's in Galatians, chapter one, verse 18.
The Greek word is hysterasi. The root word is histor, H-I-S-T-O-R, if you transliterate it.
Now, you don't jump off the deep end and say, ah, that's our word history. Well,
it is the Greek word from which we get our word history, but it doesn't mean it meant history
in the first century. But what does hysterasi mean? The English translations usually slaughter it.
I know two or three word studies on this done by non-Evangelicals. It's a very interesting word.
It means to interview so as to acquire truth. Probably the closest word we have today to
depict this hysterasi, we see it every night, depending on where you live in the country.
I used to live in Montana for three years, and it was 10 o'clock a night. For most of the country,
it's probably 11 o'clock a night. It comes on your television, eyewitness news.
The word hysterasi means check it out. It was used in papyri at an early date for people who
didn't take person's words, a geographer. It was used once of a geographer. What's up this river?
Well, I'm not going to ask you what's up that river. You might live a mile up,
but I'm going to check it out myself. So I go up the river, then I write my diary.
That's hysterasi. That's eyewitness news. And here's Geraldo Rivera out. And Geraldo's always
standing in the middle of the hurricane, so you can see that he's really suffering to bring you
the news. That's hysterasi. And Paul says, I went back here at plus five or six because I wanted
to investigate. Then as we go from the end of Galatians one to Galatians two, no chapter break.
He says, 14 years later, I went back. All right. 14 years later, I went back. Critics, Bart Ehrman,
Hummond Kirster, and Harvard, they put this event at about 48 AD. We're still only plus 18.
He went back and Galatians two, two is one of the most incredible verses in New Testament.
I love the way the King James translates it here, but most translations say just about the same
thing. Paul says in Galatians two, two, I went back up after 14 years to see the other apostles
and to set before them the gospel I was preaching to see if I was running or had run in vain.
What? Yeah, I went back up to Jerusalem to make sure we were on the same page,
to make sure we were all presenting the same gospel. Neat. So we do want to make sure that
you guys were preaching the same thing. Galatians two, two, I went back up there. I shared with
them the gospel I was preaching. And then just a few verses later, Galatians two, six, these five
words in English, they added nothing to me. They added nothing to me. Then just three verses later,
they, this is where we get the phrase, they laid hands on Barnabas and me, and they gave us the
right hand of fellowship. And they said, y'all go to the Gentiles and take this message.
We're going to stay here and give the message to the Jews. But the point is,
the message was the same. They added nothing to me. You take it to them, we'll give it here,
and that's what we decide to do. Paul says it this way in 1 Corinthians 15-11, reflecting on what,
this is them telling Paul that he was okay. Here's Paul telling them that they're okay.
1 Corinthians 15-11, he just gives a list of the appearances, and then he says this,
whether it is I or they, who are they? They are the other apostles, he says so in the context.
Whether it is I or they, this is what we preach and this is what you believe.
Paul's saying, hey, you don't like me? Great, go talk to Peter. Don't like Peter? Go talk to James,
because you're going to get the same message no matter who you talk to.
Whether it's I or they, so we teach and so you believe. Next few verses, that's why Paul says
three times, if we're wrong about this, we're liars. If we're wrong about this, we're preaching
evane. The we're is he and the other apostles. Why? Because they were preaching the same
message. It's uniform. All right, one more thing and I'm done.
So far, I've been focusing on this point right here at five to six years after the cross,
but I'm going to assert that we can get back all the way to the cross. We can close this gap.
Why does Bart Ehrman, what I started with, why does Bart Ehrman say we can get this
message back to one to two years after the cross? Why does he concede that?
Why do skeptics, you know, why has the table certainly totally changed on this?
Because of this creedal argument and in the New Testament, there's,
there are, they can tell that this was early preaching. This is the,
this is what the earliest apostles preach coming out of the gate. All right,
this is when Paul heard the message. Historici, Galatians 118. This is when he did the first
hand research. Now, Paul and James, sorry, if Peter and James gave it to Paul,
they had it before he had it. Now, when I say an early creed, one of the reasons they know it's
an early creed is because in the Greek, it reads stylistically. 1 Corinthians 15, 3 and following
reads like this in the Greek. 2 stanzas with data and not a rhyming sequence like American,
like English, but with a way that's easily memorizable. Why? Because most New Testament
scholars today believe that the vast majority of Jesus' audiences, contrary to other things
you may have heard, the vast majority of Jesus' audiences were illiterate, up to 90%.
What do you do when you teach somebody who's illiterate, but you want them to teach somebody else?
What do you do? You tell stories that they'll remember. Ah, parables. And you give them short,
pithy statements that they will memorize. Turn the other cheek, walk the extra mile,
do unto others, that they will memorize. And when you codify things into a dot,
especially if there's an Aramaic original, which is the language Jesus speaks,
now we know you're really going back in the church because somebody had to put this together.
Paul hears it. They had it before Paul. Someone had to codify. You had to get it from the events to
the dot, the dot, the dot, the dot, the dot, and we're right on top of it.
In fact, some of the leading scholars today have said the following. Larry Hurtado, just
recently retired head of the religion department, Edinburgh University. Hurtado says, coming out
of the gates, coming out of the gates in 30 AD, Hurtado says two doctrines had to be present
or there would be no Christianity. What are those two doctrines?
Deity of Christ and a resurrection. Of course, if there's a resurrection, there's a death. So
deity, death, resurrection, that's the gospel. Whenever you hear the gospel defined in New
Testament, right in the book of Acts, that's the minimal gospel presentation. Deity, death,
resurrection, and then the question of, do you have faith? That's what Paul is saying in 1 Corinthians 15,
1 and 2. What did you do with that message? Did you believe? First two verses, 1 Corinthians 15,
1 and 2. So deity, death, resurrection, belief. And Hurtado says, coming out of the gate, you've got
that from Edinburgh. Okay. Richard Balkam, Cambridge, same thing. I gave this lecture one time at
Cambridge, same lecture. And Richard Balkam, who's a very prominent scholar, slipped in and was
sitting in the back row while I was speaking. And I went ahead and gave him a regular lecture,
which took his name in vain several times and said, Richard Balkam says, you can date it there.
He sat in the back. I asked him later, do you have any
comments? He said, no, that's what I teach. That is present from 30 to 31 AD. Okay. Third guy,
James D.G. Dunn, is influential, is any historical Jesus scholar today.
Dunn says, the latest, this da-da-da-da-da-da-da form could have been memorized. The latest it
would have been put from event into form is six months after the cross. That's James D.G. Dunn.
Here's the cross. Six months later, this is in da-da-da-da-da-da-da form.
And like I said, the very latest is Barterman. I started the lecture with it. Barterman saying,
we can get this back to, he has other arguments. Barterman does. Now, to bring this full circle,
make a comment or two and I'll be done. What about my professor who said, yeah, go ahead and do the
resurrection, but don't say it happened because the New Testament said it happened. And I said,
critical scholars use, they use the New Testament, but they use it critically.
They don't assume it's inspired or even reliable. They use it critically. How would Bart
for Bart, how would Bart, Qua Bart, get that conclusion of one to two years later? Well,
one of the things he does in this book, Did Jesus Exist? He asks, how many independent
arguments do we have for the crucifixion of Jesus? Now, the Jesus seminar, a very critical, very
quote-unquote liberal group, says if you have two sources for something that makes the proclamation
a lot greater chance of being historical because two heads are better than one. Two sources are great.
Barterman asked the question, how many sources do we have for the crucifixion?
He gives a list. He cites to his skeptical mind the way he grant does this. He gives 11 sources,
11 independent sources for the crucifixion of Jesus, 11. Now, on ancient historical grounds,
why isn't 11 exemplary when, as Paul Meyer says, professor of ancient history,
Western Michigan University, Meyer says, many things in the ancient world depend on one witness
and two, make an event unimpeachable. Two. Barterman says, we have 11 different sources,
historical sources for the crucifixion of Jesus. So here's what you get, bottom line.
This phrase will have virtually no disputants in the contemporary world. Jesus's earliest followers
had experiences that they thought were appearances of the risen Jesus. Virtually nobody disputes that.
Barterman says, no, I don't dispute that. It's determined historically. We know it's true. Why
would I say I dispute it? It's just true. So here's what you do. We have that sentence. The earliest
followers of Jesus had experiences that they believe were appearances of the risen Jesus. And what do
you do if you're skeptic? You come up with alternatives. Well, maybe they were lying. Well, maybe they
saw hallucinations. But the same data, which I've been given here, the same data with scholars share
say those other theories don't work. And so now you're left with an appearance.
And therefore, a lot of skeptics, place we began, a lot of people today who are happy and are often
quoted by the skeptical community will say, I'm a skeptic, as Dale Allison does. He was the one
I was citing earlier. Dale Allison, who says, I'm a skeptic. He called himself a cryptic deist.
And then he says, but I'm sure the risen Jesus appeared to his disciples after his death. I can
give you others. But is that the definition? Ed Sanders, E.P. Sanders, Duke University, recently
retired from Duke, historian, he gives a list of well accepted historical events. And he calls
himself a liberal. And then he says this, and as well, his list of accepted historical facts,
he says the following is an historical fact. The earliest disciples saw the risen Jesus.
I don't know how exactly they saw him, but they saw him. That's his list. And that's part of his
list. That's one of his facts and his irreducible minimum list. The earliest disciples saw the
risen Jesus. How do we get that? Because we have the data that can track it back to the beginning.
Okay. Art, do I, should I take some questions here or comments? And if you have to leave folks,
don't think anything about getting up and leaving. You know, I'm used to university classes too,
and I'm used to people walking out at all time one speaker. Questions or comments?
Dragatory remarks? Yes.
Speak up.
Yeah. So it seems like one of the things that's going on in your argument is that you have these,
then you have like the 15 days where they met and talked, and you have independent eyewitnesses
coming together, and their stories corroborating each other. And that therefore, to some degree,
lending truth, or lending some kind of truth value to what they claim they saw, that they saw the
risen Christ. There's been recent technical results that show, his name is Eric Olson,
and he's a philosopher that shows that coherence of independent testimony is not necessarily truth
conducive, given that the credibility of the testifiers is questionable. And when you have
testifiers like, for example, Paul, James, Peter, it seems like their, their own credibility could
be questioned. Because? Well, because Paul was murdered. And they're, so my question is,
what is your first century source that Peter, James, and John were reliable, so that the
corroboration of their independent testimony we can think is conducive to the truth of what
they're reporting? So how do we know that the witnesses themselves are reliable? Yeah. Okay.
First of all, I'll even add to your objection. There have been a number of psychological studies
on the nature of eyewitness reports and memory. How does, in fact, Richard Balkam,
in his book called Jesus and the Eyewitnesses, the Cambridge guy I was referring to,
he has a whole chapter on eyewitness credibility and eyewitnesses as a good,
an ancient world as a good indication or not of events. And he goes through these psychological
studies and asks the same sort of question. Okay. Now, I would say one answer to that is somebody
like a Bart Ehrman, I think if he were up here, having just gone through this book to Jesus exist,
I think Bart would say, now look, I'm not a Christian, so I'm not trying to argue for Christianity,
because that's how he starts his book out. I'm not a Christian, so I'm trying to argue for this.
But I think he'd say that's why we use Paul and that's why we use those half dozen books,
because all we know is he's a good scholar in the right place at the right time and he knows
the other guys. Bart has a whole chapter on, well, it's a half a chapter. He does two things in this
one chapter and this is one of them. He does a chapter, again, half a chapter on Paul's meeting
right here in Galatians chapter one. And he stops and he says, you know, it's rather incredible
that Paul got 15 days with Peter and then he says, I'd like 15 days with Peter. You know,
that's good. That's good. And then he says, Bart Ehrman the skeptic says,
how much closer to eyewitness testimony that can we get than this? He says, this is the best
testimony we have. So I think Bart would say, these guys were in the right place, right time,
Paul himself a scholar. So he's the one that's going to check this out. Now we have a trial
attorney over here who maybe can say this, but I would say this, I'd say eyewitnesses don't prove
something's true. But in general, it's the basis of the scientific method. And in general, we think
it's among the very best types of evidence. So I'd answer your question by saying, it's not full
proof. But if somebody has a problem and says, well, that's great, but you're one guy's a murderer
and the one guy's a whatever, then they should come up with an alternative thesis
that explains this better, like you do in a court of law, or you do in a history class,
or you do in a philosophy class and epistemology, let's say. And you have to go through this,
and you'd have to make a case for something better happening. And I'm going to say the
alternatives aren't going to work very well. And that's why you have to ask, why do the EP
Saunders of Duke, Bart Ehrman, North Carolina, why have the skeptics move from, no, you can't use
that evidence, that's really, really bad, to, wow, this stuff for the resurrection is looking
incredibly good. Now, why would somebody who doesn't believe those things move over toward it?
Something's convincing them that this data is not impregnable, no data are, everything's
probabilistic, it's, you know, fallible data. We have to do the best we have of what we have,
and if you can get back to early eyewitnesses, the two E's, I sometimes call them, by the way,
empty tomb, if you want to talk about E's, there's a third one. I told you when I went to graduate
school in the 70s, nobody believed the empty tomb unless you were evangelical. In the literature
today, there are 23, at least I've come up with 23, 23 arguments for the empty tomb,
23 arguments for the tomb being empty. So now you have early eyewitnesses with an empty tomb,
and the data have to answer, have to be addressed to all that. So I just say, best place, best time,
most authoritative people we have, Paul was certainly a scholar, and so what's your better shot at the data?
My question again is what, what, now you're doing the best explanation argument?
Yeah, like abduction.
You just switched it back to me, but I want to switch it back to you.
Sure.
Again, what is your first century source that gives some degree of confidence that the eyewitness
testifiers were credible? I seem to have evidence that they were not.
Like what?
Like that, Paul wasn't.
How does somebody being a murderer mean you can't witness to something?
Well, we need to know the veracity of their testimony.
Sure. But how, but to use your example, how does Bill is a murderer so Bill can't be,
can't testify in the court of law?
No, no, it at least adds a question to whether or not they have the kind of character that we can
rely on their testimony as being conducive.
So that makes them a bad character.
So I need to, I mean, I need to read something.
But what's on the other side?
As I said, there's got to be a reason why skeptics are taking his six books and thinking they meet the
criteria. Scholar, studying into the right guys, thinks clearly can put a philosophical argument
together. So, and he's been converted by this, so you have to ask him why has he changed from being
a murderer to being a very ethical law abiding religious teacher?
What's happened to him?
And Paul says, okay, it was the resurrection of Jesus.
That's what turned me around.
You'd have to answer that on its own grounds.
Just by virtue of the people he knew, the time and place he wrote, his scholarly credentials,
how he wrote, the nature of his arguments, that's probably why Paul's the critic's darling.
That's probably why they use him.
They think he stands those tests, the very thing you're asking.
Okay, and so you think that that makes his testimony reliable?
Among other things, including his conversion, because that tells you, I used to do this,
that was horrible. I don't do that right now.
I'm over on this side of the fence and here's why I am.
So he would even agree with you about who he used to be.
He says that plenty of times in those six to seven books.
So I think you can answer those questions.
Again, if it were that easy to deal with it, scholarship today would not have moved over.
If it's that easy to say these guys are not credible witnesses.
That's why Bart Erman has a half a chapter on this meeting saying he wished he were there,
and this is a great way to hear early evidence of what's going on.
Plus, we have a lot of other reports that get us back to the cross.
What do you mean for century?
Because Bart Erman himself says we have sort.
Who's contemporary?
Bart Erman is a distinguished professor at University of North Carolina,
who is an agnostic leaning toward atheism.
He's a New Testament scholar, PhD from Princeton.
He used to be a Christian. He walked away from the faith.
He tells everybody, he says, I'm not a Christian.
I'm not trying to give you an argument for this.
I'm just telling you they have a good foundation for what they're saying.
Christians do, but I'm not one.
He's very, very well known.
He's probably got 10 books published with Oxford University Press.
He's the main guy that skeptics used to be John Dominic Crossen,
but now it's Bart Erman. He's the hot skeptic.
Yes, sir?
Yeah, on this same subject, the arguments that I've heard that are most convincing to me would be that
the accounts don't exclude evidence like Paul has had this aspect to his life.
He used to be a loser.
A lot of things in the accounts that if you're trying to make up a story,
probably wouldn't put in.
The second one, and I don't know if there's really historical evidence here,
but I've heard it, is the martyrdom of the early believers
that they actually took this witnessing that they had
and gave their life to rather than refute it.
So maybe a comment on those.
Yeah, let me take the second one, martyrdom.
Martyrdom does not prove a message.
Martyrdom proves that the witnesses believe their message.
It's all martyrdom does.
We think about other examples.
You could be an atheist, communist, and die for your message to propagate communism,
and many did, back after the Russian Revolution and so on.
Buddhist priests who set themselves on fire to protest the war in Vietnam.
You couldn't deny the fact that they were utterly appalled at the war
and thought people shouldn't be killing each other,
so they died for an ethical principle.
When the earliest disciples died for their message,
it doesn't prove their message, but you're right.
They put themselves in a position to say,
I've satisfied myself that there's enough data here.
Now you say, well, do we have evidence for their martyrdom?
I wouldn't go around saying,
I would not say that we know that all the early apostles died as martyrs,
because some of the data for that gets pretty late.
But the big four, one thing I didn't tell you was that when Paul went back to Jerusalem
in about 48 AD, James was still there.
Peter was still there.
Paul, of course, was there.
John was there.
The foremost influential Christians in the early church,
you can't pick anybody who was more influential.
All four were there.
We have first century sources for the martyrdom of Paul, James, Peter,
and a second, Christians frequently say John wasn't martyred.
We have a second century source for the martyr of John.
So the big four there, three of the four, we have sources for the martyrdom.
That only proves that they believed it.
So you have to ask on what basis.
I want to make a comment on that, because I'm not crazy about the analogies you use to
undercut that message.
And here's why.
What analogy?
The believers, the communist believers died.
Oh, Buddhist priests.
That was because that was a belief structure that they had committed themselves to.
This was the observation of an event, the resurrection of Jesus.
That's a personal experience of an event that's not...
Where the other two were philosophical positions.
People that actually personally witnessed events,
and it's different to die for a personally witnessed event
than it would be for a belief structure.
So that's...
No, I think you're definitely right.
In fact, I say regularly, when I give this little thing,
I say regularly, the difference between the Buddhist priests and the communists
who are dying for philosophical or ethical convictions, which people do.
In fact, the two fields that people most readily die for are political and religious views.
But one is in the philosophical realm, but the other one is in the event.
And as I go on to say, these four men and a few...
And others, but these four men were just about the only ones in the world.
Well, today, when a Muslim missionary dies for their faith,
when a Christian missionary dies for their faith,
they're dying for what they thought was Peter's testimony.
They're dying for what they thought was Paul's or Muhammad's testimony.
They're dying for their testimony.
Only these four guys were in a position to know whether their testimony was right or wrong.
That's the point you're making?
Yeah, I think that is...
They died for their conviction about an historical event.
Their conviction about it, yes.
In fact, there's this comment about Paul being a murderer.
There's different kinds of murders that you might say, in a court of law,
he might not be held reliable if you were a murderer that shot somebody to rob a bank or something.
But Paul's murdering had to do with the early Christians.
And because it was a matter of principle, it'd be no different than saying,
we can't trust a veteran who came back from the war and shot somebody.
And so he's therefore a murderer.
And there's a big difference in a court of law between a witness and an expert witness.
We're not saying these people were expert witnesses.
We're saying they're witnesses.
They're just telling you what they saw.
And there's no reason to deny it.
And let's say it's something to gain by it.
Or if they were unreliable because they were...
Or mentally ill or...
That's a great point.
If it's true that Paul is acting on state's evidence,
if he's acting on what the authorities told him to do,
his murders would be on the level of somebody who threw the switch for the electric chair.
Because that was a state sanctioned, that's what the Christians were.
He was sent by authorities to mop up this...
He was not unethical himself.
Craig, do you have any comment about this?
No, I just...
I think the answer to your question is there are no other sources
outside of the New Testament Gospels for Paul's character.
But of course you had to assume the truth of those Gospels to even get to Paul being a murderer.
There's no other external source.
These are the best sources.
They are the earliest.
Did they have means motive or not?
So you're accepting the sources even to get that.
Because they're the same sources.
When people say to me,
how come Christians were so prejudiced only except four Gospels
when there were...
Different numbers are given.
When there were 23 Gospels,
what they're not telling you is,
in order to say there were 23 Gospels,
you're going up to the fourth century AD.
And my comeback to that frequently is,
it's not the Christians' fault if they accepted every Gospel that was available in 100 AD,
but there were only four.
In other words, they accepted everything.
They tried to be inclusive.
They knew there were differences between John and Mark,
but they accepted them because they were the early sources.
They accepted what we had.
So at the time, there's no other comeback.
There's no other data.
We don't know.
I often ask people when I'm...
It often happens in a context just like this,
where somebody will say,
well, why couldn't this have been true?
Or why couldn't that have been true?
I'd say, I'll tell you what,
give me...
I'll let you have a much lesser standard than Bart Ehrman used for the cross.
Bart gives 11 sources for the crucifixion of Jesus.
Give me two.
Give me two first-century sources that says Paul was unreliable.
There aren't any.
And the comeback is, well, I'm just saying.
Okay.
Well, the just saying opposes the sources we have.
If all the data we have are on this side
and the I'm just saying is on the other side,
what's that to put up against the two sources?
We have sources versus no sources.
We don't have contrary first-century sources that say other things.
Jesus was a loser.
He didn't die.
He wasn't raised.
I'm telling you, I verified that myself.
And this is written in 80 AD.
This is written in 80 AD.
There's no contrary evidence.
Wasn't the canon then that came in in the fourth century?
But that's what we consider the canon now.
Anyway, but that's because I think the early sources,
the eyewitness sources and the people that were living,
the church bothers that were living at that time
that continuously went and passed on the information
were continually judging in terms of the eyewitness sources
and the earlier...
You say fourth century, but there was no council
that chose the books.
That's often said that they didn't choose books.
They recognized what people were saying up until that time.
I'll give you an example.
We have a very early canon called the Muratorian Fragment.
Dates about 165 or 170 AD.
Now, unfortunately, the documents broken off
so the last few books on the list are not there.
The end of it's been cut off.
But the list that they give, it's the same as our New Testament
back until about 2 Peter.
Only the very end is missing.
There's another work from the same time called Tation's Fourfold Gospel.
And it's a comparison of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John from the second century.
We have early writers, Clement, Ignatius,
Polycarp, Papias from Fragments.
Who list the four authoritative gospels
from the very beginning at the end of the first century.
So, we have the earlier sources saying
these are the authoritative books that we have up at the list time.
Speak up, he said.
If Mark Herman puts forward the credibility for these 11 sources for the crucifixion,
then why is he still leading toward the end of it?
Great question.
Okay, question is if he has 11 sources,
because he believes he thinks 11 sources are great.
That's why he believes Jesus is crucified.
He says, Jesus died by crucifixion, it's a historical fact.
I don't have to back away from that.
That's what ancient history says.
And he says also the earliest followers of Jesus believe they saw appearance of the risen Jesus.
I don't have to back off from that.
That's what early history says.
He says I don't back off from those at all.
But if he's not going to be a Christian,
he's going to have to explain the data variously.
He's going to have to explain it otherwise.
And so some of the evangelicals who have debated Bart,
Michael Kona, Bill Craig, Craig Evans, Dan Wallace, and others,
they go over how can you explain that data better.
That's what some of these debates are about.
Now the ones with Dan Wallace are about the status of the New Testament manuscripts,
the thing we just got talking about.
But I would have supposed that Bart Herman thinks he can get out of it some way.
But as far as the outline of the argument,
he admits the whole, he admits the setup.
He admits we can get back to one year after the cross for both crucifixion statements
and resurrection statements and resurrection.
We can get it back to one, he says one to two years after the cross.
Yes, sir.
Just on this point, it seems to me that the skeptics or atheists can still say,
they agree with all the scholarship and say,
okay, Jesus is a guy who lived in that time and he died.
He was raised with the dead people.
So what's that got to do with me?
I don't think he was the son of God.
Right, right.
Yeah, I liken it to, I remember going on a blind date before I got married.
When someone sets you up with a blind date,
a friend might say to you, whichever way it goes, guy, gal, you say,
hey, all your buddies are married, you're the last one, you're an old guy.
I'm trying to set you up with somebody who's going to change your life.
This person is the one you're looking for.
And the person comes back, guy or gal, comes back and says, you're right.
This was extremely, I mean, this person is neat.
We're going to keep up, we're going to keep up our friendship and so on.
But there's something missing here.
You mistake me for somebody who wants to get married.
I don't.
And the reason I'm here in town is because of this local church here in Santa Barbara.
We're doing a seminar, not on the resurrection.
We're doing on religious doubt.
Okay, I've got three books on religious doubt.
I'm just saying I've got a little bit of background.
I've been working with a clinical psychologist for 20 years and we've been testing,
he's been testing and we're getting ready to publish in a couple of secular journals with
what we found out.
The vast majority of doubters, the vast majority of doubters, 70 to 85% of doubters
doubt, not for factual reasons, but for emotional reasons.
Something's happened to them.
C.S. Lewis says, I became an atheist when my mother got sick and I prayed and prayed and prayed
for her to be saved and she wasn't saved physically and she wasn't and I even thought
after she died that God would raise her from the dead.
He didn't, so I was pretty ticked and a few years later I became an atheist.
It's events like that in people's lives.
In a recent survey, one of the largest people groups who are angry at God,
this is a psychological study, were atheists.
19% of atheists are angry at God, which caused one of the researchers to say,
yeah, how do you, how are you mad at somebody who doesn't exist?
And one of the researchers said this.
The guy said, hey, I don't believe unicorns exist, but I don't spend all my life hating on them.
And that was amazing, so in other words, my point is a lot of people go on blind dates who don't
want to get married. And just because, so I get asked frequently, if the evidence is this good,
why are there skeptics? It's the simplest question in the world.
They don't want to get married. They're, they're not candidates for this.
And we are all prejudiced. We all look at data with jaundiced eyes.
We all do. We call, we often call it the color of our glasses.
Bill looks at the world with rose-colored glasses.
Yeah, we all do that. So, so the reason I came doesn't mean I'm a purely rational person.
And the atheist who rejects is not a purely rational person.
We all have other things on our agenda, but not only do we have other things,
they far outweigh our rational interests as a general rule.
70 to 85% of doubters are emotional daughters.
So I think people who think that these are intellectual exercises and you solve these
things in universities and then it's all done, that's not the way belief is formulated.
So, yes.
I don't know. We need to quit, but I want to make a comment based on that.
I think it's an important one. This doesn't hold just for the average population.
I think this holds for the scientific community that we normally think are objective people
that look at their data and draw the normal conclusions from it.
And if you look at any objective scientific analysis of the origin of life from non-life,
the preponderance of the data is so hugely against this not being a spontaneous,
possibly even a spontaneous event, yet regardless of that,
I would say a large majority of people that are involved in the research in that area,
in fact, emotionally are committed to a naturalistic...
Yeah, it's Thomas Nagel, the atheist philosopher who says,
I don't take this view because, you know, I think it's the best evidence, whatever.
I take it because I can't stand the other view and I don't want to be over there.
And by the way, he's not the only one who makes comments like that.
Richard Luant and the same sort of comment.
We all do that. We're all prejudice. We all have an angle.
And it's our job to see if the view can be explained away by our angle.
Atheists should do that. Christians should do that.
Can the data be explained away by the angle we have?
Is that prejudice enough of a reason? Because we all have prejudice.
Good point. Okay. Well, I'll stick around till he tells me I gotta go.
Thanks, folks. Thanks.
For more information about the Veritas Forum,
including additional recordings and a calendar of upcoming events,
please visit our website at veritas.org.
