Hello. Sorry, she said waving the book. Welcome to the latest AQR webinar and welcome to Nick
Salsgate and Nick Chater. I'm very kindly come on board to discuss Nick Cee's latest book.
This one, The Mind is Flat, which he's just told us, has won the US prose award for best book
in clinical psychology. So many congratulations for that. Nick Salsgate, or I can hear a corner,
partook of our last webinar. So he's an old hand at this and he says he's a
philosopher turned advertising planner, turned into some sort of hybrid creature
by work at the School of Life and the Institute of Practition as an advertiser.
Nick Chater is Professor of Behavioural Science and Pathology at the School.
He's on the advisory board of the Nudge Unit. He also broadcasts regularly on BBC Radio 4,
has hundreds of publications on his under his belt and runs a, I meant to ask, what is an M00C?
On the Shocking Shallowness of Human Psychology on Future Learn. Anyway, this is about The Mind
is Flat, the relevance to qualitative research. So I will leave you to it there with me when I
disappear off the screen, hopefully. And Feta Black-Luella. So what a little phase into the background.
So Nick, thanks for joining us. I was reflecting on this. It's about 10 years since we first met
doing work at the IPA. So and it was very exciting to see you publish your now award winning book.
So all those conversations I never got to finish with you because you were rushing somewhere else.
A lot of it was in the book. But what I'm interested in is it strikes me it's quite a personal book in
that it's not just built out of your research, but it's built out of your sort of more profound
beliefs or your deeper beliefs. So I was just interested to start by asking you how you came
to write a book called The Mind is Flat for me. And then we're getting to watching Mead by The
Mind Being Flat. Yes, that's a good question. I think it comes from a couple of sources. One is
that my starting point in the academic world when I did my PhD was the world of cognitive science.
And that's the project of trying to build computer models of the mind. So it's sort of like artificial
intelligence. Your aim is to build models that are like people. And a very natural strategy to do
that is to think, well, what we need to do is to work out what people's beliefs are, what they know
about the world, and also what they like, what they want, what they don't like. So we try and get all
this out of people's heads. And then we put it into a computer program and try and figure out
what the program would like to do. So it seems like a sensible strategy and between before
about from 1980 or so, it was probably the most popular strategy and artificial intelligence.
I came into the field in I suppose about 1986 as a PhD student. So I was in the sort of latter
phases of this project. And it was very influential on me to think that when people tried to do this,
it always seemed to go horribly wrong at the very first stage. So you'd think, I want to know how
to play chess. I want to make a computer that can play chess. So I need to talk to some grand
masters. I mean, they're really good at chess. They must know loads about this. So they'll just
tell me what the strategies they're using are. And I'll put it into my computer and off it will go.
But in fact, it turns out that's a disastrous approach, partly because the grand masters have no
idea what they seem to know. They tell you different things on different days. Most of the time they
just say, well, that's obviously a silly move. You wouldn't want to do that. But they can't really
tell you why. But not only that, they also, the things they can tell you turn out to be rapidly
to lead to inconsistencies. So they'll tell you a few things like, well, a good rule of thumb is x,
good rule of thumb is y. And then you say, yeah, but wait a minute, what about this case where
they seem to give different answers? And that happens immediately, all the time.
And we see this, of course, with ethics. So you think about the general punches we have with
ethics. We're always struggling with things like, well, of course, we want to avoid suffering,
that's terrible, we must reduce suffering. But on the other hand, we want to maintain autonomy.
So we don't want to find ourselves. So that creates ethical dilemmas where people are extremely ill
or suffering terribly. So we don't quite know what to do about that. All of the ethical challenges
that we face now, I've said just illustrations of this fact that the sooner we think about anything
tricky, we realize, oh, no, my beliefs, my preferences, my values, my principles are in
contradiction. To the extent that I can formulate them at all. So just to where that got me to the
thinking about the mind is flat, or the title of the mind is flat, is the old sort of artificial
intelligence perspective would be, you don't quite know what your beliefs are, you don't
quite know what your preferences are, and your principles are. But that sort of whatever's in
your head, it's a bit, it's beliefs and principles and preferences and things like that. There's lots
on. And, you know, the more you think about them, the more you think, oh, I've forgotten about this
one. Oh, I remember that one. And you can tell a longer and longer story about what these preferences
and beliefs are. But I think it's an illusion to think that these stories are actually reflecting
what's in your head. What they are is creative enterprises. They're a creative endeavor. If
you try to understand yourself, in the moment, at the very moment, you're thinking,
well, why did I make that move? Or why is this wrong? But that's not wrong.
Then that's the point at which I'm inventing the story.
So I think what you're saying there is that rather than this, so it's in folks sort of
folk psychological terms, we can say comfortably enough, people do have beliefs and preferences,
and they know things. But the idea that they are somehow stitched together underneath in a coherent
or near coherent whole, that seems to be where your suggestion is they don't lie underneath,
stitched together. We stitch them together as we go. Yes. It's a mention in the moment because
you talk a lot in the book about the improvising mind. Yes. Now, that's exactly right. So I think
we should think of ourselves as rather like fictional characters. So again, one of the things
that comes up a lot in the book is the analogies with fiction. And I think when we're reading a book,
we have a really a real sense of the depth of the characters and our motivations. I'm not quite
sure about all our motivations. We have a sense that they're sort of deep, interesting, rich things.
And indeed, we ourselves are deep, interesting, rich things in a sense. But the sense of depth
can't be that inside the head of the character, say Anna Karenader or Sherlock Holmes, there are
real beliefs and desires and principles. Because of course, this is a fictional character, they
don't have a brain. It's nothing inside. But from the scraps of information we know about that
person, we are able ourselves to weave a complicated story about why they did this and why they thought
that and probably they would have done this in a different situation. And we can do that about
ourselves too. And I think we can do it for the same reason. So we're observing our own lives flow
by, we're observing the people around us. And we understand ourselves in just the way we understand
fictional characters or other people by improvising stories. I think the illusion is thinking, no,
no, when I'm understanding myself, I look inside, you know, I just, there's all this coherent stuff
in my head. And I just have a good, a good nose around in my own brain. And I think that's something
we just simply can't do at all. And it's sort of, sort of, we know this. I mean, if you ask me
something like, I don't know, for example, why, why, why do I, why do I do by one thing rather
than another thing? So I'm say, why do I, you know, why have I got a particular broadband
provider or something really not terribly like that? I think, God, you've got me there. Well,
I can tell you something historical about what I used to have. And I didn't get on very well with
them. And I don't know why I switched to this one, but I can give you a story. And I know it's not,
this is not a thank you a story. It's useful stuff to know. But the idea that it indicates
something like that is an trivial, it's sort of obviously true that we don't have some sort of
deep sense. And yes, I've got a big, all the providers that have strengths and weaknesses.
No, of course I have. I've just got a scrappy understanding. But that scrappy understanding
is sort of always like that. I mean, the sense is, in fact, that we have of being kind of slightly
impostors and skating on thin ice as we flow through life. I think all of us know, really,
that when we're trying to explain and understand our behavior, we're kind of,
we're kind of very unsure. We're bumbling from one situation to another. And we're really quite
good at maintaining the pretence that it's all coherent. Okay, so I want to pick up on here. So
if you're a qualitative researcher, you sit there and conversation with me. And it is a sort of
prevalent belief in the industry that our task, and indeed, this is what clients ask us to do,
they say, I want to know what is behind their thinking. Now, you've just said those, these
comments, if you ask the question, like, why did you switch your broadband provider? And someone
says, well, I became hugely frustrated with the old one. This seems this is true. They've not,
they've not said something that's like profoundly false. But your, your suggestion is what that
they've not revealed, because we're trying to learn these things to predict things. So I suppose
there's two things. So how should we sort of wait what we've discovered there? And what predictive
value should we ascribe to it, if any? Yeah, I think the, the thing I stress really is when
you're asking someone why they did something, they can quite often tell you, not necessarily all
that accurately, but they can tell you something about the history. So what happened? And a little
bit about why? Are there often that, of course, easy in fact, latter interpretation, and I suppose
I must have been fed up with my broadband provider, otherwise why did they change? I may have some
memory of, you know, service outages or something. But this is likely to be pretty partial and,
and mostly much of it will be sort of later interpretation. Having said that, that might be
quite predictive of my future behavior. So the, the sort of superficial sense I have of,
I don't trust company X, Y or Z, even if I'm not quite sure why I do that sense of anything,
that company, or any company with a similar name or any company owned by the same people or
anything that's vaguely associated with it, I just don't like it. And that's useful information to
know. It's not, it's not that there's some sort of deep theory I have, or some really, really
coherent set of things that express my sort of deep true values across all possible situations.
It's just a sort of scatter of local, local experiences and views. So I think there's something
you're touching on there, which I suppose I talked a little bit about this beforehand, that
you're, if we ask a question like that, we put, do we maybe learn very little predictively about
that individual, but maybe learn something predictably about people in general. So we learn
that frustration is a reason for doing something. But broadly, if you reduce frustration in that
market, you will keep more customers. I think this is sort of borrowing from, you know, the idea
of like a Freudian unconscious wherever you come to be, that we'd like to think that preferences
are deeply internal. I think it's the extent to which when we tell these stories about why we
change, they are predictive, not only more of other people's behavior than our own, or they're
kind of collective tropes that we borrow upon. Yeah, I think, I think there is a lot of truth
in that. I think the, sometimes, I mean, I'm first of all, I should stress that I think that
qualitative sort of face-to-face conversational interactions, rich interactions with people
are fantastically important, if you want to understand anything. So I mean, my background
is experimental research and I run a quant or co-run a quant consultancy decision technology,
which does very quanty things. In reality, you can't get very far without rich engagement with
individuals, if you want to understand, you know, or with anything you know, qualitative research
just care about. So I'm not sort of imagining that there's some alternative strategy. But I think
it's probably a mistake to think that what the qualitative research is trying to do is to uncover
some sort of hidden belief structure that the person's not really aware of. It's more that
they're, you're helping, you're allowing them to, as it were, create and give you a story about
their behavior. If you get several people to do this, you'll suddenly find sort of recurrent
patterns and the same things start to come up. And the things that people find persuasive stories
are themselves important. Because if you're introducing a new product or a new option,
a really crucial question is what story are they going to tell about this? And the answer is not
defined. It's not that it's not clear before we start. It's a creative question. And so if I
introduce, you know, the iPhone for the first time or introduce texting or something, before
texting came along, this sounded like a total turkey. It's a, you've already could speak,
now we just can be typing characters in it on a terrible keyboard to each other. That's never
going to work. But in fact, it turns out there are ways of, you know, ways of using the technology
which we love. So I think the idea, we all know that it's not, so whether people are like or
dislike something, it's not, it's not something that's, it's kind of fixed in their head before
the new product or service or offering comes to them. There's a sort of dynamic creative process of
are we all going to get our heads around this? Are we going to decide we love it and this is how
we're using it? Or are we going to just not, and you know, that's just not well, well-determined.
But qualitative interactions with people and exploring that space with them will be really
helpful when giving you a clue. So I suppose, I just wanted to pick up, have you ever in your
long career in psychology, experiment psychology, used qualitative methods? Is that?
Yes, yes, I have actually, yes. So I've been doing, what did you use those for? Because I think one
of the things that people at the AQRR are, they're used to sort of, as we were talking to Luella
before, one of the previous webinars was someone who's written a book called The Focus Group Is
Dead, right? They're used to that kind of wholesale attack on the very credibility of it. So to talk
to someone who holds this apparently sort of a heretical view, yet has used
qualitative methodologies. It'd be interesting to hear about that.
Yeah, yeah. So, I mean, let me, actually, I've used it quite a lot. So in, for example, in
pensions choices, we did a project years ago on what people do, what happens when you're,
when you get to the pensionable age and you can potentially change your annuity.
You can buy a different annuity from the one that's you've got with your current pension
provider. Most of us don't even think about this, we just plow on, we think, well, I'm with,
whoever I'm with, that's just, and often that's really not a good idea. So it's actually relevant
to you at some point in the future, any of you. Watch out, because actually, you can get,
actually, it really makes a big difference which provider you're with. Anyway, the question is,
why don't people do this and how can we get them to do it better? And of course, you might want
to have a big web-based survey of pensions of different ages and so on. There's a quantity
sort of approach and look at different possible ways in which you can persuade people to pay
differently or just get them to explore how they ended up with the pension and ended up with all
that stuff. But you can't really get started with knowing what questions to ask without having
rich interactions with actual people in a situation. And I think that's just the general
story for quantum research, which doesn't start with qual, tends to be pretty hopeless, I think.
Because you just don't know what questions you should be asking, so you just miss out something
absolutely crucial. Yeah, so you wouldn't really want to do a quant, and it used to be the classical
methodology, would never do a quant thing without at least a small, small pie, just to test the
questions, basically. Yeah, yeah. It's probably to test the questions and also to test the breath.
So I think the reality of real interaction, another example would be energy. As it's true,
most of the big quantum projects we do in decision technology do have a qual
front end of some kind, sometimes quite a big one. So things like understanding energy purchasing,
those are all about switching or non-switching for the big six or whatever it is now,
utilities. There are a lot of the factors that people that really are important to people,
are things that will never cross your mind unless you've had those interactions, which
would be obvious to listeners, but it wasn't so obvious to me. So talking to people about
energy, you would find some people who said, no, I think it's basically part of who I am,
that I can keep the house as hot as possible. And I don't want any of this insulation, because I just
want to be able to get much, much energy going through the house as possible. That's comfort.
And you might say, well, that just doesn't make any sense, so surely. It's easy,
more insulation, that's got to be good, but that's not always the way it seems.
There's a nanny state perspective. There are all kinds of perspectives on the problem,
or indeed just a sense that you don't want to think about it. It's upsetting. The whole issue of
energy builds is unpleasant. And not a nice thing to think about, and you just, you're worried about
it. And the last thing you want to be doing is focusing your mind on this and this disturbing
question. So you just don't want to even think about changing your provider or insulating your loft
or anything of that kind. But there's a space of possibilities. It's vast, and people who don't
interact at one to one level with other people who are on this question of interest are going to just
be picking a few things out of the air, which seem like they're a sensible, rational person.
A bit like them seems sensible, but that'll just miss almost everything of interest, I think.
So I think that if people are not getting these, when they express beliefs and preferences,
if they're not getting them from within, where do they get them from?
Yeah, well, I think they get them from basically two places. So one, they're getting them from
their own past experiences. There's a little bit of circularity there, of course, because,
but nonetheless, it's the case that most many of my choices are very much similar to my choices
in the past. And also, I'm using my past choices to work out what sort of person I actually am.
I've quit it. So if I'm thinking tea or coffee in the morning, I often, in fact,
won't think much about it at all. I'll just default to tea in the morning, coffee in the
afternoon, or whatever it is. But indeed, if I try to think carefully about it,
so I find myself in sipping my tea and thinking, is this actually nicer than coffee would be?
It's just really hard to tell, but you have to do a sort of experiment and test both.
We don't, that's not what we're doing. We have the feeling that I must have a desire for tea.
But actually, it's much closer psychologically to the point that I have a habit for tea.
And so that's a lot of our behaviors like that.
So we have habits for which we give reasons, because to have habits with no reasons would seem
embarrassing and incoherent. I've often had the experience of drinking not particularly nice
coffee in places like canteens, where I will have a coffee and I'll think, I've done it again.
I think of myself as a coffee drinker. So when someone says, what would you like, I think,
I'll have some coffee. But then it comes out of some horrendous machine. And I always think,
oh, this bears no relation to the thing I actually like. But there I am drinking it.
And I do it again and again. It's not, it's based on this, in my case, I suppose, a very superficial.
It's what you do in those circumstances. Yeah, your coffee is the thing I tend to respond with.
And I suppose that's sort of your range then. I think there's some, so some of the decisions
are very context driven. So I don't drink at all and I don't like beer. But if I find myself
having to wait for somebody in a pub for a long time, I have a sort of reflexive habit,
while I order a pint of Guinness, because you can sit with a pint of Guinness in a pub forever,
and no one will trouble you. That seems to be, so even though I hate, I'd like,
you have to drink about a third of it. So then people really won't, they just can't work out
how long you've been there and how dangerous you are or whatever. So that's ridiculous,
because I hate the stuff I do. Everything about it is wrong. And yeah, it's a habit.
I just wonder how much, and that seems to be driven by where I am, what I have to do.
There's some work by Steve Sloman called Knowledge Illusion, which is very much about how we,
in a very real sense, store a lot of our apparent beliefs in the outside world. So he used an example,
I think it's a Liverpool University sourced paper, about asking people who can ride a bike
to draw a bicycle. And it turns out, even people who know how to ride a bicycle,
when you ask them to draw one, that it's mechanically, disastrously inaccurate.
And that's because when they, I think when they go to ride a bicycle, the bike reminds them,
as it were, how to ride it. So you don't really need to know, you just need to know enough to
be reminded when a bicycle appears before you. So do you sort of ascribing that what we might be,
when we're questioning people qualitatively, what we're looking for, is to find those
context driven responses, where we then sort of create these?
Yeah, I think that's right. So the thing about habits is they are completely,
they're triggered by the situation we're in, they're triggered by context.
And they often are triggered in a fairly, fairly superficial way. So the bicycle example is a lovely
one. And in riding a bicycle, you don't have to know much, you have to know sort of roughly where
the pedals are, where the seat is, how to get on it. And then you actually have to know some
quite complicated balancing stuff, which you've got no conscious of when it's of any way.
And sort of off you go. But if you don't have to understand the way the gears work and all this
stuff. And so as you say, people can, but people have a sense they must understand what a bicycle
looks like. It seems obvious. And I ride one every day. I must go to the draw one. But the
answer is not at all. Now, that's one of the, going back to the first point about the early
cognitive science and artificial intelligence, the kind, these are sort of similar examples.
So it's a famous example about air conditioners, where you ask people, in America, where everybody
has air conditioners. Well, you know, what's an air conditioner do? How does that work then?
And of course, none of the faintest idea of what the earth is going on. But, but it's,
that's a revelation. And most people have a strong sense, similarly as with the bicycle,
they have a strong sense that they perfectly well understand this, they know all the details,
and they're just going to tell you, but actually now they start to think about it. It's a bit more
complicated than they thought. And I think that's not just true for parts of the physical world.
It's true for our attitudes to the political parties and attitudes of the companies,
our attitudes to deep philosophical questions, but our attitudes for everything are very much
like the bicycle. We have a few snippets, which we get us by in terms of, you know,
struggling, making, engaging with whatever this is enough that we can get by in daily life.
But if you ask us about deep things, then, you know, we're struggling.
Yeah, I decided, I suppose one of the, I mean, I'm a big advocate that the,
the role of a qualitative researcher is one of analysis and interpretation. So it's never just
to report what people said is to think. And I think one of the things that we have to weigh
time and time again is people give you an answer. So you say, do you believe in giving to charity?
This is a very leading question. And they say, yes, of course, I believe in giving to charity.
And we then have to judge whether they really mean that. It's just a socially acceptable answer,
you know, whether that would give any kind of, you're, I mean, you'd ask a slightly more
nuanced series of questions, but the task is to say whether they mean it or whether they just
talk a good game and then never do it. And you get, I do quite a lot of work listening to doctors,
for example. And you do this thing where they can talk about identifying different types of
patient. But if there are only really two kinds of treatment available for mild patients and serious
patients, every patient has to be defined as mild or serious. So even though they can describe what
an in-between moderate patient might be, for example, they will always reclassify them as
mild or serious, because there's nothing to do with a moderate patient. They're no use to them.
So this is, they can talk for hours about the moderate patient, but you know, it's in a sense
empty talk. It's completely sincere, well-meaning to be empty in terms of motivation. And do you
have any sort of tips about how you would detect in the way people talk about things, how to tell
sort of the weak from the chef, or if you think that's possible at all?
Well, I don't think there's any, I don't think there's any simple
way to detect the weak from the chef, but I do completely think it's right that
one should view the task of qualitative researchers as an interpretative task. So you,
as the qualitative researcher, with the knowledge and sophistication and understanding of people
you have, are the best place to have a sense of, well, this is the kind of thing everybody says,
or this doesn't sound quite sincere or whatever. There's no, there's no sort of methodology that
will do better than human judgment on that, I think. I think that's right. So I think, yeah,
so I think sometimes people who are keen on the value of qual from the quantitative end
sort of think that qual is a bit like quant, but it's just less of it.
Complete mistake. It's just totally, it's not that if you could only do lots and lots and lots of
qual and sort of do lots of statistical analysis of the things that people say and so on, that would
be better. I think that's completely, completely mistaken. I think what's very hard in what you
said there is, it is the ability to read other people is a human instinct or something we can do
and we can maybe hone that and get better at it and that is incredibly valuable as a research tool.
Even if we don't believe there is this deep mind, there are so many other things we can
detect in their usefulness and sincerity. Yeah, that's right. And so, I mean, the fact that there's
no, there's no sort of ground truth. There's no ground truth about, you know, am I, am I really
pro or anti charity or do I think giving to charities is good or bad? And the answer is going
to be, well, in some situations, I think it is a good idea and abstract. I think, of course,
charity is very important. People should give to them and perhaps I ought to give to them, but then
in reality, maybe I'm not giving as much as I say I should be. And yet sometimes in particular
context, I will and so I will be a jumble and we're all a jumble. So what the quality, I mean,
I think you qualitative researchers are all very aware of the sort of richness of this.
And I think the task is not to distill it down. I think, well, what's what's really going on with
this person is more to get a sense of what are the various perspectives and experiences and actions
and things that have happened to them that they embody. So what, so it will be a mixture. So I
think one thing that I think is particularly useful is getting people to talk about concrete
examples. So things have actually done. I think people can spin a good yarn in the general context,
which is fairly unconnected to the actual behavior. If you say charity, good or a bad thing,
of course, very good, of course they are. And you can talk at that level of generality forever.
But it gets much more, it's much more specific to me if you say, when did you last give to charity
and why was that? And what happens if you meet someone in the street with a tin or what do you
feel when people come to your door? When did that last happen? The more situation specific, the better.
I think that's because actually one of the questions that's come through on the the chatter
is do you have any sort of question stratagems and that would clearly be one to be as concrete
as possible and specific as possible. And I think one of the things I sort of always that comes up
in coal, I think it's interesting is what is called a FOAF, but a friend of a friend story.
And I think those are interesting because they circulate as folklore, but the person they actually
happen to, nobody has ever actually met. They're that distant. They have a certain quality that you
and you can say, well, does anyone really take them seriously or are they scare stories? So you
tend to hear them for example, say about credit card security, while somebody had their pocket
scanned on the tube and they lost thousands. And the actual occasions of this happening are
non-existent, but the belief is wide. And yeah, so you say, well, when did it actually happen to you?
It would be a very good way of shaking out that. And obviously people then double down,
they say, really did happen to them. And kind of tell when they're doing that.
Another thing to get some of the questions because I'm sort of heading towards the end of our time
is someone's asked, where in the sort of continuum of modern day psychology would you place yourself?
Because the mind of flat does seem, obviously, I realised it's the title of a book and it's
this idea of attention to a book. It seems quite a radical position.
Yeah, I think it is. It is. I was driven to write the book. So this goes back to your very first
question really, because I sort of struggled for all my academic life with two sort of contradictory
feelings. So on the one hand, the large amounts of academic psychology and artificial intelligence
and many other nearby disciplines basically do eschew and economics for that matter.
We have preferences and knowledge and they're pretty stable and they wobble around a bit of
the edges as it were. But that's basically the sort of stuff of the mind, the solid beliefs and
desires and so on. And yeah, every time I ever did an experiment and everybody else, this is
true for everybody else in judgment and decision making or social psychology or any other area of
cognitive psychology, every time you try and pin down one of these beliefs or desires, it shoots
around all over your place and change the context, change the experiment, change the instructions,
you just get totally different answers. So the struggle for me was thinking, well, what do I
make of this? Do I, how do I square this contradiction? And I think ultimately I've broken
one way rather than the other rather. So I've just come to the conclusion that the very idea
that there's any bedrock is a completely, that's just the fundamental mistake.
So this is quite a radical position. So a lot of the experiments I talk about in the book
are quite standard and indeed some of the explanations I give are quite standard. I don't
think there are very many people who are quite taking such a thoroughgoing line as I am and saying,
well, actually, it's sort of improvisation all the way down. But I think the reason one can,
that is a sustainable view and this is a sort of breakthrough in my thinking, hopefully productive
one, was thinking, ah, well, of course, the thing is that when you're improvising, you're always,
you can always improvise based on what all the other thoughts you've had before. And also the
thoughts you've heard from other people and the things they've said and things they've done.
So you're not starting from scratch, you've got this incredibly rich tapestry of previous
improvisational experiences and thoughts and things to draw on. And that's what's allowing you to
create as it were the next thought. It's not, so it's always on the surface, it's always constructed
in the moment, but every moment can refer back to all those other moments. It's not that you're
referring back to a sort of a deeper underlying, this is what I really think and who I really am
level, it's more, I'm more like a tradition, the traditional things that Nick tends to say and do.
Okay, that's it. Someone's just come to the question, it's very interesting,
whether we improvise our emotions as well as our beliefs?
Ah, yes. So there's some lovely examples of this. So I'll mention a couple from the book.
So I think the absolutely answer is yes. There's a lovely experiment where, this is by
Dutton and Aaron in 1974. So it's really an old experiment, but a beautiful experiment,
where they ask female, attractive female experiments as to interview male bridge
crosses. So people are walking across bridges. I should say this is an experiment from 1971,
isn't it? Hence the rather, sort of a pre-me to era nature of the experiment. Yeah, yeah, yeah,
absolutely. Yes, yes, yes, I should stress this. Yes, yes, it would all be done a bit differently
now. Careful. But it was a, so your female experimenters interviewed the male bridge
crosses who are crossing either a high wobbly suspension type bridge on the University of
British Columbia campus, or they have just crossed a low bridge, which is not scary at all.
And the important thing is that the experimenters give the bridge crosser their phone number to
say if there are any issues raised by this experiment, which is very unlikely because
it's not a very interesting experiment. If you want to, if you need to get back to any ethical
concerns, here's my number. And of course, quite a lot of the experimenters who are
undergraduates on campus do in fact call the, call the experimenters because they,
you know, they're interested in seeing more of them. The question, but the exciting prediction
that Dutton and Aaron made was that there would, they were predicted that there would be higher
numbers of phone calls if people had just crossed a high bridge, not a low bridge. And that turns
out to be true. So it's the way the prediction works is you say, well, if you just want to cross
a high bridge, you're full of adrenaline. When you're full of adrenaline, you're thinking,
ah, where's all this adrenaline come from? Ah, I've just met this person who's been running
me through this experiment. I guess I must kind of like them. I mean, you know, I didn't normally
have this much adrenaline. It must be because it's because of them. They've caused it. So you have
that interpretation of your physiological state of it being adrenalized. We interpret that as
attraction. And you get, and you get this absolutely everywhere. So, you know, you get,
so they get this if you go back even earlier in psychology, when you give people adrenaline
shocks, shots, the syringe, but you don't either you do tell them, I'm going to give you some
adrenaline now or you don't. If you don't tell them, then they have to sit and wait for the
experiment to begin. And then they interact with somebody who is a bit strangely and then the
person will either be more annoyed than normal by the person's behavior or more amused by the
behavior, whatever their behavior, the person who's in the waiting room with them, whatever
they do, the person who's got more adrenaline, it got adrenaline in their body, but doesn't
realize it reacts more strongly. But they don't realize that they're reacting more strongly
because of the adrenaline. Of course, they don't know anything about that. They were so annoying.
That person was just, I couldn't believe how annoying they were. And the reason they think
they're so, so annoying is because they're, the person's behaving a bit irritatingly,
but I've got lots of adrenaline. So I must be really annoyed about this because where's the
adrenaline coming from? But if you tell people, are you going to feel a bit weird? Yeah, if there's
adrenaline, there's adrenaline injection. So if you expected to be a bit, feel a bit peculiar,
then those effects don't completely disappear, but they're much reduced because then obviously I
think, oh, I'm feeling a bit strange because they told me I would. So I don't misinterpret my emotion.
So emotionally interpretation is just incredibly rich, incredibly complicated.
But it's the key, I think, to take the key taken message, and I think this is really quite standard
perspective in emotion research, is that you shouldn't think of emotions. We shouldn't think of
emotions as welling up from within that active interpretations. So what you have access to
is your physiological state. I'll know. I've got adrenaline. I haven't got adrenaline. I'm sleepy.
I'm waitful. But I'm then trying to interpret, well, why? Why am I feeling that? And that's
the emotion has been generated. And is that something where we can learn to, in a sense,
create our own emotions? Because I noticed that, despite your clear skepticism for sort of the
psychoanalysis of Freud, you speak favorably, I think, of the effects of CBT or other talking
cures. You believe those are real, that they can change people's lives for the better. So
they're not changing the deep person. What are they changing the patterns of response?
Yeah, I think what they're doing, and I think, actually, the virtues of CBT are quite closely,
closely connected to the virtues of qualitative research, actually. It's all about rich,
rich engagement with other human beings. And one of the things that CBT is doing is what I think
it's doing two key things. One is it's telling you that the experience and thoughts you have
should not be taking the face value. They're interpretations of the moment. So if you have
a feeling of, I'm hopeless, or I can't succeed, or you shouldn't think, oh, that's my inner self
speaking, it's told the real truth. Other people say I'm okay, but I've got the voice from within,
that's the one that's right. That should be treated with great skepticism, because it's
just one or more of those improvisations. And you should be able to step back from and say,
then take yourself, yeah, I improvise that sometimes, sometimes I come up with other stuff.
So that's one point, which is detaching yourself from a sense that there's some sort of gushing
inner truth bursting forth, which you just have to take, which it can be very dangerous if those
thoughts are negative. But the other thing is it's helping you create new habits and new structures
and new stories. I think sometimes therapists think of themselves as creating the true story or
uncovering the true story. And I would say that's not quite right. It's more like co-creation. We
together in this session, as it were, are trying to find a different way of interpreting your life,
maybe a more useful one, and one that will help you go forwards.
Okay, Llewela, you've reappeared. Does this mean we're out of time? Because someone has just asked
to actually what would be a brilliant question. Go ahead. Someone said, what do you think? I think
I remember your answer to this, and I think it was you just burst out laughing, actually. What do
you think of implicit association tests? Ah, right. Well, I think this is a tricky question,
really. I mean, implicit association tests do, you know, they are very powerful. They are powerful
measures of things like of unconscious bias. And I don't think that's right. Well, the implicitness,
I think, is, you might think, ah, they're implicit, these association tests, so they must
actually, these are, therefore, they must be contacting your unconscious. And I think that's
not the right way to look at it. So I think it is true that we do, we do have certain kind of
associative networks between different categories and concepts, which are very fluid and very
variable and jump around, but they nonetheless are there. And we're not aware of them. But, of
course, we're not aware of anything about our minds. We're always improvising in the moment.
So I suppose the thing I want to say, so I'm not a great skeptic of implicit association tests,
and they aren't genuinely interesting and useful. But I don't think that what they're not doing is
revealing your unconscious in any particularly particular way, because from my point of view,
you're never conscious of your inner workings of your brain. Your consciousness just doesn't work
that way. All you ever have is a stream of improvisation. And so if I say, I'll ask you
explicitly, what's your attitude to people in a particular group? I'll generate some stuff. You
might think, well, you must have been conscious of that. But the answer is no, no, you're conscious
of what you've just said. That's true. You weren't conscious of the processes underneath. And you
never are. So you're happy with the association part. It's the implicit part that you know.
That claim that you find troubling. Okay, well, I think, regrettably, because as I think I'm proving
I could talk to all day, there's a time has come to answer Luella has appeared to wrap us up. So
thank you so much for talking about your book, which I can warmly recommend to anyone. So Luella,
to you to wrap us up. Thank you very much, Nick. Well, thank you both very much. I mean,
it was fascinating. And I apologize for hanging around like a bad smell and not turning my video
off. Got there in the end. Just before we say goodbye, hope to see you at the next webinar.
Details will be coming out shortly. And just say or to remind members that there's just over a week
to go before the deadline for paper submissions to a qr's big day out. And through other little
bits and pieces, there are still a few tickets tickets left for a qr's, not the Christmas party
details on the website. There's a new breakfast bites coming up. And a qr spark returns
later on in February with transforming imposter syndrome, which sounds fascinating.
But again, thank you both very much. And I look forward to a rematch actually at some
point, because it seems to be an awful lot that didn't go said. So maybe maybe. Thank you. Thank you.
Bye. Bye.
