Thank you.
Let's see, how do you turn this on?
Thank you.
I'm faced with a little bit of an impossible task,
as most of you realize, in two different ways.
First of all, quantum field theory is an extraordinarily rich subject.
And so there's no way for me to give you, in four lectures,
there's no way for me to explain quantum field theory to you.
And in fact, the best I can do is probably to give you just a flavor of the subject.
And secondly, before I came, I had no idea what the levels of the students would be,
except that they are very different.
And the organizers told me that it would be also completely different.
So what I want to do, so my plan is the following.
I'm going to give, as an opening lecture today,
instead of a formal sort of launching into the details of quantum field theory immediately,
which I think is not what some of the students may want,
because I understand some of you are still learning quantum mechanics.
But what I'm going to give you is a colloquium that I've given at several places in the United States,
several universities, and on quantum field theory.
And I then would follow that, either today or tomorrow,
with some lectures on scalar field theory.
And then after I got through a little bit of scalar field theory,
I'll have a better of a sense, hopefully, from the questions and so on,
how we're doing and we'll move on from there.
So this is a colloquium on the nature of quantum field theory.
So let us start by asking what is quantum field theory and who needs quantum field theory.
Is that a stick here?
OK.
So in our rather cynical age, you don't really quote-unquote need to know anything.
It's only a matter of intellectual curiosity and honesty.
And in fact, these days, it's perfectly possible to be a professor of physics,
say in a physics department like the one I came from,
without even knowing quantum mechanics, let alone quantum field theory.
So the answer to this question is really on a cynical level,
is that nobody needs to know it.
But on a more profound level, of course, you do need to know quantum field theory.
And so, in fact, this question is the very first question that I start with in a textbook on quantum field theory,
it's chapter 1.1, and you see I gave this talk before the book was published,
but now it has been published.
So who needs it?
Yeah, it's an old colloquium.
So who needs quantum field theory?
And we need quantum field theory because quantum field theory arose out of our need to describe the ephemeral nature of life,
which I feel more and more as I get older.
And to give you the Chinese phrase for describing the nature of life,
life is just clouds and smoke passing in front of our eyes.
But no seriously, quantum field theory is needed when we confront simultaneously the two great physics innovation
in the last century of the previous millennium, namely special relativity and quantum mechanics.
And so now let me explain why you need quantum field theory,
a new subject when you combine special relativity and quantum mechanics.
So let us draw a two-dimensional plot like this.
On this axis, I plot it big and small, the size of the phenomenon involved.
And on this, I plot it slow and fast.
So in this corner, when you deal with big, slow-moving objects such as everyday life, classical physics is perfectly adequate.
And imagine if you want to study rocket ship near light speed, something that's going very fast but a big object,
there's no need for quantum mechanics.
All you need is to learn special relativity, which 100 years later is now considered very rather trivial and easy to learn.
Now, on this axis, similarly, if you go to very small objects, say the electron,
as long as the electron is moving very slowly, such as in atomic physics,
or you have a slow-moving electron scattering of a proton, and so on, there's no need for special relativity.
Quantum mechanics is perfectly adequate.
So in this box, you need quantum mechanics, and here special relativity.
So, but it's in this box, when you deal with phenomenon that are both involved small objects and small objects moving fast,
you have to have the marriage of quantum mechanics and special relativity.
And it's in this peculiar confluence of special relativity and quantum mechanics a new set of phenomena arises.
And this new set of phenomena is precisely what I mentioned before, the ephemeral character of life in the subatomic world,
that particles can be born and particles can die.
And a new subject in physics, a brand new subject as of the late 20s and 30s, 1930s,
namely quantum field theory, is needed to describe the birth and death and some kind of life in between.
Okay, so let me explain why then the combination of quantum mechanics and special relativity
leads to an entirely new set of phenomena, which makes the whole thing much more complicated than either quantum mechanics or special relativity.
Now, both quantum mechanics and special relativity, they each have a gold equation that sort of summarizes the essence of the subject.
So if I ask a student to write down one equation for each subject, what would you write down?
Well, for quantum mechanics, it's an uncertainty principle that if you measure a phenomenon on a certain time scale, delta t, the uncertainty in energy is delta e.
And in special relativity, the gold equation is of course that energy is the same as matter, that e is equal to mc squared.
Now, when you combine these two equations together, each of these equations we understand, I think most of the students here understand,
but it's when you combine these two equations together that something drastically new happens, because together they allow particles to be born and to be destroyed.
So they have an electron sitting there. Because of the uncertainty principle, over a very small time scale, delta t, there could be big fluctuation in energy.
And according to special relativity, this big fluctuation in energy could create more matter.
So it could create, for example, an electron and a positron pair.
So an electron sitting there is not a single electron, but it could suddenly become two electrons and an anti-electron.
On the other hand, in contrast with the Schrodinger equation, and I think most of you know the Schrodinger equation here, no matter how you shake and bake the Schrodinger equation,
no matter what you do to it, if you start out the Schrodinger equation of one electron, you could do this till you're absolutely blue in the face and you still only get one electron.
You never get more than one electron out of the Schrodinger equation.
So therefore you see the Schrodinger equation is inadequate.
So we need to introduce the concept of a field.
Now, the concept of a field actually goes back to the great physicist Faraday, Michael Faraday.
And the irony of Faraday's introduction to the field is because, is that if you read his autobiography, you would say, you learned that, first of all, that Michael Faraday came from extreme poverty,
that's described, Victorian poverty that's described in one of Dickens' novels.
So he was completely uneducated and he was merely working in the lab of somebody as a assistant, Sir Humphrey Davies, I think.
And he was complaining, his autobiography, he said he couldn't understand the fancy mathematics of the French, people like Poisson and Empyre,
and they were talking about things like unbelievably impossible things to understand, like partial differential equations, this kind of fancy mathematics.
It's like the kind of reactions that nowadays a lot of people have towards string theory, so very abstract mathematics.
So Faraday said, I can't understand these French guys with the fancy mathematics, I have to invent my own way of understanding it.
And so he introduced the notion of flux lines in electromagnetism and hence the notion of the field.
So it's really a great irony that it's Faraday's concept pictorial sort of grasp of this thing that has lasted us perhaps a more lasting value than some partial differential equation.
Now then of course you all know that Maxwell developed his theory of the electromagnetic field and so on, it's one of the landmarks of 19th century physics.
But the interesting thing is that Maxwell's theory contains two hidden symmetries which will rock later, rock 20th century physics.
These symmetries are both hidden, it was unknown to the 19th century physicists.
One is relativity, Lorentz invariance, the symmetry of Lorentz invariance is hidden in Maxwell's equation.
The other symmetry that is hidden is gauge invariance and that was later made use of by Hermann Weier and Yang and Mills and others.
And so the question I wanted to ask here is whether it's conceivable that present day theory also contains hidden structure that we don't know anything about,
that some bright young student from a school like this may discover.
So the great authorities of the time Maxwell himself did not see that there were these two symmetries.
Now in hindsight if one were to grab hold of Maxwell another eminent 19th century physicist and ask him why you did not,
considering how smart you were, how you did not realize that this theory contains these two hidden structure,
well the answer is probably this, in hindsight it's because of the terrible notation 19th century physics.
So at this point I'm reminded of something, whenever I teach a course on electromagnetism,
one of the first exam questions I would ask students is why is the magnetic field called H in a textbook?
So does anybody know the answer here? I guess most people here have studied electromagnetism.
So all the students who do not know this immediately fail the course because it shows that their lack of awareness of the history of physics,
which is very bad in my opinion is very bad.
The reason it's called H is of course Maxwell did not use a vector notation, he writes out all the components.
So the electric field he starts with E obviously capital E and so the electric field is E F G and then the magnetic field is obviously H I J.
So all six components were written out and so it's very misleading for our textbook nowadays to say there are four Maxwell's equations.
They were actually, if you look at Maxwell's papers, there's something like 24 Maxwell's equations and the whole thing looks incredibly complicated.
And so now also I believe that Yang-Mills theory is suffering from a terrible notation, absolutely miserable notation,
but physicists have no other option, they continue to work with this because as I will explain in my course later, I think, I hope I will get to that,
is that gauge theory just means a redundancy in description, the extra variables that you don't need but you put in the theory anyway,
and then later on you get rid of it.
So this is a very, very clumsy way of doing things.
If I were to take one of the students who has never heard of quantum field theory, never heard of gauge theory,
and I tell you that what the best and the brightest minds in the world right now, what they're doing,
is they write down theory, they put in all kinds of things that did not exist,
and then after some pages of calculation, they then use the formalism to get rid of those things again.
And so it's an unbelievably awful notation.
And in the same way that when we look back at Maxwell's papers, if I go to the library and I look at Maxwell's papers,
which I did about 15 years ago, I see his notation is just so awful.
You want to shake the man.
On the one hand, no, it's not quite the right reaction.
The reaction was to be even more impressed by Maxwell.
I mean, it was incredible that with that notation he could actually extract the right physics.
So I think that 200 years from now or something, people would say these people use such awful notation in writing down Yang-Mills theory,
and still somehow they managed to extract some physics out of it.
Now similarly, I believe that supersymmetry, one problem with supersymmetry is that the notation is just wrong.
So let me then go on and say that then in the early 20th century, quantum mechanics was discovered.
And so already in non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the electromagnetic field, the photon that is, is treated as a field,
but not the electron.
Those of you who have taken a course sort of beyond the ordinary course on quantum mechanics will know that in atomic physics,
one does this sort of half to pattern the expression of pardon the French as we say in the United States,
half as the method, which is that you treat the atoms as non-relativistic quantum mechanical objects,
and then the photon, the electromagnetic field, is a field, because the electromagnetic field is already a field in classical physics.
So when you go into quantum mechanics, it's a fortiori already a field, but the electron itself is not a field.
So this is completely odd, you know, that the photon is a field but not the electron.
So this was the dissatisfaction that led Jordan, Heisenberg, and Dirac, and others to say the electron better be a field also,
just to make it kind of more aesthetic and more balanced.
And so nowadays we believe that all particles are excitations in some field.
So in contrast on earlier and more innocent time, this is now considered a sacred principle of physics,
all particles are excitations of the field.
And in particular, this view may or may not last this century, it may not be strictly correct,
because there's already some very mysterious things going on, because according to this view, the graviton is also just another particle,
just like any other particle, no different from the photon, the electron, anything,
it's just an excitation in the gravitational field.
And this is a view that was particularly strongly pushed by Steve Weinberg in his textbook on gravity.
Weinberg says the graviton is no different, it's just a particle, so big deal, it is treated like a particle.
So Weinberg's book is strongly disliked by people who grew up in a general relativistic tradition,
some of my colleagues, when they come to my office and they see Weinberg's book, they want me to throw it out and replace it by wall.
But because I came out of a particle physics background, I want to throw out wall's book and go to their office and throw their copy of wall out.
So is graviton just a particle or not?
Well, it's somehow very different from the photon as a particle,
because it's also responsible for the spacetime arena in which all the fields, they work or play.
So it's like, if you go to the theater, the graviton is not only the actor on the stage, but graviton is also the stage.
It's very odd, the stage itself is part of the acting.
So it's somehow different.
And right now, we are at a time in physics when we're faced with enormous puzzles.
One of them is the nature of quantum gravity.
Another is the nature of the cosmological constant to use a more fashionable term, dark energy.
So these puzzles, the quantum gravity of dark energy and so on, it may really have something to do with this,
whether all particles can be considered as excitations of some field.
Of course, we do not ask where the fields come from.
Of course, if you use string theorists, you'll think the fields come from strings.
So, as Jeff mentioned, I published a book a few months ago.
Several months ago, this book came out, Quantum Field Theory, in a nutshell.
And it has gotten a very good response from the community, at least judging from the reviews on amazon.com.
As he also mentioned the day before yesterday, I'm donating several copies to the school to be given out as prizes for the students.
But before I go on, and I'm not here to try to sell my book,
but let me perhaps say a few things about the origin of this book.
And the story actually jumps by ten years each time.
So in the 1970s, in the mid-70s, when I was a first year teaching in my teaching career as an assistant professor at Princeton,
Murph Goldberger was the chairman, and he made me teach Quantum Field Theory,
even though it was my very first experience teaching, my very first time.
And he assigned to me a graduate student as my teaching assistant,
and the graduate student's job is to grade a homework and write up all the solutions.
And his name was Ed Whitten.
And so that was the very first year I taught.
And so the story I like to tell is the next year when I taught Quantum Field Theory again,
after a few weeks, I went to the chairman, Goldberger, and I complained.
I was pounding the chairman's table saying that the assistant, the graduate student assistant I have this year,
is like an idiot compared to the one last year.
So now at that time, this was the middle 1970s.
As you know, there are many new developments in Quantum Field Theory.
Non-Abelian gauge theories came in, all kinds of new things.
And some older people, just like now in string theory, were saying that there's no hope for them.
They can never learn this kind of stuff.
And it's at that point, like people like Goldberger said, you know, you have this,
I mean, you have this complicated thing called non-Abelian gauge theory.
How can any normal human being understand this?
I mean, it's just such fancy math, you know?
So just to give you, put things into perspective,
every generation thinks what they have to learn is incredibly complicated.
So at that time, some people suggested that I should write up my course
because my course covered a lot of these new developments.
But I had enough sense to realize that writing a textbook when you're an assistant professor is probably a kiss of death.
And so I waited until 10 years later in the mid-1980s.
Now at that time, Steve Weinberg invited me to visit Texas,
and he was trying to turn me into a Texan.
And so I was sitting in his office,
and at that time he has written two popular books,
and the first one was the first three minutes,
and him he wrote another one, which was not very well received.
And so he was in a rage in his office, actually,
ranting against the stupid reviewer and so on.
And so I mentioned that I wanted to write a textbook on quantum field theory,
and he said, oh, you know, that's a lot of work.
Why don't you not do that?
Why don't you write a book?
Why don't you write a popular book?
And so that was how I wrote my first popular book, Fear for Symmetry,
which I guess you'll hear about tomorrow evening,
tomorrow afternoon, a little bit.
Weinberg is, of course, a very powerful guy.
All he does is picks up a phone,
and he picks up a phone and calls New York,
and he says, OK, I have caused this guy up,
and he said I have somebody here who's going to come to New York to see you.
So then finally, more than 10 years later, again the story,
I guess I didn't finish telling the story,
10 years later in the mid-1990s, Sam Treeman at Princeton,
who unfortunately has since passed away, is no longer with us,
he asked me to write a textbook for Princeton University Press,
and it's taken me about four or five years.
Now, another thing I might mention about writing this book is,
first of all, I had an enormous fight with the publisher
to get them to accept this cover, which I designed more or less.
And they said, what does this have to do with quantum field theory?
You want some abstract things like some Feynman diagram or some lines,
and I absolutely refused.
And I said, what's wrong with this French painting?
It's perfectly good.
And they said, what does this have to do with quantum field theories?
Well, here's the field.
And here's the student.
And the student has to do a lot of work to get through all this stuff,
to get to the field.
And once the student gets through this field,
they have to climb the mountain, which is called string theory.
And then when they come to this, we get to the top,
they would discover what's on the other side.
So anyway, after the publisher gave in,
then we had a big fight about this letter Q,
which if you've shopped eye enough or you've seen my book,
you know that it's a different Q from the Q that I ended up with.
So three different Qs were proposed by the designer.
And I had the three Qs posted in my office,
and every physicist who came by, I asked them which Q they prefer.
So why another textbook on quantum field theory,
when there's already several leading textbooks,
the way I say it is that if there are two leading textbooks,
one is, say, Weinberg and the other is Peskin.
When I wrote the textbook, I just thought to myself,
Weinberg is over here, Peskin is over there.
I want to be as far away from them as possible.
So the reason, the way I'm far away from Peskin
is I've emphasized Feynman diagrams.
To me, Peskin is for someone who wants to spend their lives
calculating Feynman diagrams, which is not what I want to do.
So the book has relatively, for a field theory book,
less emphasis on Feynman diagrams than other textbooks.
The other thing about Weinberg is that I think it's generally felt
that Weinberg's book can only be read by Weinberg.
Weinberg himself told me this.
He said, I wrote the book for a student like myself.
And since there are very few students like this,
it's very, very heavy in formalism, Weinberg's book.
So my book, I try to be much, much lighter in formalism.
And over the objections of my publisher,
I have a lot of stories and jokes in the book.
And I start the book with a quote of Ricky Nelson
and end with a quote from John Lennon.
And I also introduce fictitious characters into the book.
I introduce a man named Confusio,
Allah Galileo.
And we trace his career from being a graduate student,
to him totally confused to being a tenured professor, still confused.
So the other thing that makes my book different from other textbooks,
which I think is some important points,
the first point I think is very important,
my generation of physicists were taught that quantum field theory
as a tool for particle physics.
The quantum field theory is almost synonymous with particle physics.
But one of the greatest stories in theoretical physics
in the last 20, 25 years that I have witnessed,
certainly, in fact, it sort of coincided with the establishment
of the Institute for Theoretical Physics in Santa Barbara,
which is celebrating its 25th anniversary.
In the last 25 years, we've seen an enormous rise
of quantum field theory in condensed matter physics.
To the extent that the young, good condensed matter theorist
in the United States, that I know,
there are probably no more quantum field theory
than the average particle physicist now.
But this, I emphasize, is to be completely distinct
from the earlier use of perturbative field theory
that was explained in textbooks like Fed and Wallachka
and Abrie Karsov that some of you may be familiar with.
This was using Feynman diagrams to calculate various things
in quantum field theory.
The new developments are quite different.
For example, the theory of the quantum Hall fluid.
In the quantum Hall fluid, the microscopic degrees of freedom
is, of course, described by the electrons
like any condensed matter system.
But the fascinating thing is that the long-distance physics
is actually described by a quantum field theory
in which the degree of freedom is the Chern-Simon gauge field,
which is completely different from the electrons,
totally removed.
And this gauge field has fractionally charged excitations.
Its excitations could have charged one-third and two-fifth
and so on, completely different from the electron.
Another example is the surface growth and renormalization group.
The way renormalization group is taught in quantum field theory
is very bad.
And in some textbooks, well-known textbooks,
as I think most people in the field know,
it's even completely wrong.
But renormalization group in particle physics language
is very abstract and very difficult for students to understand
because it relates some phenomenon of high energy
to some phenomenon at low energy.
But the original idea of renormalization group
is just relating physics on different scales.
And so the problem of surface growth,
which is, by the way, also technologically applied physics
in enormously important areas,
is that you have a very rugged surface
and you grow the surface by depositing atoms individually.
And so the surface looks very rugged on some length scale.
But you can imagine putting on very blurry glasses, right?
You put on blurry glasses that you don't see the fluctuation
on a small scale.
It becomes smoother and smoother.
So that's a very physical thing to do.
You can ask an observer that looks at it with one kind of glass
that looks at it with sharper glasses
how are their physical descriptions related to each other?
And the answer to that question is renormalization group,
which is much easier to understand.
So when I teach a course on quantum field theory,
that's how I introduce the renormalization group
by telling students about surface growth.
Another place where condensed matter physics
has some really fascinating stuff
is this whole subject of disorder,
impurities in the condensed matter system.
And the two other methods that I use is replica and supersymmetry.
So supersymmetry arises also very naturally there.
The other feature of my book is that I introduce gravity
as early as possible.
In my generation, most of the textbooks on quantum field theory,
like Bill Kinnendrell, did not even mention the word gravity.
Probably you cannot find the word gravity in it.
It was not part of particle physics.
But nowadays, of course, students in particle physics
want to learn quantum field theory in order to go on to string theory.
So I think it's important to learn gravity as early as possible.
Okay.
Now, switching from that, I go to a little bit to history.
Quantum field theory has had two near-death experiences.
As a subject, it almost died twice.
One was in the late 1940s.
Because at that time, quantum field theory was unable to produce
a Lorentz invariant result.
And it's also beset by divergences.
Every calculation you get, you get infinities and so on and so forth.
And so many people advocated abandoning quantum field theory.
So quantum field theory, just incorrect, has to be replaced by something else.
Now, the interesting thing about this part of the history of physics
is that the wild men were the older people,
people like Heisenberg and Landau and Oppenheimer.
They all said, you know, we throw quantum field theory out
and some of them even say, you know, we don't have conservation energy anymore,
you know, Lorentz invariants to be abandoned and so on.
But the young people, there were the conservatives.
It's namely the Feynman, Schringer and Tomonaga and that generation,
Dirac to some extent.
But it's really, I mean Feynman, no, I don't mean Dirac.
I mean Feynman, Dyson and Schringer and those people.
Those are the old people around 20 years old.
So what's really interesting is the revolutionary conservatives
that went out in the end.
So there may be some lessons from the history of physics here.
Again, in the late 1960s, quantum field theory almost died
and in some parts of the world, for example, on the west coast of the United States,
in particular Berkeley and Caltech, there was the rise of the S-matrix school
that some of you may have heard of also in England
because quantum field theory was unable to deal with strong interactions,
so many people like Jeff Chu and Richard Eden and so on in England
advocated abandoning quantum field theory completely.
And it turns out, in fact, quantum field theory was able to deal with the strong interaction
and just that people were dealing with the wrong degrees of freedom,
that instead it's a field theory of quarks and gluons
and not of the protons and the neutrons and the mesons.
And so in the late 60s and early 70s, field theory had an enormous triumph.
And so in the description of my PhD advisor, Sidney Coleman,
who is a very eloquent man,
he said the triumph of field theory is like a victory parade
that made the spectator gas with awe and laugh with joy.
So when I was a graduate student, when we took his quantum field theory course,
we all supposed to gas with awe and laugh with joy during his lectures.
Now, the other thing I'd like to mention is that quantum field theory
is a very awe encompassing subject
and in some ways we can, of course, discuss quantum field theory
in any dimension of space and any dimension of time.
And in fact, from a certain formal point of view,
quantum mechanics can be thought of as zero plus dimensional field theory.
It's a field theory in zero dimensional space and one dimensional time.
And string theory can be formulated as one plus one dimensional field theory.
Now, in the modern work on quantum field theory,
the path integral formalism is used a great deal.
And so I need to remind you a little bit about what the path integral formalism is all about.
But fortunately, Professor Smith very kindly explained to the students already
the path integral formalism preparing you for my course.
So I ask you to, before my technical lectures, which would not come for a little while,
to those students that are shaky about path integrals to review what he has taught you
because I'm just going to launch into the path integral immediately.
Okay, but for the purpose of the colloquium which I've given at various physics departments,
of course, I don't assume that everybody know what the path integral formalism is.
I still have to explain the path integral formalism.
So I will explain very, very briefly the path integral formalism.
So the details to be found in Professor Douglas Smith's lecture notes.
So when we teach or when we learn quantum mechanics,
the textbooks usually give us the Schrödinger or Heisenberg formalism.
But in some ways conceptually more profound and which leads naturally to quantum field theory
is the Dirac Feynman path integral or the Schrödinger functional integral formalism.
So for you to learn quantum field theory, you have to master this path integral formalism.
So in a course on quantum mechanics, we learn about the double slit experiment.
So there's a source in which the electrons are emitted.
There's a screen and then there's another screen in the middle with two holes drilled in it.
Two slits and a certain amplitude of the electron to arrive at this observation point by this path
and we're taught by the rules of quantum mechanics that we should add the amplitude for the two paths.
Now the interesting thing is that I've taught courses on quantum mechanics
and I've asked many of my colleagues who have taught quantum mechanics
in their experience in teaching this course,
have there ever been students who ask what if there are three holes in the screen?
So in my book, the way I introduce my book is that I invented a student named Feynman
and an impatient professor of quantum mechanics.
And the student was sitting in the course and the student, Feynman, named Feynman,
raised his hand and asked what if there are three holes?
And so the professor said, well, there's three holes and there's three amplitudes.
You add three amplitudes instead of two.
Okay, now then Feynman asked again, well, what if you add another screen?
Okay, so we have this screen with three holes in it.
What if I add another screen with three holes?
Then what happens?
And the professor was getting a little bit impatient and he said,
Feynman, can't you see that there's a path that goes through this hole and this hole?
There's a path that goes through this hole and this hole, this hole and that hole and so on.
They're all together in this example, nine paths, and then you add all the amplitudes.
Okay, so of course a story, I just made up the story.
Like all Feynman stories are just made up and invented out of thin air.
Nothing to do with reality.
But Feynman persisted and asked, what if I put more holes?
What if I put 17 holes in this screen and the professor got very impatient and said,
quiet, we have a lot of stuff to cover, let's go on.
So then Feynman didn't get to ask in public the most Zen questions of all,
which the most Zen question is what if you add infinite number of screens
and then drill infinite number of holes in each one of them so you end up with no screens.
So if you add infinite number of screens and you drill infinite number of holes in each screen,
you end up with this picture.
So then the answer is clearly that you must add amplitudes over all paths.
So this is the path integral.
So the path integral just says that you take the amplitude for each path
and you add over all of them.
Now of course all of this can be formulated and should be formulated more mathematically.
And in fact historically the whole path integral formula really goes back to Dirac before Feynman.
I don't know Professor Smith since I missed the first day,
he explained the history a little bit or not.
But the summary of all this, what you should take away from here,
is just the word add, add amplitudes.
So you really just have to add all the amplitudes.
So therefore quantum field theory, it turns out to be nothing but just a big addition problem.
So quantum field theory, what it involves is just one great big fancy sum.
You just have to add a lot of amplitudes together.
And in fact the sum is so big that it's in fact an integral
and this is why we call it a path integral.
So quantum field theory is just a path integral.
And I think Professor Smith explained this to you the other day towards the end of his lectures.
So all this is just an integral over something called phi which is called a field.
Phi is a function of x of space and of time.
And the spatial variable can be in d-dimensional space, capital D.
So this can be 3-dimensional space like the actual space we live in,
or 17 if you want, or 29 anything.
So then there's a functional of this field phi, s of phi,
and there's some exponential and you have to do the integral.
And that's it.
If you can do this integral, you have solved quantum field theory.
Now, well, this integral, in the last 50 years of quantum field theory,
the history can be summarized by all kinds of very smart people finding methods or tricks to do this integral.
So once you learn quantum field theory and ready to go out to do research on quantum field theory,
you may join this crowd of people trying to find methods of doing this integral.
So people try very hard to, if they couldn't do this integral,
at least try to extract some properties or make some approximations and so on.
So all quantum field theory can be summarized very to stretch a point.
It's a little bit exaggerated, but basically quantum field theory amounts to doing this.
So an example of this is lattice gauge theory.
When computer came around in the 1970s,
the people who said that instead of doing integral that we don't know how to do,
Mr. Newton told us what to do.
Mr. Newton said to chop the integral up into many, many pieces and replace it by some.
And so that's what these people have done.
And then once you replace it by some, then of course you can do it on a computer.
Now let us, this integral is very hard to do.
We can now descend in complexity.
We can make life easier and easier for ourselves.
The first step going down is supposed this phi is not a function of x.
It's only a function of time.
So in this sense, this is why I call it zero plus one dimensional field theory.
There's no space but just time.
And this thing we call the coordinate.
So this is Q in Professor Smith's lectures, you remember.
So he explained to you how to do this path integral and recover quantum mechanics.
He showed you explicitly in the second lecture how this reproduced the Schrodinger result.
So quantum mechanics can be formulated as an integral of a d phi e to the minus s phi.
So to emphasize the only difference between quantum field theory and quantum mechanics
is this integration variable phi.
In one case, it's a function of x and t.
And in the other case, it's a function of t only.
Now if quantum mechanics is too hard to do, then you can go one step down
and it's called random matrix theory.
So random matrix theory in which case you replace this phi and said it doesn't even depend on time.
It doesn't depend on anything.
And that's too easy.
If it doesn't depend on time, then it's just an ordinary integral which is in this step.
So what people do is they say that's too easy.
Life would be too easy.
So we want to make life a little bit harder for ourselves.
And we make this into a matrix.
So then this is an integral over a matrix.
So about 10 years ago, I spent a year in Paris and my colleague there, Edouard Bressin,
said quantum field theory is too hard.
Quantum mechanics is too hard.
So why don't we do random matrix theory?
So for the next five, six years, the French and I did a lot of random matrix theory.
It was a lot of fun.
Now I want to go one step further.
Then you get this becomes just an ordinary integral in calculus.
Because if this matrix becomes, it's just a real number, then this is just an ordinary integral.
And this integral, for example, now I write out what S of phi is, an example of S of phi.
S and phi can be anything.
But an example would be phi square phi 4, something like this.
So here I lay out for you the relationship between ordinary integrals that you learn in high school or later,
and random matrix theory, quantum mechanics, and quantum field theory.
And so you see they're just gradations of the same thing.
Okay.
All right.
So let me, please feel free to ask questions.
Are there any questions?
Let me pause and ask for questions.
Yes.
I'm sorry?
Right, right, right.
It's absorbed, and that's a technical detail.
In fact, it can be rotated away by what is called a wick rotation, but it's a technical detail.
So some people do field theory without the I, and some people do it with an I.
So doing it with an I is called doing field theory in Minkowski space,
and doing it without the I is called doing it in Euclidean space.
So what I've written down strictly speaking is called Euclidean quantum field theory,
but you can always rotate it back.
And last night at dinner, Professor Marov said he would be talking about Euclidean quantum field theory.
So that's a good question, but you can ask Marov that.
Yes.
What is a random mechanism theory in this group?
That's also a very good question, but that would really take us onto a huge digression.
I think the answer for a lot of the French, whom I'm very fond of, is that we do it for fun.
It's a very beautiful subject, but it's amazing.
It has connections to pure mathematics, it has connections to string theory,
and it has connections to condensed matter physics, it has connections to all kinds of things.
But it's also a very, very fun subject to do.
So if you're interested, just do this integral for the simplest case, which is what Wigner did 50 years ago,
which is to just let S of phi be trace of phi squared, where phi is a N by N Hermitian matrix,
and take the limiting which N goes to infinity.
But I can't answer your question because that goes in a different direction.
Other questions?
Okay, so I hope everybody understood this, and in particular I'd like you to think about this ordinary integral,
because in some sense this ordinary integral we all understand.
But quantum field theory, some of us in this room understand, and some of us do not.
But it really is just a fancier version of this ordinary integral.
So if you know this ordinary integral, how to deal with it, you understand what this is,
and you more or less understand what quantum field theory is already.
So that's the good news.
So the good news is quantum field theory is not very complicated.
A lot of textbooks make it too complicated, in my opinion.
So I claim that my book tried to make it easy and simple.
Now, when I was a student, I heard about these things called Feynman diagrams,
which sounded so fascinating.
Feynman has this fascinating life and all this stuff.
So when I was a student, I was really eager to learn about Feynman diagrams,
which I heard so much about.
So I'm going to explain to you what Feynman diagrams are in 10 seconds.
Okay, so let us look at this integral.
Okay, well, you don't know how to do this integral, and this integral is actually not doable.
Professor Smith showed you the other day that if this 5-4 term is not there, then the integral is doable.
The problem is called Gaussian integral, and he did it for you on the blackboard.
I was actually here, and I saw that he did it.
Okay, so you all know how to do this integral, but you don't know how to do it with this G5-4 term.
So as I said, people spend more than 50 years trying to do integrals like this.
Okay, so whoever can do this integral will get a Nobel Prize, and indeed they did.
So what Feynman did is that he came along and he said,
well, what do I do if I have this integral?
I just expand it in the powers of G.
I'd make a Taylor series expansion of this in G.
So this is minus G to the n of n factorial is an infinite sum, n equal to 0 to infinity, and this is 5 to the 4n.
And then each one of these integrals is just a Gaussian integral, which Professor Smith showed you how to do.
And then Feynman said this infinite number of terms, but if G is small enough, since this is a series in G,
I can just keep the first few terms, and this is called perturbative quantum field theory
because you're doing perturbation theory in the coupling constant.
This is called coupling constant G in this quantity G.
So you just make a little series, and there's so many terms, so you have to draw little diagrams to keep track of all the different terms.
And the little diagrams are called Feynman diagrams, and this brilliant idea,
absolutely one of the brilliant ideas of 20th century physics, won him the Nobel Prize, among other things.
Okay.
Now, so Schwinger was rather upset by this whole thing, you know, that Feynman just draw little diagrams to keep track of the terms.
So he made this remark, which I quote in my book,
Schwinger said Feynman brought quantum field theory to the masses.
And he said, henceforth, anybody, any stupid idiot, he basically said this,
anybody who can draw little pictures and follow the rules, they know quantum field theory.
So Schwinger was very upset by this.
Now, more seriously, to give Schwinger credit, Feynman diagram was an enormous revolution
because it allowed us to really calculate things in Feynman diagrams,
and contrary to efforts of an earlier generation, people like Heisenberg and Oppenheimer,
they figured out how to calculate the Feynman diagrams and not get infinite answers
and get physically sensible answers through the work of Dyson and others.
You actually get answers that make physical sense.
And a great triumph, as you probably heard of, was that, of course, it agreed with the experiment.
But to give Schwinger some credit, in fact, Feynman diagram had a very bad influence
on the development of physics later on.
And it was because the enormous influence of Feynman, and Feynman was very charismatic,
and so the influence on Feynman diagrams on quantum field theory was enormous,
and for many years, quantum field theory was defined as a sum of Feynman diagrams.
So even when I was in graduate school, taking a course on quantum field theory,
the professors would say things like quantum field theory is defined by the sum of all Feynman diagrams.
Forget about fields, fields don't exist.
What are these quantum operators? They don't make any sense.
There are singular objects to help with them.
All you have to do is define.
There is no such thing as a Lagrangian of field theory.
It's the definition of field theory of the Feynman rules.
No, no, this is actually people teaching field theory.
Yeah, doing field theory.
No, it is amazing.
It's very hard to believe that that was the atmosphere.
So, hence, historically, it was a young graduate student named To Hoft,
probably about the same age as many of you in the audience,
a graduate student in Holland and Poliakov in Russia in the mid-1970s
that introduced a counterrevolution to Feynman diagrams.
And in my book, just to make it dramatic since I've written popular books,
I call this breaking the shackles of Feynman diagrams.
That field theory was kept down by Feynman diagrams for far too long.
And so it turns out To Hoft and Poliakov discover that Feynman diagrams are just perturbative.
And so there are many structures and properties of quantum field theory
that are really marvelous and amazing that you would never see using Feynman diagrams.
So examples is, for example, the magnetic monopole,
which was independently discovered by To Hoft and Poliakov,
they emerge in certain kinds of quantum field theory.
But you can calculate Feynman diagrams till you're blue in the face,
till the day you die and you will never see a magnetic monopole
because it's just not a perturbative phenomenon.
So the Feynman diagram methods that Feynman invented, as I explained,
involves expanding as a power series in G.
But it turns out a magnetic monopole, for example, its mass,
is given by a non-analytic function of G.
So you can be calculating Feynman diagrams forever,
and you can calculate to the 296th term.
You will not see the slightest trace of the magnetic monopole.
Another thing is that once you get past Feynman diagrams,
you discover that field theory, all kinds of nice properties.
For example, one of the great properties that it has is something called duality,
which is that the theory written in certain degrees of variables
can be transformed into another quantum field theory written in some other degrees of variable,
which are called dual degrees of freedom.
And there are many, many other marvelous properties like this,
and some of these properties became very, very important in string theory,
as you would hear about.
So duality is a very important concept, which you would never see again
using Feynman diagrams.
So this was a counterrevolution in the mid-70s.
Okay.
Now, then I switch gears slightly to...
So as I said, in this first lecture, I'm just giving you an overview of quantum field theory.
So the next lecture, I'm going to...
On the next lecture, on the next transparency, I switch gears,
and I will tell you, make a statement that I hope that all of you would agree with.
Namely, what is the purpose of physics?
The purpose of physics is to understand nature.
Okay.
Now, these days, of course, it's not politically correct to say that one field of physics is better than another,
just as it's not correct to say one gender is better than another, and so on.
So you cannot compare the different areas of physics.
And I personally find many areas of physics very interesting,
and my career is such that I have to apologize to no one,
because I'm proud to have dabbled in many different fields of physics,
and I'm the last one to say that string theory Uber Alice, some people would say.
So nevertheless, I think there's a very interesting criterion to compare different areas of physics,
and I would like to describe this and tell you how quantum field theory stacks up according to this criterion.
So the criterion that I propose to compare different areas of physics
is the intellectual completeness of different areas of physics.
So let me give you an example of what I mean.
So for example, we all know about the Pauli exclusion principle and the spin statistics connection.
We know that integer spin particles behave like bosons,
and half integer spin particles behave like fermions.
And the Pauli exclusion principle tells us that electrons, which are fermions,
they want to avoid each other.
You cannot put more than one electron in a given quantum state.
So there's a very interesting book.
I always urge students to read more about the history of physics.
I think most of the physics students in the United States are woefully uninformed about the history of physics.
There's a nice book by Doug and Sudarshan on the history of the Pauli principle,
in particular on how Pauli stole the idea from some poor young guy who was totally wiped out by him.
So Doug and Sudarshan state that there is no one fact in the physical world
which has a greater impact on the way things are than the Pauli exclusion principle.
And I actually agree with them.
This is probably the one most important fact, the fact that has the greatest impact on the world.
From atoms to neutron stars, you will not have atoms, right?
If you don't have the Pauli principle, everything would collapse into very small objects,
neutron stars to lasers.
We use lasers all the time.
Every time we listen to some god-awful music, we use laser.
So much of condensed metaphysics, for example, the band structure of solids,
superconductivity, et cetera, et cetera, everything depends on the Pauli exclusion principle.
But the Pauli exclusion principle is just a rule in non-relativistic quantum mechanics.
You have to accept it on faith, right?
It's as if the Pope told you something.
So the teacher of non-relativistic quantum mechanics just tells you Pauli exclusion principle is a rule.
But in quantum field theory, one of the great triumphs of quantum field theory
is that the Pauli exclusion principle and the spin statistics connection
can actually be derived from the rules of quantum field theory.
It's a result of quantum field theory.
So in this sense, I say quantum field theory is more complete than quantum mechanics.
So in this sense, one area of physics is intellectually more complete,
that certain areas of physics have various rules, which are in fact results in another field theory.
I think everyone would agree with this.
And so another question is in non-relativistic quantum mechanics,
another example is that when you talk of course in quantum mechanics,
if you are a bright and particularly bothersome and troublesome student,
you should ask the professor, how do you know that all the electrons are identical?
Maybe the electrons were made in a factory somewhere in some corner of the universe
and the workman was negligent that day
and some of the electrons were slightly different than the other electrons.
So how do you know that?
So in non-relativistic quantum mechanics, in studying this equation,
there's no way that you cannot explain this fact.
This is one of the most profound facts of our universe.
And we need quantum field theory to explain this.
And the explanation given by quantum field theory is laughably simple,
that all the electrons are just excitations in one single field, namely the electron field.
Another example is you may also wonder when you were studying physics,
why is the electron charge exactly equal in magnitude to the proton charge?
If the proton charge is plus 1,
why couldn't the electron charge be minus square root of pi or minus 1 over 17?
And the quantum electrodynamics, which is a field theory of course,
has no answer for this.
You can write down the quantum field theory, quantum electrodynamics
of Schringer and Feynman and Dirac and so on.
You can put in any charge for the electron you like and any charge for the proton.
So by this criterion that I'm proposing,
it's less complete than grand unified theory.
It turns out grand unified theory, which is a quantum field theory
based on the Yang-Mills theory, in fact fixes the electron charge and the proton charge.
It requires that they be equal and opposite.
Okay.
So this example shows that obviously one quantum field theory
can be more intellectually complete than another quantum field theory.
Now, another question you can ask is why is space time 3 plus 1 dimensional?
Now, in this, so this is how quantum field theory, in fact,
can be written in any space time dimension as I showed you.
It's just an integral and the space time dimension is just the number of variables the field depends on.
It can be written in any space time dimension you like.
So in this sense, it's intellectually much less complete than string theory
because string theory can actually tell you that string theory doesn't make sense
except in 9 plus 1 space time dimension.
So finally, I conclude this colloquium by mentioning one of the deepest mysteries of physics to me.
And perhaps Professor Marov will explain this to us, just give us the answer,
which is that the dynamical evolution in the quantum world is given by exponential
e to the minus i over h bar, Hamiltonian times time,
but statistical mechanics is described by the Boltzmann factor e to the minus beta h.
So imaginary time, if you include this i,
and inverse temperature are somehow connected in some strange way.
Is this just a coincidence or whether there's something enormously deep about this?
So I think this is something that I've been wondering about for maybe 25 years.
And this goes back to the question this young man here asked about the fact of i.
So the i is a very mysterious thing here, but we don't know.
At this point, we don't know the answer. Perhaps we will hear the answer.
No? He's shaking his head.
But in any case, whether it's a coincidence of deep significance, it can be applied.
We can make use of this fact.
For example, we can calculate the Hawking temperature of a black hole.
Now in my lecture, back of the envelope calculation the other day,
I calculated for you the temperature of the black hole,
but of course I was not able, since I was using dimensional analysis and plausibility arguments,
I cannot get the numerical factor in front.
But using this connection, we can easily get the Hawking temperature,
including the exact numerical factor.
So this is done, as I said in my field theory book.
So in statistical mechanics, the whole subject centers around this thing
called the partition function, which is trace of e to the minus beta h.
So trace is like a sum, the trace operation.
So therefore this looks very much like the path integral formalism of quantum field theory.
Trace is a sum, and the sum is basically an integral.
But as this young man said, there is no i, so it can be represented as a Euclidean quantum field theory,
in contrast to Minkowski field theory.
So this is one way in which quantum field theory appears in condensed matter physics
or statistical physics problem.
Many interesting statistical physics problem can be converted into a quantum field theory.
Even though the problem, like the surface growth problem I mentioned,
has nothing to do with quantum mechanics, it's still described by quantum field theory, mathematically.
And actually many other problems in physics can be represented as field theories.
And so, for example, Bill Bialik, who is now at Princeton,
when he was a postdoc at ITP in Santa Barbara, he and I wrote a series of papers
trying to understand information processing in the human visual system, in the human eye.
And we found that we can formulate the problem as a two-dimensional field theory.
There's also some very fascinating work by John Cardi at Oxford,
and before he used to be at Santa Barbara, but he moved from Santa Barbara to Oxford,
and on sort of reactions on the lattice, on their particles wandering around on the lattice,
and they meet each other and form chemical reactions and so on.
And he discovered that can be formulated in terms of very interesting new kind of quantum field theory.
So there are all kinds of new kinds of quantum field theory that people are writing down.
So, completely independent of whether you believe in string theory or not,
there's a lot of interesting problems in quantum field theory to work on.
So finally, I conclude this colloquium by observing in physics there were two great marriages.
The 20th century was the marriage of quantum physics and special relativity,
and they gave the child quantum field theory.
The offspring is quantum field theory.
Now, in the late 20th century to early 21st century,
it's the marriage of quantum physics and general relativity,
and the offspring may be string theory or it could be something else.
We don't know, so it remains to be seen.
Okay, thank you.
I think that's a misunderstanding from reading older textbooks.
That is the point that I pound home in my field theory book.
There is no such thing as divergence.
The cutoff is physical.
This is Wilson's revolution that occurs.
That's the Wilsonian point of view.
There is no divergence in quantum field theory because of the cutoff.
There is no divergence.
The cutoff is there.
It's physical.
It represents our ignorance of high energy physics.
When you're calculating the magnetic moment of the electron,
you shouldn't extend your integral up to 10 to the 10 GeV.
There is absolutely no reason.
You're not allowed to.
If you do that, you have to introduce a cutoff.
Certain quantities happen to be independent cutoff,
and certain quantities are.
In condensed matter physics, routinely things depend on the cutoff,
which you would call a divergent, but people have absolutely no problem
because the cutoff is really there.
It's the lattice size, underlying size of the condensed matter system,
and it's perfectly fine.
People use these cutoff dependent quantities all the time
in comparative experiments.
It's very interesting because at the very beginning of my career,
Derac was still alive, and I met him at one of those conferences in Coral Gables,
and he gave a lecture, and it was amazing.
He insisted that quantum field theory must be not only divergence free,
he wants to be completely finite, that everything you calculate is totally fine,
not only renormalizable, but totally finite.
So Derac never believed in sort of this modern view of quantum field theory.
The other interesting story was that, of course,
somebody asked me a question about magnetic monopole,
and he reached into his pocket and pulled out a string,
and he was really, I guess he's always asked that question.
Other questions?
You're cloaking on quantum field theory.
I thought it was wonderful.
That was all the history comments.
In particular, because you emphasize,
the parts of history which are often not emphasized in talks for graduate students
and so forth, would be forward.
And in particular, oftentimes people emphasize what you would call the revolutionary changes
that are made by young physicists,
in fact, throughout the whole thing.
Things that are done by Heisenberg and so forth.
Where you emphasize the important revolutions that took place
because it's done for the system to be a more conservative attitude,
exactly, and persevered and showed that, in fact,
some conservative point of view works out just fine in the end,
if one understands a deep payout.
So would you say it's a message you're trying to sell to these young people
that in fact perhaps one should not follow every flight of fad
and fancy that comes along in theoretical physics
that attempts to throw out new things
or replace them with older principles?
Perhaps sometimes the old view is curled.
Okay.
That's a very good question.
And recently, actually,
Demi relates directly to something that happened to me recently.
Recently, I was in Taiwan in November at a cosmology conference.
And the organizers actually asked me to meet with all the undergraduate physics students
and for me to give advice to them or something.
So I said that ultimately the only advice I know of
that I think is valid,
just sort of like in everyday life, even, advice,
is the only advice is that all the correct, true, profound advice
to paraphrase newsboard, the opposite advice is also true.
So there are people who say history repeats itself.
There are also people who say history never repeats itself.
So we never know at the next juncture in physics
whether conservative attitude or liberal attitude,
a revolutionary attitude would be better.
We don't know.
But actually, historically, I think there's an awful lot of continuity.
But the history book tends to make it as a cataclysmic shift
and to use this really awful and pretentious word paradigm.
There's a paradigm shift.
But in fact, at the time of Einstein, people like Lawrence Minkowski and Fitzgerald,
all kinds of people were already worried about the speed of light
and the ether and all kinds of things like that.
It was not a sudden shift.
Quantum mechanics was not the...
Quantum mechanics is probably the most cataclysmic shift.
So I would say in the whole, probably, understanding what you have is probably...
This is like an everyday life, too.
There's advice like cherish what you have and the other thing,
the other advice would be go out and get more.
So every advice, I think the opposite is also true.
So I don't pretend to give people advice.
Occasionally, at Santa Barbara, I guess you would do this, too.
You ask to talk to the first year graduates doing this.
And I tell them the same thing,
that you should take all advice with a grain of salt.
Do you have more questions?
Well, I don't know.
Do the students...
I'm ready to carry on.
If people want to stand up for a few minutes, that's fine with me, too.
Okay, so now what I'm going to do, that was the colloquium that I've given.
So now I'm going to start telling you a little bit about quantum field theory.
And as the organizers themselves said to me in four lectures,
there's no way that I can explain quantum field theory.
And so I don't, in any way, pretend or claim to explain quantum field theory to you.
So all I can do is to give you some rough idea of quantum field theory.
And so what I would like to do is start out with scalar field theory,
which is the simplest kind of field theory.
So my first transparency, in fact, is a review of Professor Douglas Smith's lecture,
which you are supposed to know.
So this is all classical mechanics and quantum mechanics on one slide.
So classical mechanics consists, you're given an action,
which is the integral dt over time of something called a Lagrangian.
So for example, the Lagrangian for a point particle is kinetic energy minus potential energy.
You make a variation, you want to extremize the action,
and you get the Euler-Lagrange equation, which Professor Smith wrote down for you the other day.
I saw this equation several times on the board.
Now quantum mechanics is described by the Dirac-Feinman path integral.
So you're supposed to do an integral capital Z,
which is sometimes called a generating function,
sometimes called the partition function,
which is an integral over Q of e to the is over h bar,
where h bar is Planck's constant.
Now quantum mechanics and classical mechanics form a continuity
in contrast to some of the popular books or the popular men in the street point of view.
This is the point that Professor Marov just brought up,
that quantum mechanics should not be described as,
you know, they always state quantum mechanics over through classical mechanics.
It sounds as if classical mechanics is thrown out the window,
and that's just not true.
It's an extension of classical mechanics,
and of course one of the requirements of any new theory is that it reproduces the old theory.
And the way it reproduces it is very nice and very interesting,
is that there's a thing, something called h bar here,
and when h bar goes to zero,
we make a steepest descent or stationary phase approximation,
which amounts to delta S is equal to zero,
so you recover quantum classical,
go from quantum mechanics to classical mechanics.
And it was very nice for me here,
because I saw that Professor Smith went through the stationary phase approximation
for you in great detail here.
Okay, so the quantum field theory,
we start, this is how I start in my book.
I consider a system of masses and springs all connected like this,
which I call a mattress in my book.
Okay, so here's a mattress,
and the spacing between the mass point is given by A,
so this is the x-coordinate and the y-coordinate,
and qi, let me denote by qi,
the vertical displacement up and down of each of the mass points.
So each one of these mass points could move up and down,
but they're all tied together by springs.
And the index i, and this is very important,
labels which mass point.
So then now we can write down the Lagrangian,
and this is just a direct generalization of the Lagrangian
that Professor Smith wrote down the other day.
It's sum over i of the kinetic energy term
and a potential energy term.
But now we have something more
because each of the qi and qj are tied together by springs.
So there should be a term like this,
qi minus qj quantity squared with some coefficient in front.
And then plus dot, dot, dot,
which represents n harmonic terms.
They're not the harmonic terms,
so anything quadratic is called harmonic.
So this could be cubic or terms higher in queues
like quadratic terms and so on.
Now, we're going to treat the n harmonic terms
as perturbation on harmonic terms,
as I mentioned half an hour ago.
So in the harmonic system,
since it's purely harmonic, we know what to do.
We find the normal modes,
and then we can superpose them to form wave packets.
And so we can localize these wave packets in space.
We can make little wave packets,
and these wave packets will move around
according to the rules of this harmonic system.
And so they look just like particles.
And the idea is then to use these wave packets
to represent the particles that we observe in nature,
the photons, the electrons, and so on.
Now, if we don't have any n harmonic terms,
then the particles just propagate around very happily.
But if we have n harmonic terms
that introduce decay and scattering.
So I cannot explain this in detail,
but just very roughly at this point,
you just see that if I have a n harmonic term like this,
qi, qj, qh,
it would couple three different modes together.
Because if you expand them in normal modes,
q would be one mode, this would be another mode,
there were three modes that connected together.
So something like this could happen.
You can have a wave packet propagating along,
and suddenly it could become two different wave packets,
and the two wave packets could move off in different directions.
So then this is like the notion of a particle
decaying into two other particles.
And you can have a quatic term with four q's,
which would link four modes together.
So this looks like scattering,
because you can have two modes coming like this
and then go into two other modes.
So there are four modes which are coupled together.
So the n harmonic terms introduce decay and scattering.
Okay, so this is a discrete system,
and what I now propose to do
is that suppose we're interested,
there's a certain length scale here, a,
which is the separation between the mass points.
But now suppose we're interested in physical phenomenon,
in physics on a length scale,
much larger than the spacing a.
Or in other words, we take the continuum limit, okay?
We're not going to look at the detailed structure of this matrix,
but we are going to take the limit
in which the scale we're interested in
is much, much bigger than a.
So a is effectively zero.
In this case, the matrix is then replaced
by a smooth surface,
sort of a membrane,
or you can think of as a drum surface.
They promised me to take me to some place called Drum Café.
So this is in Cape Town,
so this is quite relevant.
So the matrix becomes a drum surface,
and now we see a very important point.
If I call this axis x and this y,
then the vertical displacement of this drum surface,
or membrane, how much it moves up and down,
is then described by a function of x and y, okay?
So contrast this with the previous transparency.
When we have the discrete system,
we have a label i,
and i is discrete, right?
i labels which mass point?
The discrete variable, okay?
That tells us which mass point.
But here, this label i is replaced by x and y,
which are two continuous variables, right?
x and y takes on continuous values.
So qi of t gets replaced by phi of x and t.
When this changes with time,
we can put in the time variable.
And here, in this example,
x has two values, x and y,
but in general, we can think of this as in d-dimensional space,
so x could be x1, x2, and x to the d.
This is a very important point,
which I have explicitly said here.
My convention in these transparencies,
I use many different colors,
but in general, the most important points are denoted in red.
So you see something red, that means very important.
I is replaced by x.
So x, in quantum field theory, is a label, right?
It labels which degrees of freedom
of the field you're talking about.
Just like i is a label, it tells you
which mass point you're talking about.
It is not a dynamical variable, okay?
So this is the first confusion,
one source of confusion for many students
studying quantum field theory for the first time.
Notice I use q, not x,
for the vertical position of the mass point.
So q is the dynamical variable,
and a dynamical variable here is phi.
X is just a label, like i.
So x is not a dynamical variable.
So I'm happy to see that Douglas Smith also used q and not x,
because otherwise, I think some books
really introduce a lot of confusion here.
Yes?
Yes, yes.
So x and y is a continuous variable.
Okay.
So, are there any other questions?
So now, so again, in the previous transparency,
I've got this discrete system,
and I wrote down the Lagrangian for you.
And now, we can write the continuum limit of this Lagrangian.
So a lot of it is very easy,
like this summation over i
is obviously going to become an integral over space, right?
And the qi dt is going to become
the time derivative of the field phi.
The interesting thing is to this term, qi minus qj,
because this connects two nearby mass points.
So when we go to the continuum limit,
this is going to become the space derivative of phi, right?
It's going to become the spatial derivative.
It tells you how phi changes from one point in space to the other.
So that's the important point.
This one becomes d phi dx1 squared d phi dx2 squared
up to d phi dxd squared, okay?
The sum of i has become an integral over d-dimensional space.
And so we have all this, plus and harmonic terms, okay?
So in general, what I've done is I've normalized the coefficient here to 1.
That is the normal, that can be absorbed into phi.
There's an m squared here,
which we eventually see has something to do with the mass,
but at this point, it's just notation.
Then there, in general, is some coefficient out front here also.
But this is fixed by Lorentz invariance,
because we're going to study in the next few lectures
only relativistic theory, in spite of the fact that I said
that it has a lot of application condensed matter physics.
In this lecture, in this school,
we're not going to talk about condensed matter physics.
So we're only going to talk about the relativistic theory.
So therefore, it's fixed by Lorentz invariance,
this coefficient here to be 1.
So on the next page, I'm going to remind you a little bit
of Lorentz invariance and introduce the notation.
So the relativistic notation is that you combine time with space,
okay, we're in d-dimensional space.
We're taking units in which the speed of light is 1.
Then x mu is given by this.
Mu goes from 0 to d, and x 0 is t.
And the notation, partial mu, represents d dx mu.
So you all know that given two vectors,
a mu and b mu, the scalar Lorentz invariant scalar dot product
between a and b is given by a mu b mu times the metric g mu mu.
This is the metric that Professor Ellis has been talking about
in his lecture, except that for our purposes,
our metric is much, much simpler than what he needs
for his course on cosmology.
We are only going to take the flat metric,
namely this metric, 1, minus 1, and so on,
which I sometimes also write as a to mu nu.
So then a to mu nu, d mu phi, d nu phi,
is then just d-d-d-t of phi squared minus d phi dx l squared,
right, from the minus sign.
So then the action, s is the time integral of capital L.
So this integral d-t then can be combined with this integral d-dx
because you remember l is itself
and space integral of a bunch of stuff.
So this can combine into one space-time integral.
So then the action is given by an integral over d-dimensional
space-time, or d capital D plus 1 space-time.
So the action of a relativistic field theory is therefore
to summarize is d mu phi d mu phi minus v of phi
and the integral over space-time,
where d mu phi, here I've defined for you,
d mu phi with a lower index,
and the index is raised by the metric, a to mu nu.
I'm sure some of you have studied special relativity.
You raise the index by a to mu nu,
and then you form this quantity.
In an abuse of notation,
we often just write for this thing d mu phi quantity squared.
So this is the action of a relativistic field theory.
d mu phi is just a function of phi.
So classical field theory is then given by this action,
and as I said, quantum field theory is then
given by an integral, e to the is.
And this is really e to the is over h bar,
but throughout this course,
we're going to set h bar equal to 1.
This is a functional integral.
Sometimes I write this as curly d phi
because why is it called a functional integral?
Because we're integrating over functions phi of x,
where x denotes x and t.
So in a course in calculus,
when you're in school and you learn about calculus,
we learn about ordinary integrals,
which is integrating over real numbers,
over some discrete variables.
Here we're actually integrating over functions,
and hence we call this a functional integral.
Well, then the question is how?
How do you integrate over functions?
And rigorous mathematicians would have to puff and pant
in order to define what a functional integral is.
But for us, we just take the man in the street approach,
which is just we follow Mr. Newton,
and we just pretend that we go back to the matrix
and go back to the discrete limit,
in which case this is just a big multiple integral.
We just, in our mind, we can think of a big multiple integral
over all those mass points,
and that's what we mean by integrating over phi.
Okay, so this is the object we want to calculate.
Well, as I emphasize in my colloquium,
so this is kind of nice to have given that colloquium,
is that this is it.
Okay, honestly, this is it.
This is quantum field theory.
It's just doing the integral.
So in essence, this is quantum field theory
describing interactions of all the particles
in the universe that we know of.
What we can do and which we will do
is to dress up this bare minimum, this kind of store, field phi.
So this is absolutely bare minimum field
by attaching all kinds of fancy indices to it.
Okay, et cetera.
So there will be all kinds of fancy indices
we're going to put on Lorentz indices, internal indices,
and so on, but basically this is it.
This is quantum field theory.
Quantum field theory, just evaluate the damn integral,
stop talking, and just go home and evaluate the integral.
Okay, if you can evaluate the integral,
I'll nominate you for the Nobel Prize.
So people have tried to do this integral
for the last 75 years,
and alas, nobody knows how to do this functional integral,
except in some simple cases, as I mentioned.
So we've been trying to find ways to do this integral,
and extract and understand its properties.
So the idea is often we cannot do the integral,
but we just try to understand its properties.
Okay, so I'm running out of time,
so this is actually a good point for me to quickly go over
some techniques for doing integrals with you.
And fortunately, again,
Professor Smith did most of the work for me,
so I can go over this very, very fast.
Okay, he already showed you how to do Gaussian integrals.
So let me show you a trick for doing Gaussian integrals.
If you have to do this integral,
the thing to do is to square this integral.
So if I square this integral,
I get an integral over dx and dy of e to the minus x squared
e to the minus y squared.
This combines very nicely,
and if I go to a polar coordinates,
this becomes e to the minus half r squared,
and the dx dy just becomes an integral
over the polar angle and the radius.
The polar angle gives me 2 pi d r over r,
and I change variables to one half r squared,
and it's integral d w over e to the minus w,
so it's 2 pi.
So that's a nice trick for doing Gaussian integrals.
You square it, and you form square root of 2 pi.
Now, by scaling, we have this.
Obviously, we absorb the a into x.
This integral is 2 pi over a square root.
So remember this.
Now we can differentiate respect to minus 2 da.
Every time we differentiate respect to a,
we bring down an x square.
So for example, let's differentiate this respect to a.
We get an x square here,
and then we get an extra 1 over a here,
if I differentiate.
And in fact, I can keep on repeating,
and I get the result that x to the 2n,
and it's useful to divide by,
you see in this result,
if I divide by the original integral
that gets rid of the square root junk here,
I think the square root junk is what
Professor Smith called f of t in his lecture.
Then you get 1 over a to the n,
and then times this factor, 2n minus 1,
all the way down.
It's called a double factorial.
Well, the question is,
how do we remember this crazy result?
Well, so a very brilliant man named Wick,
Giancala Wick, he figured out a way to remember this result.
And this is, again, one of the brilliant ideas of physics.
So how do we remember this result?
This a to the n is easy,
because this is dimensional analysis,
because a has dimension of 1 over x square,
as you can see from here.
So it should be 1 over a to the n.
But how do I remember this, Wick said?
So let us consider, for example,
x to the 6.
The answer, according to this,
is 5 times 3 times 1.
So the clever thing is to write down what x of 6 is.
x to the 6 is x, x, x, x, x, x.
And then Mr. Wick said,
let us connect one of these x's to another x.
So let me take this first x.
There are five different ways for me to connect.
There are five different x's for me to choose from.
So I put down a 5.
And then I take the second one.
The second one, already two of the x's are connected.
So there are only three choices.
So there are three choices.
And then finally, this last one,
I can only contract with one.
There's no choice.
So Mr. Wick had this brilliant idea
that if you just count the number of ways to contract,
that gives you the right answer.
There are 15 ways to contract, 5 times 3.
And for each contraction, you write a 1 over a.
Since there are three contractions,
you write 1 over a2.
So this is called Wick contraction.
And he didn't get the Nobel Prize.
But to me, it's one of the most brilliant things
that I've seen.
OK.
Now, we can now generalize this integral.
And again, Professor Smith showed you how.
Suppose I have j of x here,
a linear term in the exponential.
I think it's just to complete the square.
As you can see, if I complete the squares,
I get something like this.
And this quantity becomes this.
And then I have some square here,
and then this e to the 1 half j square over a.
And this integral, it's just after shift of x,
but I have to change the variable,
just the integral we know how to do, which is this.
And then you get an e to the j square over 2a.
OK.
So we keep generalizing, and going to make it harder
and I'm going to generalize now to a multiple integral.
So it's this integral here,
but a is going to be replaced by capital A,
this number here,
where capital A is a real symmetric n by n matrix.
And x is going to be generalized to n variables,
x1, x2, to xn.
And so now I'm going to do this great big multiple integral.
And the great big multiple integral
is going to be this thing plus this thing.
OK.
So xi, aij, xj, sum over ij.
And then there's a ji, xi.
So just a generalization of this.
But how do we do this integral?
It's easy.
We imagine, we can imagine our head,
we don't actually have to do it,
that we diagonalize this matrix A.
And since the real symmetric matrix can be diagonalized
by an orthogonal matrix,
D is then diagonal.
So then this becomes,
there's an O here,
so if I put in O inverse DO,
there's an O acting on the x.
So I change variable from x to y,
yk is sum over okj, xj.
And then this becomes dii, yi square.
And then this breaks up into many separate integrals over yi,
just like this integral, which I can then do.
And then in my head, I imagine rotating back,
and I get this answer.
OK.
So up here, you see it's j square over little a.
But little a was just a number.
So what does 1 over little a mean
when little a becomes a matrix?
Well, 1 over little a becomes 1 over big a.
And as you would imagine, it's the inverse of the matrix.
The other day when I did the back of the envelope calculation,
I talked about a certain physics common sense.
There is also such a thing as mathematics common sense.
OK.
So mathematically, you know that if you have something
that is 1 over a number,
and when a number is generalized to a matrix,
a good guess may not always be true.
It's just a guess.
But the mathematics common sense would tell you
it becomes the inverse of the matrix.
And then finally, there's an a here.
But in this case, of course, it breaks up into many integrals.
And you can convince yourself that it becomes determinant of a.
So I end this lecture.
This is the last transparency with a homework problem
to derive this formula for yourself.
OK.
So this is absolutely important.
You should do it because if you don't,
you'll get lost immediately in the next lecture
because the next lecture, believe it or not,
we're going to do something even more complicated
than this integral.
Much more complicated.
And if you don't know how to do this,
if you're not able to get this answer,
do it for n equal to 2.
OK.
So if you do it for n equal to 2 and you can get the right answer,
you see how to generalize it to arbitrary n.
OK.
Thanks.
Thank you.
