The way you design the world in your mind
is the way you relate to it in the real world.
And when you design it as dead matter just to be exploited,
you will exploit it.
When you design it without any understanding of limits,
you will violate the planetary limits.
When you design it with deep recognition
of interconnectedness, you will nurture those relationships.
And this basic recognition is what
I drew from my learnings in quantum theory,
that non-locality, non-separation, interconnectedness,
that is the nature of reality.
But we have a design in the paradigm
of mechanistic thought which didn't evolve.
It was imposed.
That mechanistic thought is based first
on the assumption that we are separate from nature.
And nature is constituted of discrete particles
separate from each other who can only relate through violence,
through force, through action by contact.
In the quantum world, there is no separability.
My thesis was on non-locality in quantum theory.
Everything is interconnected.
There are no fixed, essentialized qualities
that have been built into the way.
People are looked at.
Nature is looked at.
Potential is the defining quality in the quantum world.
And because it's about potential,
it's also about uncertainty.
The mechanical world is based on a false illusion
of determinateness, certainty.
And in the quantum world, we know
we cannot get rid of uncertainty, the uncertainty
principle of Eisenberg.
To this is linked to the fourth principle,
no excluded middle, no duality, no either or.
In the quantum world, it's and.
In the mechanistic world, you can either
be a wave or a particle.
In the quantum world, you have potential
to be both and they're complementary.
When you realize that the world is one interconnected whole,
you also realize that what appears different
is actually different expressions
of an interconnected reality.
For the first time in human history,
technology in the hands of the billionaires
becomes the new civilizing mission for humanity.
The illusions about the big technology firms
is they create, they extract, they don't create anything.
Software programmers create the platforms that they use.
Even Bill Gates didn't really write his basic program,
it was two math professors in Dartmouth College
who did the basic program.
They have posited themselves as inventors.
When basically we've done a new report,
because Bill Gates announced a new project called Ag 1.
All agriculture will be one agriculture control by him.
Where does he set up the office of Ag 1?
In Missouri, Women's Center's headquarters.
But we watch what's going on in India
and we piece it together.
So basically he's financing a lot of data mining
from farmers, which will then be packaged back
as big data and sold back to the farmers.
But this is exactly what happened in your 2016 elections.
Facebook sold data to Cambridge Analytica.
So when you think of why are the kind of leaders
that we have getting created, it's
very important to remember that in these 25 years
of corporate deregulation of commerce,
you basically have a lot of money
in the hands of very few people.
And they then are the ones investing in all the companies.
The companies are not independent companies anymore.
They're basically billionaire money managed
by the investment funds like BlackRock and Vanguard, et cetera.
They also know that everywhere people are on the streets.
Just look at this here.
Show me a country where there weren't protests.
Chile, Beirut, Hong Kong, everywhere.
So how do you deal with the rising demand for a change?
We threw out the East India Company in 1857.
The crown took over.
They established a policy called divide and rule.
And then they started to divide Hindus and Muslims
because Hindus and Muslims had stood together
to defend their land, their livelihoods, their freedom.
It took from 1857 to about 1920 for all kinds of means,
censors, fake identity, because people in India
would say, I'm a Hindu and a Muslim.
Because they'd go to mosques and they'd go to temples.
And when they'd be asked, who are you,
they'd say, I'm a gardener.
I'm a blacksmith.
For them, the religious part was very, very secondary.
Their occupation was their main identity, the place
where they came from, the community they came from.
And this took so long, this is what led to our partition.
And that partition is still being played out.
It's an incomplete project.
So divide and rule becomes a necessity for the 1%
to continue to hold on to power.
What are the economic policies being pushed
while people are divided?
Because that's really the agenda.
In 1906, when this divide and rule and apartheid
was being put in place, apartheid hadn't
been named apartheid then.
It was only named as a system in 1948.
But in 1906, the British wanted to turn Indians
in South Africa into second-class citizens.
So they wrote an Indian Act.
And Indians had to carry, had to register on race.
And they had to carry their identities all the time.
And a lot of what's happening right now in India
around this identity issue is related
to that history of the Satyagre.
But most importantly, any police officer
could enter your house at any time and demand your papers.
You couldn't trade locally.
You couldn't practice professions.
And so the people said, we would rather die.
This refusal to cooperate with unjust law
is what Gandhi calls Satyagre, as a duty, as a duty of truth.
He was inspired by Thoreau, who refused
to pay the poll tax here against the slave system.
He inspired Martin Luther King.
And the civil rights movement is very much inspired by Gandhi.
But it is when King started to take up
the economic justice and economic equality issues,
that's when he was assassinated.
Because the part is you can talk in very sweet ways
about civil liberties, but you don't touch economic justice.
And the economy is, for me, it's a double violence
because the origin of the word, the meaning of the word economy,
comes from Oikosa home.
The Aristotelian name is Oikonomia, the art of living.
And when you turn the art of living
into the art of money making, which Aristotle
called chromatistics, then you have
to practice violence against the earth
and violence against others, destroy their livelihoods,
destroy their freedoms, take away their resources.
So the violence is multiple.
And I look into the future.
I say, why are we building detention centers everywhere
in India along the border of Mexico?
Because I feel that if we don't activate
our sense of interconnectedness with all life, with all people,
if we don't start sowing the seeds of what
I have called earth democracy, we
are going to see 99% people as disposable,
especially with the tech working on artificial intelligence,
to make sure all the mechanical work is made redundant.
Whether it be in radiography or law or whatever,
mechanical work will be substituted.
And if that's the case, 99% people are disposable.
So you can either share this beautiful planet
with love and abundance and sustainability,
or say it's all mine, every bit of land, every seed,
every mind, because what's being mined is our mind now.
And if we don't defend the freedoms of all species
and the freedoms of all human beings,
we could see within 20, 30 years,
a level of disposability built into the structures
that humanity will not be able to respond to.
So this is the time to make oneness and interconnectedness
as one humanity on one planet, the political project
of our times.
We have to remember we are one humanity.
We are part of one earth.
And whatever we do, we will not let
this basic recognition divide us, either from the earth
or from each other.
And together, we are strong.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you.
移民.
Thank you.
And take care.
Thank you very much.
Isn't there a VHP for those of you
Quick reminder, God playing hide and seek, my mission is to find, step by step, as I walk through the valley in the shadow of death, I feel no threat, the earth is the block I rep, no fear when I step, God steady clearing the debt, I earn the respect.
C'est la vie, c'est la vie, they only bring war, but they try to call it peace, divide, then conquer the mark of the beast, oppression and control in the name of democracy.
