Welcome back to lecture two. This is the first of our eight lecture overview of cosmology.
We're trying to construct a framework on which later lectures can build. So don't worry if
things go by a little fast in these early lectures because I'll return to almost everything
later in the course. So in this first lecture I want to remind you of the hierarchy of structures
that we find in the universe. Planets, stars, galaxies, galaxy clusters and the galaxy web,
saying a little bit about each. Now in cosmology we don't take the existence of such structures
for granted because the early universe was very smooth indeed with none of these structures
present. So one of the most important missions of cosmology is to account for how all these
structures have emerged from smoothness and as we'll become clear it's the attractive force
of gravity that plays the role of chief architect in the creation of cosmic structures. So let's
start with planets close to home with this lovely picture of our own planet the earth. One is
immediately struck by its beautiful spherical shape. As promised it's the inward gravitational force
from all the matter that crushes itself into a sphere. In fact it goes deeper than this literally.
If you took a giant knife and maniacally sliced out a section of the earth you'd find the insides
to be stratified. Gravity's pulled the denser material down to the center where it's further
compressed by the overlying weight. Of course there are other planets in the solar system some
similar to the earth like Mercury, Venus or Mars but others are much larger like Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus and Neptune. In all these gravity makes them spherical and internally stratified.
The enormous mass of the Sun also provides the gravity that keeps the planets in their more or
less circular orbits. Now planets are thought to be quite common in the universe although actually
detecting them is extremely difficult and only about 300 planets orbiting other stars have actually
been found. But nevertheless we think that most stars have planets mainly because they're thought
to form as a natural byproduct of forming a star. Maybe 0.1% of all the mass that goes into a star
ends up as planets. Of course despite being so minor in mass they provide one of the very few places
in the universe with sufficiently tranquil conditions to allow molecules to form and in
particular big molecules the kind needed for life. So while planets are an astronomical
afterthought from our perspective as sentient life forms they're really very important objects.
Let's get a quick sense of scales here. The Sun is famously big compared to the earth. For
example with the Sun as this grapefruit the earth is a one millimeter ball like the ball in the
ballpoint pen. The Sun is about a hundred times the diameter of the earth so it's a hundred times
a hundred times a hundred or a million times the volume and contains 300,000 times more mass.
In this model the earth would be located about 10 yards away from the Sun. A distance of about
93 million miles or 150 million kilometers or stated in yet another way it takes light just
eight minutes to get from the Sun to the earth. We say the earth is eight light minutes away from
the Sun. Moving out planets are other tiny balls spread over a few hundred yards. Neptune for
example is 300 yards away about four light hours from the Sun. Now throughout this course we'll
be using these light travel times to measure distance so let's just become familiar with them.
They're a bit like using car journey times to refer to intercity distances. One might say for
example New York is six hours from Washington meaning it takes six hours to drive from New York
to Washington at a typical car speed. The most famous distance of this kind is the light year.
The distance light travels in one year. Now in one second light travels 186,000 miles or 300,000
kilometers or 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 times around the world in one second. So in one year which is 31
million seconds light travels nearly 10 to the 13 that's one followed by 13 zeros kilometers.
Back to our model with the earth as a sphere as a sphere at one millimeter in size a light
year is now 500 miles. So from a human perspective a light year is a very large unit of distance
but it turns out that the distances between stars near the Sun are typically a few light years.
So let's now turn to consider stars starting with the Sun. This is a gorgeous image of the Sun
taken in ultraviolet light and it really evokes the upwelling of energy from the deep interior.
Once again here's the earth which by comparison is tiny. Let's again slice open the Sun to look
inside and as before we find the enormous weight of the outer layers pushes down to make a highly
compressed core. In fact the weight is so great that the central pressure and in particular temperature
is high enough to cause atomic nuclei to combine or fuse. These thermonuclear fusion reactions
release energy so there is effectively a furnace burning at the center of the Sun. The heat from
that furnace rises quietly at first and then through turbulence and convection and it eventually
comes to the surface and heats it. Of course hot things glow and hence the Sun and stars shine.
It's really very simple. Stars shine because the furnaces at their center make their surfaces hot.
Now as stars go the Sun is thoroughly ordinary. It's mid-sized, it's mid-mass and it's in mid-life.
One sees countless stars out in the sky and although I don't have time to explain how it's
possible to measure many of their properties. It turns out that although most stars are basically
similar to the Sun there's nevertheless quite a bit of variation. They span a range of about
a factor of a thousand in mass from a tenth of the Sun's mass to a hundred times the Sun's mass.
They span a factor of a million in size from earth size to solar system size
and they span a factor of a billion in power from one ten thousandth the power of the Sun
to a hundred thousand times the power of the Sun. So they're a bit like humans. Stars are
basically the same but with some variation. Now stars gather together by gravity into huge
assemblages called galaxies. So let's now have a look at these starting with our own galaxy,
the Milky Way. This of course is the term we use for the band of light visible to the naked eye
that sweeps across the sky. Here seen above the Gemini telescope in Hawaii and here through a fish
eye lens which shows the entire hemispherical sky with the horizon all the way around the edge.
Of course we can't get outside our own galaxy but if we could this is what it might look like.
The Sun would be located about 25,000 light years from the center about two-thirds of the way out
and as you might imagine from its spiral appearance the entire system is rotating taking roughly
200 million years to complete one rotation. Now with an age of roughly 14 billion years
galaxies have rotated 50 to 60 times. One might say they are 50 to 60 galactic years old.
Now it's difficult to imagine just how many stars are in galaxies so this might help.
Imagine filling this large one meter cube with fine beach sand. 100 billion grains that's the
number of stars in our galaxy so that's one for the Sun, one for Betelgeuse, one for Polaris.
It would take me 3,000 years to count them all at that rate. It's also difficult to imagine
how big galaxies are so let's consider the Earth's orbit to be the size of this pinhead.
The Earth is now the size of a virus and the Sun is the size of a human cell and the solar system
is this big. The nearest star is another human cell 300 yards away. All the visible stars in
the night sky are within a few miles but the galaxy spans the entire United States with its centre
somewhere in Nebraska. Now the take-home message here is that galaxies are big. Pinhead to the
United States, Earth's orbit to the galaxy. So what about other galaxies? Unfortunately with the
exception of one or two they're just too faint for our eyes to see. If you could ask a nocturnal
animal, an owl for example, what the night sky looked at looked like, excuse me, they would tell
you if they could. There were points of light stars but also fuzzy blobs galaxies. Of course with
telescopes we can match and surpass nocturnal vision and this is what we see with the world's best
telescopes. Spectacularly beautiful spiral and barred shapes with lanes of gas and dust
with some galaxies being just big fuzzy balls of stars. Their apparent complexity
does correctly reveal a complex environment in which stars are born, live and die in an ongoing
cycle. Now from our cosmological perspective however we will view galaxy anatomy very simply
with just three components. A central bulge, a disk with spiral arms and a sparse halo that
surrounds both. One of our goals will be to explain how the bulges, disks and halos of galaxies are
made and why some galaxies are all bulge while other galaxies are all disk.
Let's move on to consider larger systems. As always gravities at work trying to pull galaxies
into groups and clusters. Our own Milky Way galaxy for example belongs to a small group of about
30 galaxies called rather unimaginatively the local group. You can see some of the members here
orbiting our own galaxy are a few dwarf galaxies including the famous large and small Magellanic
clouds. Roughly 150,000 light-years distant and somewhat further away about 2 million light-years
are the two beautiful spirals M31 and M33 each with their own little entourage of dwarf companions.
Now our group is fairly sparse but some groups can get quite dense like the one shown here.
You can tell from these images that when the galaxies get too close their gravitational
pulls on each other induce distortions which can look quite spectacular. In fact galaxies can and
do actually collide and even merge into a single larger galaxy as you can see in these images
with a result that is a spectacularly beautiful mess. Now this topic of galaxy collisions will be
extremely important to us because it's thought to be one of the major ways in which galaxies
are first constructed and then continue to grow by grow and mature by collisions and merging.
As for the largest galaxy groups here are some images of fairly rich galaxy clusters
containing perhaps a few thousand galaxies. As you might imagine in these rather busy
environments galaxy encounters are quite common and this results in a systematic difference
between the galaxies that live inside clusters and the galaxies that live in less crowded environments.
For example spiral galaxy disks are rather fragile things and they tend to be destroyed
in this kind of busy environment which is why you don't see too many of them in these clusters.
Now let's step back and look at the much larger distribution of galaxies out into the universe.
This map shows 250,000 galaxy positions out to about 2 billion light years roughly a thousand
times further than our near neighbor M31 which would be invisibly close to the Milky Way here
at the center of the map. What we see is that the galaxies are distributed neither uniformly nor
randomly but they tend to make up a patchy network including large regions of very few galaxies
called voids and regions with many more galaxies that are in lines or sheets. The pattern is
sometimes called the cosmic web. Again one of cosmologists goals is to explain why this
web-like pattern exists as part of the overall topic of explaining the origin of all structures
stars to galaxies to clusters to the web. As I mentioned at the beginning of this lecture
gravity is the chief architect but it needs some initial roughness to work on. As we'll see in
theme seven we think that initial roughness was made in the Big Bang itself by inflation's launching
mechanism for the expansion. This seeded the universe with slightly denser and less dense
regions which over time have grown into the entire hierarchy of structures. It's a lovely story
which we'll look at in theme four. Now to look further is more difficult and is typically only
done for small regions of the sky. The most famous example of this is the Hubble Deep Field
where in 1995 the Hubble Space Telescope stared for almost 10 days at a tiny patch of sky as big
as a pinhead held at arm's length. It was near the big dipper in the sky. The resulting image
contained almost 3,000 galaxies so we can quickly arrive at the total number of galaxies currently
visible. It's 3,000 times however many pinheads it takes to cover the sky and that turns out to be
about 100 billion galaxies. Now coincidentally that's about how many stars are in our galaxy
however many fine grains of sand will fit into our large one meter cube.
Some of the most distant galaxies seen in the Hubble Deep Field are 12 billion light years away
which is almost as far as it is theoretically possible to see. Now why is that? It's because the
universe is only 14 billion years old so one cannot see further simply because there hasn't been time
for light to get to us. Let's now get a feel for the scale of the entire visible universe.
If the Milky Way galaxy what I tried to persuade you was so huge were now just 20 yards across the
size of a large classroom then our neighbour Andromeda galaxy would be 600 yards away. All the nearby
pretty picture galaxies are within 50 miles. The large sky surveys span 500 miles and the Hubble Deep
Field stretches almost to the visible limit which spans the entire United States. The take-home
message here is that if you thought our galaxy was big the visible universe is very big. 20 yards to
the United States is our galaxy to the visible universe. Now this diagram has glossed over a
wonderful feature of modern astronomy that arises from the fact that it takes time for light to
travel to us from the remote universe. Imagine looking at a galaxy 7 billion light years away.
It's light took 7 billion years to get to us so we see that galaxy as it was 7 billion years ago
when the light set out not as it is now. Now that's half the age of the universe ago so it's a bit
like looking towards an 80 year old person but seeing them as they were when they were 40. Now by
looking further and further away we see back to the younger and younger universe. Now let's push
this idea to its fascinating limit. What happens if we look not 7 not 10 but 14 billion light years
away what was going on 14 billion years ago? The Big Bang. So we should see the Big Bang if we
look far enough away. Now notice it doesn't matter which direction we look in. All directions end
up at the Big Bang very far away. So we should see the Big Bang all around us at great distance
as we'll learn in lecture 13 that more or less is what the microwave background is.
We're now ready to sketch out how astronomers see the universe. Here's a sketch of the very young
universe shortly after the Big Bang and here's a sketch of the universe today. But what we witness
is the following. We seem to be at the center of a huge sphere of radius 14 billion light years
with old galaxies nearby and ever younger galaxies further away and at the edge of this sphere
sits the Big Bang. Now there is a potential for confusion here. This image is not how the
universe currently is. This Big Bang region happened and ended 14 billion years ago. Right now there
are old galaxies sitting there but that's not what we see because their light hasn't got to us yet.
This diagram shows us shows what we witness of the universe not how the universe actually is.
As you might imagine though this is a fabulous quality of nature because one of cosmology's
main aims is to uncover the history of the universe and one can do that simply by looking far away.
Let me end this lecture with a kind of review in which we'll place all objects from protons to the
visible universe on a single graph. This will also give me a chance to review very large and very
small numbers and exponential notation. So here is an interesting graph with size along the bottom
and mass up the side. The units are metric. The units of mass are kilograms roughly the same as
this bag of flour. The units of length are meters. It's a little bit longer than a yard.
Back to the diagram. It's very important to notice the divisions on these axes are exponential.
They jump by a factor of a hundred from one to the next. One meter, a hundred meters,
ten thousand meters and in the other direction a hundredth of a meter, a ten thousandth of a meter.
In this course I'll often be using graphs with this kind of axis because it's extremely useful.
It allows you to scrutinize very tiny and very huge things all at the same time.
Notice I've also written the numbers in powers of ten notation where the power simply gives the
number of zeros for big numbers or the number of decimal point shifts for small numbers. See here
ten thousand is ten to the four because there are four zeros and down here point one is ten to the
minus four because the decimal point has been shifted four places. One last comment about large
and small numbers. Here are their common names. So starting at one we go to a thousand, a million,
a billion and a trillion, jumping by a factor of a thousand from one to the next. And these also
have prefixes kilo, mega, giga and terra. For example a billion years is a giga year.
Going in the other direction to smaller and smaller numbers we have a thousandth, a millionth,
a billionth and a trillionth with prefixes milli, micro, nano and pico. Please don't ever confuse
these. A factor of a thousand is really very significant. Here is a meter rule and here is a
millimeter, a thousandth of a meter, the ball in the ballpoint pen. So for example if this is a
million light years, this is a billion light years. And if this is a pico second, this is a nano
second. These are not just very big or very small numbers. They're really very different from each
other. Okay let's get back to our graph of size versus mass with exponential axes. Here are some
familiar objects we can place on the graph. Each has an approximate size and mass, an insect, people,
cars, whales and so on. I've chosen the graph limits to be roughly the boundaries of our intuition.
The horizon at a hundred kilometers and the dust spec at a tenth of a millimeter.
Notice that all the objects lie approximately on a diagonal line. Bigger objects are not surprisingly
more massive. In fact they lie close to the line that is defined by the density of water.
Most objects in our world lie close to this line because they're made from atoms that are packed
and are touching. Now let's embed this graph in its parent graph whose axes now span an incredible
range of 50 powers of 10 in size and 90 powers of 10 in mass. Almost all of this lies outside our
ability to intuit but that's okay. Our exponential notation helps us navigate around these regions
beyond our intuition. Here you can see the basic building blocks of nature, nuclei, atoms,
planets and stars, galaxies and the entire visible universe with a size of 14 billion
light-years containing a mass of 10 to the 53 kilograms or 10 to the 23 times the mass of the
sun. Graphs with exponential axes are really amazing. They can include so much. Let's look
in a little more detail here. Now I've revealed a few more objects, a human cell, a mountain,
the earth, planets and the sun and you can see once again how things made of atoms really hug
this line of atomic density but also notice that when some stars die their gravity can crush the
atoms down onto just the atomic nuclei making a star of pure neutrons. So here we find the line of
nuclear density. Notice how it nearly touches the top left hand corner of our human world.
A piece of nuclear matter the size of a speck of dust weighs about as much as a house-sized
boulder of rock. What about less dense objects? Here's the solar system, interstellar clouds,
galaxies, clusters and voids and here's the average density of the universe a tiny six hydrogen atom
masses per cubic meter. As expected voids are a little less dense than average while galaxies
and clusters are denser than average. I want to end this lecture on a positive note because
throughout it I've tried to impress on you how mind numbingly huge galaxies in the universe are
and there is a danger that you are now feeling both physically and emotionally rather small and
insignificant which can be a little depressing but this need not be the case. Size and mass
are only one rather crude way to evaluate things. This final diagram tries to rank objects by their
complexity. Now I failed to find a quantitative measure of this so this is just my guess for an
exponential scale of complexity. The important thing to notice is that galaxies and stars and
planets are relatively speaking extremely simple things compared to for example DNA molecules,
an integrated circuit or a human cell. In fact on this plot living things are enormously more
complex than these astronomical objects. Here's a nice way to illustrate this. If things shun with
a brightness proportional to their complexity then galaxies and stars would be dim light bulbs
while just your brain alone would shine out like a quasar beacon visible across the whole universe.
We are special cosmically speaking and we can feel genuinely good about that but let's not get too
arrogant. Since an ant or a cockroach or your pet goldfish shine almost as brightly as you do.
