In previous lectures, I've not hesitated to say that this star is a hundred light years
away, or that galaxy is three billion light years away, but you may be wondering, how
do you know the distances to such remote objects? I mean, it's one thing to watch your odometer
click around as you drive across country, but imagine looking at the night sky. How
do you figure out the distance to those tiny points of light? And yet, knowing the distances
is crucial to our cosmological story. If you think the stars lie at the same distance
as the sun and the moon, as many pre-scientific cultures did, then the Earth becomes dominant,
possibly primary, cosmic player. But if instead stars are like the sun, but they're just faint
because they're very far away, then we live in a radically different kind of universe,
one in which the Earth shrinks into insignificance in the vastness of it all. So this is the topic
for the lecture, how distances are measured. And as we'll learn, knowing distances doesn't
just tell us the universe is really, really big. They do much more than that. They allow us to
ascertain the intrinsic properties of objects, their true sizes and powers. They allow us to
know how far back in time we're looking, which is extremely important in cosmology for constructing
the history of the universe. And in the next lecture, we'll see that measuring accurate distances
is essential in figuring out the properties of the universe as a whole, its expansion rate,
its age, its geometry and its composition. Now let me start with a very important point. There
is no single method for measuring distances to astronomical objects. Some methods work for
nearby objects, while other methods work only for more distant objects. The distances at which
the various methods work overlap. So nearby methods are used to calibrate more distant methods,
which in turn are used to calibrate yet more distant methods and so on in what is called
a distance ladder. Now given our limited time, I'll talk about just five of the most important
steps on this ladder, starting nearby and ending with the most distant galaxies. Now the first
two steps in the distance ladder make use of a standard surveying technique called triangulation,
which astronomers often call parallax. So let's take a quick look at that now. Imagine a person
looking at a foreground object against a more distant background. Actually, you could try
doing this using your finger or a pencil as the object, looking alternately with your left eye and
then your right eye. Your finger appears to jump across the background. Closer objects jump more,
further objects jump less. Of course our brains automatically use the difference between the
images of the left and right eye to intuit the object's distance. But we want a more general
method that works for any two viewpoints. Now the amount of jump is given by this angle,
which is of course the same as this apex angle. You can see that we have a long,
skinny triangle with a base, a distance and a little angle. And as you may recall from high
school geometry, knowing any two of these gives you the third. So for a skinny triangle we have
distance equals base length times 57.3 over the apex angle measured in degrees. Let's make a mental
check. Smaller angles yield longer distances, which seems about right. And for a skinny triangle with
one degree apex and a one inch base, the length is about 57.3 inches or 5 feet, which also seems
about right. Now for reasons that will become apparent shortly, astronomers often work with
extremely tiny angles. So let's just look at those briefly now. We're all familiar with degrees,
90 degrees in a right angle. So one degree is already pretty small. Now if you need much smaller
angles, then an arc minute is a 60th of a degree and an arc second is a 60th of an arc minute,
which is a 3,600th of a degree. So back to our slim triangle with a one inch base. If we now
make the apex angle 3,600 times smaller, so it's now just one arc second, then the length increases to
3,600 times 57.3 or about 206,000 inches, which is about three and a quarter miles with a one inch
base. So it's a really very skinny triangle. Okay, we're now ready for our first astronomical
triangulation method. Now remember, the distance ladder starts close to home. And the first enormously
important step on that ladder is to measure the size of the Earth's orbit around the Sun. Now the
first attempt to do this using triangulation was in 1672, when the great Italian French astronomer
Giovanni Cassini observed the position of Mars from Paris. While his assistant, Jean Richet,
observed the position of Mars at the same time from the coast of South America, 4,000 miles away.
When they compared the two positions, they found a small shift of about 20 arc seconds. And from
that, they could calculate a distance to Mars. And using that distance, they calculated the Earth's
Sun distance that was actually only about 10% off the true value. Now since then, there have been
many attempts to use triangulation to measure the Earth's Sun distance. But now, they're really only
of historical interest because modern measurements use huge radio telescopes to bounce radar pulses
off Venus. Timing the reflected signal and knowing the relative distance to Venus and the Sun then
gives an Earth's Sun distance to an accuracy of about 30 yards. Now the true Earth's Sun distance,
actually its average value, because the Earth's orbit is slightly elliptical, is called an astronomical
unit or AU. And it's very close to about 150 million kilometers or 93 million miles. By human
standards, it is, of course, a huge distance. If one step from here to here crosses the United
States, New York to San Francisco, then the Sun is 20 miles away. So now that we have a securely
measured orbit for the Earth, we're ready to move on to our next step in the distance ladder
and reapply triangulation method to measure the distance to stars using the Earth's orbit as the
base for our skinny triangles. This is almost an identical illustration to our first one of human
binocular vision, but it replaces the human head with the Earth's orbit. The position of a nearby
star is observed twice, six months apart, from opposite sides of the orbit. Sure enough, as you
can see from this little animation, nearby stars show a small jump against the backdrop of much
more distant stars. Now with a base of two astronomical units and a measured jump angle,
the distance to these nearby stars can now be calculated using our handy triangle equation.
Now as usual, although this is simple in principle, in practice it is extremely difficult because the
jump angles are extremely small. In fact, despite enormous efforts, it wasn't until 1838 that the
great German mathematician and astronomer Friedrich Bessel finally measured these tiny parallax shifts,
as they're called. For the nearest stars, the shift is about one arc second, with smaller
shifts for more distant stars. Now one arc second shift is equivalent to trying to see the jump
of an object 10 miles away by closing your right eye and then your left eye. Didn't quite do that
right? It's no wonder it took great care and excellent instruments to see these tiny shifts.
So what distances do we find for the nearby stars? Using our small angle equation, an apex
angle of one arc second tells us that the distance is about 206,000 times the base. Now let's use
light travel times to estimate this. Our orbit base is twice eight at 16 light minutes. So the
distance is about 206,000 times that, or about 3 million light minutes, or six light years.
So nearby stars are a few light years away. In human terms, this is an unimaginable distance.
Returning to our one pace crosses the United States with the sun 20 miles away.
To get to the nearest star, I would need to walk 30 times further than the moon.
Now at this point I'd like to introduce and then immediately ignore a famous unit of distance
that astronomers often use called the parsec. The word comes from a contraction of parallax
and arc second, and it's simply the length of a slim triangle whose base is the radius of the
Earth's orbit, one AU, and whose apex angle is one arc second. So from what we've just learned,
you can see that a parsec is simply 206,000 astronomical units, or 3.26 light years,
or a little more than 30 trillion kilometers. Now although astronomers tend to use parsecs,
actually killer parsecs or even mega parsecs, in these lectures I'm going to continue to use
light years instead, mainly because they give us the look back time to objects in years,
which is very convenient if your subject happens to be cosmology. But if you ever need
to convert parsecs to light years, it's very easy. You just multiply by 3 and then add a bit.
Now despite the incredibly tiny parallax angles, modern technology has made huge advances.
From the ground, atmospheric blurring limits the measurements to about a hundredth of an arc
second, but above the atmosphere you can achieve enormous improvements. So since the 1990s,
the European Hipparchos satellite measured parallax shifts for 120,000 stars with a precision of
a thousandth of an arc second, and the satellite Gaia, which is Hipparchos' successor and due to
be launched in 2011, will achieve 20 millionths of an arc second precision. That's the width of a
human hair seen from 500 miles away. It'll give distances to millions of stars across the entire
galaxy. If Gaia is successful, it'll be a truly wonderful project. Now before moving on, I'd
just like to make one historical point about the parallax shifts of stars. Because even the
ancient Greeks knew that if the earth went around the sun, then there should be shifts in the star
positions. And in the great debates over whether the earth went around the sun or the sun went
around the earth, Aristotle argued that the earth must be stationary, otherwise we would notice
the stars shifting back and forth. See for him, the alternative possibility, which was that the
stars are so far away that their shifts were just too small to see, the truth of the matter,
was philosophically unacceptable, because it would imply an unreasonably big cosmos. And that
wasn't the first time, nor was it the last time, that nature far outstrips our timid notions of
what is or is not reasonable. Okay, now let's return to our distance ladder. You can see here
the current limits of trigonometric parallax. It reaches only a small part of our galaxy,
so we're going to need different methods to go further. And by far the most versatile method
is to derive distances from objects with known luminosity. Now this illustrates the method.
In a row of similar candles, the further ones look fainter. Now as long as we know the true
power of the candle, and we can measure how bright it appears to be, then we can figure out its
distance. Of course, the key to this method is to find objects whose intrinsic brightness,
what astronomers call luminosity, is already known. Basically, we need to know the intrinsic
brightness of a candle. Now this diagram spells out the method a bit more precisely. Imagine an
object, a star or a galaxy, it really doesn't matter what, with a known luminosity, L. The units
of L are watts, just like the labels on light bulbs. As the light from that object moves out,
it becomes spread over ever larger spheres. Now at a distance d, the area of the sphere
from high school geometry is A equals 4 pi d squared. Now obviously, if we happen to be
on that sphere, those L watts have been spread evenly over the A square meters, giving the
famous inverse square law for apparent brightness. B equals L over A, which is L over 4 pi d squared,
where the units of B are now in watts per square meter. Now measuring B at the telescope is
relatively easy. So as long as we know L, we can easily calculate the distance,
d, using our simple equation. Now the last three rungs of our distance ladder rely on this method,
and they each use a type of object with known luminosity, certain kinds of stars,
certain kinds of galaxies, and certain kinds of supernova explosions. So let's look at these in
turn. To a casual observer, the stars in the sky seem not only fixed in position,
but also in brightness. But this is not always the case. If you look carefully, night after night,
a few stars change in brightness, becoming brighter than dimmer in a regular periodic way.
One of the most famous of these stars is called Delta Cepheus. Using normal binoculars,
you can watch this star getting slowly brighter and dimmer relative to its neighbors,
repeating its cycle about every 5.3 days, as it first swells and then shrinks, like this little animation shows.
Now in 1912, Henrietta Leavitt, who was working at the Harvard Observatory, noticed a very interesting
property of this kind of Cepheid variable star, as we now call this class of star. Intrinsically
luminous Cepheids pulsate slowly, while less luminous Cepheids pulsate quickly. This sort of makes sense,
reasonably sense. Big stars breathe more slowly than small stars, a bit like elephants breathe
more slowly than people, who breathe more slowly than mice. Anyway, it transpires that Cepheids define
quite a tight period luminosity relation, like the one shown here. Of course, you still need to
calibrate the relation by using parallax to measure the distances to a few Cepheids,
but in fact that was one of the primary motivations for the Hipparchos satellite,
which I just mentioned a few minutes ago. Now this kind of relation is extremely useful to
astronomers, because once you've measured the period of the star's variation, you can use the
period luminosity relation to read off its true luminosity, and then using its apparent brightness
in the sky, you can quickly find the distance using our simple inverse square law equation.
So this is how Cepheids are used to find the distances to the nearest galaxies.
You see, fortunately, Cepheids are really powerful stars between 110,000 times more
powerful than the Sun, so they can be seen quite far away as individual stars in nearby galaxies.
This was, in fact, one of the primary tasks of the Hubble Space Telescope, to find Cepheids
in other galaxies and measure their distances. This HST-key project, as it was called,
was led by Wendy Friedman and was completed in 1999, giving distances to 800 Cepheids in 18 galaxies
out as far away as 65 million light-years. Now with distances measured to these 18 galaxies,
they can now be used to calibrate the next step in the distance ladder.
Now, but before we look at that next step, I want to visit a wonderful piece of astronomical history
in which Cepheids played a key role. See, prior to the 1920s, it wasn't known whether the spiral
nebulae, which had been discovered in the mid-19th century, was simply single stars in
formation within our own Milky Way system or entire island universes, other galaxies,
in their own right, external to the Milky Way. And the issue was so vexed that in 1920,
Harlow Shapley and Herbert Curtis debated the question publicly in Washington DC,
with in fact no firm conclusions. Well then in 1923, Edwin Hubble used the then new
100-inch telescope on Mount Wilson to find and measure Cepheids in the great
Andromeda spiral nebulae, and he found a distance of a million light-years immediately
that placed it well outside the Milky Way. So that single observation confirmed nebulae were
separate galaxies, and by implication, so were all the other spiral nebulae, and suddenly the
universe was recognized to be an enormously bigger place than had been previously thought.
Okay, let's now go to the fourth step on the distance ladder, which is going to get us out to
about half a billion light-years. The step uses a relation similar to the one we met for Cepheids,
but this time it applies to entire spiral galaxies. Now the relationship was discovered
in the 1970s by Brent Tully and Rick Fisher, and it takes the form of a tight
correlation between the intrinsic luminosity of a spiral galaxy and its speed of rotation.
Basically, big luminous spirals rotate fast, while small low-luminosity spirals
rotate more slowly. You can probably guess how this is used to measure distances. Take a galaxy,
measure its rotation speed, then use the Tully-Fischer relation to read off the galaxy's
intrinsic luminosity, then compare that to the luminosity of the galaxy's apparent brightness,
and then figure out the distance using our handy equation B is L over 4 pi D squared.
Now at this point you might be wondering how could we measure the rotation speed of spiral
galaxies, but I'd like to postpone that discussion to lecture 9. Briefly, astronomers can relatively
easily measure the speeds of things using the Doppler effect. Again, something will meet in
coming lectures. So using the Tully-Fischer method, fairly accurate distances have been measured to
thousands of galaxies, but out as far as maybe a few hundred million light-years,
allowing many truly impressive studies of the structure and motion of the nearby universe,
which is something we'll come back to in lecture 22. However, in the cosmic scheme of things,
these galaxies are still relatively nearby, perhaps a few percent of the way to our visible limit
of 14 billion light-years. If we're going to measure distances to really far away galaxies,
let's say 10 billion light-years, then we need to find something that is exceedingly luminous,
but also with known luminosity. Well, in the last 10 years, a great deal of effort
has finally yielded such a class of object. They're called white dwarf supernovae,
or to use the astronomers term supernovae type 1a, and they provide the fifth and final rung
on our distance ladder. There are two qualities that make these supernovae ideal for distance
measurements. They have almost exactly the same luminosity when they explode, and they are extremely
bright, so they can be seen very far away, out to 10 billion light-years. Now, the reason the
explosions are so uniform is that they all involve exactly the same type of thermonuclear bomb.
As this artist's picture suggests, the supernova is thought to come from a rare kind of binary star
in which the outer atmosphere of one normal star is pulled over onto its companion white dwarf star,
which is just a dense, burned-out ball of carbon and oxygen, roughly the size of the earth,
but containing about as much mass as the sun. As more mass piles on, the temperature in the
interior of the white dwarf reaches a critical point at which thermonuclear fusion rips through
the star, and in a few seconds, the entire star explodes, creating an extremely bright fireball
that can outshine an entire galaxy for several days. Here's a simple animation that illustrates a
supernova event. A star rapidly appears and then slowly fades. More precisely, here's the so-called
light curve, which shows the supernova's rapid appearance and then gradual fading over about
60 days. And here's a lovely example of a supernova in a nearby galaxy. Of course, these nearby
supernovae in galaxies with known distances are very important because you can calculate their
true luminosity and so calibrate the method. The most challenging task, but the most important one
for cosmology, is to find extremely distant supernovae. For this, large telescopes are used on
several consecutive nights to take deep images that contain thousands of faint galaxies.
Each image is subtracted from the previous night's image so that any new object is immediately
visible in the difference image. Often, a spectrum is then taken to confirm the nature of the supernova
and its slow fading is followed over the next few weeks using the Hubble Space Telescope.
Some of these supernovae are enormously distant, five, six, seven, eight billion light years away.
With lookback times half the age of the universe. As we'll see in lecture nine, it's these extremely
distant supernovae at the very end of the distance ladder that gave the first evidence for an
accelerating expansion that then uncovered the existence of dark energy. Throughout this lecture,
I've needed to simplify the story of how distances are measured. The true history is much more
nuanced and troubled and it's taken over a hundred years to develop. In fact, until 15 years ago,
the cumulative uncertainty was 50%, not very good. But in the last few years, it's been,
it's seen enormous progress. The Hipparchus satellite measured parallaxes of nearby stars
including many seafheeds. The Hubble Telescope has used seafheeds to measure distances to dozens
of nearby galaxies. The Tully Fisher and other methods have been greatly improved and the intrinsic
brightness of white dwarf supernovae have finally been calibrated. So that today, the combined
uncertainty in the distance scale is more like five to 10%, a huge improvement. In future lectures,
the importance of reliable distance estimates will return time and time again. And so although
this lecture hasn't perhaps included much exotic material from the cosmological story itself,
we've been gathering some hard but necessary material that needs to be in place before we
can move forward with that story. Now, I want to end this lecture with a new method currently
being explored, which promises to bypass the distance ladder completely and yield a simple
trigonometric distance out to several billion light-years. The method has been developed using
this extremely interesting nearby galaxy. Right at the center is a small one light-year sized
disc of gas that's orbiting around a massive black hole. The method works like this.
Imagine we have a blobby ring of gas moving rapidly in a circular orbit. First, we measure the speed
of a blob here and find it to be let's say a thousand kilometers per second. Next, we follow the
position of another blob in the ring here. For a year, and notice it moves by say 10 micro arc
seconds across the sky, 10 millionths of an arc second. Since these two blobs have the same speed,
then a year moving at a thousand kilometers per second, which is about 30 billion kilometers,
is the same as 10 micro arc seconds as seen from the earth. So we have an exceedingly skinny
triangle with a base of 30 billion kilometers and an angle of 10 micro arc seconds bingo.
We have the distance to the galaxy. Now, you may be wondering how on earth can we measure
those things, but it's possible using powerful radio telescopes. The method hasn't been fully
developed yet, but in time it's hoped that it may ultimately yield distances out to eight billion
light-years with roughly two percent accuracy, which would be a great improvement and simplification
over the conventional distance ladder. Now, measuring an accurate distance to a small number of
rather unusual types of galaxies isn't itself particularly important, but what is important
is that it allows you to measure the expansion of the universe with high precision,
and that's our next topic for the next lecture.
