In the last two lectures, we've looked carefully at two important issues. One is the measurement
of distance, and the other is the universe's expansion. Now if you think about these two
terms for a moment, you'll realize that our simple notions of distance need to be reexamined
rather carefully. Here on Earth, for example, the distance between cities is fixed. New
York to San Francisco is 2600 miles apart. Period. But what if, like the universe, the
Earth were expanding? In that case, the distance between New York and San Francisco would be
continually increasing, and the value of 2600 miles is only true today. It was smaller in the
past, and it'll be larger in the future. See, we face a similar situation with the expanding
universe. When you want to discuss the distance to galaxies, you must recognize that this distance
is increasing over time, and you always have to specify a time when you specify a distance.
Actually, the situation is even trickier, because the universe can expand by large factors during
light's journey from one galaxy to another. It's as if you set your car odometer to zero when you
leave New York, but while you are traveling to San Francisco, the Earth expands by 30%, say. So
your odometer reading on arrival at San Francisco is neither the distance when you left, nor is it
the distance when you arrive, but it's something in between. Now, in earlier lectures, I've glossed
over these issues, and you may have already sensed something was confusingly missing. For
example, in the astronomers' view of the universe from lecture two, you may have been puzzled
why the Big Bang, which is supposed to be when everything is together, can somehow be far away
at the edge of the visible universe. But this hides exactly the kind of ambiguity I'm talking
about. In truth, 13.7 billion years ago, when the light set out, the material was very close to us.
But today, when the light finally arrives, that material is way off, nearly 46 billion light
years away. And the distance 13.7 billion light years, which I've previously used, in fact applies
to the distance the light itself traveled. It's the car odometer's reading. It's neither the original,
very small distance, nor is it the present day, very large distance, but it's something in between.
So I want to spend this lecture clarifying these kinds of issues. And in particular, I want to look
at how very remote things appear to us when we live in this expanding universe. And as we'll see,
there are some really quite interesting and bizarre consequences.
So let's begin by identifying three different distances using this diagram. At the bottom,
at time t emit, light of wavelength lambda emit leaves a galaxy which is a distance
d emit away. And it begins its long journey towards us. Now as time passes, we move up the diagram.
The universe expands, stretching both the photon's wavelength and the galaxy's distance.
The photon arrives today at time t now, when it has wavelength lambda now, and the galaxy
is at a distance d now. Now in the last lecture, we learned that the light waves and the separation
of galaxies are stretched by the same factor. So we have the following simple relation. The ratio
of d now to d emit is the same as the ratio of lambda now to lambda emit, which is the
redshift stretch factor or RSF for short. Now just an aside here, astronomers usually use the
symbol z for redshift, which is RSF minus one. But I'm going to use RSF in these lectures
because it's a little bit more closely linked to the cosmic stretch. Okay, so we've now encountered
two important distances, the emission distance and the current distance. What about the distance
the light itself travelled during its journey? Let's call this the light travel distance dLt.
Back in our expanding Earth analogy, that's the odometer reading on the car driven between New
York and San Francisco. Now, since light always moves through space at the speed of light,
this is equivalent to always driving our car along the road at, say, 65 miles an hour.
The light travel distance is therefore the speed of light times the journey's duration.
So mathematically, we have dLt is c times t now minus t emit, where c is the speed of light,
of course. But notice that the journey's duration is also the look back time. How long ago the
light was emitted from the galaxy? So we have the nice fact that the light travel distance
in light years is simply the look back time in years. This is the distance I've used previously
when saying something like that galaxy's 5 billion light years away, meaning we see it as it was
5 billion years ago. In fact, that galaxy was only 4 billion light years away when the light set out,
and it's now 6 billion light years away today.
Okay, now by far the easiest thing to measure for any galaxy is redshift. So a key question is,
how do we use redshift to calculate our three distances? Now, the two quick answer is to say,
use the Hubble law with distance proportional to expansion speed. However, although that relation
is true at any given time, as we look out, we look back to earlier times when the expansion
speed was different. So the observed Hubble law begins to break down at large distances,
and we need to modify it by folding in the universe's expansion history.
Now, we've met the expansion history before. Here it is. The curve shows how the separation
between any two galaxies grows over time, and it's scaled so that the separation today is labeled as
1.0. I call this curve S of t, where s stands for size or scale or separation, and t, of course,
is time. Now, I'm postponing to lectures 11 and 12 how to figure out the exact shape of this curve,
but for now, let's just get the idea that the big bang occurs at time zero when the separation of
everything is also zero. The separation between objects then increases rapidly at first, but
slowing down as time passes. Then there is a period of coasting followed by acceleration
as the effects of dark energy begin to be felt.
So let's see how to use this curve to find our three distances. And to make things concrete,
let's choose a galaxy whose redshift stretch factor, RSF, is 3. Now, if the redshift stretch
factor is 3, then the universe must have been three times smaller when the light set out.
So everything was a third as far away then. But that's just S of t, the scale factor,
or size factor, for when the light set out. In fact, this is always true. For any redshift
stretch factor, RSF, the scale factor, S of t, was just one over RSF when the light set out.
So back to our plot of S of t, we simply find where S of t is a third. And we run across to find the
time at which the light set out, 3.2 billion years after the big bang, or 10.5 billion years
ago. So immediately, we have the look back time. It's 10.5 billion years. And the light travel
distance is 10.5 billion light years. So that's one of our distances measured.
Now getting the current distance d now is trickier. Here's how we do it. We start from the previous
graph and focus attention on a small time interval during light's journey between t and t plus delta
t. During that interval, the light moves a distance c times delta t. But that distance
is going to get stretched between then and now. The amount it gets stretched is one over S of t.
For example, if at that time the universe was half its current size, so S of t is 0.5,
then our little length, c delta t, will expand by a factor of 2. That's just one over 0.5 by today.
And this will contribute two times c delta t to today's distance.
We can show this contribution by the area under a tall, skinny rectangle of height 2 and width
c delta t. Now to get the total current distance d now, we must repeat this for all the little
intervals between t emit and t now, and add them all together. But this is just the area
under the curve given by one over S of t. Now if you recall high school or college calculus,
you'll recognize that the way to write this using a fancy integral sign, really it's just this area.
For our example galaxy, we get a current distance of 15 billion light years. Now finally, getting the
distance when the light was emitted 10.5 billion years ago is very easy. The redshift stretch factor
is the same as the distance stretch factor. So the emission distance is just a third of the
current distance. A third of 15 is 5 billion light years. So finally, a galaxy with redshift
stretch factor of 3 has current, light travel and emission distances of 15, 10.5 and 5 billion light
years. We can use these area diagrams to show all three of these distances. Notice that just as we
expected, the current distance is always larger than the light travel distance, which in turn is
always larger than the emission distance. Okay, having figured out these three distances for a
redshift stretch factor of 3, how do they vary for the whole sweep of redshift from very small redshift
to very high redshift? Here you can see the rather fascinating answer. Nearby, all three
distances are the same and are given nicely by the Hubble law. But at higher redshift, the simple
Hubble law gets worse and worse and the three distances become quite different. And amazingly,
the emission distance actually becomes smaller at higher redshift. I know this sounds bizarre,
but it makes sense when you think about it. We're looking so far back in time that the universe
was so much smaller that the object was close by when the light set out. Now here's an extreme
example of that. This is our astronomer's universe. And remember, almost at the outer boundary sits the
microwave background. And as we'll learn in lecture 13, the redshift stretch factor for the
microwave background is a thousand. And doing the calculations, we find that the lookback time is
13.7 billion years, almost back to the Big Bang. And the current distance is a huge 46 billion
light years. But the emission distance is a thousand times smaller than this, which is only 46
million light years. So bizarrely, the microwave background is extremely distant, but it was
relatively nearby when the light set out. Now with this background in place, let's consider how
very distant galaxies appear to us. There are some really very interesting effects. So first of all,
the rate at which processes seem to unfold within galaxies slows down. Now this has
nothing to do with Einstein's famous theory of relativity. But it happens simply because
light paths get stretched by cosmic expansion. For example, if a supernova goes off in a
distant galaxy and lasts, say, a week, then the light waves leaving that galaxy span a distance of
one light week. But when they arrive at our galaxy, that wave train has been stretched longer.
So it takes longer to fully arrive. And so the supernova's duration seems longer to us.
Actually, here's some real data showing exactly that. At higher redshifts, going to the right,
the duration of the supernova appears to get longer by an amount equal to the redshift stretch factor.
Now what about a distant galaxy's brightness? Obviously, we expect more distant galaxies to
appear fainter, but by how much? Remember from lecture six that a galaxy's brightness
normally follows the inverse square law, so b equals l over 4 pi d squared. Remember, l is
the luminosity of the galaxy and d is its distance. But in cosmology, which distance do we use?
In fact, we use the current distance, d now, because when the photons arrive,
they're spread over a huge sphere of radius d now, an area 4 pi d now squared. Of course,
the current distance is the largest of our three distances. And so for this reason alone,
high redshift galaxies are very faint. But the situation is unfortunately even worse than this,
because two other effects make the galaxies even fainter. First of all, redshift reduces each
photon's energy. So we collect a wind pier photons. And then second, the time slowing effect that I
just talked about reduces the rate at which the photons arrive. So the final formula for brightness
is b equals l over 4 pi d now squared times 1 over the redshift's stretch factor squared.
So at high redshift, this second term is important and galaxies appear much fainter
than you would expect. Well, now let's consider how big galaxies appear to be.
Normally, when somebody walks away from you, they appear smaller and smaller as they get
further away. Remember from lecture six, the formula that gives the angular size of an object in
degrees is 57.3 times the size of the object divided by its distance. So just as before,
which of our three distances do we use? The answer is that we use the emission distance,
because the photons' directions are set when they leave the galaxy and they remain unchanged
from then on. Now this is actually great news, because remember the emission distance stays
relatively small even at high redshift, leading to the bizarre fact that galaxies at high redshift
do not appear to get smaller. In fact, at very high redshift, they can actually appear bigger,
because they were closer when their light set out. This graph shows the size of a typical
galaxy at greater and greater redshifts. After an initial drop in size, they settle down to about
one to two arc seconds across, difficult to observe but not impossible, especially from space.
This magnifying effect of cosmic expansion is really a wonderful gift from nature.
Now unfortunately, nature still doesn't make it easy for us. Almost as important as size
is a property called surface brightness. How bright is a galaxy per unit area on the sky?
And it's simply the ratio of the galaxy's brightness divided by its angular area. Now normally,
surface brightness doesn't in fact depend on distance. Basically push an object further away
and of course its brightness drops at the same rate as its angular area, so the ratio stays the same.
But in our expanding universe, the situation is much worse. The brightness drops even faster
and the angular area gets larger, so their ratio, the surface brightness, takes a nose dive by the
fourth power of the redshift stretch factor. So for example, a distant galaxy with a redshift
stretch factor of five has a surface brightness that is 600 times lower than a nearby galaxy.
Now you can see why it's so difficult to study high redshift galaxies. They are desperately faint.
Their angular size is a very tiny one arc second and their star light is redshifted
out of the optical band into the infrared. It's for these reasons of course that cosmologists
eagerly await the successor to the Hubble Space Telescope. It's called the James Webb Space Telescope
JWST, named after the man who was primarily responsible back in the 1960s for ensuring
that scientific research became one of NASA's primary goals. It's a large, infrared optimized
space telescope with a 6.5 meter mirror. As we'll see in lecture 19, it's only with
telescopes like this that it's possible to study the remote and therefore young universe.
Now at this point I'd like to introduce a type of diagram that can sometimes really help us grasp
the odd effects of living in an expanding universe and it's called a space time diagram.
And I want to introduce it in two stages. First for a static space and then for an expanding space.
So this figure shows a simple space time diagram with the x-axis for distance measured in light
years and the y-axis for time measured in years. If we are stationary our x-position is fixed
and it traces out a straight vertical line like this. Here's a planet fixed 10 light years away
and also it has a straight line like us. Now here's an alien spaceship which leaves the planet
and travels to the earth. Now perhaps the aliens send a light signal rather than a spaceship.
How does light move on this kind of diagram? Here it is traveling from the planet to us.
Notice how it moves at a 45 degree angle since for every year of time it gets one light year
closer. Well so far so good now let's consider an expanding space like the universe.
So here's a similar space time diagram with a vertical line for our galaxy. While here's a line
of another galaxy which is currently 10 billion light years away moving with cosmic expansion.
Notice that its path looks just like our earlier plots of the scale factor s of t but it's rotated
so that time now goes upwards instead of to the right. Here are the paths of two other galaxies.
They're just copies of the first galaxy one nearer and one further.
Now you can really sense the expansion. All galaxies have paths starting at the origin
which is of course the big bang and at any later time the speed at which they move away from us
is just proportional to their distance from us. That's the Hubble law. Now here's the tricky part.
Let's imagine we observe a distant supernova in this galaxy. What path does the light take?
Here it is. When the light sets out moving at light speed it travels through a space which
is itself moving. So the light makes slower headway than in a static space so the initial
trajectory is steeper than 45 degrees but as the light gets closer where the expansion is slower
it makes faster progress finally arriving at a 45 degree angle since the local space
is from our perspective essentially static. Finding our three distances for this supernova
is very easy. Here's the current distance, here's the emission distance and here's the light travel
distance. Easy. Now let's push this out to the limit and trace the path for light coming from
the big bang itself. Its shape is fascinating so let's take a look at that for the moment.
Shortly after the big bang cosmic expansion was so rapid that light was caught like a swimmer
in a fast current. It was actually dragged away from us by the expanding space. For over three
billion years the light receded from us ultimately being dragged nearly five and a half billion
light years away. Only later as the light made its way into slower moving space could it begin to
close the gap and then ultimately after a 13.7 billion year journey it enters our local
almost static space and streaks into our telescopes at light speed. Now this curved path has a very
special status for us here on earth at the present time and for reasons I don't have time for it's
called our past light cone. On it lies everything we currently witness in the universe. Notice how
each galaxy's path crosses our light cone at a particular time. That is the time we witness
when we see the galaxy in our telescopes today. Seven billion years ago for example the photons
from this supernova joined many others on our light cone all heading towards us and destined
to arrive at earth today. Now notice that our light cone what we witness is only an infinitesimal
fraction of all that there is. It's a line within a plane. There are many events in the universe.
These are places on the plane with a specific time and distance which are not on this line.
This is pretty obvious when you think about it. The light from ancient events occurring nearby
obviously arrived long ago while the light from recent events occurring very far away will arrive
in the far future. So each time has its light cone and together they cover the spacetime plane
but at any given time today for example we only see what's on one light cone and everything else
goes unseen. Okay let's finally use this spacetime diagram to identify the furthest things that we
can see what one might call our visibility horizon. Basically how big is our visible universe?
It's defined of course by how far light can travel since the Big Bang for which the lookback
time is 13.7 billion years the full cosmic age. So we want to go back to the full 13.7 billion
years of lookback time to find that galaxy's trajectory which just touches our light cone at
Big Bang. Here it is and it's further than any of the other galaxies that cross our light cone at
more recent times. Here are our three distances the lookback distance or time is 13.7 billion years
and the emission distance de-emit is of course zero that region was on top of us when the light
set out. This makes sense 13.7 billion years ago was the Big Bang when everything was together
but the current distance is 46 billion light years away so that matter which we see
out at our visible horizon roughly speaking the microwave background has by today condensed
into galaxies just like ours and they're currently sitting 46 billion light years away.
That is our visible universe anything further and we've not yet seen it.
Well this has been a challenging lecture so let me briefly review the main points.
First we recognize that the concept of distance is tricky in a large expanding universe.
For any observed galaxy there are three important distances the emission distance when the light
set out the current distance when the light arrives and the distance the light itself
traveled. We looked at how to calculate all three of these using the measured red shift
and a knowledge of the universe's expansion history s of t. A rather interesting feature
is that the emission distance actually gets smaller for galaxies at high red shift because
they were closer when their lights set out very long ago. Overall we found that when we
observe very distant galaxies their time seems to slow down they appear to get bigger and they get
very faint. We then recast a number of these themes using a space time diagram. This nicely
shows the cosmic expansion starting at the Big Bang. It also allows us to plot how light
moves across the universe. Light coming from the most distant regions started out being
carried away from us by the rapid early expansion but ultimately it made headway and finally
manages to arrive. We also use this diagram to find the size of the visible universe. We see the
Big Bang itself at the maximum look back time of 13.7 billion years. It was right here when the
light set out but ultimately it spawned galaxies that are currently 46 billion light years away.
It's a visibility horizon beyond which we cannot see but just like we know there are
lands beyond our terrestrial horizon so in later lectures we'll learn there are galaxies upon galaxies
stretching well beyond our cosmic visibility horizon.
