In lecture four, we learn that nature is made from just five elements or essences.
Atomic matter, light, neutrinos, dark matter and dark energy.
Now our entire world and experience are concerned solely with the first two of these, atomic
matter and light.
So it's a bit humbling when you discover they're only a minor player making up just
four percent of the current total.
So if we want to fully understand nature's great cosmological story, we must obviously
get acquainted with the two dominant players, dark matter weighing in at 23% and dark energy
weighing in at 73%.
So I hope by the end of this lecture you'll feel a little bit more comfortable with these
characters and the role that they play in constructing the universe.
Now for both dark matter and dark energy, I'm going to be asking three questions.
What's the evidence that they exist?
What role do they play in the evolution of the universe?
And what are they and what are they made of?
So let's start with the first of these.
How do we know they exist?
You can immediately guess why they've eluded detection for so long.
Look at their names, dark energy, dark matter.
They neither emit nor scatter any light.
They are profoundly invisible.
Now this isn't necessarily a disaster for us.
I mean after all, we can't see the air around us but we know it's there because it influences
things for example when the wind blows and it's just the same with dark matter and dark
energy.
We know they're there because they influence things by their gravity.
As we'll see, dark matter is lumpy.
So it affects motions between individual galaxies while dark energy is spread about uniformly.
So its gravity only affects cosmic expansion.
Now since we'll be dealing with motion caused by gravity, we need to be familiar with some
simple circular orbital motion.
So let's briefly look at that now.
Imagine a large mass pulling on a small mass.
If the small mass were initially stationary, it would just fall directly towards the large
mass.
But if it's initially moving sideways, then the sideways motion and the inward pull combine
together and the upshot is that the small mass travels in an orbit.
In this case, it's a circular orbit.
Ultimately, that's all that orbits are.
They're the combination of sideways motion and an inward pull of gravity.
Now then, for those of you who are happy with this kind of thing, let me briefly show you
the equations which describe this circular orbit.
So we start from Newton's second law of motion.
Force equals mass times acceleration.
The gravitational force is given by Newton's famous inverse square law, gmm over r squared,
where g is Newton's gravitational constant and the two m's are the two masses and r
is their separation.
So that equals m times v squared over r, where v squared over r is the acceleration of an
object moving at speed v in a circle of radius r.
OK, so we can cancel out the small mass to get gm over r squared equals v squared over
r and we can easily rearrange this to get m alone on the left and we have m equals v
squared r over g, which is an incredibly important equation.
Now don't worry if you didn't follow all of that, the bottom line is that Newton's simple
laws of motion and gravity mean that if you know the size and speed of a circular orbit,
you can calculate the mass responsible for making that orbit.
This is an amazingly useful formula in astronomy and I'm going to illustrate with a couple
of examples.
So first one, the earth moves around the sun at about 30 kilometers per second in a roughly
circular orbit with a radius of 150 million kilometers.
Have you plugged these numbers into the equation along with big g?
You immediately find that the mass of the sun is 2.0 times 10 to the power 30 kilograms.
Bingo!
The sun's mass is measured quite accurately.
Now my second example is much grander.
Here's a typical galaxy.
Stars in its disk move approximately on circular orbits.
Now in ways we'll get to in a minute, it's possible to measure the orbit speed and size.
And let's say they are 200 kilometers per second and 25,000 light years.
But once again, you simply plug these numbers into our equation m equals v squared r over
g and we get 1.4 times 10 to the 41 kilograms or a little over 70 billion times the mass
of the sun.
Again, you've just measured the mass of a galaxy.
When you think about it, these are quite remarkable results.
We will never go to visit the sun or a galaxy but using Newton's laws of gravity and his
laws of motion.
We can confidently measure both of their masses.
Now the examples I just showed you are for a single orbit but when the orbit will speed
is measured for a whole range of distance from the center, we get what astronomers call
a rotation curve.
It's a graph of orbital speed versus distance from the center.
Now you can play the game we just did but for each distance and calculate the mass inside
each orbit.
Here are two examples again.
For the solar system, going out in radius, the planets orbit more and more slowly.
So the rotation curve drops.
When you plug each velocity and each radius into our formula, you keep getting the same
value for the mass because each planet feels the same mass, it's the sun's mass of course.
But here's a typical rotation curve for a galaxy.
It stays high at all radii.
Now if you calculate the mass within each radius, you find, not surprisingly, that it
increases as you go out because mass is spread throughout the galaxy.
But, and this is the important part, if you could measure orbital speeds outside the galaxy
they should drop off, right?
Just like the solar system, you're now outside the galaxy so the orbital speeds should drop.
Now throughout the 1970s, one of the pioneers in this field, Vera Rubin, measured many galaxy
rotation curves using Doppler shifts of emission lines coming from clouds orbiting within the
galaxy.
Now in essentially every galaxy she measured, the rotation curve remained high right to
the very galaxy's edge.
Now this was a little bit unusual but what really needed was a way to measure rotation
beyond the visible edge.
Now there was a real breakthrough in the early 1980s when radio telescopes began to discover
and then measure giant rotating discs of tenuous hydrogen gas that extended well beyond
the visible limits of the galaxy.
Here's an amazing pair of images.
On the left is an optical image of a normal spiral galaxy and on the right at the same
scale is a picture of the hydrogen gas taken with a radio telescope.
The optical visible galaxy of stars is just the inner part of a much larger disc of hydrogen
gas.
Now one of the wonderful properties of hydrogen is that it naturally emits photons with a pure
radio colour with wavelength 21 cm and so this can be used to measure Doppler shifts.
So these rotating hydrogen discs could provide just the rotation curves we were looking for.
Now before I tell you the results of that I want to briefly show you the kind of instruments
that measure this radio emission.
So radio waves coming from the sky were first discovered by Carl Janski in the early 1930s,
first from the sun and then from the Milky Way and over the years it's become clear
that the radio sky provides a radically different view of the universe and we'll keep returning
to it during these lectures.
Now unlike optical telescopes radio telescopes are huge.
Here are two in the US and the UK both with collecting dishes roughly the size of a football
field.
Now in the 1950s a technique was developed which combined the signals from an array of
radio telescopes giving enormously improved sharpness to the image.
This one for example in New Mexico has 27, 25 metre dishes spread in a wide pattern spanning
36 kilometres justifying its name the very large array or VLA.
Ok, back to those rotation curves.
Here's a VLA observation of the atomic hydrogen emission in the nearby spiral galaxy M33.
Here's the optical starlight image and here's the hydrogen gas radio image added as blue
and here the red blue colours signify the Doppler shifts of the hydrogen gas away and
towards us.
Using these Doppler velocities here's the full rotation curve.
It continues to rise well beyond the starlight disk whose predicted rotation curve should
fall like this one.
These two curves are really very different and show that there is a significant mass
outside in the halo beyond the stars.
Now here's a second example that provided the first clear evidence for massive dark halos
back in 1985.
The optical galaxy sits within a large hydrogen disk shown here using white contours and the
rotation curve stays flat way out beyond the stars whose predicted rotation would fall
well below the observed rotation.
The only way to match that rotation curve is to add in a new component of mass and it's
labelled here as the halo.
Now I want to stress that the hydrogen gas itself is very lightweight.
It's less than one percent of the mass needed here.
Instead we need something several times more massive than all the stars yielding essentially
no light.
That is what's referred to as the dark matter halo.
Now with these new observations we need to look at galaxies with a fresh eye.
This is what they're really like.
Whenever you see a galaxy you must think of this whopping dark region around it.
It's a bit like an iceberg.
The visible galaxy is only about one sixth of the total, most of which goes unseen.
Now galaxy rotation curves are not the only thing to reveal the presence of dark matter.
Let me quickly review the evidence for dark matter in clusters of galaxies which if anything
is even more convincing.
When you take spectra of the galaxies in clusters like these you find Doppler velocities of several
hundred kilometres per second.
Now although the galaxies aren't on nice circular orbits it turns out that instead you can use
the average galaxy velocity in our simple equation m equals v squared r over g to find
the mass of the whole cluster.
Now the mass you calculate turns out typically to be 25 times more than all the stars in
all the galaxies.
So clearly there is lots of invisible matter present in the clusters.
Now amazingly this result was first found way back in 1933 by the famous Swiss American
astronomer Fritz Zwicky who measured the Doppler velocities of galaxies in the coma cluster.
But for reasons that aren't entirely clear his correct conclusion that galaxy clusters
contained large amounts of invisible matter was never really widely accepted and we had
to wait until the 1970s to rediscover this result.
Though in retrospect Zwicky is now acknowledged of course to have been the first person to
have discovered dark matter.
Now let's look at two completely different approaches to measuring galaxy cluster masses
to see if they give the same result.
The first makes use of the fact that galaxy clusters have huge atmospheres of extremely
sparse but extremely hot gas which is held down by the cluster's gravity.
These hot atmospheres emit x-rays and so they can be seen using x-ray telescopes such as
NASA's Chandra satellite.
You can see that they show up as large smooth blobs filling the cluster.
In some sense these cluster atmospheres are actually similar to our own atmosphere.
The height has adjusted so that its outward pressure just balances the downward force
of gravity.
It's a condition called hydrostatic balance.
So using the x-ray images to measure the height and temperature of the gas then yields
the downward gravitational force and it's that that tells you the cluster's total mass.
Now fortunately the results agree almost perfectly with the masses derived using galaxy velocities
so that's encouraging.
Now it's important to check of course that the mass of the atmosphere itself isn't dominating
the cluster mass and it turns out it doesn't.
This graph shows the breakdown of the three components.
The mass is in yellow, the hot gas in red and dark matter in grey.
The hot gas does weigh more than the galaxies but the dark matter is five times heavier
than both these put together.
Now the final method of measuring cluster masses is really quite wonderful.
So deep and so extended are the gravitational fields of the rich galaxy clusters that they
actually bend passing light rays and astronomers call this a gravitational lens.
In practice what happens is that the distant background galaxies seen through the cluster
appear distorted.
Some are even stretched into long thin arcs.
Now as you might imagine the degree of distortion reveals the strength of the gravity and hence
the mass of the cluster.
The cluster masses measured in this way agree perfectly with the other two methods and they
contain much more mass than is just in the galaxies or the atmospheres combined.
So I hope by now I've convinced you that dark matter is real and it's a major component
in the universe but apart from keeping astronomers busy what's it good for, what does it do?
The answer is a lot and without it we wouldn't exist.
As these sequence of images shows the primary role dark matter plays in cosmology is in transforming
a smooth young universe into a lumpy old universe.
Stated simply gravitational clumping requires mass and the atomic matter alone isn't enough.
In fact in a universe without dark matter not a single star or galaxy would have yet
formed and probably never would.
So dark matter really plays a very important role and it's something we'll look at in
more detail in lectures 17 and 22.
Let's consider that third question about dark matter.
What exactly is it?
What is it made from?
Well the simple answer is we don't know but that's not quite fair because we do know a
few things about it.
For example we do know it is not any kind of atomic matter like failed dark stars or
planets or rocks.
We know this because of evidence coming to us from the early universe.
In lectures 16 and then 25 I'll show you how the microwave background and the abundance
of light elements both tell us that the total atomic content of the universe is just 4%.
So the dark matter which is measured to be 23% can't be atomic matter in any form.
Instead it's likely to be some kind of relic particle left over from the Big Bang.
Now the fact that these particles are so elusive suggests that they only interact with matter
via gravity and the weak force making them sort of a little bit like heavy versions of
neutrinos.
Now actually we know they're not neutrinos because neutrinos travel too fast to allow
the growth of small scale clumping.
Computer models with this so-called hot dark matter lead to a universe with only huge structures
with few smaller structures like stars and galaxies.
Instead computer models need what is called cold dark matter with heavier slow moving
particles that can easily clump up and generate small scale structure.
Now so far no known particle fits the description and in the absence of any further knowledge
astronomers often use a generic term WIMP for weekly interacting massive particle.
Now lastly there are several groups in the US and Japan and Italy and the UK who are
trying to detect dark matter particles here on earth using very sensitive particle detectors
shielded deep underground where they're free from other spurious signals.
It's a very very difficult experiment.
In total at any given time there's only about a kilogram of dark matter particles within
the earth's volume and these particles almost never interact with atoms but calculations
suggest that very occasionally a dark matter particle will smack into an atomic nucleus
and knock it backwards and it's this recoiling nucleus that's ultimately detected.
As the years have gone by the sensitivity of the detectors has gotten better and better
but still no dark matter particles have yet been found.
But if or when they are it will be one of the most important discoveries of this century
and it'll certainly earn its team the Nobel Prize.
I mean after all it's not every day that you find the stuff from which most of the
universe is made.
Now in the remaining time I want to talk about the other enigmatic component dark energy
and to help get started you need to have some kind of mental image of what it is.
So for the moment just think of it as the energy of space itself.
It's not much it's about a flea jumps worth of energy per football stadium worth of volume.
So when you average over the universe it turns out to be the dominant component weighing
in at 73% of the total.
Let's first look at the evidence for dark energy.
Like dark matter dark energy is utterly invisible but unlike dark matter it's spread uniformly
throughout the universe so its gravity doesn't affect local motions.
It only affects global cosmic expansion.
Now for reasons we'll get to in lecture 12 the key property of dark energy that makes
it so unique is that its gravity causes the universe's expansion to accelerate and speed
up.
See ever since Hubble discovered expansion everyone thought its rate would be slowing
down since the matter within the universe pulls back.
So it came as a huge surprise in 1998 when two independent teams led by Saul Perlmutter
and Brian Schmidt found that the universe's expansion was actually speeding up.
Now their method is simple in principle here's the standard Hubble diagram with distance
plotted against expansion speed with the local gradient slope giving us the current Hubble
constant of 22 km per second per million light years.
Now if you go to greater and greater distances you're looking back in time.
So if the curve gets steeper we know that the expansion rate was faster in the past
so the universe would therefore be decelerating.
But if the curve gets shallower the expansion rate was slower in the past and we know the
universe would be accelerating.
One needs to look very far away to go far enough back in time to see the changing expansion
rate so it's supernovae like the one shown here that are used to measure these huge distances.
Well in practice of course life is a bit more complicated and instead people plot not the
distance but the brightness of the supernova against their redshift and they look for deviations
from what's expected for a constant expansion rate.
Here you can see the data fit the accelerating universe much better than the decelerating
universe.
So in the time actually since that discovery of dark energy back in 1998 the supernova
data have gotten steadily better and there are now actually two other independent methods
to check for acceleration and they also give the same positive result.
So observationally at least it looks as though dark energy is here to stay and we need to
fold it into the cosmological picture.
So what exactly is dark energy?
Now the honest answer is again we don't know.
Obviously the situation is even worse, we really don't know.
Now having said that there are some ideas.
In fact something resembling dark energy was even introduced by Einstein himself when he
added what's called the cosmological constant to his equations of general relativity.
His aim was to find a static cosmological solution, a universe which neither expanded
nor contracted because he thought that was how the universe was.
And of course he famously discarded that result as soon as Hubble discovered that the universe
was in fact expanding.
Now today cosmologists usually consider three possibilities for the nature of dark energy.
The first is a fixed very slight energy associated with space itself.
It's called a vacuum energy.
The second is a slightly different kind of vacuum energy, one that varies in time or
place and it goes by a different name, quintessence.
And the third involves a genuine modification to the properties of gravity, something beyond
Einstein's theory that we don't yet understand.
Now the current favourite amongst cosmologists is the first of these, vacuum energy.
So let me look at that for a moment now.
Now I know it seems a bit like an oxymoron that the vacuum, defined to be completely
empty space, can actually contain energy but a modern physics view of the vacuum does actually
allow for this.
The part of physics that treats the vacuum is called quantum field theory and it sees
all of space as permeated by fields that in a sense embody the laws of physics.
They also bring the vacuum alive in the sense that within empty space pairs of particles
and antiparticles are constantly forming and dissolving all the time.
So with this more active view of the vacuum I think you can see that perhaps these quantum
fields might actually weigh something.
They might have some energy associated with them.
Now it would be nice if quantum field theory was able to predict the energy of the vacuum
but it can't quite do that properly.
In fact the best estimate, which is probably oversimplified, gets a value about, wait for
it, 10 to the 90 tons per cubic inch.
So that's clearly wrong by any standards.
So I think at this point the optimistic statement is that finding the nature of dark energy is
one of today's greatest challenges in physics.
Finally what role has dark energy played in shaping the universe?
Well so far not too much.
It played almost no role in the early universe and only recently has begun to gently accelerate
cosmic expansion.
But its primary influence so is going to be on the future and in two rather distinct ways.
The first is that the accelerating expansion shuts down the assembly of structures in the
universe.
Ever since the Big Bang gravity has been bringing things together into clumps on all scales
from stars to galaxies to the web.
And as you might imagine, gathering things together in a universe that is expanding is
a rather delicate balance and it turns out that our universe is sufficiently close to
that balance, that when its expansion changes from decelerating to accelerating then the
clustering stops.
So the universe's current web-like pattern won't change anymore, it's now become frozen.
But the second effect of dark energy is in some sense more dramatic.
It drives an exponential expansion that doubles the separation of galaxies roughly every ten
billion years.
So as the trillions of years pass by, all parts of the universe get further and further
from each other, moving faster and faster.
So the universe becomes more and more empty.
But it's worse than that.
Not only are things far away, the space therein is moving faster and faster and in time every
galaxy passes light speed, at which point we say it crosses an event horizon and becomes
forever invisible.
Ultimately, the only things visible to us will be the stars and galaxies that are in
our immediate vicinity, their mutual gravity winning out over cosmic expansion.
Who would have thought that such an apparently innocuous vacuum energy, a mere six milligrams
per Earth volume, could so utterly affect the future of the universe?
Let's end this lecture and this first overview theme of nine lectures by returning to that
remarkable and sobering truth that 96% of the universe's contents are not only beyond
our senses, but also beyond our current understanding.
This is, however, a wonderful situation.
We know there is more to the universe than meets the eye, literally, and there are great
discoveries still to be made.
