This is the first of six lectures that will make up our fourth theme, where we'll trace
the growth of structure following a sequence from the Big Bang through sound to stars to
galaxies to their web-like distribution. Here's a brief preview of the path we'll take.
There are two key players in the story, atomic matter and dark matter, and in many ways they
act like a team. Each has its vital role to play, and neither by itself could create the
beautiful universe we find around us. I could almost assign them human roles. Dark matter might
be the parent and atomic matter, the child. And without the parent's guidance, the child
wouldn't flourish. But what the child ultimately does, the things it makes and the games it plays,
are its own creation. Now we of course, living in our atomic world, are the child, but we should
never forget that we wouldn't be here if it weren't for our parent, dark matter, that gently
provides a context, a framework for our atomic world to form and grow. So the first lecture in
this theme, this lecture, looks at how dark matter makes that framework into which atomic matter will
ultimately gather. We start with seed roughness created in the Big Bang and look at how it grows
rougher over time. The second lecture walks through the first billion years. Regions of slightly
higher density finally halt their expansion, turn around and collapse to form mini halos of
future galaxies. Meanwhile, atomic matter falls into these dark matter mini halos and continues
collapsing in a runaway process that ends in the birth of the first stars. Then the third,
fourth and fifth lectures concentrate on this atomic matter as neighbouring infant galaxies
collide and merge to form ever larger systems, ultimately becoming the present day galaxies
that we see all around us. And then in the last lecture, we'll return to look at the large scale
structure of dark matter, the web like framework revealed by the distribution of thousands of
galaxies. This is a dynamic evolving framework within which atomic matter is trapped and lives
out its creative life. So created, in fact, that of course it makes stars and planets, rocks and
trees, and you and me. So this fourth theme has many wonderful things to explore. So let's get
started. First, I want to frame the big picture. Remember, the universe is born very smooth indeed,
an endless glowing gas. The microwave background, for example, shows us this gas is uniform to one
part in 100,000. Now, meanwhile, 14 billion years later, we live in an amazingly lumpy universe.
There are vast voids with almost no galaxies in. There are some patches with more galaxies,
and some regions absolutely crammed with galaxies. It's like a giant three dimensional patchwork
mottled full of denser and less denser regions going on and on filling the universe. So stated
simply, the question for this lecture is, how did we get from so smooth to so lumpy? It's a bit
like one of those just so stories by Rudyard Kipling, how the leopard got his spots, or how
the camel got his hump. And in this case, it's how the universe got its lumps. Now there are going
to be three parts to the story. The first asks, how did roughness start? Can it arise naturally
out of perfect smoothness? Or must the universe be born with roughness? The next step is to
understand how roughness grows. Why do variations in density get larger as time goes by? And
lastly, we need to understand why the degree of roughness depends on size. From one kilometer
to the next, the ocean is very smooth. But from one meter to the next, it's very rough.
The universe is similar. Why is that? Okay, let's start with the first of these questions.
How did roughness start? One possibility is that the universe was born perfectly smooth.
And roughness arose out of nothing, naturally, perhaps, by some kind of instability. Well,
in the 1960s and 70s, a lot of thought went into this. And every possible mechanism that
was considered wouldn't work. If the universe was born perfectly smooth, it would stay perfectly
smooth. And then in the 1980s, as people began to work on the new theory of inflation, it
came as a wonderful surprise to find that roughness could be generated quite naturally
from tiny quantum mechanical fluctuations that get amplified during the inflationary
launch of the expansion. Now, we'll look at exactly how this mechanism works in lecture
32. But the bottom line is that the big bang itself makes the initial roughness. So, having
postponed answering our first question, let's consider the second one. How does the initial
seed roughness grow? So, let's start by defining roughness using this graph. Imagine moving
through the early universe along a line. The density of matter varies a little bit from
place to place. It gets denser and then less dense above and below the mean in a haphazard
way like this. The roughness is defined to be the ratio of the variation to the mean.
In math terms, the roughness is delta rho over rho, where rho is the average density
and delta rho is the small variation. Think of a swimming pool six feet deep with six
inch waves. Its roughness is a 12th or about 8%. In this lecture, what we're interested
in is how this roughness grows. Now, the average density, of course, drops with expansion,
but somehow superimposed on that, the contrast between denser and less dense regions gets
more pronounced. Now, as the universe expands, there are in fact two rather different ways
in which the roughness grows. One is called super-horizon growth and the other is called
sub-horizon growth. So, I need to explain a little bit about what these rather impressive
sounding terms mean. We've come across the concept of the horizon before, but let's just
review it. Out on the ocean, you can see to your horizon. You have knowledge of, you might
even say you're affected by, everything within your horizon, but not beyond. And it's like
that in the early universe. Every location has a sphere of influence, a cosmic horizon.
It's a region across which light or gravity can cross and influence things. Its size is
roughly the distance that light can travel since the Big Bang. So 10 years after the
Big Bang, your horizon is about 10 light-years across. 100 years after the Big Bang, it's
about 100 light-years across. Now, like the ocean, every point has its own horizon, its
own sphere of influence, but unlike the ocean, the cosmic horizons get bigger at light speed.
Now, the reason that the horizon is important for the growth of roughness is that roughness
occurs across different length scales. Again, a bit like the ocean surface has small waves
and long waves. And whether a wave is larger than the horizon or smaller than the horizon
affects how it can grow. Here, for example, is the variation in density above and below
the average along a line spanning about a thousand light-years. It clearly contains
two rather different roughness scales, one short and one long, each shown below. So the
top curve is basically the sum of the lower two. So when we speak of a roughness length
scale, we're really referring to the wavelength of a particular component that's present
in the total. See, in this simple example, we only have two components. And so you can
see that their wavelengths are about 120 light-years and 8 light-years. Notice I use the word wave
as in wavelength to refer to the up and down quality of the variation, even though it isn't
actually oscillating in time, only in space. Now, let's compare these two different wavelengths
to the horizon. Imagine it's just 30 years after the Big Bang. So the horizon size is
about 30 light-years, the size of these little circles. So clearly at this time, the large
wavelength roughness is larger than the horizon size, while the small wavelength roughness
is smaller than the horizon size. Now, this is very important because waves smaller than
the horizon and waves larger than the horizon experience two different kinds of growth.
Hence we speak of sub-horizon growth for the waves smaller than the horizon and super-horizon
growth for waves larger than the horizon. Okay, one last point. The horizon is of course
getting bigger at light speed. And so before too long, the horizon size catches up and
envelops the larger waves. And when it does so, we say these waves enter the horizon.
When they do this, they change of course from being super-horizon to sub-horizon. And so
the way in which their roughness grows also changes. So let's now have a look at super-horizon
roughness growth. It's actually very simple. Here are three regions. A is slightly higher
density, B is average, and C is slightly lower density. Notice that they're all way bigger
than the horizon, which has the size of this small circle. So, and this is the important
part, these three regions are completely unaware of each other and they expand just as if they
were three different universes with three slightly different densities. Now here's a
sketch of how their size grows with time, their expansion curves. Just as you'd expect,
the denser region A is lagging behind because it's held back by the pull of the extra density.
As time passes, the difference in region sizes gets bigger. So the difference in region volumes
gets bigger. So the difference in region densities gets bigger. So the roughness increases.
Basically, the density contrast grows because the denser regions aren't expanding as fast
as the less dense regions. Now, this is an exceedingly potent amplification process.
For example, during the radiation era, that's before 60,000 years, density variations grow
in proportion to time. So from a nanosecond to a thousand years, the roughness grows
by a factor of nearly 10 to the power 20. Now you can see how minuscule seed fluctuations
emerging from inflation can end up becoming significant at later times.
Okay, now let's look at sub-horizon growth. Here's the same situation as before, but with
our three regions, A, B and C, now well within the horizon size. So in this situation, each
region feels the gravitational pull of the material within a horizon's distance. So there
are local gravitational forces where denser regions actually pull material in from nearby
less dense regions, and so they get denser. And meanwhile, the less dense regions, because
they're losing material to the denser regions, get even less dense. So once again, for completely
different reasons this time, the roughness increases. Now this particular process actually
has a long history. Isaac Newton thought deeply about how his theory of gravity might apply
within an infinite universe. And in a famous dialogue with the theologian Richard Bentley,
Newton realized that an infinite static universe would gradually clump up. Places where the
density was even a tiny amount more would pull material in from nearby, and so its density
would grow. Ultimately, in a runaway accelerating collapse. In fact, he even wondered whether
stars might have formed that way. Now in our situation, there is one very important difference.
Our universe isn't static, it's expanding. Now this expansion continually dilutes the
matter, weakening its gravitational pull. And this seriously affects the ability of roughness
to grow by this mechanism. In fact, it's only during the matter era, after 60,000 years,
that the expansion is sufficiently gentle to allow some growth in roughness. It turns
the runaway collapse for a static universe into a slower growth, proportional to the
scale factor. So if the universe doubles in size, then the roughness doubles in size.
Now remember from lecture 12 that the expansion during the radiation era before 60,000 years
is more rapid and in a sense more potent. And this basically prevents the growth of sub-horizon
roughness. We say the roughness gets frozen at whatever level it was when it entered the
horizon. So sub-horizon growth of dark matter roughness only occurs during the matter era.
Not during the radiation era. And this will turn out to be extremely important, so hold
that thought. Because we have one more piece of prep work to do before we put all this
together and understand how the universe got its lumps. So this prep work is to understand
how cosmologists describe roughness. Going back to our example from before, it turns
out that an extremely useful way to think of any complicated pattern of roughness is
as the sum of simpler patterns of different wavelength. In this case there are really
just two of them, short waves and long waves, which combine to make the top curve. But now
look at this complex set of density variations, again spanning a thousand light years. Well
it turns out that this upper curve can be made using the lower curve, which I'm going
to call its roughness spectrum. Although the technically correct term is its power spectrum.
The idea is very similar to a sound spectrum from Theme 3. The red line shows the strength
of waves of different wavelength that are present in the upper curve. Notice for the
x-axis we have long waves, small frequencies on the left and short waves, high frequencies
on the right. Remember these waves don't oscillate in time, they're fixed in space with a wave
like form. So the frequency is really a spatial frequency, meaning the number of waves per
thousand light years. And it's labeled K. While the strength of each wave is labeled
P for power, so this curve is called P of K. Now you should remember this term from the
last couple of lectures on Big Bang acoustics, where I referred to P of K as the pure or
true sound spectrum. In that case variations in the glowing gas were of pressure, whereas
in this current context the variations are in density, and the density of dark matter
as well. But either way you can think of P of K as showing the strength of waves of
different wavelength. So the remarkable fact is that you can take a whole set of waves
all with different wavelengths, but with strengths given by this red curve and you
can add them all together and you can get the top curve. It's really quite amazing.
In fact you can make any graph this way. It doesn't matter what shape it has, you can
always find a set of waves that when added together make that graph. The person who first
figured out how to do all of this, it was in the 19th century. It was a French mathematician
called Joseph Fourier. And so these two complementary ways of representing a graph are called Fourier
pairs and the methods used to calculate one from the other are called Fourier transforms.
They're really amazing things and are widely used by physicists and engineers.
OK, we're now done with preparation, so we're ready to put all of this together into a single
story which tracks the growth of cosmic roughness from the Big Bang to today. So our starting
point must be the roughness injected by inflation. In lecture 32 we'll find out that inflation
generates a roughness spectrum, what cosmologists call the initial power spectrum, that is
particularly simple. It's just p of k proportional to k. So the roughness strength is proportional
to the wave frequency. Here's a plot of this kind of roughness spectrum along with its
corresponding density pattern. On very large scales, that's small k, on the left, and
the waves are very weak. So it's very smooth across gigantic regions. A bit like our ocean,
viewed from an aeroplane, it looks smooth. This is just what we expect. After all, the
universe is homogeneous, it's smooth, on the largest scales. And conversely, on small
scales, that's large k, the waves are strong. So the newborn universe was much rougher
on finer scales. Okay, armed with this initial roughness spectrum, let's now follow its
evolution over all of cosmic history. In other words, let's follow how those initial, tiny
fluctuations grow to become today's web-like pattern of galaxies. Now, the next two diagrams
are very important, so try to follow along. Here's a sketch with time along the bottom
and size upwards. Both axes are exponential, but we're not going to bother with details
of actual numbers, but two times are shown today. And the transition between radiation
and matter eras, near 60,000 years, which I've labeled equality. On the left are five density
variations with wavelengths of increasing size 1 through 5. Cosmic expansion makes all
of those wavelengths expand. Following the yellow lines to the right, they all get stretched
in size by the same expansion factor and arrive at their present day sizes at the top right.
Now the red line shows the increasing horizon size. Remember, it gets bigger at light speed
and where it crosses each yellow line, the horizon envelops that wave and the wave enters
the horizon at the five times shown by these little circles. Notice that the two shorter
waves enter the horizon during the radiation era, the two longer waves enter the horizon
in the matter era, and the middle wavelength enters the horizon right at the time of equality.
OK, now let's consider the growth of roughness for these five waves. In this graph, the y-axis
is now roughness measured by p of k, the strength of those five waves, and time is still along
the bottom axis. But early times on the left, the strength
of the five waves is given by the initial power spectrum, p of k proportional to k, the
frequency. So the roughness increases from weak long waves, that's number five, to strong
short waves, that's number one. Starting with the longer waves, five, four, and three,
they all grow continuously. They remain outside the horizon throughout the radiation era,
and so their growth is never frozen. And when they enter the horizon in the matter era,
they continue to experience sub-horizon gravitational growth. But the shorter waves, two and one,
enter the horizon during the radiation era, and so their roughness, p of k, gets frozen
at that time. They stop getting rougher. Now as soon as the radiation era ends, their
roughness starts growing again. But they can never make up for the lost time, and they
end up with less roughness than the longer waves. So, although the initial roughness
on the left steadily increases five, four, three, two, one, the final roughness first
increases five, four, three, reaches a peak at three, and then decreases again, three,
two, one. Let's now see how the roughness spectrum
evolves over time. Effectively, we'll move up these green lines, and we're going to ignore
the simple cosmic expansion of the wave sizes, so we can concentrate on the roughness spectrum
alone. We'll also go beyond the cartoon treatment I've been showing you, and we'll use instead
a full calculation using the CMB fast computer program from the last lecture. So here's
a graph with wave frequency k along the bottom, and wave strength p of k upwards, with both
axes exponential. You can see how the roughness spectrum increases over time, starting at
a hundred years, then a thousand years, then 10,000 years, and so on. So we're jumping
by factors of 10 up to today at 10 billion years. So at just 100 years, you see mainly
the primordial spectrum, p of k, proportional to k. But as time passes, you can see how
the strength of the small waves gets held back when they enter the horizon during the
radiation era. But when that era ends, all waves then grow in strength together. So notice
that a peak forms close to the size of the horizon, with the primordial spectrum to the
left and the suppressed smaller waves to the right. The peak gradually shifts to larger
length scales during the radiation era, but settles down to the horizon size at the end
of the radiation era, and from then on, the roughness spectrum just shifts vertically
upwards as roughness grows equally on all scales. So today, after 10 billion years, the
universe's roughness spectrum should have a peak whose position is a relic of the transition
from radiation to matter dominance around 60,000 years after the Big Bang. Let's see
how this roughness spectrum converts to a pattern of density variations along a line.
Here's the spectrum with peak and suppressed high frequencies. And in the density plot,
you can see how all the very high frequency waves are now gone. And we have quite a chunky
graph, with the strongest variations having a scale corresponding to the peak in the spectrum.
Now those density peaks will ultimately turn into huge superclusters of galaxies, while
the troughs will turn into enormous voids, and the smaller ups and downs will make individual
galaxies. Well, at this point, we really must turn to the real universe to see if all this
effort was worth it. In fact, before I do that, I'd just like to acknowledge that this
has been a very tough lecture, which probably needs listening to more than once. I deliberately
chose to aim high and take you through a topic which is rarely, if ever, presented to non-specialists.
So if you've followed even a portion of it first time through, you should feel pleased
with yourself. So we're on the home stretch about to look at the real universe's roughness
spectrum, and hopefully it should look familiar. Now, to span the full range of scales, we
need two different kinds of data sets. The first are the huge surveys of hundreds of
thousands of galaxy positions that reveal the roughness spanning a range of scales from
a few million light years to a few hundred million light years. Your eye can already
see that the strongest contrast is on fairly large scales, perhaps a few hundred million
light years. And sure enough, when you take the Fourier transform, you find a roughness
spectrum, p of k, rising for larger scales, shown here as the blue data points. Now to
get data on even larger scales, one must use the patches on the microwave background. Now
these, of course, apply to the young universe, so they need to be adjusted to bring them
forward to today's time. But when you do that, you get the red data points, which nicely
overlap the galaxy data set, and the overall shape is clear. It has just the form we now
understand. From left to right, on the largest scales, the roughness spectrum rises proportional
to k. It then passes through a broad peak corresponding to a length scale of about 200
million light years. It then falls somewhat steeper on smaller scales. The black line comes
from running one of the best CMB fast computer models. The fit is amazingly good, right down
to the little wiggles on the right. Now we'll come back to those little wiggles in lecture
22, but let's end this lecture by reflecting on what we have in front of us. We've measured
the texture of the universe from 30 million to 6 billion light years. In a sense, this
is the inherent large scale texture of reality, not the particles or atoms of the micro world,
but the scaffolding and stage on which the entire play unfolds. Remarkably, there is
a scale of maximum texture, about 200 million light years, shown by the peak in the roughness
spectrum. It arises because the growth of small scale roughness was suppressed or held
back on sub-horizon scales during the radiation era. If we take the horizon size at that time,
about 60,000 light years, and we apply the appropriate cosmic stretch factor of 3700
to bring it up to today's size, we get 200 million light years. The scale of maximum
texture, the peak in the roughness spectrum. So the peak tells us the age of regime change,
the time when radiation's early dominance gave way to dark matter. That transition way
back in the universe's youth, before even the micro-wave background was made, is imprinted
on the patterns of galaxies across the sky. It's an ancient signature for us to read.
Thank you.
