This is the third lecture in our group of six lectures on the growth and evolution of structures.
Things like stars and galaxies.
So far we've done well.
We've seen how miniscule ripples emerging from the Big Bang's inflationary launch steadily grow more and more prominent.
And last lecture we saw how the densest parts slowly halted their expansion and collapsed to form the first stars.
Here's a 14 billion year timeline from the Big Bang to now, with a blow-up of the first two billion years.
So last lecture's story took us through the dark age, the collapse of mini halos, and to first light with the birth of the first stars.
And all this took about half a billion years.
We still have a long way to go to get to our current universe.
So what happened next?
Well, roughly speaking, the next couple of billion years saw a rapid and spectacular assembly of what one might call infant galaxies.
Rather chaotic collections of stars and gas that were much smaller than today's huge majestic galaxies.
They're sort of little galaxy building blocks.
Now for reasons we'll get to, this is a fabulously active period in the life of the universe.
It's packed with galaxy collisions, star birth, and supernova death.
And the good news is, our best telescopes can now see out to this region.
So the story is based firmly on what we see.
So this is the theme for the lecture, the wild exuberance of youth.
Back to our human lifetime metaphor, we'll be looking at roughly the first 10 years of life.
Now for humans, this is a crucial time.
By 10, most of the foundations for adult life are in place.
Now so too with the universe.
And the remaining 11 billion years of galaxy growth and maturation, which we'll tackle next lecture,
will be a natural extension of these first two billion years.
So let's start with two very simple ideas.
The first is that little things merge to make bigger things, which merge to make even bigger things,
and so on in a hierarchy of assembly.
Now the second idea is that relative to today's sedate universe,
this early assembly process went on very rapidly.
So let's look at the first idea, the hierarchy of assembly.
This diagram illustrates the basic process.
Remember from lecture 17 that we can think of the actual complex pattern of density variations from place to place
as the sum of short, medium and long waves just added together.
Now the regions that are going to collapse first are those of highest density.
Let's see where they are.
They're where peaks sit on top of peaks that sit on top of peaks.
The smallest peaks will collapse first to form stars,
but because these peaks sit on top of larger peaks, then the stars are born in groups,
which collapse to form star clusters, and these in turn are formed in groups,
which collapse to form galaxies.
Now of course in reality there aren't these discrete stages,
and instead there's a continuous buildup of ever larger systems with smaller ones forming all the time.
Cosmologists call this continuous buildup of larger systems from smaller ones hierarchical merging,
and it's a key idea in the long road of assembly from the first lone stars in the newborn universe
to the giant clusters of galaxies in today's old universe.
All the way along, larger structures are formed from the successive merger of smaller structures.
You can illustrate this using what's called a merger tree,
which shows how many smaller structures gradually come together to build larger ones in the growing hierarchy.
I'm afraid I've plotted this one with time going upwards to match my earlier diagram,
so I've stood the tree on its head.
Let's now bring these cartoon diagrams to life by showing a computer simulation of this growth of structures.
This first movie gives the big picture.
A giant cube that ultimately expands to become 150 million light-years on a side that contains thousands of galaxies.
A supercomputer is used to calculate the motion of 2 million dark matter particles,
each one following the path that gravity dictates,
and the gravity of course comes from all the other dark matter particles,
so it's a complex self-interacting system.
Now I must warn you, the camera viewpoint in all of these movies expands with the universe,
so you won't see any of the cosmic expansion itself.
This is common practice in cosmology and is called a co-moving viewpoint.
It helps you focus on the structure formation and not get distracted by the expansion.
This particular calculation starts about 0.1 billion years after the Big Bang,
when everything was 30 times closer together.
Notice how smooth the distribution of matter was.
You can hardly see the tiny fluctuations that have spread throughout the region.
The movie will last just 12 seconds and so spans all of cosmic history.
So it's about a billion years per second.
It's probably the fastest action replay you've ever seen.
Okay, off we go.
Notice how extremely quickly the texture emerges,
and as time passes its form gets more and more defined.
Matter appears to be moving away from the voids and towards the filaments and clusters.
Now we'll look at this filamentary structure more in lecture 22,
but for this lecture let's zoom into one of the peaked regions,
about a tenth of this larger size,
and watch the formation of a relatively small group of galaxies.
Notice how quickly the first structures form,
and then more and more material piles into the region,
merging with what's already there.
Now the theme of this lecture is the first two seconds of that movie,
when the first structures formed amazingly quickly out of the smooth initial background.
Why was that so fast?
The main reason is fairly simple.
The universe was smaller and denser back then,
and simply put dense things collapse quickly,
in part because gravity is stronger, so the in-fall speeds are higher,
and in part because everything is simply closer together,
and it doesn't take long for two neighboring regions to collide and merge.
In fact there is an interesting simple rule of thumb.
When the region is just ready to collapse,
the collapsed duration is roughly the age of the universe at that time.
So 0.1 billion years after the Big Bang,
it takes about 0.1 billion years for regions to collapse.
While 2 billion years after the Big Bang,
it takes 2 billion years for a region to collapse.
This is pretty obvious when you consider this sketch from last lecture.
The expansion and contraction of a higher density region is roughly symmetrical.
The downward in-fall takes about as long as the expansion up to turnaround.
See, stated like that, it's now clear why there is such a frenzy of collapse and merger at the beginning.
The universe is young and relatively dense.
The collapse time is short.
So the overall pace of change is fast, relative to today's much more sedate pace.
OK, now you have the theoretical framework down.
It's time to shift gears and look at real observations of this youthful billion-year-old universe.
And I'm glad to say that in the last decade or so,
we have now been able to gather increasingly detailed observations of these very early times.
By now, you should realize this means looking extremely far away
to regions whose light has been traveling for 12 or 13 billion years.
Only then can you witness the 1 billion-year-old universe.
An absolutely key instrument in this endeavor has been the Hubble Space Telescope
with its exquisitely sharp vision.
At these enormous distances, the subgalactic blobs are exceedingly tiny and faint.
Typically, they appear about as big as a football stadium on the moon,
glowing with the brightness of a single candle.
Not surprisingly then, the strategy has been to look long and hard at small patches of the sky
to go as deep and faint as possible.
Here, for example, are the approximate footprints of four of these deep survey fields
compared to the full moon, which itself seems pretty small put next to the Big Dipper.
They go by various acronyms and are designed for slightly different projects,
but perhaps the most famous are the Hubble Deep Field, which was completed in 1995,
and its more sensitive successor, the Hubble Ultra Deep Field, which was completed in 2004.
Each of these covers a tiny region of the sky about the size of a pinhead held at harm's length.
Here's a couple of comparisons to show you how advanced these deep surveys have become.
The first compares images taken from the ground and from space,
where the absence of atmospheric turbulence makes a stunning improvement,
especially to images of the smallest galaxies that are otherwise just smeared out into smudges
by what astronomers call atmospheric seeing.
But to see the faintest galaxies one also needs very long exposures.
Here, the 400 orbits of exposure for the ultra deep field clearly shows galaxies that are barely seen
in the shallower 13 orbit exposures of the Goods Survey.
So let's take a look at this famous Hubble Ultra Deep Field.
Here's the entire image, which only really comes to life when you zoom into its roughly 6,000 by 6,000 pixel frame.
Actually, if you go to the Hubble website, you can roam and zoom across the entire image.
To give you an idea of the quality, here are blow-ups of three small regions
containing large galaxies at distances of 4, 6 and 9 billion light-years.
But a more typical patch contains dozens of tiny smudges with a variety of shapes and colours,
and most smaller than one arc second in size, equivalent to the size of the head of somebody standing 30 miles away.
Ultimately, after close inspection, about 10,000 separate galaxy images are found.
Of course, there's nothing special about this particular piece of sky.
Remember from lecture 3, the universe is isotropic on these large scales.
So we could have looked in any direction, and we'd find a similar number of faint galaxies,
totaling then 100 billion across the entire sky.
Now, when you look at this image, you must remember that you are seeing down an extremely long, narrow tunnel,
and these galaxies are scattered along that tunnel at different distances.
So to use this image to study galaxy evolution, it's very important to measure distances to the galaxies,
because only then can you separate infants from children from adolescents from adults.
Now, in lecture 6, I described several ways to measure distances to galaxies
using surfaced variable stars, or the tullifisher method, or supernovae, and so on.
But those methods don't work on these galaxies. They're way too faint and far away.
In fact, most are so faint it's not even possible to take a spectrum to measure a redshift.
We really need a different method that works just from the images alone.
Well, fortunately, nature is kind to us, and there is another way.
It's not as accurate as taking a spectrum and measuring a redshift, but it amounts to the same thing.
You see, the Hubble data set isn't just a single image.
There are actually four images taken through four different colored filters.
See, a yellow filter, for example, blocks all colors except yellow.
Hubble has many filters it can place in front of its camera, like the one shown here.
And every galaxy looks a little different through each filter.
The nice pretty colored images we're so used to seeing are actually made by combining these various filtered images
using a computer to specify each color.
The ultra deep field used four colored filters, and this graph shows the colors they let through.
They're transparent over a particular range of wavelengths, which gives the filter its name.
Blue, visual, red, an infrared, or BVRI for short.
Now actually, for those in the know, these aren't quite the names used by astronomers.
So here's the critical part. Let's look at the spectrum of a galaxy overlaid on these filter curves.
Notice that the light spans a very wide range of colors, but down in the ultraviolet there is a pretty sharp decline near 100 nanometers,
which is caused by hydrogen gas in the stars within the galaxy, which blocks light with wavelengths less than about 100 nanometers.
Now watch what happens as we look at more and more distant galaxies.
Remember their spectra are more and more redshifted, so this galaxy spectra moves to the right.
All wavelengths are stretched by the cosmic stretch factor.
I've labeled the stretch factor, the distance, and the age since the Big Bang.
Remember at higher redshifts we're looking further away and so further back in time.
Now when you get to a stretch factor of about four, the blocked region has moved into the B filter,
and by about five, the B filter gets essentially no light, while the V, R, and I filters still get light.
So here's an example of this situation.
You can see the galaxy in the V, R, and I images, but it's completely gone in the B image.
We call this a B dropout, and we know this galaxy must be extremely distant and therefore very young.
Here are some other B dropouts at stretch factor five, which corresponds to about 1.6 billion years after the Big Bang,
or about nine-year-olds on the human lifespan.
But the method doesn't stop with B dropouts at even higher redshifts.
The blocked region moves through the V filter, and we have V dropouts with an age of about 1.2 billion years or seven-year-olds.
And finally, at a redshift stretch factor of seven, even the R filter drops out,
and we have the R dropouts at about 0.9 billion years or five-year-olds.
So let's just summarize these three groups on our timeline.
You can see that the B, V, and R dropouts really push back into the first billion years, close to, but not quite, to the first stars.
So let's look more carefully at these young galaxies.
I know they don't look too impressive, but there's still a great deal that can be learned about them from these images.
Overall, we'll be comparing them to today's galaxies. We're comparing children with adults.
So right off the bat, just like human children, these young galaxies are quite small compared to today's adult galaxies.
Here are some of the brightest B dropouts, and for comparison, plotted at the same physical scale is a normal galaxy from today.
The difference is really quite remarkable. Essentially, there were no big galaxies back then. Everything was of small subgalactic size.
This is, of course, just what we expected from the theory and the simulations.
The first objects to collapse are the small high-density peaks, and larger objects only build up later as the smaller ones merge during the turnaround and collapse of larger regions.
In fact, this graph shows exactly this effect. You can see how the average galaxy size was about 10,000 light years for the first two billion years.
Then it began to increase, presumably as galaxies grew by the merging of these smaller galaxies.
Actually, there's strong circumstantial evidence for growth by merging because a very high fraction of these faint young galaxies seem to be gravitationally interacting.
In close pairs and small groups. Now, of course, our view is essentially frozen in time, but the scene is extremely similar to the simulations I showed in which there's a flurry of galaxy-galaxy collisions and merging going on.
Another feature of these young galaxies is that their shapes are much more chaotic than galaxies in today's universe.
In this collection, there isn't a single pretty spiral or smooth elliptical. They're just blobs.
Now, perhaps that isn't too surprising given all the collisions, but even in the apparently isolated galaxies, there's none of the regular symmetric forms that we find in today's large galaxies.
In fact, coming forward in time, it takes about six or seven billion years before we see the first nicely patterned, modern-looking galaxies.
This little sequence of galaxies, plotted at the same physical scale, shows what's going on.
We start with small, amorphous galaxies, hairs and groups, and only the last galaxy at an age of about nine billion years has a nice spiral appearance.
Now, although we can't see too much detail in the most distant galaxies, we think they looked like a particular kind of galaxy in today's universe called a dwarf irregular galaxy.
Here's an example, also photographed by the Hubble telescope, and I think it gives you a better idea of what these young galaxies might have looked like.
Now, although I've been talking about the growth and assembly of galaxies, there's a more essential transformation going on here.
It's the birth of stars, which themselves, of course, make galaxies. It's a bit like discussing the growth of nations.
You need to think about the growth in population, and that in turn depends on the birth rate.
For example, here's the birth rate of the United States from 1930 to today.
It's a crucial graph for any policymaker, not least because you can clearly see the post-war baby boom, with its implications for an aging population in the next few decades.
Well, the universe also has a population of stars, and that population has grown as the billions of years have gone by.
So not surprisingly, one of the key aims of cosmology is to understand this population of stars.
An important aspect of that is the star birth history of the universe.
So let's look at that now.
You may be wondering how we can measure the birth rate of stars, but although I don't have time to explain how,
it turns out that there are several telltale signs of stars being born.
And over the past 30 years, astronomers have carefully studied those signs and learned how to use them to measure the birth rate of stars.
One of the first people to try to construct the entire cosmic star birth history was Pierre Amouddou in 1996.
And since then, the methods have gradually improved, although there are still some significant uncertainties.
So here, then, is a slightly simplified version of what is often called the Medau plot, showing the star birth rate from the Big Bang to today.
As you can see, there is, in fact, a baby boom.
It happened very early on.
After a very rapid rise in the first billion years, the birth rate maxed out somewhere between one and three billion years,
after which it's been declining ever since.
So that today's star birth rate is down around one-twentieth of what it was during the baby boom period.
And just as with human baby booms in the post-war years, it's important to know why there was a stellar baby boom in the early universe.
The reason is thought to be fairly straightforward.
When galaxies collide and merge, stars are born in great numbers, for reasons actually we'll get to in the next lecture.
And because the pace of galaxy collisions was so high in the early universe, so the star birth rate was also very high.
Now, having shown you the history of star birth, there is, of course, a related quantity, the growth in the total star population.
As you might expect, the total number of stars steadily increases as the universe gets older.
Basically, stars are being born faster than they're dying.
And so there's a net build-up.
And here we are in a universe filled with stars.
Now, it's important that we don't let this brief billion-year period of frenzied star birth slip by without pausing to appreciate its spectacular nature.
These sentient life forms watching the cosmic scene at that time would be vastly more impressed than they'd be with today's subdued and empty scene.
It probably looked something like this artist's impression, showing a universe strewn with dwarf galaxies.
And don't forget, everything was five times closer.
So a high fraction of these dwarf galaxies are colliding and merging.
Along with all the star birth goes star death.
When the most massive stars explode as supernovae.
So the galaxies are studded with brilliant stars, laced with the glowing pink gas of star formation,
and perforated by expanding cavities driven out by supernova explosions.
It's really a fabulous spectacle.
Actually, back to our timeline, we can now add a history of starlight.
Brightness grows quickly after the Dark Age and the first stars peaks for a few billion years and then slowly fades towards today's much dimmer universe.
Now, you may be wondering whether it's possible to see yet earlier times.
After all, the most distant are dropouts are near 0.7 billion years and the first stars were at 0.2 billion years.
So what about that period in between?
Well, as of now, that's 2008, we haven't quite got there.
But I'm going to end this lecture looking at what might soon be possible.
The most obvious strategy is to push the dropout technique to higher redshifts.
Here's the filter system we met before, but with two more filters added in the near infrared, called J and H.
Hubble used a different camera, an infrared camera called NICMOS, to take long exposure images of the ultra deep field using these filters.
Back on our timeline, the eye filter drops out at a stretch factor of about 9, while the J filter drops out around 12, very close to the first stars, which of course is a holy grail for cosmologists.
In human terms, these two filters isolate 3 and 2 year olds, so they're like galaxy toddlers.
So what are the results been? I'm afraid so far not too much.
Four possible eye dropouts and one possible J dropout.
But that's only the current situation. Let's finally take a quick look at what new technology will soon make possible.
In late 2008, the Hubble telescope will have a new camera installed called Wide Field Camera 3, which has a significantly improved sensitivity in the near infrared.
As these graphs show, the old camera fails to see galaxies beyond a redshift stretch factor of 8, but the new camera is expected to find galaxies out to stretch factors of 11,
well into the first half billion years, almost, but probably not quite, to the first stars.
But of course, there's no substitute for a specially designed, infrared optimized, large space telescope.
And that's the next hope for this area of research.
I mentioned it before in lecture 8. It's the James Webb Space Telescope, due to be launched in 2013.
Here you can see the comparison of mirror sizes, and here's a simulation of a deep field.
If you were impressed by the Hubble Ultra Deep Field, the JWST Deep Fields will be stunning by comparison, just littered with galaxies right back to the first stars.
This is, of course, what we can expect in the next two decades, but hopefully, 100 years from now, we should understand the birth and development of galaxies, just as we now understand the birth and development of humans.
