So far, our story of the growth and development of the universe has included relatively familiar
things. Stars, galaxies, gas. And even though dark matter isn't exactly familiar, perhaps
you're beginning to get a feel for it. But this lecture, I want to introduce a very different
kind of character. If this was a traditional creation story, I'd be introducing a dragon
or a demon or some ungodly destructive power. But in the real universe, this ungodly power
takes the form of massive black holes. At the heart of essentially every galaxy lies
between a million and a billion sons of matter crushed into a region smaller than the solar
system, whose powerful gravitational field causes essentially everything within its vicinity
to zoom around at almost light speed. It really does evoke the idea of a fire-breathing dragon
hiding in its lair. So in this lecture, I want to tell you some of the story of these
massive black holes and how they play a role in affecting the lives of galaxies.
So let's begin with the amazing observational progress in finding massive black holes at
the centers of galaxies. The subject took a huge step forward in 1997 when the Hubble
Space Telescope had a spectrograph installed that allowed astronomers to measure using
Doppler shifts the movement of stars and gas very close to galaxy nuclei. Here's an
example. Hubble zeroes in on the center of this elliptical galaxy in the Virgo cluster
and then places the tiny spectrograph aperture across the nucleus. At each point along the
aperture, a spectrum is made which shows the Doppler shift of the orbiting gas and stars.
In this case, within just 25 light-years of the nucleus, the gas is orbiting at over 400
kilometers per second. You can see also the drop in rotation speed away from the nucleus
just like for the solar system, showing that the gravity comes from a single mass at the
center. Applying Newton's Laws just as we did in lecture nine, you can measure a mass
of 300 million solar masses far more than is present in the actual stars. Now since then,
similar observations have been made for nearly 100 galaxies and in essentially every case,
the Doppler shifts indicate a massive object right at the center. Even our own Milky Way
galaxy has a central black hole. Here's a beautiful nighttime view of the Milky Way
with its center located right here in the constellation of Sagittarius,
smack behind a lot of obscuring dust. Now fortunately, if we look using infrared light,
like this image, you can see through the dust. Zooming in, you see a central star cluster and
two groups, one in Germany and one in the United States, have carefully followed the motion of
the stars in this cluster. Here's a movie in which 15 years pass in five seconds and you can see
nice neat elliptical orbits around a central point. Here it is repeating. Try to watch star 14
carefully. At closest approach, star 14 is moving at 3000 miles per second and comes within six light
hours of the central point. That's as close as the planet Uranus is from the Sun. Analyzing the
orbits carefully essentially proves that sitting at the central point is a black hole with 3.7
million times more mass than the Sun. Now as I said, for almost 100 galaxies, black holes have now
been found and their masses measured. And there are two remarkable facts that have emerged.
First, essentially every galaxy that's been looked at has revealed the presence of a black hole.
The only exceptions are galaxies with no real nucleus or bulge. Things like our local dwarf
galaxies, the large and small Magellanic clouds. Otherwise, massive nuclear black holes are a
normal galaxy component, a part of its anatomy, like an arm or a leg. And secondly,
as this graph shows, the black hole mass up the y-axis increases with the galaxy bulge mass.
That's along the x-axis. For example, the huge galaxy, M87, has a 3 billion solar mass black hole
while shown at the same scale. The lightweight galaxy M32 has a lightweight 2 million solar mass
black hole. And on average, the black hole mass is about one thousandth of the mass of the galaxy bulge.
Now at this point, I should say something about the nature of black holes. From our perspective in
this course, their main quality is simply that they contain a great deal of mass within a tiny size,
so that close to the black hole, the gravity is extremely strong. Just to give you an idea,
here's the Earth with about 10 to the 25 kilograms of rock within a sphere 8,000 miles across.
So near its surface, gravity pulls with modest force. We have little arrows. But if I drop
a bag of flour through one foot, the energy it releases sounds like a thud, not very much
gravitational energy released there. But if I crush the Earth down to make a black hole,
it's now half an inch across with the same mass, 10 to the 25 kilograms. So the gravitational
force nearby is huge. We have huge arrows. Now drop a bag of flour from one foot. It falls in
about a nanosecond, moving at almost the speed of light. And the thud of its landing is equivalent
to detonating a large hydrogen bomb. In fact, the gravitational energy that gets released when
matter falls into a black hole is roughly given by Einstein's famous E equals MC squared. So black
holes are potentially incredible sources of energy. Feed them anything, and you can convert the
in falling mass almost directly into energy. Now in practice, the efficiency isn't quite 100%,
it's more like 10%. But even so, that's enormously more efficient than, for example,
nuclear energy at 0.1% or chemical energy at a millionth of a percent efficiency.
Now back to the astrophysical context. A galaxy nucleus with a black hole weighing, let's say,
50 million solar masses. At that mass, its size is about the size of the Earth's orbit.
This is tiny relative to the galaxy. From our scale model in lecture two, it's a pinhead
in the middle of the United States. Around this pinhead, stars the size of human cells
10 yards away, where the black hole's gravity is much weaker. So for most of the time, the
black hole just sits there and is, well, it's black, you don't see it. This is the condition
of the black holes I just showed you in that elliptical galaxy and in the Milky Way. It's all
but invisible. Although its gravity affects the orbits of stars out to a few light years,
and that of course is how we know it's there. There is another situation that can occur.
If gas can fall into the very center close to the black hole, then it settles into what is called
an accretion disk. It gradually spirals inwards, orbiting faster and faster as it gets closer
and closer to the black hole, until it's basically moving at light speed just before it falls in.
As the gas moves through this disk, before it finally enters the hole,
it can release huge amounts of energy and the galaxy nucleus lights up like a beacon.
Astronomers call this an active galaxy. It's a galaxy whose central black hole is having a meal.
It's devouring gas and stars and releasing energy as it does so.
Now exactly how this accretion disk behaves isn't in fact understood very well, but we think
that there are three primary ways that energy is released. First, the hot disk is extremely
bright. It produces photons from infrared to x-rays. Secondly, a wind blows off the disk.
And third, two fast-moving jets of very thin but very hot gas are launched perpendicular to the
disk. Let's have a quick look at some active galaxies. They go by various names, quasars,
see-foot galaxies, radio galaxies, depending on just how the energy makes itself known
and how much energy there is. Here, for example, are some quasars. Their active nucleus is so
bright one can barely see the host galaxy. This tiny region, smaller than the solar system,
is producing more light than all hundred billion stars in the galaxy combined.
Here are some active galaxies whose black holes are driving out powerful jets. These jets produce
radio emission, which the images show as red, while the visible light from the galaxy of stars
is in blue. So you can see how the jets push way out well beyond the galaxy, out into the galaxy's
halo. Not surprisingly, these are called radio galaxies. Now, you may have noticed something
interesting, particularly about the quasar images. They seem to be in disturbed or interacting galaxies,
and this gives us a clue about what triggers activity, what initiates feeding the central
black hole. Remember from last lecture, when galaxies interact, some of their gas falls to
their center. Here's a movie of two galaxies colliding to remind us, starting with just the stars
and dark matter. Now, here's the same collision, but showing just the gas component. Notice how it
ends up in a much more compact region than the stars. And here, let's watch that last part again,
zoomed in a bit. The two gas discs merge, and as they do so, the gas really settles to the center.
So these simulations show how lunch gets transported down to feed the central black hole,
and so the galaxy becomes active. Now, let's begin to put all of this into a cosmological
perspective. In previous lectures, we've seen how galaxy interactions were much more common in the
past, and that in turn led to much higher star birth rates in the past. Well, since feeding black
holes also seems to be triggered by galaxy interactions, do we find evidence that activity
in galaxies was also greater in the past? And the answer is a very definite yes.
Here's the distribution of 10,000 quasars, very powerful active galaxies, in one of those
pie diagrams where we are at the center. Look at the distribution. There are virtually no quasars
nearby, whilst there are thousands at greater distances. Now look at the time axis.
We go right out to 14 billion light years, essentially all of cosmic history. Clearly,
quasars were much more common in the past compared to today. Here's the final analysis
that shows the rise and fall of black hole feeding. There is a rapid turn on after about
a billion years, and a heyday between two and three billion years when powerful quasars were
10,000 times more common than they are today. Since then, quasar activity has gradually shut down
as galaxies have settled into a more sedate and tranquil middle age, starving their central
black holes. But just occasionally, in today's universe, galaxy interactions send a bit of gas
down, a snack, for the dormant black hole. And the activity resumes once more, but at a more
modest level. We call these lower power active galaxies, Seaford galaxies, after the American
astronomer Carl Seaford, who first studied them in the 1940s. Now, unlike humans, when black holes eat,
they don't excrete. This is a one way trip for the food. So all this discussion of feeding is
equivalently a discussion of their growth, of their acquisition of mass. After all, how do you think
a black hole weighing a billion solar masses actually got there? Well, maybe you feed an
initially small black hole at a rate of one solar mass per year for a billion years. Let's just check
to make sure this is reasonable. One solar mass per year is equivalent to about
one Earth mass every two minutes. Now, if you convert that mass to energy, E equals mc squared,
at 10% efficiency, you get 10 to the 39 watts of power. That's about a thousand billion times the
power of the sun, or a hundred times brighter than the Milky Way galaxy. Yes, that's about how
bright quasars shine. But that's just their growth. How do you get those initial seed black holes,
which then feed and grow? Well, at the present time, we don't know for sure. Maybe they formed
when the first stars formed, or maybe later when the first galaxies were assembled. But either way,
it must have been fairly rapid because the most distant quasars were shining brightly
just one billion years after the Big Bang. Now, at this point, I want to broaden our discussion of
black holes. So far, I've talked about them because they're a part of almost every galaxy,
and they're interesting in their own right. But let's not lose sight of our overall story here.
We're trying to explain how the population of galaxies came to be the way it is. And so far,
we've really only considered one main plot line, galaxies developed by gravitational interaction
and hierarchical merging. But in the last 10 years, we've begun to recognize that this cannot be
the whole story. There is a second plot line, and it goes by the rather prosaic term, feedback.
Basically, the huge energy release from galaxy centers due either to black holes or high star
birth rates can severely affect the galaxy and its environment. And in some circumstances,
it can shut down star formation and inhibit the further construction and growth of galaxies.
Returning to our dragon metaphor for a moment, despite being confined to its lair,
the dragon's fiery breath scorches the surrounding land, preventing anything from growing.
So let's now locate this new theme of feedback in its broader context of galaxy growth. And to do
that, we need to consider what's called the mass distribution of galaxies. Now here, for example,
is a sketch of the mass distribution of humans. It has a peak around 200 pounds,
a short tail above for obese adults, and a longer tail below for children and infants.
It gives a pretty good feel for the human body, where way bigger than mice or ants,
and with smaller than elephants or whales. So what do you think is the equivalent graph
for galaxies? Where I'm meaning the stars now, not the dark matter. Is there a maximum or a minimum
galaxy mass? And if so, why? Now, I'm going to keep you in suspense because I want to first show
you a very plausible guess. Remember that hierarchical merging builds a whole population of dark
matter halos into which atomic matter falls and makes stars. So maybe each dark matter halo
contains a galaxy. So we would expect a galaxy mass distribution to be the same as the halo mass
distribution, but perhaps shifted a bit because there's about six times less atomic matter than
dark matter. So with this idea, we need to know the mass distribution of dark matter halos.
Now currently, we can't measure that observationally, but we think computer simulations are sufficiently
trustworthy to provide the answer. Now I'll be discussing these huge cosmological simulations
next lecture, but for now, let's just go straight to the results. So here's what they calculate
for a typical distribution of dark matter across a huge region spanning hundreds of millions of
light years containing hundreds of thousands of dark matter halos. As you can see, there are
relatively few big halos, more medium sized halos and lots of little halos. And when you count them
all up, you get this graph, the mass distribution of dark matter halos. Notice the axes are exponential
and go from huge galaxy cluster sized halos of a million billion solar masses right down to tiny
dwarf galaxy halos of just a billion solar masses. As is so often the case in astronomy,
there are way more small things than big things. And above some threshold, nothing bigger is found.
Now, allowing for atomic matter being six times lighter than dark matter, we might expect a galaxy
mass distribution like this. So what's the real observed galaxy mass distribution? Are you ready?
Here it is. Well, the good news, I suppose, is that they do match for Milky Way sized galaxies,
and the overall shape is similar. Many more small galaxies than big ones with a steep drop
in the number of big galaxies. But the bad news is that the really big halos simply don't contain
really big galaxies. And there are far fewer dwarf galaxies than expected.
So we're beginning to get the picture here. To make galaxies, two things must happen. First,
you must make the dark matter halos. That's OK, we understand that. But then, you need the atomic
gas to settle into those halos and form stars. And that step isn't straightforward. It's vulnerable
to several processes that can inhibit it. Now, the reason galaxy formation is suppressed
has all to do with the depth of the gravitational field of the dark matter halo,
how strongly it pulls on the atomic matter. Here's a sketch illustrating the pull
by the size of a valley into which the gas is falling. For the biggest halos, the energy of
falling in heats the gas so much that it can't cool to form stars. These enormous sized halos
make clusters of galaxies. Remember from lecture nine, though, these also have huge hot X-ray emitting
atmospheres. There's plenty of atomic gas. It's just way too hot to form a huge galaxy.
Of course, preformed galaxies do fall into the halo. And we have the familiar galaxy cluster,
the Coma cluster in this example. Now, in slightly smaller halos, where the gas could cool,
energy coming out from big black holes in active galaxies is thought to keep the gas hot.
So once again, it can't cool to form stars. Here's an example of a galaxy with an X-ray
atmosphere shown in blue and a black hole driven jet shown in red. Notice how the jet has pushed
two big holes in the atmosphere, which heats it and prevents it from cooling. In even smaller
halos, the problem is holding onto the gas. Gravity is so weak that when the first stars
and supernovae form, they blow the gas back out. And this halts the formation of a small galaxy.
Actually, we see this sort of thing happening nearby with starburst galaxies. Here's a lovely image
of the nearby galaxy M82. It has loads of star formation and supernovae. And you can see how
they're blowing out the gas in these great plumes above and below the galaxy. Now finally,
for the smallest halos, the gravity is so weak, it can't even pull in the gas because the gas has
pressure and this prevents it falling in, just as the air in this room doesn't fall
towards the weak gravity of my body. So let's now see what happens when we fold all of these
mechanisms into our understanding of galaxy formation. As you might imagine, these four
mechanisms are complex, messy things. We're barely able to model them for a single galaxy,
let alone a million galaxies, in a giant cosmological simulation. So to make progress,
these processes are inserted into the giant simulations using a shortcut method,
and the resulting hybrid is called a semi-analytic model. Basically, the giant simulation is run
for the dark matter, but the complex gas processes are added using simple formulae that describe
things like the fraction of gas forming stars or the efficiency with which supernovae blow the gas
out and so on. In all, there are about 10 such formulae. So let's look now at the population
of galaxies that emerge from these semi-analytic models. Here you can see in gray the dark matter
distribution, what provides the framework within which galaxies might form. Now the colored dots
are where the galaxies are forming. Here, at just two billion years after the Big Bang,
they're mainly blue, which signifies they have high star birth rates, so many young stars are
present. Let's come forward in time. More galaxies form, and in many, the gas is blown out, so star
birth ceases, so the population of stars age, and that aging population is color-coded, green,
orange, and red for the oldest population. By today, we have a population of galaxies with lower
overall star birth rates, they're more yellow and red, and the red galaxies, these will be the
ellipticals, are found in the densest regions. So the model certainly seems to match two key results
from previous lectures, the decrease in overall star birth rate and the tendency of galaxies in
dense regions to be ellipticals. Now what about the galaxy mass distribution? Well,
here's our previous graph of the halo mass distribution in red, and the observed galaxy
mass distribution in blue, and here are the results of the semi-analytic model in green.
Now that's an impressive match, although it isn't quite as impressive as you might think,
because don't forget, some of the model's free parameters were chosen to optimize the match,
but even so, I was impressed when I first saw this. There are other things these models get
correct. They get the history of star formation and quasar activity roughly right, early wild times,
followed by a steady decline. They also get the correlation between bulge mass and black hole mass
correct, because the same conditions that build bulges also feed black holes and cause them to
grow. Well, I think at this point you've got the picture. We're beginning to explain in broad
terms quite a range of key galaxy properties. It's still early days in this subject area,
and in the coming years, you can expect to see significant developments, both in the observational
story and its parallel, the theoretical and computational story.
We've covered a lot in this lecture, so let me quickly summarize the main points.
Since the installation of the spectrograph on Hubble, we now realize that essentially all galaxies
with a bulge also have a massive black hole. In today's universe, most of these black holes are
invisible except for their influence on the motion of stars and gas nearby in the nucleus.
However, if gas falls into the black hole, the enormous drop liberates approximately a tenth
of the mass of in falling material as energy, and we say the galaxy is active.
Of course, galaxy interactions cause this feeding of gas to the center, so not surprisingly,
we find activity to be more common in the universe as past when interactions were common.
The enormous energy coming from galaxy nuclei can significantly influence subsequent
galaxy formation, a process known generally as feedback. One way to uncover the effects of
feedback is to compare the mass distribution of dark matter halos with the measured mass
distribution of real galaxies. And when you do this, it's clear that something is preventing
the really huge and really small galaxies from forming. We think truly huge giant galaxies
can't form in part because the gas in huge halos is too hot and thin to cool and settle,
and in part because jets driven by black holes keep the gas hot and prevent it from cooling.
And we think tiny dwarf galaxies can't form in part because supernova explosions
drive the gas out of the galaxy before it can properly form.
When all these effects are included in the giant cosmological simulations,
many of the observed properties of galaxies are found. And although it's still early days,
in this particular subject area, it seems we're well on the way to understanding,
at least in broad outline, how the population of galaxies has come to be the way it is.
But these are all still only the internal properties of galaxies. We have one
final and critical aspect to look at, and that is the location of the galaxies,
how they fill the universe, the patterns that they form, and that's the topic for our next lecture.
