We're coming to the end of our six lectures on the growth of cosmic structures, and for
the most part we've focused on the construction of galaxies, and occasionally we've looked
at the way galaxies gather into groups and clusters.
But in this lecture I want to step right back and take in the really big scene.
How do galaxies fill the volume of the universe?
Are they spread about roughly uniformly, or randomly, or are there patterns?
It's a bit like shifting from thinking about individual people and cities, and asking,
how do cities cover the earth?
For example, there are vast areas with none, the oceans, places where there are many, around
the metropolis, and lines where there are many, coastlines, and along major road systems.
And surprisingly, this is roughly mirrored in the distribution of galaxies.
There are regions with very few voids, dense regions with thousands, clusters, and long
filaments of galaxies, the galaxy web.
So let's start close to home with a lovely movie that takes us on a trip from the earth
out to the Virgo cluster of galaxies, about 60 million light-years away.
So our average speed will be 10 to the 13 times the speed of light.
We begin by lifting up out of the Milky Way galaxy, to see its full splendor.
As we back away, two dwarf companions pass by on the left, the large and small Magellanic
clouds.
Remember, big galaxies, like ours, typically have a few smaller ones in orbit about them.
So as the Milky Way recedes, we pan around, and the other two large galaxies that make
up the local group swing into view, first M33, and behind it, the great Andromeda galaxy
M31.
Notice these three big spiral galaxies are quite far apart, a necessary condition for
them each to have a nice, thin spiral disk.
Our trip now heads away from the local group.
We pass M81 and M82.
They're close enough that M82 has been disturbed and is now a starburst galaxy.
We also pass M101 and the whirlpool galaxy M51, whose little fly-by companion has induced
that lovely spiral pattern.
Our view then wheels around and shows the wider distribution of galaxies.
They seem gathered roughly along a line with a huge concentration on the left.
That's the famous Virgo cluster of galaxies, and that's where we're heading.
So our trip joins the line of galaxies to the right and then moves down along it towards
the main cluster.
This mirrors at hugely amplified speed the infall of these galaxies down onto the cluster
to build it larger.
The movie ends by heading straight for the dominant central galaxy M87, and the last
thing you notice is a faint blue jet on the left, a telltale signature of the three billion
solar mass black hole that lives down at the galaxy's centre.
Now it's all very well me showing a movie where we're zooming through millions of light
years, but in reality we're stuck here on earth.
How do we know what the three dimensional distribution of galaxies is?
Actually in principle it's not that hard.
Here's a picture of a hundred degree chunk of the night sky with a big dipper for scale.
All the foreground stars have been removed and the image shows two million faint galaxies.
Of course some of those galaxies are near and some are far.
So to turn this two dimensional picture into a three dimensional one we simply need to
measure the distance to each galaxy.
Now to measure real distances to so many galaxies would be impossible, but fortunately
the Hubble law comes to our rescue.
Remember a galaxy's redshift is directly proportional to its distance.
So an excellent first stab at getting distances to all those galaxies is to measure their
redshifts.
The greater the redshift the further the galaxy, it's easy.
So for the past 30 years there's been huge effort to make redshift surveys.
The pioneers of this were a group at the Harvard-Smithsonian centre for astrophysics.
They used a 60 inch telescope at Mount Hopkins to take spectra one by one of over 2,000 galaxies
and ultimately over a 10 year period in the late 1970s and 80s they increased this number
to over 18,000.
But in the last 10 years two teams have now increased that number to over a million measured
galaxy redshifts.
Not surprisingly they've used bigger telescopes and also spectrographs that use optical fibres
to record spectra of several hundred galaxies at one time.
One team used the 150 inch Anglo-Australian telescope and its 400 fibre spectrograph to
measure over 200,000 galaxy redshifts and the other team used the Sloan Digital Sky
Surveys 100 inch telescope and its 645 spectrograph to measure 800,000 galaxy redshifts.
These are huge projects that generate vast quantities of data and require large teams
to manage.
The Anglo-Australian team had 30 astronomers and the US Sloan team has 150 astronomers.
So what do these galaxy maps show us?
Well it's a little difficult to show the entire data sets so instead cosmologists often
take a moderately thin slice through the data that corresponds to an arc like triangular
wedge with us at the apex.
So here's a typical wedge with about 100,000 galaxies each plotted as a single dot.
Notice we're at the apex and the depth goes out to about 2 billion light years.
So our entire trip to the Virgo cluster took us no further than this little circle.
This is a gargantuan map.
It is one seventh the way out to the 14 billion light year visible limit to the universe.
Here's our scale model from lecture two where the visible universe spans the United States.
The Milky Way is a 20-yard disk somewhere near the east coast.
The local group spans about half a mile.
The Virgo cluster is seven miles away and these maps span 500 miles.
It's a significant chunk of all there is to see.
One might view our current situation like explorers around the time of Columbus.
We've made a significant start at mapping what is a finite realm.
As we'll see in lecture 35 there are plans to measure with somewhat less accuracy the
distances to a billion galaxies almost out to the visible limit.
This is extraordinary.
Within 400 years of Columbus no part of the Earth's surface remains unphotographed and
within a hundred years of today maybe no part of the visible universe will remain unmapped.
I'm not sure whether to feel awestruck at our capability or disappointed that nature yields
to our instruments so easily and probably a bit of both actually.
So back to the galaxy distribution.
Notice how it has an interesting pattern.
It's neither purely random nor purely regular.
It has a mottled look.
There are actually three types of features to look for.
There are large regions with very few galaxies called voids.
Then there are long narrow chains of galaxies which can be sheets in three dimensions and
these border the voids.
So the whole pattern looks like a three-dimensional slider's web, hence the term the cosmic web.
And where the chains intersect there are rich clusters of galaxies which can be a thousand
times denser than the voids.
This whole pattern is really quite fascinating.
Why does the universe look like this?
What crafts this web-like structure?
Well by now you won't be surprised to hear that this kind of structure emerges when
gravity acts over billions of years on the primordial roughness that emerged from the
Big Bang.
And the best way to demonstrate this is to shift our attention from the observational
work to computer simulations that recreate the growth of large-scale structure.
Now unlike previous simulations I've shown you which modeled one or a few galaxies we
now need to simulate regions several billion light-years across containing millions of
galaxies.
So these cosmological scale simulations are truly enormous in scope and they push supercomputers
to their limits.
This graph shows the progress in computing power applied to cosmological simulations
since 1970 when only 300 gravitationally interacting objects could be followed.
And 2005 that number was 10 billion.
That simulation was done by the Virgo Consortium, a group of about 16 primary scientists with
about 60 collaborators from five countries.
Here's a region similar in size to the survey I was just showing you.
It's about 2 billion light-years across.
Like them it's a thin slice, about 60 million light-years thick.
The full simulation followed the separate motion of 10 billion small samples of dark
matter each one weighing one thousandth of the mass of the Milky Way.
They were initially spread out to match the lumpiness seen on the microwave background
and their simple gravitationally induced motion was followed forward to today.
In addition gas and stars were included using the kind of semi-analytic methods I described
in the last lecture.
Ultimately then 18 million dark matter halos formed of which 2 million contain galaxies.
In fact here's the same region showing the distribution of galaxies.
Let's get a better idea of the three-dimensional distribution of dark matter with this trip
through the simulation.
You can really sense the filaments made up of many halos of all sizes with voids between
and denser regions where they intersect.
While we're zooming along here I'll just mention that the supercomputer did 200 billion
calculations per second for 28 days marching through cosmic history at a rate of 6,000
years for every second of computer time.
OK in this part of the trip we're approaching a huge cluster with thousands of dark matter
halos.
You can also see the thick filaments that feed more halos down onto the cluster constantly
building its size.
So let's now quickly check to see how well the simulation matches the real universe.
There's a comparison between the real galaxy surveys to the top left in blue and purple
and similar sized regions extracted from the simulation to the lower right in red.
The overall appearance of walls, voids and clusters is remarkably similar both visually
and when you do a proper statistical analysis.
So it really does seem that our picture of gravitational structure formation is at least
approximately correct.
Of course I've just shown you the final patterns but the simulation allows us to watch how
the structure got that way so let's look at that now.
Here's the initial almost smooth distribution of dark matter just 200 million years after
the Big Bang around the end of the dark age.
You can already see areas of slightly higher and lower density which I've marked with
these shapes.
OK let's start the movie.
The redshift stretch factor is given at the top left and as usual cosmic expansion is
not shown we just follow the same region as time moves forwards.
Notice how quickly matter moves away from the lower density regions to the higher density
regions enhancing the density contrast so the web of filaments steadily grows more defined.
As time passes notice how the filaments near big clusters contain hundreds of galaxies
that are falling down onto the cluster.
One might even call these rivers of galaxies.
Just like normal rivers they're flowing downhill where in this case downwards is towards the
large mass of the cluster and just as lakes grow as rivers feed them so clusters grow
as these filaments feed them.
Well now the movie's over let's just check that where our initial slightly higher and
lower density regions make sure that they indeed turned into the clusters and voids
and you can see they do.
Perhaps the most bizarre aspect of all this is how such narrow filaments seem to magically
appear.
Why is that?
Well imagine a terrain of rolling hills.
The peaks represent the highest density regions.
These highest peaks collapse first and because their tops are roughly symmetrical their collapse
in three dimensions is roughly spherical.
But now think about a region between two adjacent peaks.
It takes the form of a ridge.
It's the path you would hike on a walk from peak to peak.
When gravity acts on a line of higher density it tends to collapse inwards to make in three
dimensions a filament.
So filaments form along lines between denser regions.
This is another movie of a somewhat smaller simulation but it has the advantage of showing
us the formation of structure in three dimensions by rotating the computational volume as it
evolves.
As before the initial conditions are quite smooth but as time passes the clusters and
filaments form.
At this point I'd like to reintroduce the roughness spectrum from lecture 17.
Now that all this complex structure can be represented as the sum of many many waves.
Each of different wavelength and strength it's a roughness spectrum.
Here's the cosmic roughness spectrum for today's distribution of galaxies.
On the left a large scales inferred from the microwave background and on the right a smaller
scales measured from the galaxy redshift surveys.
It has four main features.
It rises on the left, there is a peak, it falls on the right and there are some small
wiggles on the right.
The shape means moving from right to left you can find ever larger structures up to
a maximum of about 200 million light years but beyond that the universe is progressively
smoother on larger scales remember it's homogeneous on large scales.
So what about those wiggles?
What are they from?
Well if you think back to the lecture 15 on Big Bang acoustics those little wiggles are
the faint remains of the acoustic harmonics in the young universe before the fog cleared
before 400,000 years.
Here's the sound spectrum from the microwave background with its fundamental and harmonic
peaks and the odd compression harmonics survive through to today's roughness spectrum as
those little wiggles.
They're sufficiently weak that your eye can't see them as patterns in the galaxy maps but
a proper analysis shows that they're there as wiggles in the galaxy roughness spectrum.
The technical name is Baryon acoustic oscillations.
This is a truly wonderful notion primordial sound is still with us writ large across the
sky in the patterns of galaxies well now let's come closer to home and add something that's
been implicitly present all along the flow of galaxies including our own although we've
seen simulations showing galaxies moving from voids to filaments to clusters can we actually
detect this movement can we see the galaxy flow pattern the answer is yes though it's
not very easy here's the method let's think back to how galaxy maps are made using red
shifts with pure cosmic expansion a galaxy's redshift should give us its distance exactly
that's just the Hubble law but if the galaxy has an additional motion because it's been
pulled by nearby galaxies then the measured redshift includes this additional part now
usually in the maps that's just thought always an error on the distance but now imagine you
were able to measure the actual distance to the galaxy independently using one of the methods
from lecture six let's say the Tully Fisher method so now you know the part of the redshift
linked to distance so you can subtract it off the measured redshift and bingo the difference gives
you the galaxy's gravitational motion so combining redshift pie maps with accurate distances allows
you to construct the galaxy flow pattern now let's be clear here we are not talking about
the global cosmic expansion the Hubble flow as it's called that's a given we're talking
about motion in addition to the Hubble flow that's arisen over time as galaxies pull on one
another here's an analysis of the gravitational velocities in the local galactic neighborhood
where local here means out to about 300 million light years about 10 times smaller than the
pie maps I showed you earlier it turns out that much of the action happens roughly within a
giant plane called the supergalactic plane so we won't miss too much if we just show this slice
of the local universe on an xy graph omitting the z dimension here's the distribution of galaxies
with darker shading for more galaxies we're at the center in a relatively low density region with
the huge Pisces Perseus supercluster of galaxies to the right and the Centaurus and greater tractor
superclusters to the left now here's the measured galaxy flow pattern using little arrows to indicate
the speed and direction of the flow at each point and to keep the figures clean I showed a model fit
to the data rather than the data itself the results are quite impressive look how the flow
always carries galaxies towards the denser regions and away from the voids just as we expect
galaxies are indeed falling downhill from voids to clusters actually the speed at which
they're falling is much higher than you would expect if they were only being pulled by the galaxies
as always dark matter is dominating all of this gravitational motion and the galaxies are really
just along for the ride being pulled by the dark matter okay back to the Milky Way notice
it's caught in a tug of war between those two huge collections of galaxies the Pisces Perseus
supercluster on the right and the slightly closer greater tractor on the left the greater tractor
is winning the battle hence its name and the local region including the Milky Way is falling
towards it at roughly 500 kilometers per second now don't be confused here we're still expanding
away from the greater tractor at 4500 kilometers per second but we would be expanding at 5000
kilometers per second if it weren't there it has slowed us down by 500 kilometers per second
so it's only relative to the Hubble flow that we are in fact falling at 500 kilometers per second
so let's now quickly zoom into this central square to look more closely at our own suburb
before we back out to look at the even bigger scene here's the local group with the Milky Way
and M31 sitting in a small filament that extends up to meet the much larger filament with the Virgo
cluster at its center that's where our flight simulator movie took us at the beginning of this
lecture there also seems to be a void behind the Virgo cluster and there are other smaller clusters
to the right and below the arrows show the flow pattern which is once again away from the voids
and towards the denser regions and as you might expect the local group and Milky Way galaxy are
falling towards Virgo moving at about 300 kilometers per second relative to the Hubble flow
and of course this entire region is moving off to the left at 500 kilometers per second
falling towards the greater tractor so let's finally step back to look at the surrounding
800 million light years about the central fifth of those earlier pie maps you can see the two
previous regions with their concentrations of galaxies but now you can see several much larger
concentrations the dense Coma cluster above and the huge Shapley concentration about 500 million
light years away and containing tens of thousands of galaxies looking at the velocity field it seems
that although the Shapley cluster concentration strongly affects its local region at 500 million
light years away it's too far off to affect us directly we primarily feel the pull of the Virgo
cluster and the greater tractor now let me end this lecture by looking at these large scale flow
patterns in a slightly different way remember how you can view all of structure formation as a hierarchy
of collapse and merger early on small high density regions turn around and collapse later on
larger high density regions do the same thing expand slow turn around and collapse and they
include many of those earlier smaller objects in their collapse well these large scale flow patterns
that we've just been looking at are really just the latest stage in this game we have huge regions
that are just beginning to slow their expansion pulled back by their higher density now here is
an interesting question will they ever finally halt turn around and collapse to form super duper
clusters of galaxies the answer is no they won't and here's why dark energy has begun to affect
cosmic expansion it's driving an acceleration and this significantly affects the future growth
of structures basically the growth is shut down and frozen in its current pattern this figure shows
a simulation of a billion light year region that is designed to match our own neighborhood so we're
at the center here's the Virgo cluster and you can see the same galaxy patterns i've just been showing
you now let's jump 14 billion years into the future that billion light year circle now appears smaller
because as usual we're not showing the expansion okay let's jump another 14 billion years into the
future notice how the structure just isn't changing it's been frozen by the accelerating expansion
of course by this time the Milky Way and Andromeda merged long since but we never fell into Virgo
and Virgo never grew much larger now let's jump a hundred billion years in the future
the billion light year circle is now a dot at the center and a new red dashed circle has appeared
that's the distance at which the expansion speed is the speed of light it's called an event horizon
now as you might imagine you can't see anything outside this circle because then light the light
never gets to you ultimately even the Virgo cluster will be outside the event horizon and the universe
will appear empty except for our own local ball of stars what was once the local group
let me very briefly review the main points of this lecture
rather than focus on individual galaxies we stepped back and looked at the overall pattern
of their distribution this pattern has become visible using huge surveys of over a million
galaxy redshifts which span several billion light years we see a web-like pattern with
voids filaments sheets and clusters all these features are nicely reproduced using giant
computer simulations that follow the motion of literally billions of objects that represent
dark matter starting from the slight roughness in the early universe using these simulations
we can see how the patterns steadily become clearer as gravity pulls galaxies from lower
density regions to higher density regions and we can even see the remains of the acoustic harmonics
leftover from the sound waves in the million-year-old universe we also saw how combining
distance measurements with redshift surveys allows us to map out the galaxy flow patterns
superimposed on the Hubble expansion it turns out locally we're falling towards the Virgo cluster
but we and the Virgo cluster are both falling towards the greater tractor
finally we learned that this ongoing growth of structure will soon shut down as the accelerating
expansion caused by dark energy freezes the pattern of galaxies more or less in its current form
well our lecture course is a little over halfway through so i hope you're ready for a change of
topic we have several wonderful themes coming up starting next lecture with the story of how all
the atoms that make up our world including you and me were first made
