In the last few lectures, I've told the story of how huge structures have grown in the universe
as it's aged, the birth of the first stars, the maturation of galaxies, and the development
of the galaxy web. Our focus couldn't have been further from our cozy home here on Earth.
But surely an important part of any creation story is how our own very local world came
into being, including, and perhaps most importantly, how we ourselves came to be here. What does
modern cosmology have to say about this? Does it deal with such mundane things as this
podium, or my pen, or even my hand? Does it tell their story? The answer is yes, of course.
It must do. We are no less a part of the universe than any star or galaxy, and we can only have
arrived here via a cosmological route. So it's this route I want to explore in the
next three lectures, and I hope by the end of them you will look differently at everything
around you, and you may even feel your own cosmic origins. So let's start by carefully
looking at my hand. What's it made from? As you probably know, if we zoom ever deeper
down in scale, we first pass skin, then cells, then organelles within those cells, then giant
molecules, and finally, about eight factors of ten in magnification, we arrive at an ocean
of tiny jostling spheres. These are the atoms from which everything is made, and they are
famously tiny compared to us. If this marble were the size of an atom, then my hand would
be the size of the earth. Imagine fingers five thousand miles long, a thousand miles
across, packed with marbles. Atoms are incredibly tiny, and they're incredibly numerous. Now,
as you probably know, there are about a hundred different kinds of atoms, which differ in weight
and size and how they stick to each other. The most famous way to organize them all is
in the periodic table of the elements, something I suspect you learned about in high school.
Each element is made from atoms of just one kind, and they are all arranged in a sequence,
from one to about a hundred, but wraps around so that elements with similar chemical properties
all line up in columns. Here are just four examples. Lithium and carbon are numbers three
and six, gold and uranium are numbers seventy-nine and ninety-two. Of course, it's the amazing
ability of atoms to stick together as molecules that makes atomic matter so creative. In the
same way that a few dozen letters in an alphabet can make millions of words that can be arranged
into sentences and books and libraries, so a few dozen kinds of atoms can make millions
of molecules that can be arranged into cells and organs and people. Here are some models
of simple molecules, water, ethanol, the neurotransmitter serotonin, and a tiny fragment of DNA.
Now since our aim is to learn how atoms were made, we need to get beyond this simple cartoon
of atoms as shiny colored spheres. So here's a slightly better diagram of a beryllium atom,
that's number four in the series. There are four lightweight negatively charged electrons
orbiting around a heavy, positively charged nucleus. It's the electric force of attraction
that keeps the electrons in orbit, rather like the sun's gravity keeps the planets in orbit.
Now the atom's nucleus appears way too big in this diagram. It's actually a hundred thousand
times smaller than the atom. A fly in the middle of a football stadium is a good match
to a nucleus in the middle of an atom. So if you remove this space from all the atoms
in all the people of the world, we would all fit into this sugar cube. You see, relative
to nuclei, atoms are very large, very empty things. Now, despite their amazing tininess,
we actually know a great deal about atomic nuclei. They contain two kinds of particles,
protons and neutrons, and it's the number of protons that defines the element. One
for hydrogen, two for helium, seventy-nine for gold, and so on. Usually, there are slightly
more neutrons than protons. So for example, gold has seventy-nine protons, and it has
a hundred and eighteen neutrons. Now the neutrons and protons are held together very tightly
by a second kind of force called the strong force. But unlike the electric force, it has
a very short range. You can think of it a bit like velcro. Close enough, it sticks.
But a little further, nothing. Now this attractive velcro force is crucial because without it,
the positively charged protons which repel each other would just blow the nucleus apart.
Now at this point, I want to introduce one of the most important graphs in astrophysics.
It's called the nuclear binding energy curve. Along the bottom from left to right, we have
all the elements from one to ninety-two. And up the y-axis, we have all the energy that
holds all the protons and neutrons together. It's called the binding energy. It's the
energy you would need to pull the protons and neutrons apart. The lower a nucleus sits
on this curve, the more glue energy there is, the more tightly bound it is. Notice that
the curve starts very high with hydrogen, drops to a minimum and then slowly rises again.
The reason it has this shape is because there are both attractive and repulsive forces at
work inside the nucleus. For lighter nuclei with not too many protons, the proton repulsion
isn't that much. So the strong attractive velcro force dominates and makes nice tightly
bound small nuclei. But as we move to the right, the proton repulsion begins to build
up and competes with the attractive velcro force, so the curve begins to rise. And really
big nuclei like uranium are fairly close to just blowing themselves apart. The element
that sits at the bottom of this curve is iron, number twenty-six. Its nucleus is the most
tightly bound.
Okay, well now imagine the following. Let's take two light nuclei and fuse them to make
a single heavier nucleus. For example, let's fuse hydrogen to make helium. We move to the
right and downwards on this graph. Since lower on the graph is more tightly bound, then energy
is released. Think of rolling a ball downhill. So fusion reactions that combine light nuclei
together release energy. It's these kinds of reactions that power stars and also hydrogen
bombs. Now look to the right. If we break apart a heavy nucleus like uranium, we move
to the left on the curve which is also downhill. So energy is also released. These are fission
reactions and they power nuclear reactors and also atomic bombs. Now what's not so apparent
from this particular graph is that the actual amount of energy released in nuclear reactions
is about a million times greater than in chemical reactions. For example, fusing a kilogram
of hydrogen to make helium releases about a million times more energy than burning a
kilogram of coal to make carbon dioxide. Of course, burning coal is easy, but fusing
nuclei is difficult. Why is that? It's because nuclei are all positively charged. So they
repel each other like crazy and it's very difficult to get them together. One way to
do this is to rely on very high temperatures to hurl nuclei together such that they can
actually collide and stick. The speeds need to be very high, typically a few thousand
kilometers per second corresponding to temperatures of millions or even billions of degrees. These
kind of reactions are called thermonuclear fusion because they rely on high temperatures
to get them going. Now it's these thermonuclear reactions that provide the crucial link to
the nature of stars. You see, the reason stars like the sun are hot luminous balls of gas
is that they are busy converting light nuclei into heavier ones and the energy released
keeps the star hot and shining. Ultimately then, new elements are built up inside stars
and that overall process is called nucleosynthesis, the synthesis of atomic nuclei. The bottom
line is stars are atom factories. So let's look in a bit more detail now at how all of
this actually happens. Here's a star, it happens to be the sun, but it's going to represent
stars in general. Let's cut into it to see its interior. Stars of course are huge things
with huge quantities of matter whose enormous weight compresses the interior to make an
extremely dense hot core. At the center of the sun for example, the gas is ten times
denser than lead and 14 million degrees. Now these conditions are ripe for thermonuclear
fusion. In a very real sense, the core of a star is like a furnace and the rest of the
star is like an insulating jacket. Within the furnace, a fuel of lightweight nuclei is being
burned in the nuclear fusion sense to make an ash of heavier nuclei and that burning
gives off energy, heat. Just like a normal furnace, the heat generated from the burning
does two things. It keeps the core hot so that the burning can continue and it also
moves out through the insulating jacket and ultimately it escapes into the colder environment.
Now in the case of the sun, the energy makes its way out of the star in a couple of ways.
The gas rays slowly diffuse up through the foggy interior and huge convection currents
carry hot gas from below up to the surface. The surface is really the part of the star
where the gas turns transparent so that the light from the hot glowing gas is set free
and streams out into the darkness of space. So when you next look at those points of light
in the night sky, try to think of them as glowing surfaces of distant atom factories.
They're a direct indication that new atomic nuclei are being made. Now there is a key
property of stellar furnaces that you won't find in normal human furnaces. The nuclear
ash from one thermonuclear reaction can become the nuclear fuel for another thermonuclear
reaction. Let's go back to our binding energy curve. The first thermonuclear reaction fuses
hydrogen to make helium. But when all the hydrogen fuel runs out, helium nuclei confuse
to make carbon and oxygen. And when the helium runs out, the carbon and oxygen nuclei can
begin to combine to make neon and sodium and so on and so on. The nuclear ash from
one reaction becomes the fuel for the next and this sequence steadily creates heavier
and heavier elements. But there are two catches to this simple story. First, it only works
up to iron which sits at the bottom of the binding energy curve. It's the ultimate nuclear
ash because to go beyond it is uphill, which of course absorbs energy, not releases it.
The second catch is that these later reactions need much higher furnace temperatures. For
the very simple reason that heavier nuclei have more protons, so they repel each other
even more forcefully. So you need even higher temperatures to get the nuclei together. For
example, hydrogen fuses at 15 million degrees. Helium fuses at 100 million degrees. Carbon
fuses at 600 million. And oxygen fuses at one and a half billion degrees. Now, whether
or not a star can actually achieve such high furnace temperatures depends on the mass of
the star. You see, when one fuel runs out, the core of the star, that's the furnace,
begins to contract under its own weight and this compresses the core and heats it up.
Now how hot the core gets depends on how massive it is. Relatively low mass stars like the
Sun can never ignite carbon, while intermediate mass stars can never ignite neon. It's only
massive stars that confuse elements all the way up to iron. Now, I'm going to talk about
these reactions in more detail in next lecture, including the all important processes that
make elements beyond iron. But for now, let's just recognize that the furnaces that reside
deep inside stars can generate the whole sequence of atomic nuclei that we find in the periodic
table of the elements. Now, it's all very well making atomic nuclei deep inside stars,
but here they are in you and me. How did they get from out there to in here? Let me trace
that remarkable journey for you now. For many atoms, the process starts with what's
called convective dredge up. They are brought up to the surface in huge hot currents of
gas. Of course, higher up in the star, the temperature is lower and so one by one, negatively
charged electrons get caught and attached to the positively charged nuclei. And by the
atom, by this time the atom arrives at the surface, it's all but one or two of its final
quota of electrons. So, while nuclei are built in the star's core, atoms are assembled near
the star's surface. The factory has, if you like, its conveyor belt. But we still need
to get the atoms out of the star and into you and me. And that takes quite some doing.
Ultimately, what happens is that the atoms are ejected into space when the star dies.
And I'm using the term die more or less as you would for a furnace, when the fuel finally
runs out and the thermonuclear reactions cease. Now, there are actually several ways in which
stars die and I'm going to mention three of them. So, let's start with stars like the
Sun. What astronomers think of as relatively low mass stars. About five billion years from
now, when the Sun's fuel begins to run out, its core will begin to contract. And fusion
reactions just outside the core begin to burn extremely vigorously and create lots and
lots of energy. And this makes the Sun swell up enormously. Here's the Sun today, sitting
at the center of the orbits of Mercury, Venus and Earth. But as its furnace begins to die,
the Sun will expand to engulf the orbits of Mercury and Venus and almost touch the Earth.
It becomes what astronomers call a red giant star. Needless to say, at this time the Earth's
surface will return to an utterly barren and lifeless state. Now, with its atmosphere so
extended, a star's gravity can't easily hold on to the outer layers. And as more and more
energy comes up from below, it actually pushes off the star's outer atmosphere. And over
a few tens of thousands of years, the outer layers are blown away in a strong wind and
a beautiful nebula is created. Now, the atoms in these nebulae steadily move out to join
the rest of the material between the stars. And I'll return to pick up their story in
just a minute. But first, notice that in the middle of many of these nebulae, you can see
the exposed hot dead core. These hot cores are called white dwarf stars. They're made
of highly compressed carbon and oxygen, not much bigger than the Earth, but with about
as much mass as the Sun. So they're incredibly dense. Now, normally, over billions of years
they would just gradually cool down and fade away. But in certain special circumstances,
they can be rekindled in a very dramatic way as a supernova explosion. This can happen
when the white dwarf happens to be in a binary star system with a second companion star orbiting
nearby. When the second star begins to exhaust its hydrogen and swells up, some of its atoms
outer atmosphere falls over onto the white dwarf. As mass is transferred, the white dwarf
gets compressed and heated. And there is a critical moment when its temperature is sufficiently
high that the carbon and oxygen nuclei undergo thermonuclear detonation and the entire star
explodes. We actually met this kind of supernova back in lecture six because they provide
a fabulous way to measure the distance to very remote galaxies. But in the current context,
we're more interested in the fact that thermonuclear detonation not only creates a whole set of
heavy elements mainly around iron in the periodic table, but it also holes them out into space
at thousands of kilometers per second. Now, there is in fact another type of supernova
that comes from the death of a much more massive star, whose furnace can actually ignite elements
well beyond carbon. This time, when the fuel begins to run out, these massive stars swell
up even larger than red giants to become what are called red supergiant stars, roughly the
size of Jupiter's orbit. But way down in the center sits an amazingly dense hot core.
See, with such high temperature and density, elements heavier than carbon start fusing
so readily that they form a set of nested concentric shells. Many furnaces burning simultaneously,
each receiving fuel from the shell above and dumping its nuclear ash to the shell below.
Right at the heart of this is a dense sphere of iron nuclei, the ultimate nuclear ash that
cannot yield any more fusion energy. It's about the size of the earth, but with more
than the mass of the sun. As time passes, this iron core steadily grows in mass and
in one of the most remarkable events in astrophysics, the pressure supporting this iron core snaps,
and in a fraction of a second it collapses and triggers a monumental explosion. Just to give
you an idea of the energy released, if we orbited such a star and were subjected to its
explosion, each square foot of the earth's surface would be hit by the energy equivalent
of a thousand times the global total stockpile of nuclear weapons. That's each square foot.
These core collapse supernovae are prodigious astrophysical bombs, but in the current context
they're also remarkably creative. They make elements past iron all the way up to uranium,
and furthermore they hurl these new elements out into the interstellar medium.
The spreading guts of these stars' explosions is called a supernova remnant. In that animation,
the remnant was designed to look like the crab nebula whose star exploded almost a thousand years
ago. Here are two other young remnants that are about 400 years old, and they've now expanded to be
just a few light years across, and they're found to contain almost pure heavy elements
with little or no hydrogen or helium, which is a pretty strong indication that these elements
were indeed made inside these stars. Now after many thousands of years, like these older supernova
remnants, the gas has expanded to cover several hundred light years, and in time it gradually
disperses and joins what astronomers call the interstellar medium, the tenuous gas that exists
between the stars. This is the next stage in the lives of our atoms, so let's take a closer look
at it now. You can get a reasonable impression of the interstellar medium in this lovely wide-angle
image of the Milky Way. All that patchiness is gas and dust between the stars. The gas is exceedingly
thin, maybe one atom per cubic centimeter, that's equivalent to one person per continent for humans.
In addition to single atoms, there are also groups of maybe a million atoms stuck together
in tiny grains that astronomers call dust, though you can think of them as very fine smog
particles. In fact, those dark patches you can see across the Milky Way are caused by this
interstellar smog blocking the light from more distant stars. You see, you can view the interstellar
medium as the galaxy's highly polluted atmosphere, polluted by all the heavy elements and smog
particles coming from all those atom factories, the stars. They really are filthy furnaces.
After 14 billion years of pollution, the Milky Way's atmosphere contains about
2% heavy elements. If you compress the gas to match our own atmosphere's density,
you could not see your hand in front of your face. It is that polluted. Of course,
one can choose a more positive metaphor and say that the interstellar medium is enriched
by heavy elements. After all, they're an essential ingredient of building planets and people.
So let's follow our story further. How do these atoms continue their journey into the earth and
into you and me? Well, our atoms probably drifted around in the interstellar medium for at least
a billion or two years, subject to the general mixing of galactic rotation. And in time, at least
some of the atoms find themselves in denser clouds like this. When gas is gathered into denser
regions, gravity begins to take over. And in small pockets, it can cause a headlong collapse
that ends in the formation of a star and its planets. Basically, these utterly beautiful sites
are where new stars are born. Here's a lovely example, the Great Nebula in Orion. If we zoom
into the region with the Hubble Telescope's sharp vision, we can find new stars forming all over
the place. Perhaps a few thousand will ultimately form. But more important for our current story
is that these new stars are surrounded by a flattened disk of gas and dust. And it's within
this disk that planets form. As this artist's painting suggests, conditions in the disk allow
gentle collisions to build larger structures. So atoms stick to form grains, grains form pebbles,
form boulders. And at some point, gravity takes over and attraction onto the largest boulders
builds first embryonic planets and eventually full-scale planets. In the case of the Earth,
about 10 to the 50 atoms ended up in a spherical ball, looking maybe a little like this,
with a barren, crater-popped sterile surface heaving with volcanism. In one of the most
remarkable transformations of all, over a period of four and a half billion years,
this young sterile planet gradually turned into our current world, with warm oceans filled with fish
and continents teeming with plants and animals. That transformation has its own wonderful story
and is of course way beyond the scope of these lectures. It has its roots in the amazing ability
of atoms to bind together in a myriad of complex ways. At great glacial pace, an extraordinary
selection process begins to leave its mark. Molecules that are stable and can duplicate
gradually become more common and this principle continues in a hierarchy of structures that
ultimately leads to life. Natural selection and the passage of time are superb craftsmen,
with unimaginable dexterity, instructions inherited from long lines of ancestors,
coax billions of atoms into huge structures. After thousands of millions of years,
it's even possible for atoms to arrange themselves into plants and animals and people.
And that brings this lecture full cycle. We set out to track our own matters history,
to find its location in the cosmological story and what a story it's turned out to be.
Our atoms were forged billions of years ago, deep in the fiery furnaces of ancient stars long
since dead. When those stars died, the newborn atoms were launched out into the cold emptiness,
of interstellar space, where they drifted for several billion years. In time, they joined a dense
collapsing cloud and became incorporated into the sun and planets. A select few ended up on the
earth's surface and spent time moving from plant to animal to soil and back again. And for just a
brief moment in their long, long lives, billions have gathered to make your body. And some of these
are right now comprehending this sentence. And in a sense, they're actually thinking about themselves.
