I don't know how you're feeling at this point in our journey through modern cosmology.
I'm guessing you might be puffing and panting a little bit from the exertion.
We had some fairly steep climbs and some of the going has been quite tough in places.
So you'll be pleased to hear we've now reached a perfect place to sort of sit down, get out
our sandwiches and catch our breath because in this lecture we are not going to be moving
into any significantly new territory and instead I want to pause to gather together
some of the topics that we've already encountered and focus on a rather specific aim.
You see, throughout this course I've often referred to particular numbers that measure
the properties of the universe, things like its expansion speed or its age or its composition.
Actually there are about a dozen of these so-called cosmological parameters.
But we've never really considered all these numbers together as a single group and nor
have we really looked carefully at how they've all been measured.
So that's going to be the aim for this lecture, getting a handle on the universe's vital statistics.
Now I know it may not sound too exciting to be chasing down a dozen or so numbers but
as you'll see the effort to find them has turned out to be a fabulous success story
and it's the primary reason cosmologists are now feeling so optimistic about the state
of their subject, why they feel cosmology has come of age finally.
So let's start off gently by quickly reviewing the six key pieces of evidence that point
to the fact that we live in an expanding, evolving universe that began in a hot big
bang a few billion years ago.
So first, galaxy redshifts show that the universe is expanding, a naively extrapolating the
expansion backwards suggests it began about 14 billion years ago.
Second, when we measure the ages of things, stars or galaxies, we find all ages up to
about 12 to 15 billion years but nothing older has ever been found.
Third, looking way out into the universe and therefore way back in time, galaxies appear
younger.
It really does seem as though the contents of the universe are systematically aging.
Fourth, we observe an extremely uniform microwave background that has an accurately thermal
spectrum suggesting it came from a hot smooth early phase.
Fifth, the microwave background also has slight patchiness that over time can yield
the patterns of galaxies that we find around us today.
And finally, as we learned in the last lecture, helium has 25% abundance almost everywhere,
even in the oldest stars, suggesting it was formed in the hot big bang itself.
Now in addition to these observed properties, we also have what seems to be an extremely
robust theoretical framework for describing the universe.
We start with Einstein's theory of gravity and use it to follow the expansion of a homogeneous
distribution of matter, radiation and dark energy.
The Friedman equation tells us how the universe expands with time and therefore how the density
and temperature of these components drops with time.
The theory also includes slight fluctuations, roughness, superimposed on the homogeneity
and it's possible to follow this roughness using a computer to see how it grows and to
form structures, from the first stars to galaxies to the web-like pattern of thousands of galaxies.
Now this theoretical cosmological model contains a number of parameters and it's these that
we're trying to measure.
See the overall game is to vary the parameters of the model universe until we find the best
match to the observations of the real universe and when that match has been found, then in
a sense we've measured these parameters for the real universe.
Now of course, the whole game only works if the match is at least reasonable, but as we'll
see it is in fact remarkably good.
In the end, the best-fitting parameter set defines what cosmologists call the concordance
model, meaning this particular model is in concordance with all the observational data.
So here's what we're going to do. First we'll look briefly at the parameters themselves
with their current best estimates, their concordance model values.
Then we'll look at the five key observational data sets that are used to compare to the
models. Then we'll look at the nature of those comparisons in more detail and by the end
of all of this, I hope you'll see why this game of finding these parameters has really
brought the subject alive.
So let's start by listing the primary cosmological parameters. You've met most of them before
but it's nice to gather them together into a single group. The most famous of course
is Hubble's constant H0, which gives today's rate of cosmic expansion. Its value is 22
km per second per million light-years. Next come the current densities of the five
cosmic constituents. Here they've given in units of hydrogen atom masses per cubic meter.
From largest to smallest we have dark energy, dark matter, atomic matter, photons and neutrinos.
Now remember, there is that important reference density lurking here, the critical density.
It's the density that makes the universe's geometry Euclidean or flat. Here's its formula
from lecture 10 and plugging in 22 km per second per million light-years for H0 gives
a critical density of 5.8 hydrogen atom masses per cubic meter. So when we divide our component
densities by 5.8, we now convert them to their omegas. Here they are, 0.73, 0.23, 0.04 and
much smaller values for radiation and neutrinos. The total omega is 1.00, which tells us that
the universe's geometry is indeed Euclidean. Moving on, the next cosmological parameters
deal with the presence of roughness in the universe and there are two important ones
here, an amplitude A and an index or slope N. Remember from lecture 17, cosmologists
quantify roughness using a graph that we call the roughness spectrum. Here's a sketch of
it for today's universe. It has a peak of maximum roughness near 200 million light-years
and it's smoother on both larger and smaller scales. And remember also that the peak comes
because the growth of small scale structure and roughness was suppressed during the radiation
era before 60,000 years. So the initial spectrum before suppression is more like this straight
line. The two roughness parameters are the slope of this line, N, and how high it is,
A. Now to be complete, I should mention one more parameter that we've not talked about
before and it concerns the nature of dark energy. I've always suggested this energy
is fixed. It doesn't change as the universe expands, which is what we expect if it's a
true energy of space as a vacuum energy. But since we don't really know what this actual
nature is, a much more cautious approach is to allow for the possibility that dark energy's
density might change with expansion. Now cosmologists do this using a parameter that
they call W. It's really very straightforward. As the universe expands, if W equals minus
one, then dark energy is constant. If W is less than minus one, then dark energy increases.
And if W is more than minus one, then dark energy decreases. Now as you can see, its
value has already been measured to be close to minus one and so many cosmologists assume
that it really is minus one and that the density of dark energy is constant during the expansion.
Now in addition to these primary parameters, there are four other secondary parameters
that I think you'll recognize. They're all times. The time when the density of matter
and radiation were equal was near 57,000 years. The microwave background formed at 380,000
years. The first stars formed at 400 million years. And the current age of the universe,
the time since the Big Bang, is 13.7 billion years. Now at this point, I haven't mentioned
how accurate all these numbers are. And we'll get to that a bit later. But just to give
you some idea, most of these numbers are known to somewhere between 5 and 10% accuracy. Some
are a little better, some are a little bit worse. So let's now take a look at the five
primary observational data sets that are used to measure these parameters. We've met them
all before, but we've not really viewed them all collectively. Ultimately, as we'll see
in a minute, it's the combination of all of these data sets that provides such a powerful
way to measure all the parameters. So first data set includes all the distance measurements
to nearby galaxies. Remember in lecture six, we looked at the various methods to do this.
But perhaps the most critical have been those Cepheid variable star distances measured using
the Hubble Space Telescope. That whole project culminated in an estimate of the Hubble constant.
You can see the classic distance redshift graph, whose gradient, or slope, gives the
value 22 km per second per million light years, with about a 7% uncertainty. Now the second
important data set is an extension of this first one, and includes distance measurements
to remote galaxies using those white dwarf supernovae. Of course, by looking very far away,
one is looking long ago, and so it's possible to probe how the expansion rate has changed in
the past. Remember from lecture nine, the surprise 1998 result that the expansion was slower in the
past, so the universe's expansion has been speeding up. It's accelerating. Now since that time,
many more supernovae have been found, and here's the kind of plot you can construct using the data.
Time is along the x-axis with today at zero near the middle, and the y-axis is scale factor S,
the relative size of the universe, so it's one for today. Now the redshift of each supernova
tells us the scale factor when it went off, and its brightness gives us a distance from which
we can figure out the look back time when the supernova went off. So these data allow us to
construct our old familiar curves of S of t, how the scale factor changes with time. Now remember
from lecture 12 that the Friedman equation tells us exactly how this graph should look as long as
we specify two key numbers, omega dark energy and omega matter, where omega matter is the sum of dark
matter and the atomic matter components. So here are some of those classic curves of S of t. Here's
a dense universe with omega matter of eight that quickly recollapses. Here's a flat universe with
omega matter, unity, but no dark energy, so it's always decelerating. Here's an empty universe that
just expands at a constant rate, no acceleration or deceleration. Now notice none of these match
the data, which clearly lie above the simple coasting universe, indicating acceleration. Well,
you can see the method here. Using the Friedman models as a guide, the data rule out a whole set of
possible universes, but the data do fit quite well a Friedman model with omega matter about point
three and omega dark energy about point seven. And so in a sense these two parameters are now measured.
Let's turn to the third key data set that's used to measure the universe's parameters, the
microwave background. Remember from lecture 13, the microwave background shows us the universe
just 380,000 years after the Big Bang, when the hot gas had cooled below 3,000 degrees and turned
from a glowing fog into a transparent gas. And remember, we look out through the transparent
universe to see all around us this foggy wall of glowing gas. Its bright orange light redshifted
enormously as it crosses the universe, arriving in the microwave part of the spectrum. Microwave
telescopes such as the WMAP satellite find the microwave sky to be extremely uniform, the same
in all directions, suggesting that the gas at that time was quite smooth. Its spectrum has a perfect
thermal shape with a temperature of 2.725 Kelvin with only 0.1% uncertainty. Now this immediately
tells us the energy in photons and hence the important cosmological parameter, omega radiation.
Now also, because we understand the physics of how the fog cleared, we know it happened when the
universe was 3,000 degrees and hence the scale factor s must have been about 1,000th and this in
turn pinpoints the time of the microwave background to 380,000 years. If we also fold in our knowledge
of omega matter, we then find the great transition between radiation and matter dominance took place
around 57,000 years. But most of the information in the microwave background of course is stored
in its slight patchiness. When we contrast, stretch that uniform all-sky microwave image,
we get the now classic mottled all-sky sphere showing regions of slightly higher and lower
density and temperature. These are the peaks and troughs of huge sound waves from which the
web-like pattern of galaxies will ultimately form. Now remember from lecture 15 cosmologists quantify
this patchiness by casting it as a sound spectrum. Here it is, the amplitude of the sound waves is
up the y-axis plotted against their size with small waves that's high pitch on the right.
It has a remarkable shape with a fundamental peak and several higher harmonics rather like a musical
instrument. And just like a musical instrument, the sound of the universe depends sensitively
on its properties. So as we learned in lecture 16, the exact form of the sound spectrum can tell us
a great deal about the universe's properties. Remember the metaphor I used in lecture 13.
The patches on the microwave background are like the DNA of the universe. They're influenced by
its past and they help determine its future. Studying these patches is to cosmology what
the human genome project is to the life sciences. Here are three of the most obvious features in
the sound spectrum that are affected by the cosmological parameters. The location of the
first peak is sensitive to the geometry of space and so it gives us omega total. The strength
of the first peak is sensitive to the total amount of matter so it gives us omega matter.
While the relative strengths of the second and third peaks is sensitive to just the atomic
matter and so that gives us omega atomic. Now here's an example that shows how the patchiness
changes from a universe with only 1% atomic matter to a universe with 10% atomic matter.
The small scale roughness is stronger which of course shows up very nicely in the sound spectrum
where the blue line is for the atomic rich 10% universe with its stronger higher harmonics.
Just to alert you here these spectra have an exponential frequency scale
so they look a little different from that previous graph.
Here's a second example that shows the data from the real microwave background
and the concordance model fit in red with omega matter 0.27 and omega dark energy 0.73.
It's a fabulous fit but look how it's ruined if we leave out the dark energy which is the blue curve.
See it's this sensitivity to many of the cosmological parameters that makes the
microwave background such a key player in this whole game.
Let's now look at the fourth data set galaxy redshift surveys. Here are sections from three
of the most well-known surveys the CFA survey, the Anglo-Australian 2DF survey
and the Sloan Digital Sky survey. Remember each dot is the position of a galaxy
and you can see the characteristic web-like patterns with walls and sheets and voids scattered about.
And here are the equivalent sections taken from the millennium computer simulation.
Remember these simulations follow the gravitational motion of billions of particles
and they help to understand how galaxies formed and gathered into the clusters and the web.
As you might guess the most important cosmological parameters that affect the growth of large scale
structure are the input initial roughness spectrum and the density of matter. So let's briefly look
at these two now. Here's a set of simulations with omega matter that's the density of matter
increasing from 0.1 to 0.5. Not surprisingly the simulations with higher density end up with
more structure because gravitational aggregation is faster at higher density. In fact just eyeballing
these pictures allows you to guess that the middle of the range roughly matches the real galaxy maps.
But of course the proper way to make the comparison is to use the roughness spectrum.
Here's a set of calculated roughness spectra from the simulations with the same range of omega
matter and the real galaxy data clearly single out omega matter near 0.3. You may be wondering
what those wiggles are. They're called baryon oscillations and they're the relics of those
acoustic harmonics seen in the microwave background sound spectrum. The slight excess roughness
at the harmonic peaks survives until today and is etched in the pattern of galaxies.
These baryon oscillations in fact allow very precise measurements of several cosmological
parameters and I'll have more to say about them in lecture 35 when we look at major
observational projects for the future. The fifth key data set we just met last lecture.
It's the abundance of the light elements deuterium, helium-3, helium-4 and lithium-7.
Remember these nuclei are made about three minutes after the Big Bang and their abundances
depend on the density of the gas at that time. Here is that dependency and by matching the
observed abundances we found a density near 10 grams per cubic meter. When we convert this
to today's density we get omega atomic of 0.04 with about 10% uncertainty which of course confirms
that atomic matter is only a minor cosmic component. Now at this point you may think
that the story is over. We've used our data sets and models and measured a number of the
fundamental parameters but in fact the whole game is much more interesting than that. You may have
also noticed that some of the parameters could be measured by several data sets, several different
data sets and so this offers an extremely important possibility which is to check whether they all
agree. Is there a single set of parameters that fits all the data sets simultaneously?
So let's have a look at that now. In this diagram we have two of the most important parameters,
omega matter along the bottom and omega dark energy upwards. Each point in this plane
specifies a particular universe. For example those for which omega matter plus omega dark
energy is one have flat geometry. They lie on this line. Now let's take the supernova data.
Because there are uncertainties in the data we have a region of acceptable values. The true values
are more likely to lie in the dark inner region and less likely outside that. Notice that the
region is elongated and tilted. This particular method is sensitive to the difference between
omega matter and omega dark energy but it's not so sensitive to their sum.
Now let's consider how the model fits to the microwave background sound spectrum.
Well it's a huge relief to see that the regions of high confidence do actually overlap but notice
how the microwave background data is sensitive in a completely different way to the two parameters.
So the acceptable region lies at a different angle. As you can see combining these two data sets
gives a much more precise measurement of omega matter and omega dark energy.
Let's finally add the redshift survey data set on galaxy clustering. It has yet another kind of
sensitivity to the two parameters so comes in at yet another angle and just look at that match.
All three data sets overlap in a tiny region. They really nail these two parameters.
Now this convergence on a single unique value for from completely different data sets happens
again and again. It's an incredible indication that the entire approach is valid and robust.
I'll just show you two more examples. Here's a sequence of models with different omega atomic
with their comparison at the top to the microwave background sound spectrum and at the bottom
to the galaxy roughness spectrum. Now the thing to look for is that when the match is best at the
top it is also best at the bottom. The same value of omega atomic is singled out for both data sets.
What is that value? Have a guess. It's 0.04 exactly the same as the value we got from yet
another data set the light element abundances. Okay here's my last example. Our two parameters
this time are omega a total which tracks the curvature of space with euclidean at unity
and up the y-axis is the age of the universe in billions of years.
W maps first year of observing the microwave background excludes everywhere except the white
region and adding two more years of data narrows it down further. Now bringing in the galaxy red
shift surveys further narrows it down and of course this is all consistent with the age estimates
of the oldest stars in the galaxy. Notice that the final region really does suggest
we live in a universe with euclidean geometry and that the Big Bang really did happen about
14 billion years ago. Now although I've shown you a few examples of fitting models to data sets
in reality all these fits are done essentially together in one huge match between models and data
and as you saw a minute ago it's the fact that each parameter must conform to several data sets
that really allows most of them to be measured with such high precision.
Well let me end this lecture by once again stepping back to try to see where we are.
After a century of effort technological advances have finally provided the kind of
powerful data sets we really need to accurately measure the properties of the universe.
Individually these data sets have yielded many of the fundamental cosmological parameters
but taken together they provide a stunning degree of agreement and coherence.
It seems that a relatively straightforward theoretical framework provides all we need
to match the data. It's an expanding euclidean universe with five major constituents.
These constituents were spread about almost homogeneously but not quite.
An initial spectrum of roughness is amplified by gravity to generate the structures we see
on the microwave background and in the distribution of galaxies.
The theory has about half a dozen primary parameters and about as many secondary parameters
and almost all of them have now been measured to an accuracy of between five and ten percent.
Here they are the concordance model parameters and their uncertainties.
They're the universe's vital statistics. They encode much of the universe's overall
character or at least they define the stage on which the play unfolds.
I think one way to view these numbers is a bit like the first post-Copernican estimates
of the sizes and shapes of the planetary orbits. The numbers may be refined in the future
but the overall framework is almost certainly correct and is here to stay.
I think more than anything else it's been this amazing convergence on a single set of values
from such different data sets that has really galvanized the astronomical community.
One might even suggest I think parallels in the reactions to Newton's theory of gravity
or Darwin's theory of evolution. With each so much falls into place and is explained
that the theories are seen to be clearly on the right track.
But of course with all these theories there is also room to grow. In Newton's case it was general
relativity. In Darwin's case it was genes and this is no less true for cosmology. Just consider
the following questions. Why do we have the components we do? Why is the geometry so special
being flat? Why is there initial roughness? And why is there something and not nothing?
Yes we are on the right track but there's still more of the journey ahead.
So where to next? Well if we want to answer some of these questions we need to head back
to the beginning, back to the first second where even the laws of physics are being
busily created. So come and join me there at the next lecture.
