here we are at the penultimate lecture in this course we've managed to cover a
very great deal and I hope by now you've got a sense of what an amazingly
rich story cosmology is telling us. The progress recently has been quite
remarkable and it's come in two rather different ways. On the one hand several
huge observational projects have produced superb data sets and on the other
hand these data sets have been interpreted and understood using
detailed theoretical calculations often using huge computer simulations. So the
subject right now is in an extremely interesting condition. The primary story
has been established. Essentially it's the inflationary hot big bang story that
I've tried to tell in these lectures. But as always in science when the first set
of questions is answered another set of questions arises. So in this lecture my
aim is to highlight some of the next steps for cosmology. What a cosmologist
currently working on and what might they learn by say 2030. Now I've picked out
six themes to look at and although they they don't cover all the work that's
going on I think they'll give you a good feel for the near future of the subject
and I'm also hoping of course that as I move from one theme to another in effect
I'll be reviewing much of the material we've covered in the course. So let's
start off with our first theme dark matter and I've picked two areas. Efforts to
detect dark matter particles and efforts to map its web like distribution. So
arguably the most fundamental discovery in all of science at the present time
would be to actually detect dark matter particles. One of the approaches is to
use particle accelerators to actually create dark matter particles in high
energy collisions and the other approach is to detect cosmic dark matter
particles using extremely sensitive detectors buried deep underground. Now
the discovery of dark matter particles has Nobel Prize written all over it.
First you'd be discovering the primary matter component of the universe and
second you'd be taking physics beyond the standard model. So it would be a
simultaneous breakthrough in cosmology as well as fundamental physics. What about
future astronomical observations of dark matter? One of the primary projects is to
use gravitational lensing to map out the web-like pattern of dark matter and
watch its structure grow over time. The idea is that the light from very distant
galaxies gets slightly distorted by the gravity of dark matter. It's a bit like
looking through an old pane of uneven glass. Everything looks a little wonky.
So by taking deep images and analyzing the shapes of hundreds of thousands of
distant galaxies it's actually possible to reconstruct the distribution of dark
matter along the path. Here are some of the first results of this method using
the Hubble telescope to look at a small patch of sky about twice the size of the
full moon. It shows the dark matter and even reveals how it changes from being
smoother far away long ago to being more clumpy nearby today. This weak lensing
technique as it's called is really remarkable in that it renders visible
something that is otherwise inherently invisible. So for the future there are
several projects that are going to use this technique to map out dark matter
but I'll just mention two of them that will actually do much more than that.
They're the Panstars project with four 1.8 meter telescopes and the large
synoptic survey telescope LSST with a single 8.4 meter telescope. As you can see
the Panstars project is underway while the LSST is still in its design stages.
Both projects aim to photograph large areas of the sky using huge cameras
with specially designed optics. I think one of the most remarkable things to come
from these projects will be the positions and approximate distances and properties
of almost a billion galaxies as far away as 11 billion light years. That's much
bigger than the recent Sloan or 2df redshift surveys I've shown you in the previous lectures
and extends almost to the edge of the visible universe. So this situation is similar
to 18th century global exploration when most but not quite all of the world had been mapped
and just like on earth once it's complete that's it. There are no more continents to find.
There's no more volume in which to find galaxies. Within one century we will have
gone from knowing just our galaxy to knowing all galaxies.
Our second theme is dark energy. By now the evidence for dark energy is pretty strong
and we know it makes up about 73% of the total cosmic density but we still have no clear idea
what it actually is. So finding that out is the next major goal. Remember dark energy is
thought to be one of the following. A simple constant vacuum energy which behaves like
Einstein's original cosmological constant. Quintessence which is basically a vacuum energy
that varies with time. Or a new and unknown property of gravity something that's beyond
Einstein's theory of general relativity. So the major task now is to try to sort out
which of these three it is. And you won't be surprised to hear that the way to do this is to
see whether the density of dark energy changes over time. And in cosmology that always means you
look far away back in time to see if it was different back then. And there are actually
three different approaches for doing this. The first is to simply improve on the original
method for discovering dark energy using distant supernovae to measure how the expansion rate
has changed over time. There are already several projects using ground based telescopes to gather
more supernova data but a huge leap forward would come from a dedicated telescope in space
like this one called SNAP for supernova acceleration probe. Just to give you an idea
of the kind of improvements here's the classic diagram from 2003 showing how more distant supernovae
that's along the x-axis get fainter of the y-axis. The data nicely distinguish between
universes with and without dark energy but they can't go much beyond that. Look how the situation
would improve with 2500 new supernovae from the SNAP telescope. The expansion rate is really nailed
across nine billion years of cosmic history which would tell us quite accurately whether or not
the density of dark energy has changed over time. The second approach uses the technique I mentioned
a minute ago weak lensing to study how the clumpiness of dark matter changes over time.
This computer simulation shows how the dark matter changes from being very smooth 12 billion light
years away to being quite lumpy nearby. It grows clumpier over time as gravity pulls it
into denser regions. But remember from lecture 22 the accelerating expansion caused by dark energy
tends to suppress the growth of clumping. So if you measure how clumping changes over time
then you can infer how dark energy changes over time. So that's the second method.
Now the third method measures what are called baryon acoustic oscillations. This method makes
use of the acoustic waves that we see as the patchiness of the microwave background. Remember
the sound spectrum of that patchiness gives this amazing graph with its fundamental and harmonics.
But of course the gas that makes those patches goes on to make galaxies. So the harmonic peaks
on the microwave background should be present in the patterns of today's galaxies. And as we saw
in lecture 22 although your eye can't pick them out in the galaxy pattern the roughness spectrum
shows them as these little wiggles. Now these little wiggles are extremely useful for the simple
reason that we know their true physical size because we understand the physics of how they
were made in the young universe. So just as the faintness of supernovae allows us to measure
distance because they act like standard candles. So the angular size of the acoustic harmonics
also allows us to measure distance because they act like standard rulers. And this gives us another
way to measure how the expansion rate changes over time and so whether dark energy changes over time.
But the real power of these three methods comes in combining them. Here's a diagram with omega
matter along the x-axis and w up the y-axis. Now remember from lecture 26 w is the main parameter
that measures whether dark energy is changing or not. Look at how the data from the supernovae
and the baryon acoustic oscillations combine beautifully to single out this little region
suggesting w is roughly minus one. This is the value we expect for a constant vacuum energy.
But to properly distinguish between the various options for dark energy one really needs much
better data which of course is what these major projects are designed to do.
Now our third theme is to really begin to observe properly the first billion years. The primary goal
is to study the first stars and galaxies. And a second goal is to observe the diffuse gas
that's condensing to form both of these which I'll come back to in a minute. So here from
lecture 18 is our first billion year timeline. The big bang and microwave background are the narrow
line on the left after which there is a 200 million year period of darkness before the
first stars begin to form. And after another few hundred million years the first infant galaxies
form. It's an absolutely crucial time in the cosmological story and yet it still remains
almost completely unobserved. Remember from lecture 19 the Hubble Telescope's ultra deep field
only just manages to see galaxies at the end of the first billion years. What's desperately needed
are bigger telescopes both in space and on the ground. So let's look at what the next couple
of decades will bring. The successor to the Hubble Space Telescope is the Hubble Space Telescope.
The successor to the Hubble Space Telescope is the James Webb Space Telescope and it's
due to be launched in 2013. It's named after the man who made sure in the 1960s that science was
one of NASA's primary missions. It has a compound mirror that's 6.5 meters across much bigger than
Hubble's 2.4 meter mirror. The whole telescope is carefully folded up and launched in a European
rocket and taken to a special parking spot about four times further than the moon on the opposite
side to the sun. Once there it slowly unfolds to make this rather bare looking structure with
large sheets to protect it from the sunlight.
Here's a simulation of what the telescope will see in a small patch of sky. It's an absolutely
amazing vision of galaxies upon galaxies upon galaxies near and far down a 13 billion light
year tunnel. Many of those tiniest dots will be infant galaxies in the first billion years
and a few will be the first stars. It'll be a really wonderful moment when for the first time
we see the universe's first stars. Now along with this space telescope cosmology is also benefiting
enormously from a new generation of huge optical telescopes on the ground. Here are a few examples
the famous Keck telescopes in Hawaii. Here are four European run telescopes in Chile.
The large binocular telescope in Arizona and the Gemini North telescope also in Hawaii.
The main feature of all these telescopes of course is having a huge light gathering mirror.
Here's one eight meters across that's a person standing in the middle. A mirror of this size
gathers four million times more light than your eyes and the cameras are 50 times more
sensitive than your retina. So combined you can see how telescopes like this could easily pick
out a candle on the moon which is what they need to do because that's about how faint the first
galaxies are. Of course the next generation of telescopes like the one illustrated here will
have 30 meter mirrors and a plan to start around 2015. All these new optical telescopes are a
wonderful example of how modern technology really drives science forwards. So let's look at another
example this time for radio telescopes. So here's our first billion year timeline again
and this time let's think about the diffuse gas that's making those stars and galaxies.
Remember the microwave background way over on the left is when the universe changes
from an ionized gas to an atomic gas. The electrons get caught by the nuclei.
So throughout the dark age the universe contains just cooling atomic hydrogen and helium gas
getting clumpier and clumpier until finally after about 200 million years the first stars form.
Now remember these stars are hot and bright and their ultraviolet light begins to
re-ionize the gas. The energetic photons smash the atoms and knock off the electrons.
So there's an extended period from about 200 to 800 million years called the epoch of
re-ionization as the atomic hydrogen gradually gets more and more ionized.
Here's a computer simulation of this period. You can see how we start with mostly neutral gas in
orange and then where stars form the ionized regions gradually spread out wider and wider
until the entire region is almost completely ionized. It's a very important time to study
because the patterns of ionized and atomic gas tell us a huge amount about the nature
of those first stars and galaxies. So a major goal for the next two decades
is to observe this whole period but how do you do that? Well you may remember from lecture nine
that simple atomic hydrogen gas has the enormously useful property of emitting
radio waves with wavelength 21 centimeters that's about eight inches which now in the current context
is redshifted to between one and a few meters wavelength. So what we need are radio telescopes
specially sensitive to these very long radio waves. Now once again although there are many
projects to do this I'll mention just the two largest ones. The first is already being built
it's called LOFAR for low frequency array and it's the first of a completely new kind
of radio telescope. Each antenna is remarkably simple and receives radio waves from all over
the sky but there are thousands of these spread across northern Europe with a concentration in
Holland. The signals are sent to a supercomputer housed in this building where they are combined
in extremely sophisticated ways and the upshot is that the entire array acts like a single
telescope that can study any part of the sky with great sensitivity. Actually a much bigger version
of this is planned to begin around 2012 and it's called the square kilometer array or SKA
and like LOFAR it has a central region with more antennae and outlying stations spanning a few
hundred kilometers. The total collecting area is one square kilometer giving it extraordinary
sensitivity. So with these and similar instruments perhaps in 10 or 20 years I'll be able to show
you pictures of hydrogen filaments in the dark ages gathering ready to make the first stars.
Back to our human metaphor that maps all of cosmic history onto a human lifespan
this is equivalent to studying the gestation period just using ultrasound to watch the embryos
development prior to birth. Now theme four is galaxy evolution and of the many planned projects
I've picked two that I think are particularly interesting. One uses a new facility to find
and study infant galaxies and the other detects the merging of massive black holes. So remember
from lecture 19 that the early universe is filled with colliding and merging galaxies
a bit like these lovely nearby examples and during these collisions many new stars are born.
So you may be surprised to see that the spectrum of a typical merging galaxy looks like this.
It goes all the way from ultraviolet on the left through optical and infrared to radio on the right.
Notice that the starlight in the optical is a minor component compared to this huge bump
in the infrared. What makes all that infrared light turns out to be tiny carbon and silicon
particles that astronomers call dust. They absorb most of the starlight and re-radiate it in the
infrared. So obviously if you want to see extremely distant colliding galaxies you should forget
about starlight and focus on this big bump. Now in distant galaxies the spectrum is red shifted
which moves that bump from the infrared over into this part of the spectrum right on the
boundary between infrared and radio with about one millimeter wavelength.
Well for this and other reasons in 2012 this spectral region will be revolutionized by a
fabulous new instrument called ALMA for Atacama Large Millimeter Array. It has 64 dishes like this
one spread over a few kilometers and it's located way up in the high Atacama Desert in Chile.
This new facility will add to all areas of astronomy but in the current context it will
really allow cosmologists to study in detail those chaotic early times when the first galaxies
were rapidly growing by mergers and star birth rates were as an all-time high.
Now you may remember from lecture 21 that these early wild times were also when black holes were
first formed and although they do this and how they do this we still don't really know it is
thought that black holes grow in two different ways by pulling in and swallowing gas and stars
and by merging. Two black holes can merge to make a bigger black hole. Just watch this simulation
of the late stages of two merging galaxies. See how quickly their central regions merge together.
Now if those central regions each contain a black hole you can see how the black holes themselves
might also merge. Now when two black holes finally spiral in together and merge
it's thought that a lot of their mass is converted into gravitational waves that move out
into the universe at the speed of light. So billions of years later when they cross the solar system
those gravitational waves shake everything a little bit. The shaking is extremely slight
but technology is now almost able to detect it and that's the aim of the LISA project which stands
for laser interferometer space antenna. The project has three satellites five million kilometers apart
in a huge triangle and the distance between the satellites is measured extremely accurately using
laser beams. All three satellites orbit the sun trailing the earth in its orbit.
When a gravitational wave passes by the triangle arms lengths change very slightly
about a thousandth of the diameter of an atom and amazingly this can actually be measured
and so the pattern of the gravity wave can be analyzed and from this the nature of the black
hole merger can be figured out. When it's operating sometime in 2020 LISA is expected
to be able to detect massive black holes merging anywhere in the visible universe of which there
might be roughly one occurring per year. This would be an extraordinary scientific achievement
partly because you're actually witnessing one of the most dramatic events in the universe
but one is also using an entirely new window on the universe the gravitational wave window.
Theme five is to try to find more evidence for inflation and there are two key methods
both of which require very careful observations of the microwave background. With luck these should
be made by a european satellite launched in october 2008 called Planck after Max Planck
who was one of the founders of quantum mechanics. Each decade there's been a steady improvement
in the quality of the all-sky microwave maps from Kobe in 1990 to WMAP in 2003 and now here's the
predicted Planck map with even more sensitivity and detail. This higher quality detail should yield
a better sound spectrum and this in turn will allow a primordial spectrum created by inflation
to be measured more accurately. You may remember from lecture 32 that the slight tilt and curvature
in this spectrum not only provides evidence for inflation but they also allow you to
figure out some very important details of how inflation occurred what the shape of the potential
is to use the proper term. But the most important quality that the Planck satellite is looking for
is the polarization of the microwave background the direction the microwaves wiggle when they get
to us as you can see in this illustration. Remember inflation shakes all of space time
and this sends out gravitational waves that leave a characteristic pattern on the polarization of
the microwave background a sort of spiral pattern. Now detecting these polarization patterns would be
viewed as extremely strong evidence for inflation so it's a huge current priority in cosmology.
Now my final theme is the early universe and drawing from lectures 28 and 29 I'm just going to list
the outstanding questions that may or may not be answered in the next couple of decades. The first
four questions concern the first picosecond. Why did matter have a slight one in a billion excess
over antimatter? What are the properties of a quark gluon plasma? Remember that's the stuff the
universe was made of before 10 microseconds so it's pretty important to understand its behavior.
Did the early universe obey supersymmetry and if so is the lightest supersymmetric particle
also the dark matter particle? And finally does the Higgs boson exist and if it does how does it give
mass to all the other particles? All these four questions are within reach of our best current
accelerators. For example the new large hadron collider at CERN has experiments that should
shed light on all four of these questions so who knows maybe in 10 years at least some of these
questions will be answered. But the next questions are well beyond any feasible experiments they
concern the much earlier time when the big bang got its launch so progress here is only likely to come
through developments in theory. So we want to know how and when inflation occurred and how
long did it last for and we also want to know the form of the inflaton potential that's the hill
down which the ball rolls. So obviously then what we really need is a better understanding
of the nature of inflation but the greatest challenge is to place inflation into the wider
context of the pre-inflation universe and to do that one needs a theory of quantum gravity.
Among the various possibilities string theory is thought to be the most promising
but it's also fiendishly difficult and it may be many years if ever before this fundamental part
of the cosmological story becomes clear. So I hope this lecture has left you feeling that cosmology
is in an extremely healthy and interesting time. Although much of the basic story now seems to
have fallen into place there are nevertheless many wonderful puzzles remaining including some
fundamental ones. So as I mentioned at the beginning of the first lecture now is a great time to be
a cosmologist or to simply find out about the subject.
