Hey guys, welcome to Future Thinker's podcast, episode number 43. This is the second half
of our interview with Daniel Schmockdenberger, who is the co-founder of Neurohacker Collective.
In this half, we talk about the process of neurogenesis, which parts of ancient wisdom
are useful in modern society, therapeutic use of psychedelics, and rites of passage,
and many other fascinating things.
For all the links, mentions, and books from this episode, go to futurethinkers.org slash
forty-three. And to listen to the first half, go to futurethinkers.org slash forty-two.
And if you haven't listened to our other episode with Daniel Schmockdenberger, in which we
talk about the global phase shift we may be going through, go to futurethinkers.org slash
thirty-six. And if you're interested in trying qualia, the smart drug stack that Daniel's
company has developed, go to futurethinkers.org slash brain hack. All one word.
Before we get into this episode, I want to say thank you to our recent patrons and donors,
Christian, Pablo, and Richard. You guys are awesome. Thank you for helping us make this
show possible.
All right, let's get into it.
Welcome to futurethinkers.org, a podcast about the evolution of technology, society, and
consciousness.
I'm Mike Gilliland.
And I'm Yuvia Ivanova.
To get notified of new podcasts and videos, go to futurethinkers.org and subscribe to our
mailing list.
You can also find us on iTunes, Stitcher, and YouTube.
If you like what we do and you want to help us make more podcasts and videos, give us a
like or a review, share it with your friends, and consider becoming a patron.
Go to patreon.com slash futurethinkers.
If you're looking to get serious about meditation, check out the meditation app that we've created
with Negupta called the Cutting Machinery.
Go to cuttingmachinery.org slash app.
Last but not least, if you want to get access to more content, hidden episodes, or if you
just want to chat with us and previous guests, then check out our community at community.futurethinkers.org.
I'd like to go back to neurogenesis and maybe talk again about some of the more specific
treatments that support neurogenesis.
And I'm also wondering, is this work mostly being done in the space of Alzheimer's treatment?
No.
Neurogenesis a fascinating field, adult neurogenesis in particular, because up until not that long
ago, it was commonly believed that we didn't generate new neurons after adulthood.
And that's not true.
It's why neurogenesis is so fascinating.
Our brain does continuously produce neural stem cells, mostly in the hippocampus, that
then differentiate into other regions of the brain, other tissues.
And that that rate of neural stem cell production can be increased or decreased by a number
of factors.
So when we think about brain aging, and also neurogenesis isn't just for brain aging,
it's also for dealing with traumatic brain injury and the ability to actually heal areas
of brain that were damaged.
It has to do with increasing gray matter density and just increasing the total information
processing capacity of the system.
Also dealing with nerve damage, peripheral nerve damage, or neurodegeneration.
Researcher on our team just wrote a meta-analysis of all of the research done on adult neurogenesis
and we'll be publishing it soon, and it's fascinating.
Our hypothesis from an evolutionary biology perspective is that when you think about human
genetics and what they selected for more than anything, they selected for, this is a generalized
but fair way to say it, they selected for neurogenesis.
Our genes selected for means.
They selected for a creature that could change themselves and their basis for acting over
the course of their life significantly and one generation to the next faster than genes
could change.
And so most animals, their behavior is pretty genetically hardwired and modulated by the
environment a little, which is why they actually have the hardwired code to like get up and
walk and do stuff in the first few minutes of life.
And we are neoteness and basically useless for so long, right?
For a year and a half, we can't do hardly anything.
And it's because we are very softwired because as tool makers that modify our own environment,
think about like the most adaptive person 10,000 years ago at spear throwing would be
useless today because they couldn't text and they couldn't type and they wouldn't know
how to call an Uber.
And so it's very important that as we are modifying the environment, we can adapt to
our new modified environments, which means that we are not hardwired, that we can be
rewiring our innate processes, right?
And neurogenesis is a major part of that.
So it's a super fascinating field for disease recovery, for anti-aging, for understanding
human nature, and for kind of hyper learning and capabilities.
So there's a bunch of things that affect neurogenesis.
There are these chemicals called neurotrophins, which basically upregulate neuron production
BDNF is the most well-understood one, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, NGF or nerve growth factor.
So there are things that can increase BDNF, increase NGF.
And normal lifestyle things like exercise is one of the ones that we know better than
anything that actually increases neurogenesis.
Weightlifting and HIIT training in particular, more than aerobics, are very BDNF upregulating.
And lack of sleep means decreased neurogenesis.
There are a number of nutrients that are also involved, and there are some herbs and mushrooms
that have very, very potent effects.
So, you know, lion's mane has been used for nerve injury for a long time, and it happens
to very acutely elevate NGF levels.
Some key nutrients like methylcobalamin, the methylated form of B12 and torene, in fairly
high doses, upregulate the endogenous rate of neurogenesis.
Then there are some drugs that are being developed for neurogenic purposes, and I actually think
this is one of the most brilliant things a drug could do.
You know, I said some things that sounded like they were negative regarding pharmaceutical
approach as a whole earlier.
I want to say that some very meaningfully positive things are happening in all branches
of pharmaceuticals largely because other areas, especially in complex disease, are failing.
So the cool new areas that are happening is not just a chemical that will try and change
the level of something, but a drug that will actually support the body's ability to do
something better, so that I can make this point well.
Think about a statin, right, for cholesterol.
If your cholesterol is high and we give you a statin to lower it, we don't know why your
cholesterol is high.
Your cholesterol can be high because of diet, it can be high because of diabetes-like things,
it can be high because of mold toxicity, and so just lowering it doesn't actually address
the pathology or the behavior or the whatever.
So that kind of drug approach is not that interesting.
And very interestingly, sometimes the opposite is what needs to happen.
So if your blood pressure is high, and we give you a drug to just lower your blood pressure,
all right, you just exogenously lower blood pressure, but why had the body been setting
that point too high to begin with?
If you exercise, the reason that exercise lowers blood pressure is because when you exercise,
it raises your blood pressure, and when the blood pressure spikes even higher, it actually
kicks in the hormetic mechanisms, hormesis is the body's response to stress, it kicks
in the hormetic mechanism for the body to say, oh, the blood pressure is too high, let's
bring it down on our own, and the body starts regulating blood pressure better, but it actually,
rather than externally moving it lower, what it needed was to be moved higher, and then
its own self-regulation occurred.
So drugs that just try and move something into range without asking why it happened and
without increasing the body's ability to maintain that range, not so interesting to me.
Even though, I mean, they're life-saving, they're just not adequate solutions as we move forward.
But as we move from the chemo-therapeutic approaches to cancer to immuno-oncology, immuno-oncology
is the beginning of us doing anything with cancer that's really interesting, where we're
actually training the body's immune system's capacity to kill cancer cells better.
That's actually pretty great.
Well, in the neurologic space, there's a company called NeuralSTEM, they're working on a drug
there in, I believe, phase two clinical trials right now called NSI-189, and it was originally
being developed for ALS.
But now, I believe that the first thing that they're trying to approve it for is major
depressive disorder, but for ALS, they were originally working with NeuralSTEM cells.
They would grow NeuralSTEM cells and shoot them up into the spinal cord, either where
there was spinal cord injury or neurodegeneration, like ALS, and they were getting some results
and they wanted to say, well, could we increase the body's rate of producing its own NeuralSTEM
cells?
So they were growing NeuralSTEM cells in vitro and seeing if there were any molecules that
would increase their own proliferation.
They found some that did, and NSI-189 was the primary one.
So here, it's a drug that isn't trying to modulate an in-chain chemical.
It's actually up-regulating your body's own regulatory process.
Once you have those new NeuralSTEM cells, they keep doing their thing.
They become tissues and they do their regulatory thing.
Now, if you think about, if that drug continues to succeed, and I don't know if it will, but
there will be a whole class of ones like that, it could fix nerve damage from injury, nerve
damage from neuropathy, it could fix retinopathy, it could fix MS, ALS, Parkinson's, and the
reason why it was working in depression was as they were getting up-regulated production
of new STEM cells in the hippocampus, and then that's starting to affect the surrounding
basal structures, the person actually had more information processing capacity to process
their emotions and process their experiences, and they didn't get overwhelmed and get depressed
by them.
There's a company called Zingup.
They have a website, zingup.com, and they originally developed a friend of mine over there, developed
a set of processes that they were trying to bring about for helping autism, and then
what they figured out, they ended up applying to just performance enhancement, so right
now it's a performance enhancement site, but they found that there was, you actually
really dig this, there were movement patterns that, more than other movement patterns, radically
up-regulated neural STEM cell production, and specifically were growing gray matter
density in the cerebellum, hippocampus pond, mostly cerebellum, and that autism was getting
better, depression was getting better, you know, they did a study in prisons and violence
went down because when people are overwhelmed by the amount of stimulus coming in, their
emotions, et cetera, and they can't process at all, then the results of the not-processed
stuff is lingering anxiety, depression, confusion, and just being able to process it better physiologically
led to, you know, the healthier, happier people, and so how they found to do it, I think this
is a kind of profound insight, was when you first start doing some kind of coordination
activity, like riding a bike or walking on a slack line or juggling, that you've never
done, at first it seems almost like it's impossible, like you can't even find the place where
it makes sense that that will be possible, because you don't have the neural circuitry
to do that particular kind of balance sensory-motor coordination stuff yet, and then as soon as
you start to get it, you're like, okay, I'm not nowhere near perfect yet, but I have the
hang, like there's something inside of me that knows how to do this, going from that
I have no idea how to do this up to getting the hang of it, there is a rapid rate of the
production of new neural stem cells that are saying, whoa, we're actually in danger
because we can't do this physical activity that obviously needs to happen, let's upregulate
our capacity like crazy, be able to do it, once you can do it, and now you're just getting
better at doing it, you get a diminishing return on that, and so what they figured out
to do was how to take people through a series of exercises, and they customized them based
on assessment, but in general, anyone could do this, a series of exercises, it involved
coordination and balance, and coordinating multiple sensory-motor groups that were super
difficult, and as soon as you started to get the hang of it, they switched and did a new
one, and then as soon as you started to get the hang of it, they switched and did a new
one, so you were maximizing for the growth rate of neurogenesis, which then ended up
having an effect on all kinds of other things, the hypothesis there was that it has to do
with automating learning, so we start learning some motor function, and it's very hard, and
we're trying to think about where our hands go and where our feet go and all these things
at once, and we can't think about that many things consciously, so our brain has to try
to get some of them in unconscious memory, and then we can drive a stick shift without
even thinking about it when at first it seems like seven different hard things to coordinate.
In an evolutionary environment, us moving stuff from conscious to unconscious, right?
Consciously we're trying to learn some new skills, now we can unconsciously perform it.
We would have done that for motor tasks more than anything else, and cognitive and language,
et cetera, tasks kind of came evolutionarily on top of that, so our capacity to learn new
stuff, motor tasks are going to be able to drive that evolutionary hardware more specifically,
right? That was our hypothesis, and it seems to be well supported by the evidence,
and so if you do a bunch of sensory motor tasks that you can't do at all, and then you start to
be able to do them, and you do a bunch of different ones, you're actually increasing kind of the
neural infrastructure for the rate of learning and automating conscious to unconscious performance,
and then that same infrastructure is used when you are learning cognitive tasks or
interpersonal skills or anything else. So the idea was that it would increase rate of learning,
and they've got a bunch of research showing that happens to be the case. So that's another
example of a methodology approach, right? So you've got drug approaches, nutrition approaches,
exercise approaches, methodology approaches for neurogenesis.
That is fascinating. I think that explains in plain terms how yoga works and how yoga actually
supports brain development just through doing a series of different complex movements.
Totally. I would say yoga is probably a combination of that effect that we just mentioned,
along with the stress relieving effects and some of the effects of increased breath,
both increased breath on parasympathetic function and on oxygen carbon dioxide levels.
Very cool. What are some of the other areas that are important to talk about? So now to
summarize, we've talked about the gut brain, the emotional regulation, we've talked about
movement, systems approaches to measuring and understanding what is going on in your body
before you're going to go and mess with it. What are some other areas of neurohacking that are
really important pillar areas? We didn't talk about altered states of consciousness yet.
All right. Let's wait for that one. So psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy,
psychedelic-assisted spirituality, psychedelic-assisted neural repatterning,
super fascinating field. Even though that field started with people like Stanislaw of
Groff, etc., back in the day, it has been accelerating a lot recently and I'm very happy
to see this. When I think about the role of psychedelics, entheogens in human development,
I think about three distinct categories. You can use it as a personal development tool. You can
use it as an interpersonal tool and as a transpersonal tool. So as a personal tool, we can talk about
the role in addiction recovery. So you've seen the results of Ibogaine and 5MEO-DMT
being used along with psychotherapeutic processes for addiction recovery for people
on opiates, on benzos, on all kinds of things. It's a fascinating field. It shares some things
with ketamine's approach to depression. So you can look at addiction recovery, work with PTSD,
with end-of-life anxiety. These are areas where it seems to be having an effect
that is either more than or different than any other therapies and so very fascinating.
This is for working on pathology. For just more psychotherapeutic growth,
the role that psychedelics can play in shadow work and integrating parts of self is really
fascinating. When you realize that we don't remember, when we're remembering memories,
we don't remember the memory. We remember how it's consolidated in our brain,
factoring all the times we've remembered it and changed it. That's a big insight
because it means that if you can re-remember a memory and remember it quite differently,
you can actually affect how it was stored and all the future times that will be referenced.
Say someone is on MDMA and so they're in a pretty euphoric state and then they think about
some negative experience of their past, but they can't feel negative while they think about it.
So it would always be in the past that they would think about it and feel negative. They had that
associative conditioning. Now they're thinking about it and feeling great. That means that the
regions of the brain and the chemistry that's involved in feeling great and that specific
thought are co-wiring together. Then the next time when this person is sober and they think about it,
they remember the last way they remembered it and it doesn't have that same charge that it used to
have for them. This can be about a traumatic memory of the past. It can also be thinking about parts
of themselves that they're ashamed of or can't love or whatever and instantly, like in a fairly
short amount of time, one or a small number of sessions, radically change the charge around
psychological topics. This is something I've been really interested in and thinking about
and partially why I brought up the whole idea of the gut brain and asking your gut how you feel
about something because I'm trying to separate how I feel and what I think about memories and
about how I look into the future. This has been an extremely useful tool for me because
I separate the memory into its two components and then process the emotions on their own so
that I don't have to continue feeling negatively about an event. This has worked really well.
You have the memory of just what happened and then you have all the meaning making around it
and the meaning making can change while you still remember the event that happened. When the
meaning making changes, the somatics and the emotions can change accordingly. You experience
some event in childhood and the meaning was something about that you're a failure and you
should never try stuff and whatever. When you reprocess and say, actually, that's not a realistic
meaning. I was a kid and I have actually done well at those things later, etc., you can still
remember the event but it doesn't have the same associated meaning about self and about reality
so then it doesn't have the same charge, the fear charge that's trying to protect you from that
painful possibility in the future, etc. You can do that without psychedelics. Psychedelics just
happened to be one very fast way to change that association. I think psychotherapy is another
one and also hypnotherapy because you can induce somebody into trance and then re-imprint a certain
experience so that exactly like you were saying, the processing of it changes how your brain processes
that. When you talk about hypnotherapy and inducing trance, if we're going to try and
change the way that someone has stored a memory or changed their association with a phobia or
whatever it is, then we want to get them into a state that is amenable to change. Psychedelics
are a good way of doing this largely because they actually increase neuroplasticity. We talked
about neurogenesis, developing new neurons, but developing new synapses and cleaving old
synapses might be even more meaningful, which is what in the brain interconnects with what.
Old synapses that are no longer relevant get cleaved mostly during deep sleep by microglia
and then new synapses get developed. It's called synaptogenesis through the learning process,
so that zing up example as you go from can't find it at all to find it, that's the process of
synaptic formation. Then healthy synapses that are doing something effective get
re-supported through something called the long-term potentiation process that says,
yes, this is still a good synapse and we want it to keep operating automatically,
so let's keep strengthening it. One of the things many psychedelics do from a neurophysiologic
point of view is increase neuroplasticity. That's one of our best understandings of one of the things
that's happening, and that would mean increased ability to actually change neural structural
associations with whatever you do next. If that's the case, it would make a lot of sense why when
someone has a bad trip, it can be so lastingly hard for them, and when someone has a really powerful
trip, it can be so permanently changing for them is because what was happening during that time
was having more net impact on their brain than is usually capable of happening per unit time.
Right, right. Interesting.
Psychedelics can do that. Breathwork, like the holotropic breathwork, can create a state of
increased susceptibility. You can use strobe lights to try and drive specific brainwave patterns.
Sleep deprivation creates increased susceptibility, which is a technique that militaries use,
and even some conferences use. I would say in general, different forms of psychotherapy are
trying to change our information processing, change our meaning making, our semantics, our
emotion. When you start to work on the brain side and the psyche side together, you can get
synergistically compounding effects. So think about this. This is a fun example. If you do
psychedelics and then you are in a set or setting that is not appropriate and you end up just freaking
out and then you kind of wire that you're unsafe in a dangerous universe, that's lame, right?
Which is why set and setting and super lame can matter, which is the difference between just
tripping and actually doing psychedelic assisted psychotherapy or personal development.
But if you take psychedelics and so now imagery is very intense, well, you can do better guided
imagery work. And you can be in some image, so you're going to go back and do regression work,
think about childhood, but when you're visualizing it, you can actually visualize in its sensorial
and real. So it actually rewires more powerfully, plasticity is increased. And you can even do a
micro dose, right? A micro dose where you're still pretty much sober, but plasticity has increased,
which is why people use micro dosing when they're going to go learn new athletic capabilities or
language or whatever for just rate of learning is a plasticity. Say you micro dose, then you do
some psychotherapy or EEG neurofeedback or anything that's going to be changing
neural patterns. And then afterwards, you do things that chemically increase long-term
potentiation and help lock in those new patterns so that they actually
stay. That would be like coal energics. And there's a handful of things that support the
long-term potentiation process, but we can just say mostly coal energics for now.
That sequence of things is going to have synergistic value beyond what any of those things have on
their own, right? Increase plasticity to change old patterns, put in input to change old patterns
to new patterns, put in chemical inputs and then lock in those new healthy adaptive patterns.
So this is just starting to scratch on what interesting neural hacking can look like.
That is fascinating. I mean, this kind of multi-tiered approach to psychedelic therapy as
opposed to tripping, like you said. I wonder how this relates to the shamanic and
initiatory practices of the past where it was a kind of a multi-tiered approach to this profound
consciousness change that they were trying to achieve, where on one hand, you have a shaman
that is guiding you. Then on the other hand, you have the herb, the psychoactive ingredient that
you're taking. And then on the other hand, you have some sort of stress testing. So you have
sleep deprivation or physical exertion or facing dangerous environments. And then
after the person goes through this, you have the integration practices where everybody hugs.
And the person comes back to the tribe and you kind of have this supportive environment
that probably releases some brain chemicals for integrating this experience and retaining it.
I wonder how we can take this sort of multi-tier approach and apply it to modern life with better
technology. It's the same as you were mentioning that it sounded like yoga had some of the similar
properties to what I was saying with the Zing Up Neuroscience. For 250,000 years,
give or take the same brains as we have now. So there have been smart people around for a long
time. And as they were paying attention to what worked and didn't work and then being able to
pass that information down over a long period of time, they figured out stuff that worked.
And so there's certainly some stuff in the ancient traditions where we've figured out
much better stuff. And there's some stuff where their methods are still meaningful in ways where
there's nothing in modern life like them. And so obviously the integration of understanding
our evolutionary biology and just our biology of the ancient past, understanding what the ancient
wisdom culture has figured out that was meaningful and then being able to not override that but
add to, enhance that with what we know and are growing to know from all of the disciplines of
science and advancing technology and exponential technology is a right integrative approach.
So in your opinion, which aspects of this kind of shamanic initiation practices do we have today
that we can enhance with modern technology? And what are the aspects that we have seemingly lost
that should be brought back or kept as in the same way that they were doing it before?
All right, well, let's start with things that some wisdom cultures, indigenous cultures had,
and I don't want to over-romanticize that their versions of these were perfect or that all cultures
had them. There was obviously a whole mix of things, but there's some very meaningful stuff
that we have lost that needs to be reincorporated in some way. Rights of passage is an example.
So the right of passage, there were many different rights of passage that happened, you know, in
childhood when a child became self-sufficient in some ways that could be a right of passage to
recognize it. Sometimes they got a different name at that point, right of passage of
puberty and acknowledging what that meant. Our children growing up through puberty are experiencing
their interest change, their body change, there's so many things, and we just don't do anything to
acknowledge it. And what we do do to acknowledge it usually just makes it feel worse, right? We show
them videos of gonorrhea and call it sex ed. You know, and all the rights of passage,
the rights of passage in menopause, I have a friend that is one of the top evolutionary
biologists, and he was saying that in his assessment, one of the interesting ways to assess
the wisdom of a culture is the role of postmenopausal women in the leadership of that culture.
And that women after menopause who can't give birth, who can't make more babies, but who are
still wired towards, you know, so have evolutionary wiring towards mothering, have a unique capacity
that neither premenopausal women or men have, which is to be able to hold a mother energy
towards the whole. That when you have young kids, it can still be easy to be a little self-centered
to you and your kids, but when you don't have young kids anymore, and yet you still have a
mothering energy to be able to hold the whole, whether it's the whole tribe or expansively,
the whole biosphere, et cetera, you know, so like that's a right of passage that we mostly just
think of as a bummer that, you know, she needs Botox now rather than any meaningful kind of thing.
So how we just understand life and the phases of life and the roles rights of passage, pretty much
all of the wisdom cultures did something better than we do. And I don't mean that there was nothing
barbaric, but there were some really beautiful things too. That's one example. Another key
example was they understood that there was a difference between comfort and happiness.
And they understood that happiness oftentimes required beings that were resilient to discomfort.
And here's my narrative for this. After the Scientific Revolution, science was just awesome
for so many things, but one of the challenges became, so what's real is what's measurable,
and if something isn't measurable, we can't do anything really with it. And comfort was an
easier to measure thing than happiness was, right? We could kind of objectively measure
how comfortable mattresses were and how good the shock systems and cars were and transport,
be able to measure evolution in those ways. But measuring individual human happiness is a much
trickier thing to do. And so you can see how much we, like people have physical comforts now,
even just average people that kings didn't have in the past. And yet we have rampant mental illness
that we also didn't have in the past. And one of the interesting things that you know
most wisdom cultures is that they had practices that intentionally induced meaningful discomfort
to teach people to be resilient emotionally to discomfort. So when you think about what a
sweat lodge was, or what a vision quest was, or even what Hatha yoga is, like yoga, I don't want
to say this is all yoga is, but if you just think about yoga through the lens of get in a really
awkward pose, and then find your breath and find peace, and then get in another really awkward
pose and find your breath and find peace and get bent out of shape and all these different ways
and realize that wherever you are, you can find your breath and find equanimity, find peace.
You're actually semantically imprinting that no matter what kind of position you're put into,
you can find your breath and find peace in any of them. That's an amazing insight.
As people learn that their inner state doesn't have to be affected by the environment as much,
that leads to more resilient, happy people. As you have people that are only focused on making
their environment as comfortable as possible, you can get people who are profoundly unresilient,
right? Psychologically. So this is another thing that I would say wisdom cultures had that we have
largely lost is the distinction between comfort and happiness and the importance of
optimizing for happiness so that we don't have to actually have a lot of real suffering. You
have to actually just induce non-damaging discomfort. That's another example that is just
really not part of our wisdom. There are so many things. If you think about the fact that they were
all 150-person tribes, right? Dunbar number of tribes, from an attachment theory point of view,
you had secure attachment to 150 people. Those people weren't leaving no matter what.
And so you didn't grow up and we're all alone in the world and try to find all of your secure
attachment in one person called a romantic partner and then completely freak the fuck out if they
don't want to be with you because you actually had really secure attachment across a lot of people.
And so, again, modern life, nuclear, family homes, private balance sheets, people are very lonely
and very disconnected and very overwhelmed in trying to meet their social and connection
and attachment needs in way too few of places. So there, I mean, we could go, we could do a whole
show on what aspects of indigenous wisdom need reincorporated in the modern world without regressing,
right? We're not talking about giving up technology. We are talking about reincorporating
some things that were lost in the transition to a new kind of world structure that is different
and better than either modern or pre-modern. Right. And so on the other side of the spectrum,
what are the things that the ancient cultures figured out that we can actually do better or
enhance with currently available technology? So many things. So for instance, let's take
Ayurvedic medicine or Chinese medicine or any ancient system of medicine.
They were developed in a time, in a place with some people, right? And so even if they were
amazing at that time, they were going to apply to the genetics of those people and the kinds of
things in their environment and the health issues they faced. So for instance,
I happen to have a celiac, right? Genetic predisposition to severe gluten intolerance.
I had some pretty severe gut issues. I didn't know what it was about and I was about 18.
I went to see some of the top Ayurvedic doctors in the world and they had helped a lot of people
I knew. They saved my mom's life when medical doctors had diagnosed your terminal. They had
done great things, but they diagnosed me with a vata disorder, which was the worldview that
they see through. And so one of the things that I needed were heavy foods and they gave me as an
example, chapattis, flatbreads with a lot of oil. Well, the flatbreads were made of wheat and they
would have killed me if I was eating lots of them. But there was no such thing as Indians with
gluten intolerance. It was a genetic thing that was outside of that whole worldview, right?
And simultaneously, if we start looking at heavy metal exposure or exposure to plastics or PCBs
or styrenes or phthalates or pesticides, all the kinds of toxic exposure we have that can affect
cancer, neurodegenerative, endocrine issues, the ancient systems aren't going to know what to
do with those things because they weren't part of their environment. So I would say,
you know, knowing what the genome is is kind of a big deal. Having clinical chemistry, being able
to do imaging, like these are really big deals. There's, we don't die from infectious disease
for the most part, acute infectious disease anymore, because just hygiene and antibiotics and like that
actually serve a role in medicine. Pain killers, you know, like you, it's important that people
can endure pain, discomfort sometimes to have emotional resilience, but pain killers for dentistry
are pretty awesome, you know, compared to not. Simultaneously, we can say like following Western
prices stuff that the indigenous people didn't need as much dentistry before they got Western diet,
that's also true. But there are heaps of places where we have, let's even take EEG and neurofeedback.
There are many Buddhist monks who've went and worked with neurofeedback and found two things.
One, they found that students could get trained to go into certain states of experience much faster
with the neurofeedback than they could with just traditional Buddhist practice. And they even found
that some of the very advanced Buddhist meditators got insights about their meditation that they
hadn't had in decades previously. So, I mean, I don't think almost any of us would say, all right,
let's trade and go live in indigenous culture, even though there's so many upsides, right? Because
there's also so many upsides to modern technological life. But to be able to advance and integrate
both is a great thing. Along the lines of rights of passage that you brought up earlier, I think some
of the basic ones like the rights of passage to become an adult, becoming a teenager are pretty
obvious. But what would you say that are in the context of our modern technology and world would
be a good idea to create as a new rite of passage? For example, like the day you're allowed to use
your cell phone or something, being a cultural thing to be using social media in a responsible
and effective way that you're not addicted to notifications and that sort of thing?
I would say it is a great inquiry for us to think about. The rights of passage did have a lot to
do with both making sure someone was prepared for a certain kind of responsibility and predisposing
them to handle it well. And so, as we have the technological capacity to be more affected by
our tech and to affect more in the world through our tech, we both need to prepare,
we both need to build the tech better itself. So Tristan Harris and others are talking a lot about
how we're building tech that is actually really mostly bad for humans, that is optimizing blue
screen clickbait dopamine addiction for people with really shitty attention spans and distraction
issues. And we actually need to build the tech differently itself because, again, this is a gaming
mechanics thing. If I'm focused on how do I get the most number of clicks and the most time on
site, that's not going to make the happiest people. And the happiest people are going to come do their
shit and then probably leave and do different kinds of behavior that are not focused on
driving clicking on ads. So if I learn how to hijack their dopamine opioid response,
this is a bad thing. So part of it is that we actually just have to develop the technology
differently. And again, that gets back into the theory of incentives, right? So just like with
the pharmaceuticals, if the incentives of the tech developers are not exactly aligned with the
well-being of the people that the tech is being developed for, we're going to get a deep mismatch,
right? So anywhere that incentive and well-being is misaligned, that externality gap is a problem.
And with exponential tech capacity, that externality gap becomes a catastrophic problem.
But I think also preparing people to handle the responsibility of tech better is a meaningful
part of it. And so I would be very curious to see what the rights of passage in the future might
look like. This is why blockchain has become such an interesting thing for us, because it's a
different way of looking at building these technologies while removing the incentives
to optimize for a single entity, for example, clickbait, time on site, that sort of thing.
So I picture using the blockchain to develop an operating system for a phone
that would be open source and people could develop something like maybe making ad block and that
sort of thing native to the phone. And then building in a whole operating system around
this principle of we're going to make it better for the human. And then I also picture having
sort of the rights of passage and rituals built into that operating system too.
Right. So now let's expand this one step and I'll say the big picture of how I think about
neural hacking is everything in your environment is affecting you, right? This concept of ontological
design that we build environments and they in turn affect us. That's the fascinating thing is that
natural selection is creatures that are being selected for based on their adaptiveness to an
environment. But we're the first creature that radically changes its environment, even one
generation to the next. But then we're making an environment that is in turn affecting us back.
And since we can't genetically change that fast, we are, you know,
neuro structurally changing, epigenetically changing. And so when you think about everything,
right, you think about the color and the contrast on your phone, you think about the fact that it's
two dimensional rather than three dimensional, you think about just how much time we spend looking
at a fixed focal distance, you know, on our laptop or whatever, and that that's a big part of why we
lose our eyesight because our eyes are spending too much time looking at a fixed focal distance
rather than than having a continuously changing focal distance part of our evolutionary environment.
But you move from that to even thinking about, okay, so we're in a house
where the paint is filled full of volatile organic compounds and the carpet is made out of
shit with volatile organic compounds, aldehydes and etc. that are either endocrine disruptors,
carcinogens or neurotoxins. And our indoor air quality is worse than freeway air quality.
We need to completely change the building materials we use, right? And then you think, well,
so those indigenous people spent very little time indoors. So one of the effects was that
they didn't have a ceiling above their head most of the time, right? And so they looked up at the
sky a lot. If you're in an eight foot ceiling, you just don't look up a lot. The actual neurologic
effect of your eyes going up and your head going up stimulates your brain in different ways that
are involved in the creative process and all and etc. So everything from like the physical
structure of our buildings to the structure of our digital spaces to colors to chemistry,
you know, of houses of the entire built world, we're building it for a very small number of
metrics, right? Like how many cubic feet can we enclose how cheaply, etc. But when we start
thinking about that it's all affecting the humans inside and we say, well, how would I build a house
where my primary metric was optimizing the enlightenment and well-being of the human
that was inside along with the well-being of the environment? Oh, I love this.
I wish you could see UV's face while you're talking right now. It's just fireworks.
But now that's the question about how do we rebuild the entire human built world
to optimize for the thriving of all life, right? To optimize for the psychology and the physiology
of all the humans and the non-human life and have a built world that reflects the design
integrity of the natural world. You know, when you look at in nature, a hand is optimizing for a
million functions at a time. It's not optimizing for a few, right? And it's also
optimizing for its own adaptive capacity to do so many things. If we start to understand what
the difference between complex and complicated systems and learn how to actually grow complex
systems, right? How to do complex system design where we're designing across a lot more parameters.
I actually think that's a fair way to think about what humanity's task today is. It's to
rebuild all of civilization from scratch, meaning our monetary incentives, our social
status systems, our houses, our digital environment, the physical infrastructure, all of it. To rebuild
it all from scratch aligned with thinking about all of its effects, internalizing all the
externalities. Think about all of its effects and say, what's going to produce the most thriving of
the human and non-human life that connects with this system across all metrics of thriving.
That's our task. Wow. Mind blown. Yeah. So we might be reaching the end of our time here,
but this brings up another really interesting point of focus for maybe a future episode,
is talking about what you guys are doing with Neurohacker Collective and sort of the big
picture systems approach you're taking. The mothership. Yeah. Well, I think we have flagged
a few follow-up conversations on just this conversation already. We've got the hard problem
of consciousness and existentialism, maybe some deeper stuff about what is good and indigenous
wisdom. I think we talked about briefly before the show what does transhumanism look like in
this framework? What is a kind of transhumanism that is optimizing for thriving across all metrics
and that understands the complex, complicated distinction and maybe how we're thinking about
all those things and what we're doing at Neurohacker. So it sounds like we have some conversations
ahead. Definitely. Fantastic. Cool. Well, let's wrap up there. Then Daniel is really good to have
you on the show. Again, mind's blown. I think we're going to be talking about this for weeks.
And I offer one more thought about what you all are doing in your show. Sure. We have so many more
apocalyptic and dystopian visions for our future than we do possibly viable pro-topic ones.
So when you guys are thinking about and sharing in the show what are positive visions of a future,
if we share positive visions of a future that aren't actually tenable, they
aren't actually anti-fragile in the presence of exponential tech, or they
presuppose things that involve going backwards in ways that would never be selected for,
those are useless. But to have more humans visioning, what is a viable, thriving civilization
aligned with our evolving capacities? What could it look like? I think that's actually one of the
most critical things that has to be happening more for humanity to make it and for those positive
visions to come about. Completely agree. There's two key tenets that we have discussed so much in
the past, which is behind our thinking about future thinkers, which is you don't create a better
future by visualizing the worst case scenario all the time and not thinking of the actual thing that
you want. Yes. And that works across the board with business, with anything that we've had experience
creating our lifestyles. You can look at our lifestyles and the fact that we've traveled for
five years and basically done anything on a whim that we've desired to do because that's the thing
we go after. We visualize what would be great, what would improve our lives, then we go after
that thing. And then the second thing is not being uncomfortable with discomfort and negative
possibilities of the future as well. And actually spending the time to incorporate anti-fragility,
like you said, and recovering from negative situations into your plan for the future.
You made that point earlier in the show and I think that is absolutely huge and we keep
harping on this lately that you have to, in order to be resilient, you have to actually be comfortable
with being uncomfortable. Yes, definitely. Well, I'm delighted to see the direction that the show
keeps taking. I'm delighted to be on. I look forward to the next time too. Cool. Thanks for
joining us again. This is always fun. Thanks, y'all. So to get the show notes with the links,
mentions, books, et cetera, go to futurethinkers.org slash 43. And to listen to the first half of
this interview, you can go to futurethinkers.org slash 42. If you haven't heard our first interview
with Daniel about the global phase shift, then go to futurethinkers.org slash 36. And if you're
interested in trying qualia, the smart truck stack that Daniel's company has developed,
go to futurethinkers.org slash brain hack. All right, we'll see you in the next episode. Bye.
Thanks for listening to the Future Thinkers podcast. To get notified of new podcasts and videos,
go to futurethinkers.org and subscribe to our mailing list. You can also find us on iTunes,
Stitcher and YouTube. If you like what we do and you want to help us make more podcasts and videos,
give us a like or a review, share it with your friends and consider becoming a patron. Go to
patreon.com slash futurethinkers. If you're looking to get serious about meditation,
check out the meditation app that we've created with Vinay Gupta called the Cutting Machinery.
Go to cuttingmachinery.org slash app. Last but not least, if you want to get
access to more content, hidden episodes, or if you just want to chat with us and previous guests,
then check out our community at community.futurethinkers.org.
