OK, so welcome again, everyone.
So I'm very happy to introduce today
to Italian Philosophers of Science, friend of mine, too.
Claudio was one of my supervisors.
So today, they're going to speak about coherentism,
in particular, about the quantum case.
So they have a couple of papers about that.
I'm sure they're going to give references.
So as far as I understand, this is an ongoing project.
So they did something very nice.
Namely, they on purpose decided to develop a new part
of this project for this seminar.
So I'm very happy about this.
Thank you, guys.
So yeah, whenever you want, you can go.
Hey, thank you very much.
So let me let us start by thanking you, Christian,
for setting this up.
It's great to be here.
And yes, it's great to be here and try
to share some results and some ongoing work
that we've been actually working on for quite a while now.
So we are really anxious to actually have feedback
from you guys.
So basically, the idea is that, yes, OK,
we will first give you a general outline of what we mean
by coherentism at a very general metaphysical level.
So I will first introduce very quickly
the issue of fundamentality and foundationalism
and its alternatives.
So coherentism is, first of all, an alternative
to the traditional metaphysical view of reality,
according to which we have a sort of hierarchical structure
with an ultimate basis.
Something ungrounded that does all the work of grounding
on the rest.
So this is exactly what we want to question, at least.
So given this very general picture,
then we will zoom into quantum mechanics
and, in particular, quantum entanglement.
And we will try to convince you that coherentism is perfect
for providing a nice ontological interpretation
of quantum entanglement system and, maybe, quantum mechanics
in general.
In doing so, we will mention structuralism and monism,
which are two very popular alternatives to coherentism.
Actually, they are the most popular views of entanglement
because coherentism is not really on the table yet.
But again, we want to convince you
that this is a novel approach that is worth taking seriously.
And it's actually, we think, preferable
with respect to structuralism and monism for many reasons.
So we will try to mention some of these reasons.
And time permitting, Cloudia, will also
say something more about possible ramifications,
applications, and prospects for the research.
OK, so this is the plan.
Starting from the very general metaphysical issue,
some terminology first.
So metaphysical structure.
By metaphysical structure, we simply
mean the fundamental architecture of reality,
the way in which things in their generality
are organized, structured, at a very general level.
One important thing is that when we say fundamental architecture,
we don't mean that there has to be something fundamental.
So these two are two separate notions.
The fundamental ways in which the universe is
may not include fundamental items.
So this is our basic starting point.
Now, on the other hand, there is this traditional view
in metaphysics, which is foundationalism, which
is exactly the view according to which there must
be a source of being.
There must be a starting point, something
ungrounded that is the foundation for everything else.
So this is our polemical focus, in a way.
Just to give you a very broad picture,
if you don't already know this, which you probably do,
if you want to be a foundationalist,
you can be a foundationalist of either of two sorts.
You can get a pluralist, which basically means
that you believe there are many, at least two,
fundamental items.
And of course, the paradigmatic version of pluralism
is atomism.
So in this case, the foundationalist
believes that there are many meteorological symbols.
But foundationalism is not the same as atomism.
So this is just one variety.
On the other hand, you could be a monist and believe
that there is only one fundamental entity,
and this entity is the universe.
So this constant U here stands for the universe as a whole.
And a monist might be a sort of Parminidian monist
and believe that really, there is only one thing,
the cosmos as a whole.
And this is known as existence monism.
Nowadays, most people are actually priority monists.
So they believe that the whole is prior,
but they actually also believe that there are parts.
So this is an important difference,
because at some point, Claudia will talk about monism
with respect to quantum systems.
And actually, we're going to talk about priority monists.
But this is just to set the stage.
OK, we are not going to discuss foundationalism
in any detail.
So our main objective today is to convince you
that there are alternatives which are really important.
We need to take them seriously.
So first step, which are these alternatives?
Let me show you visually what we are working with.
So let's talk about grounding for a moment.
I'm just using this term because it's very popular.
And you probably know what it means, more or less.
But let me also point out that we don't really
need to work with a special notion of grounding.
We don't really need grounding at all.
We are just using it as a shortcut.
So whatever relation or relations
you take to actually structure reality
at the most fundamental level, then let's call it
grounding for simplicity.
Actually, later on, we're going to talk about ontological
dependence and priority.
So for present purposes, just take grounding
and ontological priority as synonyms.
So many times, we would say something
like, the fact that entity x exists,
grounds the fact that entity y has such and such properties.
Simply take these as more or less the same as saying,
entity y depends on entity x for having
such and such properties.
Nothing really hinges on this particular choice.
So when we try to study the structure of reality,
we basically start with a general request for a ground.
So whatever you have in front of you,
maybe a bottle, a chair, or a tree, quantum entangled system,
what you want to know is, how is it
that I have this thing in front of me?
So you start with a request for a ground, OK?
And you have two options.
Either grounding relations build up
a hierarchy, a sort of pyramid in the vertical direction.
You move from the less fundamental to the more fundamental.
In that case, you may additionally believe
that there is something really basic.
And in this case, you have the first option here,
which is foundationalism, which I already introduced.
But you may also believe that grounding relations
go in a vertical direction, but there is no endpoint.
So you keep on finding more and more levels.
And in this case, you would be an infinitist.
I find this very interesting, but we have no time
to discuss this today.
So let us move to the third option, which is actually
very different, because you deny that grounding relations
have to go from the less to the more fundamental.
Instead, you pose it sort of horizontal, same level
grounding relations.
So you have many entities, and they
are symmetrically related, one to the other.
They support each other.
If you are familiar with the debate about justification
in epistemology, this is very similar to epistemological
coherentism.
If you are a coherentist about justification,
then you believe that there is a belief set,
and all the beliefs support each other.
So there is no set of beliefs which
is more fundamental than the others.
You have these interconnections, OK?
So this is exactly the view that we
want to develop more in the metaphysical case.
So let me say something more detailed about this.
What does it look like if you try to see more closely?
Just to be a little bit more specific.
So traditionally, metaphysical structure
is understood in terms of strict partial orders
with fundamental basis.
So this is mathematical terminology
to say basically the same thing that I already said.
You believe that you have these grounding relations,
these dependence relations, and they build up a structure.
And this structure has very general form of features.
If you're a foundationalist, you believe
that these features are the following.
Whatever relations you are using,
it has to be irreflexive.
It will be asymmetric, and it is transitive.
And on top of this, it is well-funded,
because you have this ultimate ground.
So these four assumptions are enough
to characterize foundationalism, OK?
Now, if you are an infinities, you will drop the fourth, OK?
Now, coherentism does a different thing.
First of all, you will deny well-fundedness,
because you have these horizontal connections,
so there is nothing more fundamental than anything else.
But on top of this, we also want to question
assumption number two.
We are assuming that it is the case,
or it can be the case, that grounding relations are
symmetric.
At least some instances of grounding are symmetric.
And now a potential problem arises,
because you may know that asymmetry
follows from irreflexivity and transitivity.
So given that we want to deny asymmetry by modus tollens,
we have to give up either irreflexivity or transitivity
or both.
Now, transitivity seems very intuitive, right?
Because if A grounds B and B grounds C,
it seems impossible to deny that, in some sense, A grounds C.
We may want to discuss this in the Q&A,
but we are taking this for granted.
So Claudia and I believe that what we have to do
is not an option.
We have to accept reflexivity.
And now you may already see what the objection,
the obvious objection, is.
The objection is basically that if you
have at the basic fundamental level of reality,
a reflexive relation, then you end up
with empty explanations, right?
Because you had something like this.
Whatever A is, it could be a fact, an entity, a property.
You end up saying, basically, A grounds A. A depends on A.
The fact that A is such and such is explained by the fact
that A is such and such.
So this is probably the reason why
coherentism is so ignored in the literature, to say the least.
It's not even considered, actually.
But Claudia and I also believe that this objection is
as strong as misguided, because it's
on a very intuitive level.
It is very powerful, right?
Because reflexivity is bad in explanation.
But let us try to convince you that it is not necessarily
so bad.
So first of all, circularity might
be vicious if you have the same thing doing, acting
as the explanance, and also as the explanandum.
As in the previous case, A explains A. A grounds A.
But it could also be a good, virtuous circularity.
For example, if you have a sort of symmetric relation
in the explanance, then the circularity
could be genuinely explanatory.
And indeed, what we're going to say later
is something like this, the symmetric dependence
between A and B, where A and B are placeholders.
It would be particles or physical systems, whatever.
This symmetric dependence accounts for something else.
So we will have to fill the dots, and this will come later.
But basically, the first reply is that the circularity is not
vicious if we distinguish between the connection
between the explanance and the explanandum
and what goes on in the explanance.
Now, a second related reply is more general.
It is not obvious, at least not to us,
that reflexive relations cannot be the basis
for genuine explanations.
It is not always the case that whatever you have
reflexivity in explanatory relations,
then you have bad explanations.
So to convince you of this, let me go back once again
to the debate about justification in epistemology.
OK, one of the options in epistemology
is, as I mentioned, to be a coherentist.
So you believe that the different beliefs
that you have in your mind, they support each other.
Now, what is important for our present purposes
is to distinguish between two ways
of being a coherentist about beliefs, first of all,
then then parts of physical reality.
OK, on the one hand, you might be, for some weird reason,
a naive coherentist.
So probably the early formulations
of coherentism about justification, they look like this.
You have any belief set, suppose a very simple belief
set with three beliefs, A, B, and C. And the coherentist
originally said, well, look, you can start anywhere.
A justifies B. B justifies C. C justifies A.
And that's it.
Everything has an explanation.
But this is actually bad, because if you look at it,
you end up having to say that A fully justifies A.
So all the work of justifying A is done by A itself.
And we agree that this is bad.
So this is the sort of paradigmatic vicious circularity
that we want to avoid.
OK, lucky enough, in the epistemology literature,
there are some suggestions.
Most coherentists nowadays are sophisticated coherents.
So they don't actually buy into this picture here.
They actually say something different.
And the story goes something like this.
You have a bunch of beliefs.
It could be the beliefs of the subject,
or possibly entertain beliefs.
And they do something together.
They determine a specific belief structure.
So there is something else beyond the beliefs.
A belief structure, which is simply
the complex of all these beliefs taken together.
Then this complex may or may not have some properties.
It may be coherent.
It may be useful for the subject.
It may be credible for the community, whatever.
The idea is that if S, the belief structure,
has these properties, then S, in turn,
lends support to the individual beliefs.
Only at that point, the beliefs become justified.
OK?
Then you may think, how is this different?
It is very different because it seems to us
that in this case, what is reflexive
is only partial justification.
It is only partial because it is impossible for each belief
to justify itself.
It has to do something together with other beliefs
and together with some features of the structure as a whole.
OK?
And our basic claim is that reflexivity
of partial justification is not bad.
And of course, now you can imagine how it goes.
In a metaphysical case, we want to make a very similar claim.
And the claim is, take a bunch of physical entity.
Entity, here, is an umbrella term,
whatever you want to discuss.
Quantum systems and trees, chairs, whatever.
The idea is that the joint existence of these entities
determines the existence of a specific whole or plurality,
S, where S is not identical to just a set of the entities.
It is a connected, it is a structured plurality.
As before, this plurality may or may not
have some properties.
If it does, then the nature of S constrains and shapes
the features of each particular entity.
So again, the idea is that each one of the initial entities
partially depends on or is partially grounded in itself
and all the other.
But only partial dependence is reflexive.
Full dependence is not.
Same with grounding.
Partial grounding is reflexive, and this is good,
but it is not bad.
Full grounding is not reflexive, which would be bad.
So this is basically our answer to the circularity
objection.
In some cases, you can formulate coherentism
in such a way that the circularity is not actually vicious.
Let me add one important thing.
As you can see, we say whole or plurality here.
This is not just a terminological issue.
It is very important to stress that the coherency
is not committed to the existence of an additional entity.
Say the neurological sum of the initial entities.
No, we don't have to say that.
We only need to say that the starting entity,
they do something together.
They are structured together in some way.
And it seems to us that this does not
imply that there is an additional entity.
Why is this important?
Because it makes a whole difference
between coherentism and monism.
Because if we had to say that the whole is prior to the parts,
because it determines the properties of the part,
then this would be foundational.
So make sure you get this.
If you have questions, please ask.
This is very important.
So summing up, metaphysical coherentism
is the view according to which it is the case.
Or at least it is possible that for some entities,
each one of them partially depends on
or is partially grounded in itself and all the others.
By doing this, they constitute, let's call it,
a connected plurality S. And this determines them
in one or more of the following respects.
This is another important point.
We are not just saying A grounds B and B grounds A.
We want to go fine-grained enough
to give you interesting explanations.
And we think ontological dependence can do this.
We need to specify in which respects
A depends on B and B depends on A.
And we think once you do that, you
realize that there are many different very interesting
applications, even outside physics.
And Claudia will talk about this.
So which are these respects?
So far, we could think of three main respects, existence.
As a model, you can think of quarks at low-energy regimes.
They only exist in triplets.
Even if it's not a metaphysical necessity,
we can talk about this.
Second respect, identity.
Think about mathematical structuralism.
If you are a structuralist, you believe
that the identity of numbers is fully determined
by all the other numbers.
Structured in some way.
And there is a third respect, which
is the most important for us, because we think
this is what happens in the entanglement case.
Two things, or more things, several things,
may depend on each other for their qualitative profile,
their physical properties.
And again, you can see there is no necessary visual
circularity, because you can have
two different existences, they exist.
And by interacting in some way, they
affect each other's qualities.
We don't see any viciousness in this.
OK, just one last thing before I leave it to Claudia.
One potential objection could be, look, even assuming
that coherentism works, what about the case,
the limited case in which the universe is
only has one thing?
Surely, in that case, you cannot really distinguish
between partial and full dependence.
So in that case, you have very bad circularity.
And we think this is not really an issue,
but it allows us to introduce a potentially useful notion,
which is the idea of quasi-reflexivity.
A relation is quasi-reflexive if it
holds reflexively only provided that it also holds non-reflexively.
And we think this is exactly what happens.
So coherentism does not apply in the limiting case
in which you only have one object.
It is genuinely a view about pluralities.
So if you want, we can discuss this notion later.
But basically, the idea is that you have something like this.
Entity X partially depends on itself, only if X also
partially depends on some other Y, which is not
numerically identical to X.
OK, so enough for the general characterization of the view.
I try to convince you that the circularity objection is not
bad, and there are technical, technical,
and there are technical ways of getting out
of this circularity objection, including this idea of quasi-reflexivity.
So that's it for me.
And, Claudio, do you want to use your PPT or shall I keep it?
I mean, it depends.
Maybe if I can share it, it's going to be easier for me, but.
You try to share yours.
Yeah, OK.
I mean, can I do this, Chris?
Yes.
Can I try?
OK, let me see.
Shad, do you see mine now?
Yeah.
OK, play from current slide.
Let's see.
OK, good.
So OK, good.
So Mattel got us through, I mean, the general part, right?
And hopefully, you convinced that it's not, I mean,
cohesionism is not obviously false.
And so now what we're going to do is we're going to focus,
actually, on particular cases and quantum mechanics
in particular.
And then I'm going to give you some consequences, which
is entirely new work.
That's why we wanted to actually have new work here.
And we know because there are people that work in these fields.
And we'll see what we get.
OK, good.
So summing up was minimal coherent.
We will take minimal coherentism to be the view
that there are interesting cases of symmetric dependence.
And wait, OK.
So and as Mattel just said, I mean,
these could go against traditional wisdom
that these dependence in uses a well-founded three-spartial
order, which is metaphysical foundationalism.
And also, it's going to be important later on
against another view, a traditional view,
which is absolute fundamentality, is independence.
And this is going to be crucial when we go back now.
Unfortunately, we have to signal that this traditional wisdom
is really widespread throughout Western thought.
And unfortunately, especially for me,
this is encapsulated here by one of my most favorite person
in the entire world, which is Dante himself.
So Dante here, this is the 27th, 28th canto of heaven.
This is where Beatrice explains the structure of reality
to Dante.
And as you can see, this is just one amazing canto in which
actually Beatrice exactly says that all creation
depends on one body.
This is traditional foundationalism at its best,
I would say.
But I mean, to rescue Dante a little bit,
I'd say that this is actually philosophically very deep.
So if you know this, Beatrice doesn't
say that God created the universe.
She's really saying that the universe depends on God,
which is, I think, it's a very profound insight by Dante.
Now, we're going to challenge this.
But still, this is just because I have a soft spot for Dante.
More parties coming later on, so please stay tuned.
OK, good.
So as Mateo noticed, we think that symmetric relations
of dependence can do a lot of work.
Now, let's see some examples to actually convince you
that it shouldn't be a bias.
There shouldn't be a bias, a foundationalist bias,
towards a well-founded history of partial law
that's when it comes to the structure of reality.
So here are some examples in metaphysics.
So Bert Partifler has improbable instances,
imminent universal essentialism, trope theories,
phenomenal reality, and ultimate reality
according to Buddhist thought.
They all have been modeled using symmetric notions
of dependence.
So in philosophy of mathematics, there's
a famous position, which is close to mathematical,
to structuralism, which is linear,
or the linear mathematical structuralism.
And this is Johanna Wolff actually discussing
physical structuralism, the view that quantum, I mean,
then systems, physical objects depend on structures.
And in the paper, Mateo and I actually
distinguished that from actually clientism, which
it seems to us that linear is actually
invoking some kind of coherentism here, not
structuralism, because it says that every object depend
on every other object, which is exactly what
we take to be the signature, let's say, of coherentism.
And in philosophy of physics, I don't
know whether Vansan is here, because I see only four of you.
So Vansan and Michael Esfeld has used symmetric notions
of dependence to provide what they call
modern structuralism.
This is the view according to which objects and relations
mutually depend on each other.
And as Mateo just suggested, there's
now an interesting to actually account for quad confinement
in terms of symmetric notions of dependence.
This would be, I mean, anyone that
can provide some physical details here,
I think would be a great service, because as of now,
there is just basically the thought
that the three quarks are symmetrically
dependent on each other.
And quad confinement should be understood in those terms,
but nothing more than this.
I mean, just zooming in, what about quantum cases?
So quantum cases, we're going to go a little bit focus
on entanglement, because this is what we already did.
But here are some new things that knowing
that there will be some people in the audience we actually
put forward for discussion.
So the first one is, other possible cases
is bandone ontologies for quantum mechanics,
for some interpretations of quantum mechanics
have been explored as of lately.
So the best instances of this, as far as I know,
are relational quantum mechanics and the model
Hamiltonian interpretations, especially by Olinco Lombardi
and Nuta da Costa and Andrew Alfredi
for relational quantum mechanics.
Here's the thought is that quantum systems
are just bundles of properties that are represented
mathematically by particular kinds of operators.
And one traditional objection against the view
is that you need to have a principled reason of why,
for example, you don't see bundles that have only,
let's say, mass property or spin property or something like this.
This is especially true in the case
of model Hamiltonian interpretations,
because the core view is that elemental systems
are bundles of properties that commute with a given
Hamiltonian.
Now, symmetric relations of dependence
will get you out of the problem pretty quickly,
because you will just say that those particular properties
are symmetrically ontologically dependent.
And therefore, whenever you have one,
you're going to have all of them.
So that's why you will never see a bundle which
is not a saturated problem.
So this will get you out of a very powerful objection
against these ontologies, which has been explored
lately for these particular interpretations.
So are there possible cases?
So here, here's Michael Esfield talking
about Bohmian mechanics.
So here's what he says.
I'm going to read it, because it's easier for me.
Let me put you here.
How do you do that?
Let's do this.
OK, so in quantum Bohmian mechanics,
the structure consists of a network of relations
that relates the position of strictly speaking
all the particles with each other.
So such that the temporal development of the position
of each particle depends on the position
of all the other particles.
Now, if you can make the claim, now,
is this coherentism already?
No, that's not coherentism already.
But if you can make the claim that, for example, something
depends on something else from one respect,
therefore, there is a sense in which it depends on that thing.
Then it will get you coherentism even in this case.
It's just going to be a two-line proof that gives you that.
Now, I acknowledge that the principle I just used
that if I depend on Christian for my beauty, let's say,
that I depend on Christian, these are controversial principles
that shouldn't be accepted lightly.
But if you can't find something like this,
then coherentism will get you what you want
also in the Bohmian case.
OK, let me move.
But now, the other possible note, the other one
that we thought about was, was relational quantum mechanics
itself independently of the bundle theory ontology
for relational quantum mechanics.
So this is a beautiful quote from Carlo, which
I think is in the audience, and Federico on the sep entry.
So the notion of a substance that plays
a major role in Western philosophy
might be inappropriate.
Perhaps the idea of mutual dependence
can give us, let's say, a philosophical scaffolding.
And then mutual dependence is exactly
the signature of coherentism.
Now, there's nothing more than this.
And so we don't have here anything more to offer,
but can I do a little bit of promoting, separate?
We will have a, I mean, Christian is one of the organizers
as well, we will do an entire workshop
on relational quantum mechanics with Carlo and Matteo
and Matteo and Mauro, which is in the audience, I think.
I think we'll talk about this a little bit more in detail.
But I'm here, Claudio, I'm here.
Yeah, I think I saw you.
So this is it.
So we'll stay tuned on the 25th.
Wait, Paul, you had a question?
I don't know how's that as the thing here.
Do we go?
Yeah, I was waiting for you to finish the sentence
and then ask Paul if it's a clarificatory question
or you're muted, Paul.
Yeah, I was I was intending to wait for the end.
It's up to you.
Well, no, I'll let you finish, because I don't want to throw up
throwing off course at the moment.
Sure.
OK, so at this stage, the argument
is simply that symmetrical relations of dependence
can play explanatory roles in different scenarios, right?
From metaphysics to philosophy of math,
philosophy of physics in general,
to really particular concrete cases in quantum mechanics.
And now we're going to, before we move to the consequences,
we're going to show the paradigmatic case a little bit,
which is entanglement, which is the work that we already did.
So here's, so we start with just the toy example,
just the similar state.
So even even in the toy example of the singular state, right?
These the singular state supports counterfactual,
robust counterfactual, such as if we were to measure spin up
for the first particle, we would measure spin down for the second.
Therefore, there seems to be more connections here.
And if you just apply straightforwardly,
a very weak version of the so-called human dictum
to the point that there are no necessary connections
between completely independent entities,
you get that whatever systems are there in the singular state,
they're going to display some dependence relations.
Now, the question is,
what is the shape of these dependence relations?
And we just want to argue at first
that coherentism provides an alternative
to the most widely held view in the literature,
which are structuralism and wholism.
And to do that, actually, we need it to go a little bit
into the details of the relations of dependence.
And we did that because the debate about bringing in
relations of dependence for entanglement
was initiated, I'd say, with a beautiful paper
by Keri McKenzie, in which she argued
that this was the key to actually frame rigorously,
even frame rigorously structured.
And so she has a particular version of, I mean,
a particular construction of relations of dependence.
We're just following suit here.
We just did more distinction
because I think we're important.
So usually what you can have,
the different versions of dependence
depending on the shape that they take.
So let me walk you through some important points here.
So the first one is that,
what we call rigid essential involvement,
you just say that X depends on Y,
if necessarily, X is related by R,
there is an R such that X is related necessarily,
is R related to Y.
So there's a stronger one that says that,
which is called rigid essential necessitation,
that says X depends on Y,
if necessarily the existence of X
requires the existence of Y.
Okay.
And then you can have different variations of that.
We're gonna, I'm gonna talk about
only genetic essential necessitation
because it's important for what comes next.
So look at, it says that X depends not on Y,
but on a Y that is F, okay?
It means that X exists only if and only if necessarily,
it also exists on Y that is F.
But it doesn't specify which thing it is.
So this is the key difference, right?
For example, from rigid essential necessitation
and generic essential necessitation.
With the rigid claim, right?
You read to X depends on a particular thing, okay?
So I depend, let's say, on Christian,
I depend on Vera, I depend on Carlo,
or I depend on Manuel, okay?
With the generic essential necessitation,
you don't actually say that I depend on one thing,
on exactly one thing, like rigidly on one thing,
but just on something that satisfies description, okay?
So for example, I depend on a philosopher
that lives in burn.
Now, in my, my very well be Vera,
but in my very well be someone else, okay?
And that's gonna be important later on, okay?
Good.
So, I mean, what else being equal,
you can see that rigid claims are more informative
than genetic claims, right?
Because they specify the object on which you depend
among the one that actually satisfy a given description, okay?
And then for different reasons, which Mattel already went,
a little bit, which has to do
with the distinction between naive
and sophisticated co-existentism.
We also needed actually to,
let's say enlarge our logical vocabulary
to plural logic and have plural variables,
and, but we're really not going to do here in details,
but the play role, as a matter of fact,
because I didn't have much time
and I want to go actually to the new part
to see what you think about this.
Okay, so, and in the paper,
we use that just because,
can we, can we use that?
And that version of dependence, right?
Which builds on the logical work on,
from which Correa, Keith, fine.
I mean, the logic of that relation is already well started.
So, I mean, we just could borrow all the results,
all the former results from that literature.
But of course, you should be,
you should feel free to plug in your favorite,
I mean, more than a certain details,
your preferred notions of dependence here,
particularly understanding primitivism,
just simple model dependence, explanatory dependence,
or even different ways of catching our dependence talk.
In general, like Mattel mentioned, grounding,
I think that Alice, that Wilson now has
something like with structural equation models
and counterfactual dependence.
Now, we will just assume that dependence
is our relation whereby something X depends
on something else for, as Mattel put it,
for some respect, like you might,
it can be its identity, it can be its quality, its profile,
it can even be its existence.
And of course, you have to allow for conditional
and international dependence.
I would say X depends on Y provided at five, okay?
Provided a certain condition is met,
in which in our case will be provided
that the systems are in time, okay?
So these qualifications, I will not repeat it all the time,
but it's actually is in the background.
Because we are trying to account for entanglement here, okay?
And as a matter of fact,
we will end up saying that we will start
from conditional genetic essential involvement
and then move for token claims to rigid dependence.
So that's the move that we do,
that we think it's not really possible
in cases like structuralism and organism,
which will give you that coherencies
and is actually explanatory, I mean,
it's explanatory better, it's least in certain respect.
Okay, let us go through the most widely held
view in the literature.
So the first one is structuralism.
So structuralism as Lederman wrote it is just
a typically, but a plank in a more,
structuralism about quantum entanglement.
It's just a plank in the larger project
of anti-structural use, okay?
Which is any form of realism based on an ontological
or metaphysical inflation,
that inflates priority of structures and relations.
So now has Kerr-McHensey put it,
the thought is that in the entanglement case,
and this is just for the toy model,
I'm just gonna use the singlet case,
but as a matter of fact, for raw criticism,
for example, of allism, it actually matters
that we move from the two particle case
to the many particle case.
But in the case, just in the toy example,
in which you have just two entangled systems,
what the instructionist will say is that
the symmetric and irreflexible physical relation
that weakly discern the quantum system, okay?
There are also those relations
that the systems depend on.
And this is what you, so the framework that we use
allows us to frame this pretty rigorously.
It's this claim, necessarily, if the two system exists,
there exists a relation,
a little fleshy but symmetric relation between them.
Okay, now, as you see it immediately,
we wrote it that way, so that you can see immediately
that these has the right logical form of a dependence claim,
and as a matter of fact, of a genetic claim, okay?
It doesn't say which relation.
It tells you that there is just one relation
that satisfies the description,
which one to reflect and see.
So you can see immediately that this is a dependence claim,
and it's a generic one, okay?
What about wholism?
So in the two particle entanglement case,
what the wholist would say is that
there is a methodological sum, okay?
So entanglement is at least sufficient for composition,
the rhythmological sum of the two systems in question,
and now the two systems in question depend on that sum.
The usual argument that is found over and over
in the literature here is just that,
oh, the state of, in quantum mechanics,
the state of the whole always determines
the state of the part, if you can attribute states
to the parts, like if you have formalism,
which is general enough to do that,
like, you know, density matrices or something,
but the converse does not hold an entanglement B
in the case in which the converse does not hold, okay?
And the wholists, for example, Jonathan Schafer,
Jenna Nisman, which I know you had as a guest
a few weeks back, want to say that
the lesson we should learn from this
is that the whole comes first, okay?
So and how to put it in our framework,
well, the first step is gonna give you something like this.
It's gonna give you that necessarily,
whenever there are two entangled systems,
there is a whole such that they're both part.
And as you can see even here, right,
this has the right logical form of a dependence claim.
I mean, we did them purpose, of course.
I mean, we did our own work, right?
And this is a generic claim as well, okay?
Because it says that there is a why
such that these are parts of it.
Now, there are ways of making this rigid.
We will see some.
But every way of making it rigid,
we think it's problematic.
So, but as of now, we just want to argue
that there is another option out there.
These are not, this is not an exhausted list.
So, and first of all, let us say that
that both require a substantive reading of the quantum state.
So for example, structures will say,
oh, it describes a relation.
And the wholists will say,
no, no, no, it describes a monadic property of the whol, okay?
And as I said, it delivers at first tab,
it delivers only genetic claims.
And if they deliver rigid claims.
So for example, there is a way
of making this a rigid claim.
And so for example, say,
not that there is something of which there are parts,
say that there is a fusion, okay?
It will easily, I mean, you could see immediately that
if you want to take the most general case,
you will end up actually very close to monism.
Like being that the whol, okay?
The whol is the more compassionate whol,
which means the whol of which everything else
is a proper part, which in technical terms,
in meteorology is called the universe, okay?
This is the only fundamental thing.
And you might not want to be a monist for different reasons.
So for example, because the monist argument,
for example, cashed out in a bad level,
just breaks down for particular interpretation.
For example, for relational quantum mechanics,
because the monist argument, right?
Remember that the state of the whol always depends
on the state of the parts,
implies that there is such a thing
as the way function of the universe, okay?
And the way function of the universe
actually describes the properties of the universe.
And we think this is in peculiar contrast
with relational quantum mechanics.
So you might want to resist that move,
but if you want to deliver rigid claims,
you've got to have to go there.
And now, apart from this, right?
We might have some other reservations.
So for example, it's unclear to us
that structuralism as it is formulated,
meaning like, oh, that,
so let's say in the singlet case,
like it's entangling the spin degrees of freedom,
the structuralists are just saying,
oh, wait, I mean the entangle system actually depends on,
they're entangling the spin degree of freedom
depends on every opposite spin for their spin profile.
Or there's another one here that is just,
is just restating the power of principle.
Why?
Because from the power of principle,
it seems that you can actually build easily enough, right?
A symmetric and yet a reflexive relation,
which is the following,
having a different value for at least one quantum number.
And then I already said something about
some reservations about holism.
And there might also be some reservations
about fine greatness,
because there are cases, for example,
in which you have more than one entangled particles,
such that, I mean systems or particles, whatever,
these are just place owners,
they don't have really to be particles
in the metaphysical sense here.
So for example, in which the first system is entangling
the spin degree of freedom on the second,
second is entangled for the position degree
of freedom with the third.
And it seems that at best, all it can say,
we don't actually mention parts of the whole
and relations among the parts, right?
Which you can't,
because it's fundamental ontology does not has that.
So it just has to say that all of the parts
actually depend on the whole.
So we think that you lose the precise information,
but, so I mean, these are not clearly
don't knock down arguments.
The thought was that just,
okay, there are some difficulties here.
Is this inexhaustible?
Is this, does it exhaust the possible
metaphysical underpinnings of entanglement?
And we wanna say that co-edentism
provide them to everyone.
And roughly, well, to put it roughly enough,
the right conclusion to draw is that
it's not that the physical relations are prior
in character to the systems,
or that the objects depend on a more fundamental bond,
rather is that when they're entangled,
provided they're entangled, right?
One system depend on the other system
for a particular degree of freedom,
the degree of freedom on which it is entangled.
Okay, so and you start technically speaking
from the insight that the entangled systems
are essentially related in some generic way.
Now, look at this claim.
This claim is not the claim of structuralists,
as a matter of fact,
because it does not have the right logical form.
The right logical form of the structuralist
has the symmetry, the existence of the quantum systems
on the left-hand side,
then it has on the right-hand side, the relation.
This just says that whenever they're entangled,
that's an essential relation, okay?
Now, once you recognize these structuralists,
go a step further and say that that relation here
also plays the role of the first relaclum
of the dependence relations.
And this is where the structuralist
and the co-init is part ways.
We don't wanna go there.
We just wanna start from these notions of dependence
and then move, right?
I mean, make a move that is being made
in the metaphysics literature
by, for example, Keith Farn says, right?
It's sometimes, and I'm just gonna read it here
because it's easier.
Okay, wow.
Okay, it's sometimes thought that objects
whose nature can be understood in terms of one another,
in addition to possess constitutive essential properties,
we'll also enter in constitutive essential relations.
And let us therefore say that an essential relation
between the two is irreducible
if it is not a logical consequence
of the essential properties of the objects
considered separately
or the essential relations among this joint subset.
Two objects may be taken to be reciprocally dependent
under the present, but that doesn't matter.
I mean, a method for us, but for technical reasons,
just in case they stand in an irreducible
essential relationship, okay?
And that's exactly what we were saying
here in the case of the Italian, right?
So we're gonna say that once you recognize
they stand in that relationship, okay?
What you have, because it's essential
because of course, the relation doesn't superveno,
it's not a logical consequence of the properties
of the systems actually considered individually, right?
What you get in quantum jargon just means
the probability distribution of the relevant degrees
of freedom does not factorize, okay?
And this ensures that you're actually
the co-herentist analysis actually targets
exactly the cases of genuine entanglement
that is sometimes in the literature
called the Gerardi-Marinata-Veber entanglement,
which is the entanglement, it's not just simply due
to anti-symmetrization, and what you will get
if you go like this way, it's just this claim here
that provided they're entangled,
the systems depend on each other,
which is the claim that I just wrote here.
So you start from the session involvement, okay?
In the most general sense, right?
And then for particular token cases,
once you give me a particular, let's say, quantum state,
like a particular quantum entanglement state,
then I can tell you, then I can run the analysis
for tokens, okay?
And I can deliver rigid claims of dependence here.
This is not actually, you should be able to see
that this is not a genetic statement of dependence.
This is actually a rigid claim of dependence.
And then of course, in the cases in which you have more
than one, you'll have to complicate the story a little bit.
But in the singlet case, that's what you get, okay?
Good, and this is, I mean, I'm gonna skip,
I'm moving real fast because I think we're out of time.
So and these actually, so this is what's to say
that when you have this particular,
you have more than one, more than two systems, right?
What you get, you get the sophisticated coherentism
that Mattel already talked to us about,
and what you get the sophisticated coherentists,
for example, which is the counterpart
in the histomology by the position, by the usual.
And the argument here is simply that coherentism, right,
is a genuine alternative to the standard interpretation.
It delivers different claims of dependence, okay?
It delivers generic claims in the first general instance,
but rigid claims when you give me token examples, okay?
And we will see that this is important.
And then it's different from structuralism
because the relative of the dependence relations
are not relations on the one hand
and systems on the other are just systems,
and it's different from monism
because even if monism or holism, sorry,
has both the latter, let's say systems, right?
You don't have holes.
And this is important because it's a substantive question
whether things compose something else, okay?
Coherentism is fine not even if there is no
meteorological sum of the quantum systems to begin with,
which you might actually want.
So there is a literature now on quantum meteorology
where there are quantum counter examples
to fusions, axioms in meteorology, okay?
So now that doesn't mean that it's the best.
It just means it's an alternative at this stage of none.
Now, in the paper we go as far as claiming,
there are something to be said on Coherentist's behalf.
It strikes a balance between structuralism and holism.
It incorporates insights from both, right?
But I mean, the dependence relation can hold
between physical systems,
and you have to actually allow for essential relations,
but it's fierce clear, right,
of more controversial thesis.
For example, then in the case of meteorological composition,
the dependence relation always goes from holds to parts.
So it's explanatory.
So we use it actually to underwrite
non-causal violation of outcome independence
in both types scenarios.
It's informative because once you give me a particular state,
it gives you rigid claims of dependence,
such as system S1 depends for the spin degree of freedom
on systems S2, whereas S2 depends on the position degree
of freedom system S3, which we think, for example,
holism will have a hard time recovering.
So actually, this might be a little bit better off here.
And of course, I mean, as you can see, right,
you should see that there is no conflict, right,
with the generic claim that we started from.
This is not entanglement now.
This is a particular token of entangled systems,
like let's say the one in quantum state,
in the senior state.
And of course, and in the paper we go,
we discuss some subtleties about entanglement,
maximally, that says no, maximally entangled state,
and we show that Coherentism can allow
for such a distinction, and then we go on.
Entanglement distillation, in which you start
with a bunch of systems that entangle,
only a part of which is entangled,
then you distill the entanglement in a subspace,
in the subset of those, or you can dilute the entanglement.
You can actually spread the entanglement
over more parties, and you can swap entanglement.
You can swap the entanglement between system one and four
and two and three, with one, three, two, four,
and we show that Coherentists have the resources
to explain all these nice subtleties about entanglement.
And then if you want, you can also add
a conservatism argument to the point that
Coherentism can say that, for example,
I depend on material for my, let's say,
position degree of freedom,
because we don't want to be more than five meters apart
from each other, because we love each other.
But at the same time, we can retain,
we can retain, like, good old fashioned, traditional,
a mere logical dependence from parts to holes, for example.
If you should, you won't, you don't have to, okay?
Now, so that was actually our case for, you know,
quantum Coherentism, in general,
quantum Coherentism in particular,
Coherentism for quantum entanglement,
even more in particular, more fox.
Now, for the last part, and then I leave you with all the
prompts, we're gonna give you the consequences of it all.
So if you're with us, that it's at least an option
worth considering, because as Matteo was pointing out,
like, there is basically no paper background about that,
about mutual dependence relations,
beside ours, I would say, in philosophy of physics at least.
So what are the consequences?
And I know that we already done a lot of metaphysics,
but I think it's an interesting case here,
in which the consequence for metaphysics
and philosophy of physics are related.
So we have to go through the consequences of metaphysics
to tell you something about the consequence
of philosophy of physics, which might interest most of you,
which is, which we think it has an important consequence
for a position, which has been recently defended
in quantum metaphysics, which is way function of the others.
But first, we have to go through a little bit,
more of just pure metaphysics talk.
Okay, good.
So, and here, let's go back with what Matteo said, right?
So coherentism could undermine
the foundation of the hierarchical picture of nature, right?
It could actually just undermine
that the view that nature comes structured
in different levels of relative fundamentality, okay?
It just can't be done with that.
But yet, it's an important point
that it is compatible with such a view.
Now, I am going to provide you a toy,
a toy, I mean, a proof of concept,
which I did in an afternoon.
So this is not supposed to model any real time,
I mean, any real world cases.
But this is just a proof of concept to show you
that it can be compatible with such a picture,
but it will still undermine
main tenets of foundationalism and this is important, okay?
So for the toy case, let D stand for dependence,
whatever dependence relation you might want,
and this guy stands for more fundamental than, okay?
This is the relation X is more fundamental than Y
and F, as Matteo just already introduced,
is just absolute fundamentalities,
just this is absolutely fundamental, okay?
Now, technically, we did it for facts,
because facts are fine-grained propositional entities,
but nothing hinges on that.
So I will just use facts just because I did it,
the formal work I did for that, okay?
So now you give me a set of facts, okay?
And now I define a set of retic partition on those facts.
That is, I'm gonna define subsets
such that they're pairwise this joint
and the union is the set that you gave me, okay?
So here's the toy model.
So I'm gonna define, and the subsets,
I'm gonna call them levels,
which were, they're supposedly the counter part
of levels of reality.
If you want to still hang on to the view
that reality comes structures in levels, okay?
So I'm gonna define a relation of the level I
is more fundamental than the level J,
just by using dependence.
And I'm gonna say that for every fact in the first level,
in the second level, in LJ,
there is a fact in L, oh, sorry,
there is a fact, this should be in LI, okay?
Such that the second fact depends on the first, okay?
So you give me one fact in one level,
I'll give you a fact in another level
such that there's a dependence relation between the two.
Okay, good.
So now I'm gonna define,
these, of course, is a relative fundamental talk.
It's a relation between levels.
I'm gonna define absolute fundamentality for levels
the following way.
FL is the fundamental level, okay?
Even only if there is no level
such that it's more fundamental than this.
This is just, I mean, this is just supernatural, right?
And now piggyback, I can piggyback on these relations, right?
To define the target notion that we want to define.
Fact one is more fundamental than fact two
and fact one is absolutely fundamental.
Or entity one is more fundamental than entity two
and entity one is absolutely fundamental.
And here's what I did in 15 and 16.
So I'm gonna say that fact one
is more fundamental than fact two
simply by saying there are two levels, okay?
If they belong, basically, let me just go quickly.
If they belong to different levels, okay?
This is just what 15 says.
So 15 defines a relation between entities,
piggybacking on the relation of relative fundamentality
between defined between levels.
And now I can also define a notion of fundamental fact,
of fundamental entity, just by saying that it's a fact
that belongs to the fundamental level, okay?
And now this is a toy model,
but this is completely compatible with coherentism.
You can just check that it is compatible.
And I suspect actually it is the naive picture
that some particle physicist has in mind.
So here's the cane introduction to particle physics
which says, oh, you get me quarks, I'll give you addrons, okay?
Then you give me, then you build from atoms,
from atoms you build nuclei, from nuclei you build atoms,
from atoms you build molecules,
and then the hierarchy of structures in nature is built, okay?
That seems actually very, very, very similar
to what's written here.
Now, I don't think that anyone should hold
this particular view, but there are actually
more complicated and more sophisticated
view in the vicinity.
You will have to tweak the formal work
to ensure that, for example,
so this you can just verify that it's a strict order.
In other cases, you don't get it for free
and you need to do some formal work,
but for us, the toy example will do, okay?
Okay, why is that important?
Because this is all compatible with coherentism,
and yet it still undermines two widespread thesis
in the vicinity of foundationism.
The first one is that fundamentality for entities
is absolute independence,
and this is important for the quantum case, we think.
So here's the definition of fundamentality
for entities or facts, just as independence,
and this is the orthodoxy in literature, okay?
That just says that a fact is fundamental
if there is no other fact such that the fact depends on this.
Okay, why the toy model actually is incompatible with that?
Well, it's because nothing precludes at the fundamental,
because the definition I gave here, right?
The definition I gave here, 16,
just says that to be fundamental fact,
you belong to the fundamental level,
but nothing clearly precludes
that there are dependence relations
between facts at the same level, okay?
And as a matter of fact, coherentism
will give you exactly that,
that there will be dependence relations
between facts at the fundamental level,
but there will still be fundamental.
So coherentism with the toy model I just gave you
will actually falsify this,
which we think it's very important.
And it will also falsify that dependence
always tracks relative fundamentality, right?
And this is a good result, right?
Because coherentist clearly wants 18 to be gone.
This 18 is just a conditional that
if F1 depends on F2, then F2 is more fundamental.
If I depend on Chris, Chris is more fundamental than me.
Of course, coherentism should want this to go away, right?
Because given that more fundamental,
then it's probably a strict partial order.
It didn't use a strict partial order.
Coherentism cannot say that dependence induces
a strict partial order because it gives up
anti-symmetry and assymmetry, okay?
We want this to go.
And of course, this in the toy model has to go as well
for the very same reason.
Nothing prevents dependence relation to obtain
between facts at the fundamental level, okay?
For those two facts,
given that there will be at the same level,
there will be equal fundamental,
there will be, each of them will be as fundamental
as the other one, but there will be
dependence relations between them, okay?
And these we're gonna see, it's very, it's very, very important.
And in effect, if you go as far as this, okay?
Good, so here's the most speculative, here's a jump, okay?
So if you go, if you aren't with us as far as this point,
I think we can go a little bit further
and say that coherentism really side
with a complete different,
if you want to hold on to the hierarchical picture,
you might not want to do that, then you jump ship.
I mean, this part where the talk was pitched
for the ones that still want to believe
that there are levels in nature, okay?
But even in this case, coherentism will provide
a completely different picture
than traditional foundationalism.
And here's why.
Traditional foundationalism holds on to 17, okay?
And it holds on to 17 because usually we attribute
two theoretical roles to fundamental things.
They're unexplained explainers, okay?
There are things that they're not explained
by everything else, but they do explain everything else.
So foundationalism is very close
to actually the unexplained part.
These are independent things in so far
as they're not explained by anything else.
We just told you that coherentism, right?
Probably we'll give up this,
even when framed in a picture which retains levels of nature.
Okay?
And as a matter of fact,
we think that it will favor actually focusing
on the other part of the theoretical role
of fundamentalism.
It's not important that unexplained
that there is independent.
The important fact is that they explain everything else.
Okay?
Coherentism seems to say,
look, give me hold the coherent bit, right?
So suppose that the fundamental level
is a coherentist level, right?
In which there is,
or now just looking at the boxes that they have
is Paul, Christian, and Matteo.
Let's say that these are the three things
at the fundamental level, right?
And they're mutually dependent on each other, right?
They can still do all the work,
the theoretical work we want fundamental things to do.
If we just relinquish fundamentalism independence
and we say, oh no, fundamentalism is not independence.
Is actually everything else depends on those.
Okay?
That's the key.
And we think that coherentism sides
well with this notion of fundamentalism,
which actually is a radical departure,
even in the case in which nature comes
trying to fight into levels
from traditional fundamentalism.
Now, so this is already the consequence
for philosophy, for metaphysics, okay?
It will give, it will side with this notion
of fundamentality that has been largely explored.
And of course, now we are doing some formal work
to see when these two notions,
these two notions of the being independent
and being such that everything else depends
on that come apart.
So I was supposed to do the formal work,
but I got distracted.
So I just got up to a certain point.
I think it's necessary that it's a strict partial order.
So of course, coherentism will drive these notions apart.
Why is this important for philosophy of physics now?
Okay, so we think it's important
because it can give us reason to undermine
what is being called by Alyssa Ney,
which I think you had, you had there as well, right?
No, okay, well.
No, she came for the conference, but-
Oh yeah, she came from the conference.
In the book, we just came out,
the work in the wave function,
and the master argument for wave functionalism,
which is roughly an ontological picture
for non-relativistic quantum mechanics.
Alyssa is very clear that when you move
to the relativistic regime,
you will have to actually do some adjustments
and not easy ones at that,
but for non-relativistic quantum mechanics,
you can just put it in a form of a slog
and the wave function
represents a fundamental field in configurationism.
Okay, and this is the master argument
Alyssa puts forward in the book.
After going in the first two chapters
on different arguments that have been with us
in the literature for a long time,
such as success of wave function representations
and entanglement as well.
So here's the master argument, this is in chapter three.
Having a fundamental ontology,
which is both separable and local,
is a desideratum for any ontology?
This is an assumption.
Second assumption, the only fundamental
non-relativistic quantum ontology
that is both separable and local,
is wave function realism?
Therefore, all else being equal,
we shouldn't do a wave function realism.
So this is the master argument.
Now, why the metaphysical consequences
of coherentism actually are important
for evaluating this argument?
I mean, this is the new part,
which we don't know whether we're completely off track.
Just tell us that if we think we are.
Because the argument is that,
it seems to us that you get P1,
you get that separability,
which we're gonna see a formulation right now.
It's a desideratum for your fundamental ontology.
Even on if, I mean, this is not logical,
if only the reason why you want
your fundamental ontology to be separable
is exactly because you think
the fundamental things are independent things.
And there's a matter of fact.
This is the formula, the standard formulation
by Dona, by Ayaward, which is called in NAE, right?
So separable, I say, two subsystems,
the content of Teresa Paravity
is that the content of any two spacetime regions
are separable if and only if you can,
each possesses his own distinct physical state,
and the joint state is completely determined
by the individual states of the subsystems.
Of course, it seems clearly that separability,
what separability actually ensures you
is that the subsystems in question are independent.
And there's a matter of fact,
I think historically Einstein actually wanted,
cashed out some sort of this principle
exactly in terms of dependence
and independence of physical systems might be wrong.
So surely, if you believe that fundamental,
so here's the train of thought.
If you believe the fundamental items
are independent items,
then you should want your fundamental ontology
to be separable, right?
Because separability will ensure exactly that.
But as we saw, coherentism, right,
is a way of actually denying
that gives you a way of denying
that fundamental entities, if there are such entities,
okay, should be conceived as independent, okay?
What we should be conceived as,
that everything else depends on those,
but those don't have to be independent.
But if so, right, so to wait, this is just to repeat,
separability ensures in effect independence
of the subsystems, but coherentism,
if no one relinquishes fundamentalist independence,
one loses the most compelling,
if not the most compelling reason or motivation
to endorse fundamental separability and thus P1.
If you don't have the view that fundamental items
should be independent items,
there is no reason to have separability
as a visited item for your fundamental ontology.
And therefore, you don't get the first premise
of the master argument of the functional realism.
And if I put it all together,
it seems that coherentism actually has a nice application now,
also in a hotly debated question
in another debate in quantum metaphysics,
that is, it might give you a way
of undermining the master argument
of functionalism, not the only one, of course,
but it's just, we think it's a nice one,
it's a nice one actually that depends on,
the metaphysical work that coherentism can do for you
and give you a different perspective
on the architecture of realism.
Okay, so, and just to conclude,
so we did a lot of metaphysics, I'm sorry about that.
And so with the philosophy of physics and to conclude,
let's talk about more important things,
which is, so this is all me, so don't blame me on Mattel.
So this is all me, so this is the new edition
of John Down's Poems, which has just came out,
which is a beautiful edition.
And in this book, I mean, this is the first,
this is the first, okay?
So in which you have also, as you can see,
the love poems that he wrote before,
he was a Dean of St. Paul and the allergies.
And one point that, one very famous point that you have here
is the ecstasy, right?
So the ecstasy is a famous point for coherentists,
let's say, because, so we reproduced four stanzas.
So because usually it is taken, these last two stanzas,
they are usually taken to actually argue,
let's say in favor of the symmetric dependence
of body and soul.
But we want to go, we want to be misfits in this case as well.
We want to focus on the first two, actually.
So the first two describes the metaphysics,
I mean, the mechanics of love,
the mechanics of the entanglement of souls
once love enters the souls, okay?
And so, and you can see, right,
the love into the animates through souls,
then, and then, you know, the effects of loneliness,
controls, which is such a beautiful,
these are such beautiful stanzas.
And, well, let me, you know, I won't read it,
but so here's why we think this is important, right?
Because you think that actually,
John Dunn is such a deep thinker
that you can actually find traces of all the explanations
we actually talked about in the case of entanglement.
So here's the thought is that you have two souls,
love enters them, and the love animates them
in such a way that they construct another soul,
which doesn't change, as a matter of fact,
as you can see, of whom no change can invade,
which is a topos, I think, in the Zebedian poetry.
So you might remember, you know,
Shakespeare, like, love is not love,
which alters when no alteration finds, okay?
And then you can run these three actually explanations,
right, for the mechanics of love
and entanglement of the souls.
So here's what the holism will have to say.
And the good thing is that all of these explanations,
you can find hints of all of these explanations
in the stances by Dunn.
So here's the holist explanation.
Love composes a new soul, the unchanged one, okay?
And then the two souls depend on the new soul.
So here's what structuralism has to say.
Love, when it enters the two souls,
and the atom is, as you put it, on the two souls,
relates the two souls, and both the souls depend on love.
Okay? Or love itself.
And then here's our question.
The two souls, when related by love, okay?
When they're in love, they depend on each other.
And now we are partial to the co-edentists.
I mean, I'm partial on the co-edentist explanation,
also in the case of love.
But that's me and you guys.
Um, should I stop sharing?
Uh, yeah, for now, yes.
And then if someone asks, thanks a lot,
both Claudio and Matteo, wonderful.
I really enjoyed that.
So I have, well, I have Paul since a little bit,
but Giuliano asked me to go first,
if you don't mind, Paul, because he has to leave early.
Yeah, sorry guys, I have to go.
And thanks Paul for letting me.
Yeah, that's a question about,
so I guess that links certain things in the first part
with the other things in the second part.
But so you wanted to, so in the first part,
you sort of make it clear that you wanted to stress
you wanted to stress that your position
can resist any charge of being
explicatorily buckles or circular,
circularly in a bad way, at least, no way.
And so, but this is, so here the idea is that
it's the position that has explanatory power
and that's it's orthogonal with respect to whether
the specific dependence relation that you pick up
has a explicatory power, at least as you presented,
that seems correct because you want to be neutral
with respect to which dependence relation to pick up
and not all of them have a explicatory import, right?
Now, I was wondering, and that's connected
with something in the second part,
especially with respect to the compatibility
with the letter, but not with the spirit of nationalism.
I was wondering, so if one could
so could read your position as one in which
there are, so when the relation of dependence is symmetric,
it doesn't have a explicatory import.
That seems to go in the direction of your first remark
that you say, when you say that, oh, but it's bad
when the, when the explanance depends on the explanandum
and vice versa, not when the mutual dependence
is in the explanance, and because it seems that,
well, then if it's like that, no, then in the explanance,
the dependence relation has no explicatory import.
It's just like, let's say, counterfactual dependence
or any relation that just gives you a correlation
between behaviors of the entity.
What is important is that then the fact
that there is this correlation explain other stuff.
And I mean, if you see it in this way,
then you have something, a picture
which is very close to a foundationalist picture
in which it's still true what you said in the second part
that the formal properties are different,
for instance, you don't have reflexivity,
if you say that, your reflexivity, anything like that,
but still the third point that you had
in that, in the, in commenting the compatibility
with the foundation, foundationalism would not hold, no,
because in that case, it would have that the elements
at the fundamental level are explanatorily unexplained.
So you have a dependency relations,
mutual dependence relation between the elements
at the fundamental level.
And those are just brute facts.
It's not that there's any explanation
between the, it's just that there are those dependencies.
And the fact that there are those brute facts
explain all the rest, but that's looks much more
from the foundationalist than you want to think.
Okay, I hope that being clear.
Hello, shall I go first?
I'll try to answer the first part.
Let's see if I understood you correctly, Julianne.
Okay, there are two replies that I gave
to this obvious objection, water.
It seems to me that they are connected.
So let us see if they are.
It seems to me that if you have reflexivity
of full grounding or full dependence,
then in a way you don't leave any room
for, you know, ontological wiggling with other things,
but you need this room in order to make explanations
non-trivial.
So let me put it this way.
You focus on the exponents.
Within the exponents, you can posit any sort
of relations you want, grounding, ontological dependence.
It seems to me that whatever you use,
if it is fully reflexive in the sense that in the end,
you want to explain A and you go back to A
and all the rest can be set aside.
You go through it and then you ignore it.
Then you have vicious circularity.
And in that case, there is no space
to then build an interesting explanation
by adding something else.
So this is the thought.
Why if you have only partial dependence,
then of course it could be a bad explanation after all.
It is not sufficient, but it is necessary.
So that's the idea.
You want to have partial dependence
and then you have to build the right story.
And that's why we spent all this time thinking
about specific versions of dependence
for specific cases.
If you don't get those right,
then even if you have partial dependence,
it could be not sufficient for actually giving something
to people interested in quantum mechanics.
So this is the general story.
For the second part, I think, Claudio made it clear,
but Claudio, you go ahead.
We are not against foundation of this altogether.
Yeah, Claudio.
Yeah, so let me take the last part,
which I think, yeah, as Martel suggested,
we're not completely against foundation.
And there's a way of making it compatible,
let's say, with the hierarchical structure,
the toy model again.
Now, that doesn't mean it seems to me, though,
that the compatibility is at a different place
from which you pointed out.
Because you might very well be,
you might very well have even like relations,
symmetric relations of the things that support,
actually, as a matter of fact, nothing prevents you,
that support the explanations, partial explanations, right?
As Martel pointed out, even at the fundamental level,
perhaps you want to say that, I don't know,
perhaps you want to say that really the existence
of one quirk is grounded in the existence of the other.
And you think, now, and those things,
so the things at the fundamental level, right,
they will be actually, they will not be unexplained.
So this is a point of departure.
The point of contact will be there,
then in those picture, there will be fundamental entities.
That's true, right?
So with the tradition, we will agree with the traditional,
let's say, picture of fundamentalism in that respect,
that there are fundamental things,
these are the ones that belong to the fundamental level,
but we will not actually agree on the foundation on this,
that those things are unexplained.
I mean, we might not want,
that depends on the right relation that holds,
I mean, of course, if there is no, let's say,
explanatory backing, I mean, no relations of symmetric
dependence that backs up explanation,
that it will also be unexplained,
but nothing prevents it to be.
So there is, as a matter of fact,
one point of contact with traditional foundationalism,
but it's just in the sense of fundamental entities, I think.
It's not on the unexplained part.
There might very well be that they partially explain each other.
So the existence of the fundamental entities
will be a point of contact, but not the unexplained.
So I think you're right in saying that the last part,
I mean, will get you closer to foundationalist picture,
but I would tend to disagree that where,
so it's not in the unexplained part, I would say,
it's right rather in the existence of fundamental things.
But that's me thinking.
No, but I mean, I got, if I just,
so I got that you are not compelled to say that,
they are not explanatory the relation
between the fundamental entities.
I was just wondering whether you can,
it would be more economical in a sense.
So I wonder if you really need the explanatory relation
at that level and not just simply
correspondences of behavior
and where you need explanation is just going up, so to say.
But okay, well, I see.
Yeah, but for these, I think my test completely right.
I don't think, I mean, I don't personally have a general recipe.
I think we should go case by case here.
And depending on what your hands
on the fundamental level and what relations,
I think that in these complicated cases,
just give you a picture.
It's just like, as much as I enjoy doing formal,
coin models, there's so much you can get.
Thanks.
Anyway, the most important thing is not to worry only
about the myriology, right?
It seems to be lurking behind your question.
What is really in need of an explanation
is the part-whole structure of the world.
The little things doing the big things.
And this is the driving force behind foundationalism.
And we are happy with that.
I mean, if you want to have a myriological story,
it's not gonna be a coherent story.
But there is a lot more to be explained,
the qualities of things, their identities,
their behaviors.
And I'm not sure I would agree with you that,
those things, you can just leave them there.
There are correspondences of behaviors.
Of course, you can go that way.
If you cannot find a law, you can be a union
and just say, this is the way things are.
What we are not convinced about is that,
whenever you don't have a traditional story,
myriological story, foundational story,
then you don't really have the need for an explanation.
We think you do have the need until you can prove
that you don't get an explanation in any way.
And in this case, myriology is gonna be traditional.
We are talking about different explananda.
Okay, got it.
Thanks.
Okay, next one is Paul.
You can go ahead.
And bye, sorry, I have to go.
Ciao, Gideon.
Thank you.
Sorry, ciao, Gideon, bye.
Paul, you're still mute.
But I keep muting people and I'm...
Okay, no, okay, I'm back on that.
So look, yeah, really interesting.
I think it's a very interesting conceptual space
to be exploring a few things to say.
I'd like to start off with a brief question
as to whether you've thought about any relation of this
to the Particle Democracy,
Geoffrey Chu, the 60s, early 70s,
when there was a debate about whether, you know,
we went to quarks or not.
It was, Claudia's remark about quarks,
which made me think of it really.
I mean, it was quite strong at the time
and then what happened was, well,
the quark theory was adopted,
so it was sort of a blow for,
or a victory for fundamentals, if you like.
Rich, and so,
No, so first of all, I mean,
do you know about that connection at all?
I mean...
So I happen to...
I mean, this is recorded, right?
Yeah.
Which is not a great way to start.
What are you gonna say?
So I know of a connection,
of a very interesting connection,
as a matter of fact, with S-matrix theory.
Right, okay.
Yeah, so Carrie Mackenzie wrote a paper on that
and she argues that, for example,
it's infinitism that gets...
So it's the other alternative,
I mean, it's the other alternative to foundationalism,
the one in which you give up well-foundedness,
because each hadron was supposed to be built
by an infinity of other hadrons.
Now, as a matter of fact, I tend to agree with you
that it should be a co-identity story,
it's the particle democracy thing,
and I know I've been...
I mean, a book is about to come out
that actually will make up this point.
It's not by me.
So there will be...
So I think that there will be a space
to make that argument.
I mean, the book that is about to come out
will tell you the infinity story for S-matrix.
But I think that the right story to tell
is according to this one, as a matter of fact.
Okay, so fair enough.
So then another thing I wanted to say is quite early on,
I'm talking about the idea of how the co-herentist
or that sort of family of approaches has been neglected.
And in a way, I think you could say
the reason why it's been neglected
is just because of the victory of the clock idea
in the 70s, I mean,
because, you know,
oh, look, we're down to another level sort of thing.
So, and what I wanted to say is,
I mean, I suppose I sort of work very much
in a sort of fundamentalist tradition, if you like,
but at the same time,
I don't think one has to characterize it
as being an overarching sort of...
trying to say the way the world is sort of thing.
I mean, and I appreciate that you're saying
that the co-herentism is compatible with it.
I sort of get that point.
But in a way, I think when you're in a situation,
and I mean, you're trying to understand
intangible and that sort of thing,
well, particularly intangible,
is you're in a situation
where you're sort of groping for ways to go.
And one way is to explore
the co-interest approach.
Another way is perhaps to just hypothesize,
well, maybe there's another level.
You know, maybe when we've got,
if ever we get an accelerator big enough
to find out how quarks are constructed,
if they are so constructed,
maybe there is another level.
And so, but then that's not to say
there's another level after that
or another level after that.
You know, in a way,
I do get the impression that you might be,
in a way, committing the sort of sin
that you're accusing fundamentalism of.
So I'm trying to say,
well, this is the way the world is.
It's, you know,
co-herent is the way the world is.
And characterizing fundamentalists is saying,
well, you know, that's the way,
it's levels of the way the world is.
We should be more modest.
We should just say, here's a problem situation.
Let's go with this hypothesis,
go with that hypothesis.
Let's go with both,
you know,
tend to people to spill birth, you know.
So that's,
I expect that's my reflection on the,
on the situation.
Yeah.
Would you say that's fair?
Yeah, well, I think it does sound fair,
but on the other hand,
there is a problem in philosophy
in deciding how you want to go to provide answers to questions,
right?
Suppose you want to be,
well, we all want to be naturalists, right?
So you take your science seriously.
And if you want to answer questions about the fundamental ways
things are,
you look at your best actual science, right?
So this is the thing.
Obviously you have something you cannot explain,
like, you know,
these violations of beds,
inequalities,
these non-local connections.
Of course you can say, well, this is,
this means that physics is incomplete.
But this has,
it's been a mistake in the past, right?
Just hoping for some developments in the future,
sticking to your preferred metaphysical view and weight.
So we're just doing this.
The other one, you know,
until you get the new physics,
this is the physics you have.
And this is one possible way.
We didn't,
we didn't say the right way.
One possible way of making sense of it.
Then of course it only makes sense of it.
If you buy into metaphysics vocabulary,
but this is another problem.
Because if you are a foundationalist,
you do it anyway.
So you need to have a clear reason for not buying into this project.
Maybe you don't like symmetry independence,
but again, you know,
this,
this is just presupposing foundationalism.
So we don't want to do that.
It's not that it's not that we say it's wrong.
It's not that we say this is the final pieces.
No,
it's just a temporary project for what,
for making sense of what we have.
Right. Yeah.
I mean, I do that.
And I think that's fair enough.
We should.
I mean, we,
each intervention,
we have different intuitions about things.
One needn't be accepting something because it's an established
option.
It might be just because, you know,
that just for whatever reason seems to be the right way to go in
kind of certain senses. But, but yeah, I mean,
it's total liberalism in terms of which way your research is to go.
I agree. Yeah.
Okay.
So,
uh,
you're up next.
Hi.
I hope you hear me.
So first, thank you very much.
It was really a wonderful talk.
And especially since it's a rather abstract topic and some really
my area of expertise and still I found it very clear and nice to
follow.
And I have just two somewhat related questions slash objections
maybe.
Yeah.
I mean,
I had the impression that you were relatively non-committal with
respect to what the relevant properties are that,
but for which these partial dependencies hold,
but you'll go to example,
one of your go-to examples was,
was spin, right?
And indeed,
if you want to say,
if two electrons are entangled with respect to their spin,
then, you know,
the spin of you,
the one is partially depends on the spin of the other and that
would admittedly fit well with how many people talk about
quantum mechanics,
but I think it's,
it's wrong nonetheless.
So what's clear is that if they are entangled in this way,
then, you know,
the outcomes of spin measurements performed on the particles will
be correlated,
but I think it's well understood nowadays that the measurement
process plays a very active role in bringing about these
outcomes.
And then it would be a mistake to think of spin as a preexisting
property that the particle possesses,
or that the electron possesses independent of the measurement
process.
So I,
you know,
I find it a bit,
yeah,
I don't know,
a disappointing sounds like too negative,
but yeah,
disappointing that on the one hand here,
so you do such sophisticated metaphysics.
On the other hand,
you seem to adhere at least in these examples to,
to a naive realism about quantum observables.
And the second related point is that,
I think in Bohmian mechanics,
it's most,
most clear how entanglement actually manifests,
the velocity of each part of any particle depends on the position
of all the other particles.
And I'm not exactly sure how to map this abstract structure that
you talked about onto this example.
Right.
For instance,
it's not,
it's,
it's,
it's,
it's not a relation about,
it's not about dependence,
see relations between velocity,
for instance,
I mean,
no one would say that the velocity of a particle partially depends on its own
velocity,
but the velocity of a particle partially depends on its own position.
That is true,
but it's not something that would even come under suspicion,
I think,
of a,
of a circularity or,
or anything like that.
But maybe,
maybe I just have to think more about how the,
how your proposal fits,
fits with Bohmian mechanics.
But maybe, yeah,
maybe it could be helpful also for you to,
to, to clarify this.
Michael, you want to go first, right?
No, you go first.
No, no, no, no.
I can answer the second because I have,
I have thought about this.
Oh, okay.
Okay.
I'll answer the first.
I think we do agree with you.
We cannot be naive realist when we discuss quantum properties.
The thought was maybe we were, you know,
too naive in doing this.
We were sticking to very simple examples to drive the basic idea,
but this is always dangerous and we agree with you.
Let me see if rephrasing it pleases you.
I mean,
it's not a discussion about specific properties.
So the basic distinction that we drew at the beginning is between
observables, right?
So you have a theory and you have observables and these observables
are supposed to be in a one to one correspondence with properties out
there.
And this is the thing that if you're a realist,
you want to reify.
So these are real, right?
So the basic claim is not about these things.
It's about entanglement.
It's about the way in which these properties are exemplified.
So actually we don't care about speed.
Our point is that if you want to reify a relation as structure,
let's do,
you're doing something really extreme because it's not a physical
constituent.
It's actually a way in which physical stuff,
properties mirrored by observables exist.
It's actually a fact about states, right?
And this is why you want to resist reification.
So just forget about speed.
That was a toy example to show that the key point that we are trying
to make,
it's a point about what the theory tells you about states,
about the ways in which systems depend on each other.
And then you can make all, you can use all the examples.
And I agree with you that once you do,
you propose a toy example, it is potentially misleading.
But our point is not about being a coherentist about speed.
No, coherentism is a claim about states and ways in which systems
are connected to each other as mirrored by the states as described
by the theory.
And I think this fits with your demands at the beginning.
Don't be a nave realist.
Don't presuppose anything about measurement.
We totally agree with you.
If you stick to the formalism of the theory,
it tells you that the states are not independent.
That's it.
We stick to that.
And then, yeah, you're right.
I told you already three times, you're very right.
It's not a claim,
a simple claim about actual spin values.
In particular,
we are not presupposing spin values before measurement.
That would be a horror.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay. Thanks. No, I understand.
So it's best to think about these partial dependencies as dependencies
between quantum states.
So to speak.
I would say that.
I hope Claudia agrees.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
As a matter of fact,
I've been pushing the line in print for a long time that actually,
it doesn't.
So in these cases, it doesn't make any sense that that is in
the termines,
exactly because the partners that don't, do not have precise value.
So would be bad for me if I say that because I would contradict.
What I've wrote,
what I've written in print.
But if you go to the point, right,
you remember we start with necessary involvement,
which is a relation, right, between the systems,
which is encoded by exactly the state.
And then the move that you make,
you can make it, I mean, technically speaking,
you can make it exactly because that relation, I mean,
doesn't actually, it is not grounded in,
oh, I have this beam, it has this beam,
and they are anti-correlated.
It's exactly because you cannot make that move
that you can make the co-identist move.
So it's not only that we don't do it, we're not allowed.
Like, if that, because it has to be essential,
an essential collective relation in fine sense.
So if that was the case,
we couldn't even move to the claim
of essential necessitation to the claim
of rigid dependence between states.
So you look at the state, because yeah,
yeah, so it's repeating like,
and putting some details on what Matteo said.
So even from the metaphysics point of view,
just the straightforward metaphysics,
if we were to subscribe to that,
to what you said, Dustin,
I mean, the whole project will crumble down
because then we will not be able to pass
to the co-identist, to the co-identist actually.
Okay, I completely understand.
I just missed the point of the example, right?
Because we seem to agree that the claim cannot be
that the spin of one electron partially depends on the spin.
Exactly.
As an intrinsic property, obviously.
Yes, yes, exactly.
Yeah, yeah.
And that's just, you know,
when you use these toy examples, it's always like,
the second one, I think you're completely right.
And it's, so I report the Michael Desford quote,
because he said that very nicely, right?
But the good thing to, as you pointed out already, right?
It doesn't give you in and on itself.
It has some co-identist flavor.
Like, oh, the velocity, you know,
depends on the position of every other particle.
That's some kind of sounds, co-identism,
but it's really not, right?
As you pointed out.
I mean, first of all, because you have a velocity
that depends on the position of the other particle.
And you don't have a position of the other particle
depending on the velocity of one.
So you don't get the symmetry which you need
to run the co-identist story.
So you're completely right.
That there's some more work to be done here.
So here's one way, but this is very tentative.
So if it doesn't really true,
suppose I can have some principles such that,
suppose that I say that if one of my qualities,
let's say it depends on one of Paul's qualities, right?
I can make a claim that, you know,
I depend on Paul for one respect.
And if I depend, and then second principle,
if I depend on Paul on some respect,
I depend on Paul.
Now, if you-
Okay, yeah, you mentioned that in the talk.
I didn't put it together, yeah, yeah.
Definitely.
So if you grant me those things,
which are very controversial, right?
Because if you get me those things,
then you will get that every Bohmian particle
depends partially on every other Bohmian particle.
And this will be coherentism.
But of course, I mean, both the rich principles, right?
That from dependence between qualities of me and Paul
to dependence upon one respect of me and Paul,
and dependence from one respect
to just playing dependence on me and Paul,
both as a matter of fact are controversial.
And so I, so yes, I don't know what to say about those.
Yeah, thank you very much, that clarifies a lot.
So I think more about if and how it fits with Bohmian mechanics,
but I get the idea and the first objection I just take back,
you just clarify it to me.
Okay, thank you.
Paul, if you have a very good-
But it's just that, yeah, I mean,
it was just something that Claudia just said.
In fact, which reminded me of something
which has all that in the book,
which was, do you see the courageism
as being somehow dependent on non-locality
and tanglement non-locality?
Because, well, I'll leave it there.
I mean, to expand a bit further,
some people who support many worlds
would say that there's no entanglement,
no non-locality, there's no EPR,
but EPR-Belch, I'm barely looking for the name.
There's no EPR-Belch non-locality for many worlds.
So is there a connection with non-locality?
Is there a connection with non-locality?
Is somehow non-locality necessary
part of your view of what the coherentism involves?
So is the thought that if you are a many-world guy,
you don't think that the probabilities
for the joint state fails to factorize?
If they do factorize,
if they do, then there's no ontological question.
I think it's simply that if,
I mean, the problem is there are various use of many worlds,
but if you take the sort of view of many worlds
which Leves takes and which I take as well,
but in slightly different way,
then when you get a new Alice, Bob, Charlie sort of setups,
all that, what happens on measurement is fishing.
I mean, there's no Alice, Alice splits, Bob splits, Charlie split.
You can't get the, the, the, the better inequality argument work.
It doesn't work if you, if you accept that picture.
I mean, there are alternative pictures to many worlds,
which maybe that doesn't imply that.
So I would completely agree with Leves for instance,
that there's no, the implication is that for many worlds,
the implication is that for many worlds,
there's no spooky action at a distance, right?
There's, there's, there's not, there's not non-locality in that sense.
But basically we, we, I think, Claudio,
we agree on the fact that, you know,
your classical mechanics as a very simple ontology,
I mean, very intuitive ontology, it's not mysterious.
And it is basically union in the sense that you have local
monadic properties.
And if you put different systems together,
they don't surprise you.
They just sum up.
And if I understand correctly many worlds,
then you have a multiplication of classical stories, right?
In that case, there is no point in being specifically
a coherence specifically about quantum mechanics.
Then as we try to mention,
it is not just about quantum mechanics,
but today it was.
So I would agree with you.
It really depends on your interpretation.
And Claudio and I are really aware of this.
It is about time we start talking
about specific interpretations.
We, we know that.
And I think you, you, you've got a point.
Yeah.
Yeah, I just agree.
So, I mean, one, one, one, two, we make coherence.
So in the, in the paper, for example,
we use coherence to actually give you a non-causal,
let's say, explanation of the bell type,
of the bell type scenarios.
And of course, if you're many world theories,
you know, you will not need this thought.
So you will lose some, let's say,
initial appeal of coherence as a matter of fact.
I agree with you.
It's true.
Okay.
Okay. We don't have much time
and we have still have four questions.
I'm not sure we can have all of them,
but so next one is Mauro Dorado.
Mauro, you are muted.
You are muted.
Still, still muted.
Wait, let, I'm going to ask you to unmute.
Can you hear me now?
Might work.
Great.
So first, thanks to Christian for having put up
this series of workshops.
I think it's very important that we guys can
when talk to each other.
And then some congratulations to Mattel and Claudio.
I reread a paper and they're really masters
in combining metaphysics and physics.
They know a lot about the two.
So I'm just, but now the bad part.
The bad part, I don't know what, are you ready?
Because I don't know what dependent means.
Dependence, you talk about dependence.
I don't know what it means in science.
I have three possible readings.
One way to cash it out is probabilistic correlation,
which obviously is fundamental in the quantum correlation.
Notice that probabilistic correlation is symmetric
and irreflexive like your notion of partial dependence.
But correlations are not causes.
And this is well known in probability.
And we look for causes often
and causes are time asymmetric.
Now you have this dilemma.
Either there are no causes for entanglement.
And then we have to say that correlations are fundamental
in the same sense that free fall or inertia are.
Or if there are causes, then we must introduce time.
So there's a second sense in which you can talk
about dependence.
It can be a relation between physical magnitudes,
for instance.
And typically this is established by a physical law.
And I think Matteo did well in mentioning
that the notion of substance has been replaced
by the notion of law.
And then this is the line that comes from Kasira.
But now this is my point.
There are laws of coexistence and laws of evolution.
And it seems to me you just talk about laws of coexistence
while in science in general,
it's the latter kind of laws that are more important.
But think about the law of coexistence as a boil law.
I mean, that relates pressure and volume and temperature
as you know, but laws of evolution are much more important.
And because the world evolves,
so you have galaxies and then stars and then planets
and then life.
So it seems to me that if you just concentrate
on the problem of quantum correlation,
which of course you can do,
you forget the possibility of explaining them
in a temporal way.
So you're assuming that they are fundamental,
but if they are fundamental,
then you don't need any explanation.
So probably I talk too much,
but you're leaving out time,
it seems to me, in this discussion.
Okay.
Well, yeah.
Tell me.
I was actually, so I was writing down,
because I think it's important.
So two things, I think we,
so first of all, we might very well be experts
in the conjunction without being experts in the conjuncts
of metaphysics and physics.
Just this is a weird thing in which,
but I'm, so I mean, for more serious things.
So I think you're completely right.
At least that's what I was looking.
We weren't looking for causes
and we clearly weren't looking for,
you know, temporal, we just set it aside.
And as you pointed out,
I mean, that is just a very tiny part.
And it may be the less important part
of physics and physical explanations.
So we should clearly,
so whether there are diachronic relations of dependence,
I honestly don't know.
Like, it might be very well investigated.
So in that case,
give it Bomean mechanics in which the velocity,
which I mean, it's not,
but it's usually taken to be like another,
let's say an instantaneous property, right?
It depends on the position or what the other partners
might be, you know, one way to look at.
But I will just simply grant that,
we just didn't look for this, at least as of now.
Of course, but why not use in the notion
of probabilistic correlation,
which we know what it means,
rather than relying on this notion of dependence.
And I don't know what that means,
especially scientists don't know what it means.
Unless you talk about laws.
With that, so, I mean, I can say two things here, right?
So first of all, it seems to us,
so for example, take, take,
so there are two questions, right?
I mean, it seems to me,
one is unintelligibility, right?
I don't know what they are.
And why do you bring it?
And the second is,
even if you make me understand
what they're bringing more to the picture, right?
So for the unintelligibility part,
I don't know what they are.
I'm just gonna say, so for example,
clearly, for example, in the last part of the talk,
we just took it as a primitive,
and I just give you a formal, I mean,
a formal, of course, fine.
So these are, I would say,
we could be subject to the objection.
But now, in the first part,
like we actually, we talk a very specific,
you know, dependence relation,
and we just define that in terms,
model operators, entailment, and existence,
and quantifications.
Now, it seems to me that in that case,
anyone that understands that
should understand what I say.
Like, because it's just,
so the most straightforward definition, for example,
the ones that usually no one uses anymore,
like the model notion of dependence,
it's just X depends on Y,
even only if necessary,
existence of X entails the existence of Y.
Now, I just defined that using existence,
just first order logic and model operators.
Now, I can even grant you that
you can read the model operators
at a neurological possibility.
So I think that just by doing this,
I think I shielded myself from the fact.
I mean, if you insist that you don't understand,
then I'm just gonna say, well, then,
I mean, I don't know what to do
because I just gave you a definition of that.
No, it's not that I don't understand,
but scientists would have a hard time to understand it.
No, I don't think that's a worry.
I mean, we're doing philosophy here.
Scientists don't need to understand.
I worry about that.
No, I don't think, well, we discussed this many times.
It's the time that physicists get a course
on first order logic and model logic.
It's just time that physicists do model logic.
That's what I mean.
I think it would be too ambitious on our part
to convince physicists that they should use this concept.
They should use them as long as they want to do,
if they want to, philosophy of what they're doing.
But that's a different thing.
I mean, it's not like if you do philosophy of food,
you want to convince the cooks of certain concepts.
It's a different level.
No, but look, probability.
Otto, can I ask you to have a very last quick remark?
Yeah, yeah, sorry.
No, sorry, you.
I'm really enjoying this, but we are running super late.
I can talk to Matt there.
Just probability is also a model notion.
So anyway, I'll stop.
Yeah, again, sorry for interrupting you.
No, no, no, I just can just say one thing, which is important,
which is, apart from probabilities,
I think you're right in a certain respect.
But I might want to disagree a little bit about what,
just a bit, because when you claim, for example,
if they are fundamental, when you say one part of the objection
was, if they are fundamental, you don't need to explain.
Now, I think that that's wrong, just because that actually
meaning the following.
This goes through if and only if you
think a fundamental is independence.
And our point is exactly that.
I think that coherentism gives you
a picture in which fundamental is not independence.
Therefore, the fundamental items can be explained,
as a matter of fact, what the fundamental items should do.
They should not be unexplained.
They should explain everything else.
So that I think where we probably part ways a little bit.
And it's an interesting question whether physicists
are more attracted to the view according to which
the fundamental level should explain everything else
or whether the fundamental level should
be the unexplained one.
I don't have any clue here, like whether the physicists
are more attracted.
We have a bunch of those here.
I honestly don't know.
It's just I honestly don't know.
I don't know, Mateo, you have a last remark to make on this.
Actually, I want to say that I think
Mauro got exactly the point right.
We started off, no, I mean, in a sense,
we started off by realizing that a causal explanation
of the violation of belts inequalities
is not for coming.
So then you have two options.
Either you take them as fundamental in the sense
that you cannot explain them.
And this seems to be your position.
And this assumes that whenever you
use concepts which are not actively used by scientists,
they are not informative.
And I agree with you, you can do that.
So the natural thing to do in that sense,
you just take the non-factorizability of probabilities
as a fact.
And I agree with you, you can do that.
The other thing that we do, of course,
assumes that we are talking to people
that agree that grounding talk, dependence talk,
is informally.
It's a big if.
We are just saying, look, we cannot use probabilities.
That's the fact that we want to explain.
And you say, well, it cannot be explained
in terms of anything more fundamental in the sense
of physically fundamental, scientifically fundamental.
We agree with you.
And that's why we are doing metaphysics of science.
The big if remains.
I mean, if people don't buy into this grounding talk,
the things we've been saying for two hours,
obviously they will not cut any ice.
And I agree with you.
I mean, I know that you don't get convinced
because you don't see the point.
And there's not much I can do.
I'm just repeating the things.
I mean, as a philosopher, you should say,
well, I don't care about the theories of truth
because I know why not proposition is true.
But as a philosopher, you will say, no,
the fact that X is P grounds the truth
of the proposition X is P.
What I'm trying to say is that whenever you give
philosophical explanation, typically,
they don't use scientific concepts.
I agree.
Yeah, that's our starting point.
Thank you.
Thank you, all guys.
That was a very nice exchange.
And OK, so I have to say sorry to myself,
Aurelian and Alberto, who are on the list.
But I have to go.
I really have to go to get the vaccine, which is a good news.
But I, which means I really finished the meeting today.
Sorry.
Well, I was joking on myself, but sorry to Aurelian and Alberto.
I couldn't allow you to ask a question.
Sorry.
I mean, you can write us, right?
We would be happy to actually discuss this.
You can maybe send it.
Well, you have the emails in the mailing list.
So Christian, I can try to chair the discussion.
I mean, I don't want to be unfair to the speakers.
I don't want to force it because if I leave you the chairing,
then it's up to you.
If you leave me for London, the speakers won't.
Otherwise, I'll have to ask your apologies for having to.
I would be happy to.
OK, let me first stop the recording
because it's on my computer.
So I'll do this.
