If you don't mind, Hippo.
Yeah, of course, of course.
Cool.
I mean, if it's bad, don't put it on YouTube.
We can discuss about this later.
We can also cut, you know, if there are questions.
Yeah, OK.
We can cut some parts.
All right, so welcome, everyone.
I'm very happy today to introduce Hippo Lit, Durden.
I was a colleague of mine, which are at the office,
although we've almost never been to the office
due to the pandemic, but we stayed in touch anyway.
So yeah, Hippo is going to present a paper, a very nice paper,
I believe, called Argodillion Hunch from Quantum Theory
on why the measurement problem is a self-referential paradox.
Stage is yours.
Thank you very much for the introduction.
So yeah, to give you some context,
so I'm going to present you what I'm going to present you
is based on the paper that I wrote for last year
FQXI essay contest, and I had the chance.
So I won the third prize to this essay contest.
And so it's going to be published sooner in a book
with the other winning essay.
And so the topic of the contest was
undistability and computability and unpredictability.
And so the topic was basically, there
are some rigorous arguments that show
that what we can prove, predict, or compute is limited.
And so do these arguments, do these results,
like for example, Griller's CRM, as any implication for physics?
This was the topic of the contest.
And so my essay of course straight
will kind of answer this question.
So here is the outline of my talk.
So first, I will talk to you a little bit
about my main motivation.
The question is fix paradoxical.
Then I'm going to present you what
I called Gaudelian Ensch, and try to analyze the mission
problem in the light of this Gaudelian Ensch,
measurement problem, and the Wigner-Fernsford experiment.
If I have the time, I would also like
to say a few words about contextualities,
party paradox, and analyze the Frosch-Gerner paradox
to give you my view on this new paradox.
If I'm too short on time, I will go directly
to the last section.
Well, I will try to maybe just compare my view with the already
existing interpretations, whether they are
realist or anti-realist ones.
So of course, if I'm not clear at some point,
don't hesitate to ask me clarifying questions.
And I hope we will have a nice discussion after the talk.
So let's start with my motivation.
So I don't know if everyone knows about this article
from Ernst Baker.
So it's entitled The Logic of Non-Simultaneously
Decidable Propositions.
It was published in 1960 in the review in The Electica.
And so basically, this is a seminal paper
for quantum contextuality.
This is the first paper where the Core and Speaker results
appears in the literature.
So it's seven years before the Core and Speaker paper,
but the result is already in this paper.
At least maybe not prove really rigorously,
but it's enunciated.
And so there is an epigraph to this paper, a motto put here
by Speaker.
And it's a quote from Ferdinand Gonset, who
is a Swiss philosopher.
And it's the following one, La logique et d'abord
une science naturelle.
So logic is, at the first place, a natural science.
What does it mean by that?
Actually, so shortly, Gonset defended
the idea that logic might be empirical.
The idea that logic might be just
at least some kind of logic might just
be some kind of, yeah, an empirical or a future birth
science of any object whatsoever.
And Speaker kind of agreed with these points.
And of course, so maybe some of you
know that there was, so a few years later,
this famous debate between Putnam
and Dumet on the exact same question,
is logic empirical?
So Putnam defended the idea, and Dumet was against the idea.
And it's basically the idea that this logic is empirical.
And if quantum theory, in some way,
is going against classical logic,
so maybe we should revise classical logic on what
the quantum result set would get.
So yeah, so I'm not going to answer directly
this question, is logic empirical.
I'm more interesting in the dual question,
or the mirroring question, is physics paradoxical?
What do I mean by that?
So if we take paradoxical or paradox
in the etymological sense, so what goes against the doxile,
what goes against the common opinion,
well, the answer is quite trivial, right?
Because I think we could all agree in some sense
that scientific research in general
is driven by paradoxes, is driven by something
that is against common opinion.
Otherwise, we won't research anything.
Everything will be just, well, common opinion.
And scientific theories are very often
counterintuitive, whether it's quantum or not.
I mean, almost every theory is based on something
that is counterintuitive or paradoxical.
This is where we want to search.
So in this sense, it's quite trivial.
This is not what I'm interested in here,
because, of course, quantum theory
goes against common opinion, but it also
seems to go against classical logic.
So the sense of paradoxical that I'm interesting in here
is a more precise one.
It's the one of logical paradoxes,
which can generate self-contradictory statements
and things like this.
So just to give you a quick reminder,
the most famous of one of these logic paradox
is the layer paradox.
So probably everybody knows this one,
but I'm just going to remind you.
Anyway, so what is the layer paradox?
So we have a layer.
We have a layer here, and the layer
is enunciating the following sentence.
The sentence is false.
Why is it a paradox?
Well, if the sentence, this sentence is false is true,
then the sentence is false.
And if the sentence is false, then it is true.
The paradox emerges from the fact
that we have a self-referential structure, logical structure,
and a contradiction.
And this leads to a form of overdetermination,
because the sentence is both true and false.
If it is true, it is false, and if it is false, it is true.
And so if we define, give a really broad definition
of decidability as the ability to associate a true value
to a sentence, a proposition, then we
can say that this sentence, the layer sentence,
is undecidable.
There is a lot, of course, of various versions
of this paradox.
So one is the straight and layer paradox,
where you have two layers, Alice and Bob,
but it's basically exactly the same structure.
You have self-reference, a contradiction,
which is going to lead to some kind of overdetermination.
So in the straight and layer, Alice
is saying Bob's sentence is false,
and Bob here is saying Alice's sentence is true,
and so you see the circularity, and they're
going to control themselves at the end.
OK, and so the layer paradox underlies
really, really famous results in the foundations of logic,
so the Goddard theorem, so again, a little reminder for everyone.
So I'm not a specialist of logic, a disclaimer.
I'm not a specialist at all.
This is why I'm going to give some really broad view
on what the theorem is, because I
don't want to go into the mathematical details,
because I won't be able to talk about this.
But so the Goddard theorem, so there are two Goddard theorem.
The first one stipulates that a theorist
is sufficient to demonstrate the basic theorems of arithmetic
is necessarily incomplete, meaning
that there are statements which are neither demonstrable
nor refutable.
And these are called undecidable statements.
The second Goddard theorem shows that theory is consistent,
so there is no contradiction inside the theory
if there are undecidable statements.
And what I want you to remember for what
is going to follow for my talk is the following.
We can just take it as the broad sense that
is underlying the Goddard's results
or the fact that who realizes the proof of the consistency
of a well-behaved scientific theory
must be external with respect to the theory.
In the sense that he cannot use only the proof
theoretical tools allowed by the theory.
She must also use meta-theoretical tools.
If you want to prove that your theory is consistent,
you have to be external.
You have to use theoretical tools that are not inside the theory
that you are studying.
This is really important.
There is also another famous theorem
in the foundation of the logic that is also
based on the layer structure, on the layer paradox structure.
It's Daski theorem.
And this one stipulates that any description of the truth
of a proposition must be made in a richer meta-language
than the language in which the proposition is stated.
So who grabs the concept of truth for a well-defined theory
cannot only express himself in the language of the theory,
he must use a higher-order meta-language.
So yeah, I hope everyone gets what I mean
by meta-theoretical meta-language,
because it's going to be important for the rest of the talk.
And so here's physics paradoxical.
I told you that I was going to understand the sentence
with the in the sense of logical paradox, for example,
the layer paradox.
And so now that I remind you what Goddard theorem is,
I can talk to you what I mean by Goddardian Unch.
So it's an expression that was coined by Sangolius
in this paper, Epistemic Origins and the Foundation
of Quantum Mechanics.
And he said, so in the paper, he said that Goddardian Unch
is the idea that the origin of the peculiarities
surrounding quantum theory in phenomena related or at least
similar to that of incompleteness in formal systems.
So my way to rephrase it with my own words,
what Goddardian Unch is, is to say,
what if the paradoxical nature of quantum theory
could find its source in some undecidability analog,
at least, with the one emerging from paradoxes
like the layer paradox.
So it's quite general, it's quite broad,
but this is, yeah, this is the idea
that I want to argue for and defend here.
So now that you know about my motivation,
you know what I mean by Goddardian Unch.
Let's try to analyze the measurement problem
in the light of this Goddardian Unch.
So you know that measurement problem,
there are various ways to define it.
There are arguably different versions
of the measurement problem.
The measurement problem I'm interested in here
is what I call the what's in the box problem.
So as Jaislav Druckner expressed in one of his paper,
analyzing the quantum measurement problem,
it's the question of what makes a measurement a measurement.
There is nothing in the theory to tell us
which device in the laboratory corresponds
to a unitary term summation
and which device corresponds to a projection.
So we want to know what do we put in the box?
Do we put the device, do we not put the device?
To illustrate this, to be a little bit more clear,
let's start with on the one hand with a Qubit, okay?
This Qubit, so I didn't put the normalization here,
but of course there is some normalization.
We start with a Qubit.
And so for instance, you can just imagine
that you sent a photon on a beam splitter
and your Qubit is what happens next, okay?
So, and your Qubit is inside this quantum box, okay?
This is your quantum system that you want to study.
Now, in this case, the measurement process
is going to be described by a projection,
projection either on the zero state or on the one state, okay?
This is your device.
You ask the question in the computational basis,
is it zero or one?
And it's going to be projected on either zero
with a certain probability or either one, okay?
But on the other hand, you could say, okay,
but these devices are physical system.
And in the theory, there is nothing that forbids me
to also describe my devices as physical system
and quantum system.
So I can define a quantum state for my devices.
And so the initial state M just means my devices
are ready to perform, are ready to measure.
And so the same measurement process
is now going to be described as a unitary evolution
of this compound system composed by the Qubits
and the devices.
And at the end of the unitary evolution,
we are going to end up in a completely
maximum entangled state, zero, zero plus one, one,
where you have, if the Qubits is observed in state zero,
then the device zero click,
and if the Qubit is in state one,
then the device one is going to click.
This is the state.
And so here you see that what's inside my quantum box,
what's in the box is different than in the first case.
Here, what's inside the box is both the Qubit
and the measurement device
that are completely entangled at the end.
And so the measurement problem arises from this fact.
We have two ways to describe the same physical dynamic,
the same process,
the same measurement process in two different ways.
And so we put in each,
we have put something different inside the box,
but is there a right description?
Is there a right description?
And how can we make sense about this?
But with just quantum theory,
we have two ways to describe the same thing
in two different ways
that seems to be contradictory.
So maybe there is some tension,
I don't know in the formulation of quantum theory,
so we can analyze this afterwards.
Another version of this problem that I'm going to analyze
is the Vigno...
This is actually what I'm going to analyze.
This is a Vignoference thought experiment.
And it's basically just a meta illustration
of the same problem I showed you before.
The Vignoference thought experiments
wants to answer the question,
what happens when an observer observes another observer
observing a quantum system?
So in the first case, we still have our qubits
and now we are just explicitly saying,
so here is the observer,
this is we're going to call him Alice's friend
or the friend.
And so the friend is going to measure the qubit
and the qubit is going to collapse.
So its measurement process is going to correspond
to projection, the collapse of the wave function.
On the other hand, well, we have Alice,
who is going to describe the compound system
made of the qubits and her friend.
And so in Alice's quantum box,
we have the friend box,
but the friend that is also inside the big box.
And so she's going to describe this measurement process.
So the measurement of the friend,
she's going to describe it by the unitary evolution
because it's inside the quantum box.
She's going to describe it quantumly.
And so the bigger friend for the experiment
is actually the same problem, what's in the box.
So we have two ways to describe the same process
in something that seems to be contradictory.
So for the friend, it's a collapse
and for Alice, it's a unitary evolution.
Okay, so now I'm going to give you my analysis
of this problem.
I'm going to define the notion of theoretical object.
Theoretical object is just an object described by the theory,
so a quantum object, okay?
So qubit, for instance.
We also have a meta object,
meta theoretical object and meta theoretical object
is just an object that is using quantum theory
that is supposed to be outside quantum theory, okay?
And I also define the term meta context,
which is just the set of the studied quantum objects,
so the theoretical object
and the meta theoretical object that is studying it.
So in the first case, my object is a qubit.
The meta object is the observer, is Alice friend,
and the meta context is the set qubit Alice friend, okay?
And so when he applies,
so when he's measuring the qubit,
it's going to be a measurement process
described by a projection,
and so the final set will be either your other one.
On the other hand, we have this case where this time,
Alice is, seems at least a little bit different, right?
Because she's going to be able to measure
the compound system of an object and a meta object.
So we might want to call her a meta meta object, okay?
It seems that we are in a higher level of abstraction.
So we could start by saying, okay, Alice is a meta meta object,
she is a meta observer.
And so here the meta context is the compound system
of the qubit and the friend, what's inside the box.
And the observer or the meta observer system is Alice.
And so she is going to be described
what's happening in the box.
So the measurement process is inside the box
by a unitary evolution,
and the final state is going to be this entangled state.
And so now we can try to see
what are the underlying assumptions here.
I'm going to propose a set of assumptions.
I'm not claiming that it's complete.
Maybe there are some hidden stuff in what I'm,
but this is basically what I want to do.
How I want to derive the paradox.
So the first assumption is universality.
Universality means that quantum theory is correct
and can be applied to any object.
Another assumption that is crucial according to me
is what I called non meta contextuality.
What does it mean?
It means that the truth values
that are associated with quantum proposition.
So what I mean by quantum proposition
is just two quantum states.
The truth values that you associate
with the quantum proposition
are independent of the meta context.
So the truth values that you are going to associate
to this state or this state are independent
or considering this meta context or this meta context.
This is kind of equivalent with the notion
of observer independent facts by Chancellor Prokner.
And so if you assume these two assumptions,
universality and non meta contextuality,
this corresponds to something
that I corresponds to absolute universality.
And what is absolute universality
is the fact that quantum theory is correct
and can be applied to every object
irrespective of the meta context.
So to give you an example for so to derive,
to show you how we can find a paradox from here,
let's assume absolute universality.
Let's assume that we have universality
and non meta contextuality.
And now we are going to assume
that we have an infinite chain of observer.
This is actually the fundamental chain.
So you just assume that you have an observer,
a meta observer, a meta meta observer.
Okay, so we start by an object.
We have an observer that is observing the object.
We can put these two guys inside the quantum box.
So we have a meta observer.
We can put her also in a box.
So we have a meta meta observer.
We put it in the box.
Meta meta meta observer, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
And you can go to infinity like this.
And if you want, you could just assume
that at the end of the road,
you have some kind of ultimate meta observer
that you can call God if you want.
It corresponds to some kind of laplacian demand.
So let's go with a demon.
And so if such a demon exists
and if such a demon can measure the whole universe,
so every object, so because we assume absolute universality,
then the demon is necessarily excluded from the universe
because if he's not excluded from the universe,
you're going to have self-affirming problems.
He's going to just measure himself at some point.
And so it's going to lead sometimes
to some laplacian consistencies.
I'm not inventing this.
So there is a theorem that shows this quite rigorously.
It's a Breuer theorem.
It shows that if a theory, whether it's quantum or classical,
it works for both.
If a theory is considered to be absolutely universally valid,
the theory cannot be experimentally fully accessible
due to self-affirming problem.
And so there seems to be some kind of tension
between absolute universality,
so universality and non-meta-contextuality,
taken together,
in which the measurement process is described theoretically.
And then the notion of measurement
in which measurement is treated as a meta-phoretical process.
So try to be a little bit more clearer here.
Assume that you have absolute universality, okay?
So if you want to describe the whole universe,
then necessarily, if you want to measure it,
you have to be outside.
But if you're outside the universe,
you're not part of the universe,
so your theory is not universally valid
because you're outside of it.
There is one object to you that is outside.
So it means that if you want absolute universality,
you cannot talk about measurement.
You have to be inside the universe, okay?
So you don't talk about projection at all.
You just talk about unitary evolution and that's it.
Everything is entangled to describe
the wave function of the universe,
the unitary evolution of the wave function of the universe,
and you're just inside.
You're just an object like any other object,
but you're not an observer.
And if you try to take the position of an observer,
you're going to face self-reinforced problems.
And yeah, that's it.
And on the other hand, you can also play the other chord
where you're okay with abandoning some form
of absolute universality and just talk about measurement
as what it is.
A measurement is a meta-theoretical process.
So interaction between an object that is outside the theory
that is using the theory
and an object that is described by quantum theory,
that you use quantum theory to describe it with.
So let's go back to our Ignorance problem.
So here is, according to me,
the underlying three assumptions
that are contradictory with themselves.
So we have three assumptions, universality,
non-meta-contextuality and measurement.
And by measurement, I mean the fact that you have
an interaction between an object and a meta-object.
And this interaction is meta-theoretical.
So and by meta-theoretical,
I mean you describe it by your projection.
The projection is not at the level of quantum theory.
It's at the meta-theoretical level.
And so now we can just play the game
which assumption we want to draw.
So I'm going to say some stuff here.
I'm not sure at all about what I'm going to say.
So of course, for the discussion,
we can just discuss this if you disagree with me.
I believe that GRW is not quantum theory.
I guess everyone agrees with it.
So they just dropped universality in some sense.
Maybe also measurements, I don't know,
but at least they dropped universality.
Because in universality,
I assume that quantum theory is correct.
This is not true for them.
Everlight and many worlds,
they just give up on measurements,
or at least they should.
It's quantum theory from inside.
It's just absolute quantum theory.
They describe the evolution of the way function of the universe.
And so they should not talk about observer at all.
And if they don't do that, they're completely consistent.
And yeah, it's just quantum theory from inside.
The boy boom, I'm not sure at all.
I guess they abandoned the projection, I'm not sure.
And there is a form of extra contextuality
in the boy boom theory.
And so I believe that in some sense,
they are going to abandon something
inside non-metacontextivity, but I'm not sure at all.
I think that my assumptions are not super convenient
to analyze the problem theory.
So we can discuss this later,
but I don't really know how to interpret that.
And of course, so the way I formulate it,
in my opinion, the most logical solution,
the most evident solution,
is to just give up non-metacontextuality.
This is why I formulate this set,
because I believe that's the most natural solution here
is just to drop non-metacontextuality.
And so unknowledge metacontextuality, what does it mean?
Unknowledge metacontextuality means that you acknowledge
that your theory is still universal,
but not in an absolute way.
It's universal in a relative way.
It's universal with respect to a metacontext, okay?
And so remember a metacontext is a definition of the set,
what is studied and what is studying in some sense.
Also, if you don't like the word studied,
yeah, what is quantum and what is not quantum?
You just have to put a cat somewhere.
The cat can be put anywhere.
It's an indiscriminative sketch.
So it's the shifty cat that Belle was telling about.
And so, yeah, it's completely, it's a universal cat.
You can really put it anywhere.
And here, the notion of meta-observer
or meta-meta-object has no sense at all,
because if you try to start building a York,
you're actually of observers.
You're going to end up with the paradox
I just showed you before with the Laplace and Deman.
So here, everything just needs two levels.
Every description is two levels.
The level of quantum theory
is the level of the meta-theoretical.
And that's it.
So everything is perfectly consistent
inside this meta-context.
Everything is perfectly consistent
inside this meta-context.
And you don't talk about meta-meta-objects, actually.
Alice is just a meta-object
and inside the box, we have the object,
the theoretical object, and that's it.
And every question that you ask,
if you are inside the meta-context,
if you ask question of what is happening
in the other meta-context, it's just undecidable.
It's just, so you could say it's meaningless.
We can also debate this, but yeah,
it's going to raise just inconsistencies.
To see that, I give the following illustration.
It's inspired by Alexei Greenbaum epistemic loops.
So just describe all the theoretical object
of your theory by a loop, okay?
Every point of this loop
is going to corresponds to a theoretical object.
Now, when you cut the loop,
you send an object inside the meta
to the meta-theoretical domain.
So in our first meta-context,
we have the qubit that is on the loop
and we have sent the friend outside of the loop.
It is meta-theoretical and it's going to,
when it's going to measure,
the qubit is going to do a projection, okay?
Now, in the other context, the friend is on the loop.
It's still part of the,
is treated quantumly with the qubit, okay?
And now the object that is outside of the loop is Alice.
So she's the meta-theoretical object
and here you have your object, theoretical object.
If you ask questions,
if you are, let's say you are in this context
and you ask question,
what is happening inside the box?
And if you interpret the friend as a meta-objects,
when he's actually treated as an object,
it's like you're just ignoring the cuts.
It's like you're ignoring meta-contextuality.
You just go back to non-meta-contextuality.
And if you do this, if you ignore the cuts,
and if you want to treat a measurement
as a meta-theoretical process, so as projection,
well, you're just going to have
self-referential paradox at the end.
Okay, I don't know how I'm doing on time.
Yeah, I'm going to be maybe a little bit quick,
but I want to talk to you about contextuality.
So I will take some time to do this.
But so yeah, this was actually the main part of the talk.
Okay, so now what I'm going to say
is just to give some further examples and that's it.
So now I'm going to talk to you about contextuality.
So a reminder what is contextuality.
So it comes from the Coran-Speaker theorem
that actually shows that the quantum formalism
cannot be extended in such way that Boolean logic
holds in the extended domain.
Quantum logic is based on intertwined Boolean algebras
that cannot be embedded in a global Boolean algebra.
There has been a lot of work on the Coran-Speaker theorem,
a lot of generalizations, graphical generalization,
topological generalizations, ontological generalizations.
One of the generalizations that I really like
is the contextuality, which is the topological generalization,
where contextuality is seen as a logical obstruction.
So contextuality emerges when you have locally consistent data
that are globally inconsistent.
Nice way to represent this in just a pictorial way.
It's not rigorous at all,
but just to see, to try to picture what it means
is the construction of the Penrose Triangle.
So you imagine that you have your datas,
let's say for example, it corresponds to,
I don't know, some observables,
that you have three bars, A, B, and C,
and you can form three local contexts with these three bars.
You can, let's say measure A with C,
you can measure A with B, you can measure B with C,
and each context is completely consistent.
You see that you don't have any paradox here, right?
But when you try to define a global context,
you face some kind of logical contradiction.
You see that you end up
with a completely logical, impossible figure.
And so this is the way that contextuality is working, actually.
So in a similar way.
They're not saying that this is quantum theory, of course,
but it's analog, at least.
And so a nice illustration of this contextuality,
Abramsky, a nice canonical example, is the Hardy Paradox.
So what is the Hardy Paradox?
You have two players, Alice and Bob,
and they share a quantum entangled state.
So you have two qubits that are actually entangled.
Alice and Bob can ask two questions to their own,
to each part of their system.
The first question is the computational question.
Is the particle in the zero of the one state?
The other question is the diagonal question.
Is the particle in the plus or minus state?
And so the initial state of the particles,
it is the following entangled state,
zero, zero plus one, zero plus one, one.
And what is nice about the Hardy Paradox
is that you can really easily picture it with quantum optics.
So I come from quantum optics.
So this is where I really like to draw photonic circuits.
And so you just imagine that Alice has a positron,
Bob has an electron.
The positron is going into a magzindar.
The electron is also going into a magzindar,
and you're just going to collapse them together.
So join them.
And so this is basically just like,
I don't know if you know this,
but it's an elizio-viteman bond,
but with a generation to bipartite elizio-viteman bond.
And so what's happening is that
if the positron is going on this path, the zero path,
and if the electron is going on the one path,
they're going to meet.
And if antiparticles meet,
well, they destroy each other.
And so this is why you don't have the state zero one here.
Okay.
This is how you get zero, zero plus one, zero plus one, one.
They just annihilate each other in the middle.
And so here are the quantum system.
So what's in the box?
Again, what's in the box is this, okay?
And the quantum proposition.
So what is your quantum description
of what's happening in the box is this state.
When Alice and Bob are going to ask
a computational question, both at the end, okay?
So Alice and Bob are going to ask,
is it zero one, is it zero one?
And so you just write what's happening in the box
in the corresponding context.
And so you end up with this system.
And of course, you can rewrite it
depending on what they're going to ask.
So before measurements,
if Bob is going to ask, is it plus, minus,
and if Alice is going to ask, is it zero one,
you can just rewrite the previous state
in the different basis, okay?
So this is before measurement, of course.
This is what's inside the box here.
But you can, and you end up with a new quantum proposition
associated to a different context, measurement context.
Of course, you can do it in the other case.
And of course, you can also do it
when they both ask the plus or minus question.
Now, what we are going to do
is we are going to add a meta theoretical statement
to the quantum proposition.
So you have the quantum proposition,
which is a theoretical statement.
So it's just the quantum states, quantum theory.
And now you're going to add a meta theoretical statement
on top of it.
So for example, here, one,
the meta theoretical statement that we are interesting in
is Alice or Bob, it doesn't matter, but let's say it's Bob,
is going to infer from this
that they can both obtain the minus-minus state, okay?
There is a probability of one over 12
that they are going to end up in the minus-minus state.
This is a meta theoretical statement.
Now we're going to do this for each context, okay?
So in the other context here,
we have Alice who is going to infer
that if she has ended up in the minus states,
then it means that Bob gets the one state, okay?
So this is a meta theoretical statement
that you can infer from this quantum proposition.
So you have this one also where here Bob is saying,
if I have one, then Alice gets one.
And the final one, it's Alice who is saying,
if I get one, Bob gets plus.
And of course, you can see now that just start
from the beginning,
with just looking at the meta theoretical statements,
Bob is saying we can both get minus.
Alice is saying, if I get minus, Bob gets one.
Bob say, if I get one, Alice gets one.
And Alice says, if I get one, Bob gets plus.
And it's completely contradictory
with the starting point.
And so this is what Abramsky and Etal
are calling a layer cycle.
This is not actually the layer paradox, of course,
but it's kind of analog.
You have some kind of loop
and that is contradicting itself.
And so what is the conclusion from this
in the light of my good Dery and Ange?
Well, if meta theoretical statements are attached
to quantum proposition,
they cannot be embedded in a global Boolean proposition
in general, by global Boolean proposition,
I mean global classical proposition.
And so if you want to associate a true value
to quantum propositions,
the meta propositions are infected in some way
by the non-Boolean logical structure of quantum theory.
And they become just globally indecidable
and can potentially lead to some kind
of logical contradiction analog with a layer.
And this is why, yeah,
how I argue for good Dery and Ange
from quantum contextuality.
Okay.
And so now that I presented you the winner friend
and the good Dery and Ange from the winner friend,
I presented you contextuality
and the good Dery and Ange from contextuality.
Now I can talk to you about Frouzsigar and our paradox,
which is just a mix of these two guys.
So you may know that in the field of quantum foundation,
nowadays there is a renewed interest
in the beginner friends for the experiments.
Why?
Because recently there has been a lot of work
on some kind of new hybrid paradoxes
that are just mixing a quantum paradox,
oh, paradox, yeah, let's say it's a paradox.
So that are based actually on some form
of contextuality, a contextuality at albumsky.
And they just take this quantum paradox
and they just mix it with the beginner friend.
So we have different examples.
So there is this paper by Chaslav,
a no-go theorem for observant-independence facts
where he beginner-friendified the CHSH inequality
and also the GHZ argument.
You have the most famous one is the one by Frouzsigar
and Renner, where they just beginner-friendified
the hardy paradox.
You also have a work where Vilacini and Nouria
and Ligadierio generalize those results
to describe them in a GPT framework.
And they also give as an example,
a beginner-friendification of the PR box.
And so I have personally worked on the beginner-friendification
of Corrine-Specker theorem with the Marine Paris Square,
but recently just I've been put on the archive,
so I'm going to stop working on this.
But yeah, Sangolias has also done this
so with the Marine Paris Square.
Okay, so but we are going to talk
about the most famous one who is this guy.
So what is a beginner-friendification?
You just take your qubit, so your computational basis,
you have here the observer, the qubit,
is going to measure it in the,
if you just measure it in the zero one basis,
the beginner-friendification is just this thing.
So you're just going to have a meta-observer,
so I have not abandoned any assumption here,
so I'm still going to talk about meta-observer for now.
So you have Alice, a meta-observer,
who is just going to measure in the computational basis,
this computational basis,
this is the qubit,
the compound system of the qubit and her friend.
And so you can interpret this basis
as an observer-level basis.
Why? For Alice, at least.
Why? Because it's kind of,
it's like Alice is just asking her friend,
did you find zero or did you find one?
And but it's going always to be consistent.
If the friend has zero, it's going to observe zero,
so it's going to be the zero, zero state,
and if he observed one,
it's always going to be the one-one state.
So at the end, you're just asking,
what does an observer observe?
What does a friend observe?
So this is why I call this an observer basis.
You can also, beginner-friendified,
of course, this is the most important part.
You can beginner-friendify the diagonal basis.
So here it was just a measurement
in the plus-minus state here,
but now at the meta-level,
you assume that it's still a computational measurement
inside the box here,
but it's Alice who is going to measure
the compound system in the diagonal basis.
This is really important.
And now she's going to actually perform
some kind of quantum measurements
on the compound system of the qubit and her friend.
So this is, yeah, this is this definition.
And you can interpret this at the meta-observer level
because it's going to be interpreted
as the observer level, of course.
Here, the friend is described quantumly with a qubit.
And so what does the Frasci-Gerenna paradox do?
It does, yeah?
It's just, it's going to take every quantum proposition
from the Rd paradox and beginner-friendified them, okay?
And just rewrite them according to what I just showed you,
the transformation that I showed you.
So if you have the one plus, zero plus, zero minus state,
you're going to have the one, one plus,
zero, zero plus and zero, zero minus state.
And here you have to be careful
about the other spaces you're considering
because so when it's a computational basis,
it's an observer basis.
So it's the system and the friend.
But when you have the diagonal basis now,
it's really the meta, at the meta level basis,
at the meta-observer basis.
And so you have done this with the quantum proposition
and you're also going to do this
with the meta-theoretical statement.
And so in this case, we say that if Alice gets one,
Bob gets plus, this corresponds to this.
And this is going to be now interpreted
as if Alice's friend gets one,
then Bob gets plus.
Okay.
If Alice's friend gets one, then Bob here gets plus.
And so of course we have the previous slide cycle
that I showed you.
And now we're just going to vignify all of this.
And so we have Bob who is saying we can both get minus.
Then Alice is saying, if I get minus,
Bob's friend gets one.
Bob's friend say, if I get one, Alice's friend gets one.
And then Bob's friend is saying,
if I get one, Bob gets plus.
And it's contradicting the first statement.
And this is how you have a contradiction.
There is a two difference
with the RD paradox and the regular friends.
Here in the RD paradox,
you could interpret it as something
that is fully contingent.
And actually it's what's only statements
you could associate with Alice or Bob, but that's it.
Here you have each statement that is associated
with a different observer.
So this is one point that is really interesting here.
And also unlike the vignoves friend for the experiment
where it seems that there is some contradiction,
but there is no really logical contradiction.
Here you have a logical contradiction
that comes from the RD paradox section.
You have just logical contradiction.
And so how to interpret this?
So in their paper, they proposed the following
set of assumptions.
So universality, quantum theory is correct,
and can be applied to a system of any complexity.
Consistency assumption observer and meta observers
should be consistent with each other.
And a single outcome assumption,
measurement is a single outcome.
This was a lot debated in the literature,
especially the consistency one
who is quite weird.
And actually, so I'm just going to give you my take on this.
I believe that there are two things
that underlies this assumption.
The first one is non-contextuality
because to derive the paradox,
it's really based logically on the RD paradox.
So you have to assume some form of non-contextuality
at some point.
So the fact that truth values
associated with quantum proposition
are independent of the measurement context.
And so for instance, if you're a Bohmian,
you just, since Bohmian mechanics
just drops non-contextuality,
they just fine with the Froucica-Rena paradox
because they have contextuality.
And so they just give up on this one,
but they're not giving up of something really strong.
They're just saying, yeah, our theory is non-local
and it's contextual.
And so yeah, they have no problem
with the Froucica-Rena paradox at all
because they just give up on non-contextuality.
You can also, inside this there is also
non-meta-contextuality that is underlying here.
And non-meta-contextuality is actually
just the bigger friendification of non-contextuality.
And so if you are like me,
you want to talk about meta-contextuality,
you're also super fine with Froucica-Rena paradox.
There is no paradox at all.
And so the conclusion,
if you drop non-meta-contextuality,
the conclusion of the paper,
of the Froucica-Rena paper,
that is a self-referential use of quantum theories
contradictory claims is not surprising at all.
Because if you just analyze that quantum theory
can only be applied in a defined meta-contextual,
that's the use of quantum theories that meta-contextual,
then there is no surprise at all.
Okay, so yeah, of course,
you can also use the same picture with the loops.
I'm not going to stay here
because I want to go to the conclusion.
So here is my point.
Analyzing the measurement problem
as a logical error is avoided when you are to this
undiscommitted cards that you can put everywhere.
This idea is not new.
I don't have the time,
but if I add, I wanted to show you a little bit of literature
just to show you that I have completely stolen my idea
from other people.
That's our old ideas that were made in the 70s, 80s and 90s.
I don't want to take too much time to talk about them,
but if you want, yeah, there is a lot of literature
that are just comparing the measurement problem
as a logical error and analyzing more rigorously
than what I'm doing,
the comparing the measurement problem with good end theorem
and trying to say that measurement problem
is just a self-referential problem.
So there is this paper from Perez and Zurich
where they conclude that also quantum theory
can describe anything a quantum description
cannot include everything.
And so quantum theory is universal,
but it is not closed.
And this is really important is that here,
I'm also going for some form of incompleteness of the theory,
but it's not an ontological incompleteness.
It's a metaphysical or logical incompleteness.
It's the fact that the theory is not semantically closed.
It cannot be universally valid
if you want to absolutely universally valid
if you want to talk about measurements.
So you have a form of incompleteness,
but I don't interpret this incompleteness
as something that is ontological,
like the Bohmian do for instance.
There is this paper which is really, really cool
by Dela Chiarra who is, yeah,
really comparing set theory with quantum theory.
And so I don't have,
I won't take the time to dive into this,
but yeah, so you have a logical inconsistency both
in both for set theory is the resultant in me.
And for quantum theory, it's a measurement problem.
And so she derives a logical inconsistency
from two assumptions and derive three kinds of solutions.
And she compared each time what's happening in set theory
and what's happening in quantum theory.
And in my opinion, it really makes sense.
And this is a really interesting paper.
And so yeah, the interpretation that I'm defending,
so meta-contextuality corresponds in your paper
to what she called the Feynman interpretation,
where the evolution of the compound system
is not governed by Schrodinger equation.
And any apparatus which realizes the reduction
of the wave function is necessarily only
a meta-theoretical object,
but it can be any object in principle, of course, a theory.
And she also, of course, she also compare this,
so she said, such a conclusion does not sound
like a subjectivist claim.
On the contrary, it seems to be very close
to some similar limitative results
that we have accepted in logic,
like Goddard theorem or Tarski theorem.
And she also points out that I'm quite agreeing with this,
that it's a kind of purely logical solution.
And if it's sufficient to avoid the paradox,
it doesn't give any explanation
of what's really physically happening in the box.
And for some people, I completely understand
that it might be unsatisfactory.
And so, yeah, I'm going to skip this.
So I just wanted to say it's not new now,
just to compare it with other solutions,
so other interpretation.
So again, this is my statement.
The measurement problem is the logical error
emerging from the fact that the theoretical
and the meta-theoretical are not distinguished.
The use of the quantum theory,
of quantum theory is meta-contextual, this is my claim.
So in GRW, they talk about some kind of,
they have some kind of cuts,
but the cut is completely ontological, okay?
And they introduce it by modifying quantum theory,
and it's a cut that is as completely different nature
and is even, I would say, justified
in a completely different way.
But what is interesting of us with GRW,
it's that it's a true physical theory.
You can refute, you can test it empirically.
So still, yeah, of course, it's really interesting.
So it's not an interpretation,
it's an interesting new physical theory.
The variable, it's quite funny.
I have, of course, I don't want to have some issues
with the Bomians, but in my opinion,
they just embrace the paradox.
They just made the paradox ontological.
And what do I mean by that is that the theory is completely
really, really strongly contextual,
not in the metaphysical sense that I'm presenting,
but in an ontological sense.
They say nature is contextual.
And this is weird, but why not?
Just, yeah, the big difference
with what I'm defending here is that the incompleteness
that I derived here, analyzed from a logical point of view,
they just interpret it straightforwardly.
And in my opinion, maybe it's too quickly.
They consider it to be something that is ontological.
So there is something missing,
but I'm deriving the thing that something is missing
is not some kind of object that we are not describing.
It's just a conclusion from a metaphysical statement.
And of course, I'm not saying I'm right and they're wrong,
of course, but it's another take on the same issue.
And I've written many worlds,
in my opinion, just quantum theory from inside.
And it's perfectly consistent in that way.
They don't have measurements.
They're not talking at all about meta theory.
So no projection at all.
And I think that if they stick to that,
it's perfectly, it should be perfectly normal,
but you cannot talk about,
so you should not talk about observable measurement,
because if you do that,
well, full-measurability fails due to self-reference.
It's from the Borges theorem.
And so this actually justifies the introduction of worlds,
because what they do that I don't do
is that they interpret quantum states as ontological.
And if you do that, of course,
you want to, yeah,
define some kind of concept to describe what it is.
And so, yeah, it's just quantum theory from inside
with different worlds.
And actually, the world explained why also
we didn't have full-measurability.
You, of course, cannot,
you cannot measure the way function of the universe,
of course.
And, yeah.
And also CSM, so context system and modalities.
So it's Alexia of FMV-Granje interpretation.
So after some long discussion with Alexia,
I figured out that they have the kind of same logical cut
that I'm defending here.
But what they do, and I don't do,
is that they made it ontological based on empirical evidence.
And I'm not particularly fond of it, but why not?
But they want to say more.
They want to be more realistic than I am.
And so they want really to add some ontology.
And so that cut is not, at the end,
is not the same because it becomes ontological.
Okay, I'm going to almost end here.
I'm really close to the end, sorry,
if I'm a little bit long.
Now, of course, I'm going to just talk about
the heirs of Copenhagen,
the new Copenhagen interpretation,
because, of course, this is what I'm kind of defending here.
So recently, Mathieu Leifer gave a talk
where he was comparing objective
and perspectival Copenhagen interpretations.
I'm not sure if I agree with what's this separation.
So according to him, there are two kinds
of Copenhagen interpretation.
There is the objective one where there is an objective fact
on the matter about what an observer observes.
And there are the perspectival ones where he says that,
well, what is true depends on where you are sitting.
I'm not sure that this class actually exists,
but if it is right and if it exists,
and as he said, this new hybrid paradox,
so the Wigner-Frenz paradox,
there are some kind of no-go theorem for this case.
If you are a Copenhagen or a neo-Copenhagen,
you have to be perspectival, okay?
You have to agree to put the cut anywhere in principle.
Of course, maybe more pragmatically,
you're not going to put it everywhere,
but you have to agree that on a logical point,
you can put it everywhere at some point.
So there's a fundamental distinction
for all this interpretation
between the meta-theoretical and the theoretical object.
The interpretation that is probably the closest
to what I presented you here
is the relational quantum mechanics
who's made the cut completely democratic.
There is also Bruckner paper on no-go theorem
for observer-independent facts,
which really was a huge inspiration for my paper.
And of course, Cubism also defends the same idea.
What they do more is that they just interpret
meta-theoretical object as Bayesian agents.
And that's the only thing they do that I don't do.
But on a logical point of view, it's exactly the same.
Okay, so this is my conclusion.
Of course, you can do a lot of metaphysics from here.
It's not the end of the road.
So my conclusion is, is physics paradoxical?
So quantum paradox is, I argue that they are not physical,
but a much from a lack of metaphysical distancing.
And what do I mean by that?
They're just, yeah, lack of metaphysical analysis.
And I quite agree with Wittgenstein's sentence
that the subject does not belong to the world,
rather it is the limit of the world.
So every discussion that you want to make about the world,
it's limited by the definition of what is the subject
and so to be a little bit provocative,
absolute universality has some kind of good-like flavor
on these two paradoxical features that cannot be said.
On the other hand, if you analyze,
so this is a kind of consian point of view,
but if you analyze the fact that the cat is
as a translator status,
that the translator status of the meta-theoretical object,
well, the classical Boolean description
is the condition of possibility
of the rendering of quantum events.
What do I mean by this is that you have two levels,
you have the levels of your theory, quantum theory.
And if you want to talk about it,
you have to use a classical description
and that is going to be some meta-theoretical statement
that are going to be the condition of possibility
for the rendering of your theory,
but you have to be careful about this
and you have to be aware that you're doing this distinction
because if you're not, you're going to end up
with Frouzsiguer and our paradox and stuff like this.
So you have to be meta,
the use of quantum theory is still meta-contextual in the end.
So, yeah.
And this is really close to,
so Wheeler is probably the first one
to have defended this Guderian answer, actually.
So there is a famous anecdote where that says
that he went to Guder's office to try to talk to him
about an eventual relation, an eventual link
between Guder theorem and the Eisenberger Center
in principle and Guder, according to the story,
just kicked him out of his office.
But still, Wheeler's intuition, I really like this intuition
so that physics is not machinery.
Logic is not oil occasionally applied to that machinery.
Instead, everything physics included
derives from two parents and is nothing but cathode tube image
or the interplay between them.
One is a participant, the other is a complex
of undecidable proposition of mathematical logic.
Just food for thoughts to start the discussion.
So of course, because I guess there might be something
that you disagree with, but some kind of ideas
that we can discuss for the last hour.
So the question that I'm from this,
that I'm asking myself is quantum theory or physical theory?
If you think that physics has to give an ontology,
then my answer is, yeah, maybe not.
Because of course, I didn't put any ontology
or I didn't, on the logical point of view,
I just stick to quantum theory as mathematical theory.
I don't need to put any ontology here.
So maybe quantum theory is not actually a physical theory,
maybe.
It also lead me back to the first slide that I showed you
about the logic as physics of any object whatsoever.
Maybe quantum theory is just a physics of black boxes
at the end of the physics of the relation
between black boxes.
So it might still be physics, but not physics of entities
or physics of particles or physics of microverse or whatever.
Maybe quantum theory is just a physics of black boxes.
We can of course discuss this sentence,
classical Boolean description is the condition of possibility
for the rendering of quantum non-Boolean events.
We can also ask ourselves,
I am interpreting the cut as something functional.
Is it satisfactory?
Because when I say functional, what I mean,
what I really mean is,
I don't want to consider it as ontological, of course.
But maybe we can say, I don't know,
but maybe we can say more, maybe we can say,
so it's not functional, but maybe it's epistemological,
maybe it's metaphysical, maybe it's semantical.
And it's just, yeah, goes back to the question,
what is an observer?
For example, cubism to them observer or Bayesian agents,
but I don't have to say that.
For example, Roveli is not saying that,
but they share the same ground.
So yeah, there is some discussion, I guess,
to have here.
And also, is it a condition of possibility of what?
For an object to have a property,
for knowing the property, for defining the property,
for talking about the property, I think that there is also
some work to do here.
It also is related with the question
of non-interacting quantum systems,
and is meaninglessness the only solution.
And actually, so yeah, because when I'm,
if I'm saying all that matter,
it only makes sense when I have a defined meta context.
Well, what's happening when you're not interacting
with the system?
Can we say something about this,
or does it just has no sense?
And so, Christian actually worked on this in the paper,
so quantum relational indeterminacy,
and I think that there is a lot of things to talk about this.
So yeah, he interpreted the correlation quantum mechanics
in the light of metaphysical indeterminacy,
and I think that, yeah, meaninglessness,
so I'm defending meaninglessness,
but I guess this is not the only solution, of course.
You can, of course, be more realistic than I am.
You can also talk about structural realism,
which affects.
And my last point would be,
I don't think that anti-realistic or neocopinagin,
or whatever you want to call them,
this approach is my approach.
I don't think that they have to be really take
as just interpretations.
I think they're just some kind of starting point
from a program research.
It's like, we want to analyze quantum theory
for what it is.
When we do that, we don't feel the need
to add some ontology.
There is nothing to tell us what is,
where is ontology and stuff like this.
But now that we have understand the problem
on the logical, at the logical level,
we want to try to go beyond.
And this is often what Fox is saying about cubism,
is this is not an interpretation,
it's just the start of a program of research.
I think that the design is also doing something like this,
when he is talking about reformulating quantum theory
with intracinist mathematics.
Something that I will be really, really fond of,
but I don't have the time to do that.
But if someone wants to do that,
I will be really fond of this work,
is to try to reformulate it,
in the light of sparse symbol, imaginary body and algebra.
Alexey Limbaume also worked towards this past.
He's defining the fact that quantum theory
has a theory of formal languages.
And yeah, of course, something that will be really,
really interesting is that,
I'm saying you will have quantum theory
and a meta-typical theory,
but when we actually formalize the meta-typical theory,
can we say more about the observer?
Can we define actually in the meta-typical theory,
what is the observer?
Because I have not done that, of course.
But yeah, this is something that will be really interesting
to do or to discuss.
And so thank you for your attention.
Thanks a lot, Ippo.
Great talk. Thank you.
So, Arellian said sorry to leave.
I was curious to hear his reaction,
but I guess we can have a chat with him.
Yeah, yeah.
So, any questions, please raise your hand.
So, arellian, can you say a few words?
Yeah, yeah.
So, any questions, please raise your hands
or let me know your name in the chat.
Okay, yeah, I've got a question.
Okay, you can go.
So, yeah, I hope it is very interesting.
And I did have a bit of a look at your paper beforehand.
So, I'm not sure which helped a bit,
but it's a really nice way you presented it, I thought.
I think that what's striking me is,
it seems to be turning on a sort of analogy between
undecidability and indefiniteness.
And maybe your reference at the end to Christian
and talking about in not indefiniteness,
but indeterminism, but I mean different words
for the same thing, really.
If I wanted to defend this from a many worlds point of view,
what I'd say is, and I know that if Levy's still here,
he won't agree with this,
but I think in terms of what's inside the box,
knowing that the box, it has to be causally isolated
from the outside, right?
So, I would be thinking in terms of what's in the box
goes into superposition, it goes into an indefinite state.
And what's that supposed to mean?
Now, it could be taken to mean somehow it's undecidable
whether it's one or zero,
or it could be taken as sort of some sort of
just fundamentally paradoxical state
as the way, as he introduced it,
thought it's just an absolutely impossible state
to send anything to be in.
And that was, what did he call it, a ridiculous state
or something like that.
But on the other hand, one might hope to have an account
of the indefiniteness.
And I think, I mean, I was just reading a recent paper
by Christian, he gives a very nice, very clear example
of indefiniteness, which I don't think is exactly applicable
in quantum mechanics, but it's a nice analogy,
which is he talks about his red jumper,
which doesn't have a definite hue.
And there's nothing mysterious about that at all.
It's just partly scarlet and partly crimson.
So it's perfectly clear.
So I would say, from a many world's point of view,
that what happens inside of the box is the measuring instrument
splits into one showing up and one showing down.
These are on separate branches.
But the branching can't get out of the box
because it's kind of caused the isolated.
Yes, I agree.
Right.
So if there were an account of indefiniteness
on the lines of what Christian suggested using myriology,
then it seems to me that all the mystery disappears completely.
It's quite, you've got a quite clear sort of statement
of what's in the box.
And just on the overall point,
it's also called the Quine Duhem hypothesis, isn't it?
The idea that nothing is sacrosanct in science.
You can go right down to questioning logic,
but at the same time, of course,
you're trying not to cut as deeply.
You want to avoid cutting as deeply as possible.
You want to go down to logic,
then you're really cutting deep.
So it's the sort of last-ditch option I would have thought.
But anyway, that's...
Yeah.
I mean, on the last point, I would say,
I want to go as deeper as I can to really try to see
where the problem is hiding and something like this.
But on everything, I would say,
I completely agree with you.
This is why I'm saying that for many worlds,
this is why I talk about quantum from inside.
In many worlds, you don't have any incompleteness.
In many worlds, it's completely closed
because you're describing the wave function of the universe
and every object.
What I'm saying is that if you want to talk about
meta theory or formagerability,
it doesn't make any sense because this
in many worlds quantum theory is closed
and so it doesn't make any sense
to try to put some levers or stuff like this.
The observer is just an object
like any other object
because it is entangled,
so the device is entangled with a qubit of things like this.
But I agree with you that
there is no indefiniteness in Everett, right?
It's complete.
Well, I mean...
I think that...
I mean, I think that's a problem with many worlds
that there isn't indefiniteness
because I think at the micro level,
the ontology is obscured
in many worlds and because it doesn't...
But that's going off...
going off target a bit.
But I mean...
So what I mean to say...
I mean, if you agree with me about the...
the box, inside the box,
the object and branch,
and so, you know,
there's...
and if you've got an account of what it is,
well, there you've got an account of...
of it.
It's indefinite, for example.
It's in a branch state.
It's got one part in inverted commas
and another part in inverted commas
with one string, zero, one string, one.
But to say that there's no measurement,
I mean, it just seems to me that from the many worlds point of view,
when you measure something in an indefinite state,
you split into your branch and that's what happens.
That's what measurement involves.
So...
So it seems unmysterious to me.
You've got measurement, but measurement is...
it doesn't have a single outcome.
That's the difference.
But then, of course, it seems to me that having a single outcome,
you know, is a fundamental assumption
in what you're suggesting, which is fair enough.
But, yeah.
Yeah, okay. I see the your point.
But yeah, so...
I don't know what to say.
I agree that if you want to talk about measurement,
under my analysis,
there will be some issue,
but I guess that's when you do the splitting,
you don't describe it.
It's not a projection, right?
So this is how you get out of here.
So yeah, yeah, okay.
But so would you say still that so...
Would you agree with the way I'm defining things
that measurement should be treated, you know,
as something metaphorical, not theoretical?
Or not, because...
What should be three...
Measurement.
Measurement is metaphorical.
Well, no, I didn't think...
Well, I mean, from my point of view,
it seems that within eight teams in the many worlds,
the count is completely unmysterious.
It's...
Yeah.
It's front.
And there we are.
I mean, it has definite outcomes,
but it has multiple definite outcomes.
That's what...
You know?
Yeah.
It's just an alternative sort of point of view, really.
Yeah.
Yeah, okay.
Okay, thank you.
Lev?
Maybe I have too many complaints.
Sorry.
The first thing...
You know, I've worked in foundations
of quantum mechanics for many years.
And I remember a time like 20 years ago,
that every two years there was a conference
on quantum logic.
Or maybe even every year.
And I think fortunately, it's kind of stopped.
It was slightly resurrected lately,
and if I understand that you are trying
to resurrect this idea.
I don't know, yeah.
Yeah, quantum mechanics is not clear,
but maybe what we...
The reason is logic.
For me, it's kind of strange,
because I would like to use normal logic
to talk about everything.
I agree.
The problem with quantum mechanics and logic,
when you think that observables have values.
If you forget about quantum mechanics,
I think the first thing I studied in quantum mechanics,
a wave function.
So the wave function tells me that X
is described by a wave function.
There is no value for X.
There is a wave function of X.
Probability or whatever, no value for X.
Observables do not have values.
This is a very strange idea to attain values to observables.
And if you try it, you'll get all kinds of questions
back here, whatever it's all for me.
And not to the point.
If you study quantum mechanics,
you don't talk about values.
And if you do talk, you come to all kinds of paradoxes,
you don't have any interest whatsoever, to my point.
So this is kind of generated.
Number two.
What I understand from Godel and the signables,
you need a theory which has infinities.
If theory is finite, there is no Godel theory.
There is no such thing.
I don't see where is this infinities in measurement problem.
I can arrange a single qubit, a single photon and a beam splitter
and two outcomes.
And I don't see any kind of any infinities there.
And there is this, from me, as I understand,
there is a measurement problem.
Formalism of quantum mechanics tells that somehow both A and B
present in the formalism, but we see only one of them.
And no infinities whatsoever.
But you say that Godel theorem and measurement,
undecidable measurement problem are kind of connected.
And maybe the final kind of a small point,
which I just, it's not very important,
but I'm surprised that you have this list,
GRW, Dibroly, Everett, and you consider them,
especially Dibroly, a Bohm and Everett.
And you kind of say one, it's non-contextual,
and another is just something else.
I think both old GRW, Dibroly, Everett say,
forget about measurements, forget about observers.
This is a theory about physics.
I tell you what exactly happens there.
In particular, I will understand what's happening
when I perform some measurement.
But measurement is not a primitive and there is no,
and this is just kind of, I have some,
clearly there is some ontology.
Now, there is kind of contextuality in Bohm
if you want to have values.
In some cases, then you know,
if you have initial condition of Bohm,
you know that the spin, particular device will come up.
You reverse the current and it will come down.
So this is kind of very much non-contextual,
non-contextual property.
You say the spin is contextual when you have an EPR pair.
But really, the Bohm doesn't want to talk about this.
It says the outcome is not,
he says there is no value for spin.
There is only wave function and Bohm in position.
And I can tell you exactly what will happen
if you'll tell me which measurement you will do.
So I'm not sure that from,
the same as Everett,
Everett says there is a big wave function at the both.
I know exactly how, and I have some recipe,
how to correspond to experience of creatures there.
So I don't see the difference,
conceptually it's strange that you put them kind of different.
Okay, I put this because I was not sure actually.
So thank you for the clarification.
I was not sure about the variable,
how to interpret the problem with nothing.
I was not sure if I could compare it with Everett
as some kind of contemporary from inside,
or not.
But so according to you,
there is also, they are also giving up on measurement
in a sense.
So yeah, okay.
Thank you for the clarification.
On the second point,
with the infinity problem.
So first of all,
I'm not saying that
good old theorem is completely related to the measurement problem,
or that the measurement problem is all the current speaker theorem
is the same thing as a good old theorem or something like this.
This is why I use,
oh, I didn't, but somebody has first used the word hunch.
It's just a hunch.
And then the next,
there seems to be some kind of analogy,
but I'm not trying to derive something that is really
rigorously like the good old theorem.
And actually, of course,
as a point that it's not possible at for now,
I mean, and in some people that are more rigorous than what I presented you.
So more rigorous on the logical aspect.
They actually,
they say and show that this is,
there is no good old theorem here.
So I would agree with your point.
So sorry, maybe I was not clear enough,
but it's just,
I'm just talking about analogy,
some kind of incompleteness analog to good old theorem.
There is some kind of infinity in what I presented you,
but I'm not sure that this is going to be,
yeah, to make any sense here.
It's the infinite chain of observers,
but yeah, I don't think this is related to what you pointed out.
But I would agree with you.
This is not good old theorem and it's just an analogy.
I'm just interested in an analogy.
And on the first point,
I'm not a logician, I'm a physicist,
and I don't think I'm interesting in trying to revive quantum logic
or things like this,
but as you guessed,
I disagree with the first point that was saying that
logic is empirical.
I kind of disagree with this.
I don't think that we have to develop quantum logic.
I think that we have to be careful that when we want,
when we talk, what we are using in our everyday life is classical logic.
When we want to talk about quantum theory,
well, the current speaker theorem shows that
you cannot do it if you're not careful,
because if you do it and you're not careful,
you're going to end up with some kind of logical contradiction,
because you're talking in a classical sense about stuff that are not classical,
that you have non-buttoned algebra,
and that's it.
This is what I'm talking about.
So I completely agree with the fact that
when we are talking about classical,
and I don't want to develop quantum logic,
maybe it's interesting, but this is not what I want to do here.
I just want to point out that we have to be careful.
When we talk, we talk with the classical language.
Quantum theory is not classical language.
If we are too quick and we just put classical language on quantum theory,
we're going to end up with logical paradoxes.
This is all I'm saying.
But I think I agree with the point.
But just maybe, can you tell me specifically,
what I'm against is values for observables,
which is necessary for all this.
Of course, you will say classical language,
so the observables have to have values.
This is the idea, because I say,
forget about values for observables,
and then no paradoxes.
Yeah, okay.
I guess my point would be,
you can talk about values when you're,
so as you guess, I'm kind of anti-realistic.
So when you talk about values,
you have to do an experiment.
You have to interact.
If you don't interact,
you don't talk about values.
This would be mine, so.
But I guess we would disagree on that,
because I'm not...
Then it's related to your examples
like Renner, Fraunhofer,
Extended Wigner,
because you have different observers
who see different outcomes.
And I really, I'm still kind of very confused
why all these things was revived.
Clearly, in one stage,
an observer has two different outcomes,
and you have these two.
You take...
When you two have your logical contradiction,
you use some of the facts
which know some of the observer,
and then this Wigner or whatever omnipotent friend
makes some experimental observer,
he creates another outcome,
which was not before.
So there is no...
It's clearly not legitimate
to use all this chain,
because in all this experiment,
when you make another measurement,
so the previous memory,
you cannot rely on it,
because you make a measurement on an observer.
You change his results.
So it's...
In one place, you said
there is a single outcome
for every measurement.
When you measure an observer
who performed the measurement,
you make the single outcome
two outcomes, so many outcomes.
So it's clearly not...
So this stops
all this logical line, I think,
because I think it doesn't work.
I think I agree with you
that the logical line
that I am defending
assumes a single outcome.
And if you do that,
well, you just give up on non-metacontextuality,
and so you just end up
with the logical argument
that we have...
Our description needs a metacontext,
and comparing...
Ask questions or comparing values
or observation from different metacontexts,
in my opinion, is meaningless,
or maybe you can say more metaphysically,
but it's going to lead
to something that is undecidable.
I also agree with you that if you drop
the assumption that you have a single outcome,
like probably
as many others do,
that you also don't have any issue
with this paradox.
I just think this is two different solutions.
I want to stick to one single outcome,
and you don't stick to one single outcome.
Last remark, I will stop here.
When people talk about Wigner,
this was the idea of Wigner,
that Wigner can measure his friends
who measured some outcomes,
and Wigner measured that his friend
in a superposition of getting two outcomes.
So when you consider Wigner's friend's experiment,
how you can add the posterior
single outcome, because this is the whole story of Wigner,
that there is no one outcome.
Tested that his friend has two outcomes,
two different outcomes.
So this is, I think, complete...
I don't understand it.
How people continue to talk about Wigner,
Wigner's friend,
and add to this single outcome?
There is a contradiction.
Wigner tested that this is not so,
so you cannot assume this.
So even the people who are not many world people,
I say whatever, but this is a special case
when you arranged many world.
Even not a many world will say that this Wigner
has these apparatus which makes them
in this clean superposition.
So for some, at this moment,
there are two outcomes.
Maybe very fast they will stop to be,
but in some moment,
in the moment of measurement of Wigner,
there are two outcomes.
You cannot assume that there is one.
I think it depends on different stuff.
I think it depends on how you interpret the quantum states,
because if you want to operate it as a real object,
I guess you're probably right,
but I have not made this assumption here.
I think it also depends on how you interpret measurements.
Is it a physical process or not?
And so my take is that quantum theory does not...
So if you take quantum theory from outside,
so if you do the distinction between
metal object and object,
if you do quantum theory from outside,
so your theory is not universal,
it's just a measurement and you can project
and you can have one single outcome in both cases.
This just means that you cannot apply quantum theory
to the universe.
And it also means that...
Yeah, I don't know what I want to add.
But if you do quantum theory from inside,
then the measurement is just universal,
a unitary evolution.
And here I agree with you that you...
You might get two different outcomes
from the point of view of Alice, for example.
But I think that it depends on the assumption
that you're just on what you want.
If you are a realist about the wave function
and if you want universality,
I completely agree with you that you might have two outcomes.
I think it's just a different flavor,
a different point of views.
I don't know, maybe disagree with me,
but yeah, this would be my answer.
Okay, certainly I think that the physics
explains everything myself.
Okay, but let me stop, I think.
Thank you very much for your comments.
We still have some time,
so I'm going to ask you a couple of questions,
but then we can...
I think one of the things I wanted to ask was...
First, let me say I really enjoyed the talk, really, honestly.
I never told you in person.
I think it's very good in...
You're defending very consistently
an approach to the theory, so I appreciate that.
Of course, I think you know where we might disagree,
so I'm not going to repeat it.
But there might be one thing
that someone who read the paper might be
sort of worried about,
which is maybe what Otso Lev was pointing to.
One way in which I understood,
which might be wrong, the measurement problem,
it was the idea that we should not
have the word measurement as a primitive.
This is what I thought part of the problem was.
It's not the problem,
it's part of the ideas behind the problem.
So now you seem to be telling me,
I think there was a slide where you say
that the measurement is a metal level operation
or something like that.
Sorry if I misquoted you.
No, this is not just gay.
It's quite at the end.
At the end?
Yeah, I guess so.
When you start off giving the conclusion...
Yeah, maybe useful to read the quote so that I...
I guess this will be there.
Maybe one of the last slides.
Yeah, I guess so.
Yeah, that one.
This one?
Yeah, the previous one.
So the idea is that it's a logical error
because there are metatheoretical...
We need to have a cut
between metatheoretical and theoretical operation
or something like that.
And the idea seems to be that...
So if that's the case,
then it's even more pressing the worry
that measurement is a primitive
or something like a primitive.
Or if it isn't, then I would just simply ask,
okay, what's the definition of a measurement?
What kind of thing a measurement is?
And I think one of the good things
about realist interpretations or interpretations
is that they want to either avoid talking about measurements
or at least defining what a measurement is unambiguously.
And so, yeah, I just...
I think that there is a worry always
in this kind of way of putting the measurement problem,
which might not be...
Which might not reflect what the worry many people have is actually...
I don't know what you think about that.
I quite agree with you because the measurement problem is
very often interpreted from
an interpretation point of view
or at least a realistic point of view.
And I completely agree that realists
don't want measurement as a priority, of course,
or most of them.
Or at least they want to...
I don't know, maybe consider the measurement process
as a physical process that you can describe with your theory.
And I completely agree that I'm completely taking a different point.
Maybe more... I don't know.
I don't know how to call it.
I don't know if you want to call it anti-realistic
or pragmatic or I don't know.
But what I want to say is the measurement problem...
Well, the problem is that we don't know
how to describe the measurement.
Or we forgot that we are doing a measurement.
And so, I want to interpret the measurement
as not something that is part of the theory,
but as something that is relating
something that is outside the theory,
maybe using it or maybe, I don't know,
but something outside,
the relation between something outside and something inside the theory.
So, an object that is outside and an object that is inside.
So, maybe it's a different measurement problem.
I don't know.
I don't know.
But yeah, I guess I will agree with you that I want to talk about measurement.
I want to say...
But maybe measurement is not the right word also.
Because, of course, if you take Carlos in the interpretation,
it's really weird to talk about observer.
It's really weird to talk about measurement because
an electron measuring another electron doesn't make any sense, right?
So, maybe measurement is not the right word.
I don't know.
But if you have...
Because I think that from this logical point of view,
you can have different metaphysical takes.
You can have a fully anti-realistic takes
and say, okay, we are doing measurements
because we are scientists.
Quantum theory is a scientific theory,
and it's human physics.
And so, when you interact with objects,
this is you as a physicist that is interacting with objects
and you're doing a measurement.
And so, this will make sense on this.
And actually, cubism is quite close to this
because they say, we are quantum...
We are Bayesian agents.
We want to predict...
So, it's not measuring.
We want to predict stuff.
Quantum theory is a tool to predict.
And that's it.
You can do that from this, starting from this argument
that I gave you, logical argument.
But you can be more realistic than that.
You can be like Carlos.
And I think that's one thing that...
I don't know if he does it or not,
but one thing that Carlos should do or should do
is to avoid the word measurement, maybe,
because, yeah, again,
electron and measurement doesn't make any sense.
But I think that you can still talk about a relation
between something that is meta-theoretical and theoretical.
And it's in sense...
What is meta-theoretical would be the object
that is not treated quantumly
and what will be theoretical will just be
the object that is treated quantumly.
And, of course, you can describe both objects quantumly also.
It will be just a different context.
So, in the words of Carlos,
it will be, I think he's talking about not reference frame,
not frame, it's terminology, actually,
but it will be a different relation.
But...
So, I'm very curious about this reply,
and I'm going to...
I just had...
So, the reply seems to entail that you can sort of
replace this problem or replace the results you're giving
or part of them without mentioning the word measurement,
but just by...
Yeah, I think so.
Okay, that would be something I would be happy to see,
because I'm still thinking that much of the things you said
are, you know, intertwined with...
Yeah, I agree with you.
So, it would be a very nice challenge, which I...
I agree. It won't be easy. It would be a challenge.
But as you know, I have some kind of anti-realistic way of thinking,
and so this is why I completely agree with you
that my way of presenting things is intertwined,
because sometimes, even I see it myself,
sometimes I say,
but what I'm saying here is completely anti-realistic,
and I might not need to be...
to use this terminology to talk about this.
So, I think that you can rephrase it in a purely logical way
without talking about vision, I think.
And I think so, actually,
that's, for instance, the study you did,
the metaphysical study of what you did about Carlo,
could also be applied to some...
this same argument in some sense,
because you want to say more,
so here I'm arguing for meaninglessness,
but of course you could want to say more.
So, yeah, I agree that I'm using some terminologies
that are sometimes going towards anti-realistic interpretations,
but you could still be more realistic than I am,
and still be based on the same logical arguments,
I would say.
But it would be a challenge, I would say.
I would be happy to discuss.
Again, I think if you...
one of the reasons why I took the mission
of trying to do metaphysics with Carlo's interpretation
is because at least I couldn't...
I didn't see in that interpretation the problem
I mentioned about having measurements as a primitive.
So if it's everything about interactions,
I can ask the question you have in the last slide.
So what about systems that do not interact?
I can ask questions that seems to be...
in a way, seems to be physical questions.
Then, of course, there are counter-intuitive results,
but at least I don't have measurements,
I don't have observers, which is what worries me.
And if you can do the same without measurements,
then, of course, then I think I see a ground
where you can ask me physical questions.
So I believe it can, I'm not saying it is.
I believe it's possible, maybe it's not, but I believe it.
Thanks a lot for the reply, really useful.
Other questions? Yeah, yeah, sure.
Well, just to say something which might possibly be relevant,
because what seems essentially in your point of view,
is this sort of, this idea of a division between a level
and a metal level. Exactly.
That sort of did cost me.
And if I would say, I would define a measurement
as just a particular type of entanglement,
but it happens to be entanglement
which creates a representation of an outcome.
So, you know, you don't get an electron measuring an electron
because electrons don't create representations
of the world around them.
People do.
So people do, so they have thoughts
and they make statements about the outcomes.
Perhaps cats and dogs create,
I'm pretty sure they do create representations of,
but the whole issue of representation
and what constitutes representation in the brain
or not, no, that sort of thing.
There's quite a sort of fluid area
and, you know, not very well understood.
But it does, it can easily, you know,
historically has created the impression
that a person on the body has different things,
that a thought is something, an object, you know,
the ontic sort of level or how would you say,
the ontic status of a thought is something different
from the ontic state of the brain.
And so you get this sort of generating
some sort of dichotomy, which perhaps, you know,
leads, is connected with your sort of level,
I don't know, but I just wanted to throw that in as a thought.
No, yeah, thank you. It's an interesting comment.
I mean, yeah.
So one thing that could be also argue about what I'm saying is that,
of course, yeah, I'm just dropping the fact that
when I'm talking about measurements as a method theoretical process,
I'm saying this is a projection.
And of course, you might disagree with that.
You might.
So, or you could have, because when you're talking about
measurement as entanglements, to me,
it's just you're describing it at the theoretical level, right?
So because at the end, it will just end up as a,
the process will end up as a unitary evolution.
But, but then of course, I mean, yeah,
I mean, it would be, but yeah, I mean, this is so this is also,
yeah, you could argue that maybe you can still have two levels
without saying you have the projection.
And yeah, I mean, you might also define two levels
differently also, I guess.
Yeah, it seems interesting.
Yeah, I won't try and pursue it further, but
can I say anything more about it?
Well, I mean, yeah, the idea of measurement is just
a particular type of entanglement.
It really does focus on the point that
it's particular sorts of objects which do measurements.
It's not electrons.
It's not people do measurements, but maybe, you know,
maybe cats and dogs do measurements, maybe, I don't know,
snails do measure, but what's the issue is whether the object
which gets entangled creates a representation
of what it's entangled with.
Let's put it like that.
But that's what it is, which sort of,
the way I see it is what, if you like, defines that category
of entanglement, which is a measurement.
Yeah.
Yeah, it really needs some more thought.
But yeah, thank you for the comment.
It's interesting.
I have a question from Alberto.
I just wanted to make a couple of observations.
First of all, thanks to people.
It is very stimulating talk.
It certainly covers the ramification of topics.
And I want to make a comment on Gerdl and on Wigner.
On Gerdl, I would like to remind that
his theorem has a plus and a minus.
The minus is famous is the query logical system
will have undecidable propositions.
The plus is that if you have an unclearing system
because of Gerdl's construction of his proof
is extraordinarily easy to prove a proposition
and their opposite at the same time.
So the structure of the theorem shows that
you have, although it's a probabilistic empirical test,
if you have an unclearing system,
you can easily prove that he's unclearing.
If a system persists in time like quantum mechanics
for a hundred years without having been able
easily to show that there is a quite highly likelihood
that he's coherent.
Nevertheless, I think there might be
just that the analysis has to be made on two levels.
Because on the experimental and the practical
and scientific level, there is a clear way to use it.
And the coherence is proven by his persistency of effectiveness.
While on the descriptive verbal level,
and there you have all interpretations,
there might be something that is used
with easily generated paradoxes.
And it makes quantum mechanics as falling
in the opposite case of Gerdl's theorem,
which is where inconsistency is easily generated.
Although at least not the inconsistency
is highly relevant once you use the theory for physics.
So I think your hunch is maybe to be thought in this way
or like I encourage you to visit taking these two sides
of the Gerdl's theorem.
The other comment is on Wigner and Wigner friends.
My understanding, and I encourage as well to think about this,
is that Wigner brought his famous paper as part of a book
which is called The Scientist Speculates,
which was edited by Isaac Isador,
now called Good, who was one of the promoters
of the first artificial intelligence revolution.
He was a member of the Turing team.
And the article is about mind-body relationship.
So if you actually go and read the article,
Wigner tries to explore, is purely explorative,
is not assertive,
explore whether in the measurement discussion
there could be a mind-body topic.
And the post-Wigner analysis is that that part of the article
is for most people incorrect.
Nevertheless, he introduced this idea of the cap,
although he doesn't use this word term,
and the cap is terribly useful to compare theories of measurement.
So it's a tool that makes it externally useful
to compare different theories.
So from this perspective, one has to be careful
not to fall back in the mind-body mistake.
Accomplish your view as you are.
That's the origin of the article because it's a strong temptation.
And one of the temptations, and Wigner says it in his article,
is the fact that when you do measurement on quantum statistics,
the knowledge of the future measurement increases.
Because as you sample, you need to get the born distribution,
the knowledge of the future measurement increases.
That's where the mistake starts.
And then is there something in the memory,
in the memory of your head, and so on.
That's why he goes in the wrong direction.
So that mistake should be avoided.
Nevertheless, the quantum theory, as it is,
does not really address this issue with Wigner pointed out in his article.
How does it work?
The knowledge of the future measurement increases.
There's nothing in the quantum theory that says anything about it.
So these are maybe the ingredients that are more relevant
to do the next step in your analysis, just as my opinion.
Thank you very much for the talk.
Thank you for the comments. It's very interesting.
Yeah, on the second comment, I completely agree with you,
that we should be really careful not to fall back,
especially in the way.
So I guess between physicists and philosophers, it's okay.
We are all careful about our definitions,
or I hope we are.
And so, yeah, try not to go back to the mind-body debate,
or try to talk about the collapse of the wave function
from consciousness and stuff.
Of course, really, we don't want to go along this path.
But I agree with you that we should be careful,
at least when we are talking about these ideas,
for example, to larger public or things like that,
we have to be really careful about that.
And thank you for the suggestion at the end.
It's interesting. Yeah, thank you.
Yeah, so yeah, an addition to it.
Thank you for your remarks on mine.
There is nevertheless an issue,
which is also on the philosopher side,
and is that, at least in my experience,
one of the biggest challenges of quantum mechanics
is that you can talk about it and describe it
with all the words and careful you want.
But it is almost impossible to teach it properly to use it
if you don't make the person do measurements himself.
It is that one of the transmission challenges
that theory cannot really teach people
without making them do some experiments.
And there are certain nuances of the theory
that are never properly integrated
or understood by the person
until an experiment is made.
One of the many differently from, for example,
classical mechanics, where today is very effective at teaching,
you can teach most of the things
without making the person go in the lab
and doing the experiment.
And so that is, and that's why I was talking about the two,
the plus and minus of good theory
because of your analysis,
that if there is a missing link between words and facts,
when you use the words,
they very easily fall in the logical system
where inconsistency are very easily generated.
And so, and that's one of the big challenges we're facing today
and why foundation of quantum mechanics
are becoming more and more important
is that we cannot, we're still in a situation
where we haven't found a way to transmit properly the knowledge
without asking the person to go in the lab
and do the experiment.
There are certain things that don't pass.
So I think the care has to be kept by the philosophy of the well.
It's by nature is less aware of these challenges.
Thank you.
Thank you for all interesting comments.
Thank you.
I don't have anything more to say.
I quite agree with what you were saying.
Thank you.
I think we asked you enough questions and I'll be tired.
I'm a little bit tired, but it was super interesting.
Thank you very much for staying and I did comments.
There's also a comment I should mention by Martino.
Yeah, I saw it.
Okay.
Okay.
I just wanted to make sure that you use paper.
Okay.
So thanks a lot again for the very nice.
Thank you very much for staying and asking questions.
Okay.
I'll see you everyone in two weeks with genome.
I hope you'll be around.
That's going to be fun too.
Very different topic and very different.
Scholar.
So yeah, we'll see.
See you next week.
Right.
See you next week.
Bye.
Bye.
