know about each other.
Okay, so I also, I should say it's really a pleasure to see
many familiar faces. And I think those of you are already here
early in the morning. And maybe some of the others watch this
as a recording. Okay, I'll start with something that is quite
well known. It's the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. But I
will already early try to put it in a slightly different
context, namely in the context that is given by the title. And
one important word of the title is this quantum in front of
agents. So usually when we use quantum mechanics, we are of
course, talking about quantum systems. But in my talk, it will
be important that actually the users of the Siri, the agents,
so an agent for me will mostly be a user of the Siri, our
quantum mechanical as well. But let's first start with the
traditional picture where we have, let's say a normal agent,
which we usually implicitly think as a classical person in the
sense that will hopefully make them become more clear during the
talk. But I think we all understand somehow that we are
classical, at least our sorts, the way we process information
is pretty much a classical machine, if you think in these
terms. Now, the Heisenberg uncertainty and expert or
principle could be illustrated in the most simple case, and by
the measurement just of a single spin system. So assume that we
have your system s that is, let's say a qubit or a spin. And
then there is a measurement device here. And this measurement
device leaves us an option we can either measure in the x or in
the set direction. So we can either measure spin up down or
right left, and we get an outcome, either x or set. Now, you
probably, I mean, if you learned quantum mechanics in the
traditional way, you probably learned about Heisenberg's
principle as a relation that is phrased in terms of some
variants that is bigger than h bar times something that depends
on the commutator of the observables. But there is also
an information surrectic formulation of the principle.
And in the case of a single qubit or a spin system, this
formulation and in the case of x and set measurements, so
that's a very particular case. And I'll only talk about this
case today. We can write it in terms of an entropic expression.
And this also generalizes to more complicated systems, even
two continuous ones, but I'll only talk about this very simple
case to illustrate this. So this h here is the von Neumann or not
von Neumann. And so x is a classical thing. So h is the
Shannon entropy that is well known from information theory. So
what this tells us is that the uncertainty we have about x about
the, I mean, what does it mean to have an uncertainty about x? So
there is this measurement. And of course, the person who, who
prepared the experiment knows the state here. So this could be an
arbitrary state, phi could also be a mixed one, if you like. And
this person could now ask himself, how much do I know about the
measurement outcome? And so this quantity is the uncertainty he
has in the case where he will do a mixed measurement. And that's
the uncertainty has when he will do a set measurement. And it's
pretty obvious. I mean, you can easily verify this in special
cases. If the person, of course, prepares, for example, has been
to the right, then he knows the x measurement will tell him the
spin is right. So there's no uncertainty. This term is zero.
However, the complementary term and the measurement in the other
direction set is, and of course, maximally uncertain. So this
entropy will be one. And this equation tells us that however,
cleverly, you try to choose the state to minimize the total
uncertainty, you will never be able to actually reduce that
below one. Okay, that's a very well known result. And I think I
will now not give references because it's actually coming out
of a sequence of a very long development that took place long
before my time, of course, started by Heisenberg. Now, as I
said at the beginning, this word quantum is very important. So
let's now try to see how this experiment looks like. If we
think of this person here, so the person was implicit so far.
But let's suppose this is now a very elaborate agent one that
can in can process quantum information. So and someone who
has some knowledge, K, and K could in general be a quantum
system. So what does that mean? How can we generalize the same?
Let's for a moment, just reflect how we could as well express
the inequality that that is here, still in the case where K
would be restricted to be a classical value. So in this case,
we could just write the same equation as x or the inequality
as H of x given K plus H of z given K is larger or equal to
one. So if K is classical, what this means, it's just the
average entropy of x conditioned on whatever that
knowledge is. And of course, if this inequality holds always
for any classical knowledge, then it also holds in that sense, if
I average over the possible knowledge. So that's still kind
of a classical statement. But now if and if you really think of
this as a quantum machine, for example, quantum computer that
uses quantum mechanics, then it's very natural to say that K is
not necessarily a classical value. And so these entropies here
have to be generalized. And this is not something we have to now
invent. We know very well what it means to talk about the
uncertainty about still a classical value x. So the outcome
of the measurement will still be classical but conditioned on
knowledge that is quantum mechanical. So information
series have studied this. And this is not just a mathematical
expression. Mathematically, by the way, you could write it as
h of xk minus h of k. So you can express it as the total entropy
you have about x and k together minus h of k. And you would say,
okay, that's just the mathematical equation that
doesn't tell us much. But information series can show that
this quantity corresponds to the amount of bits you would have
to learn if you already know k, so that you're able to reproduce
x. So you can really interpret this operationally as the
number of bits that you're missing or lacking until you would
know x. So it's by an optimal scheme. So you could ask for these
bits and then you know x and the same here. So this is not
quotation marks merely a mathematical thing, but an
operationally relevant quantity. This is, of course,
important if you want to claim things that are somehow
relevant. Because of course, we can write down whatever
equations we like. But the question is, do they have
anything to do with physics? So this one clearly has. It's
telling us exactly this thing. However, what we also know, and
this is also nothing new, is that if in the extreme case and
one extreme case would be that this observer that I thrown
here would now not prepare a fixed state in some way, but
would be entangled with the quantum system. So that's also a
kind of knowledge the person could have in the quantum
sense. So it's just the knowledge consists of a qubit. That
is, let's say, maximally entangled with the spin system
here. So in case k and s are maximally entangled, we can look
at these entropies. And it's not surprising given also the
operational meaning of those that they are now zero. So both h
of x given k and h of z given k are equal to zero. So that's
consistent with the operational meaning that I just mentioned
before. Because clearly, if this person is entangled with this
whatever measurement would be done, the person could perfectly
know what the outcome is for both possible measurements. So this
means that this inequality here, so the information's retic
version of Heisenberg's uncertainty relation is not
valid in general. It's only valid if we make an additional
assumption about k. And this is an assumption we would of
course naturally make without even talking about it, namely
that the knowledge k is classical. I think the point of
this kind of introductory part is really to tell you that
whenever we make statements in quantum mechanics, we are
usually implicitly making the assumption that we are looking
at the world from the viewpoint, from a classical viewpoint, we
are classical. And not all the statements we are making in that
sense are valid, if or would still be valid if we were
ourselves quantum mechanical, certainly not this statement. But
there's a more interesting aspect to this. And this is somehow
the starting point would say, okay, this is now no longer
true. But is there still some interesting inequality that in
a reasonable way generalizes Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle? Because you could say, okay, that would have shown us
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle is just an artifact of
the fact that we are classical, but not really fundamental. But
this is not true. There is actually a version of Heisenberg's
uncertainty relation, which still makes almost this statement,
but in a slightly different way in this again, completely
generally valid. And this is also still stuff that is kind of
known since several years. Let me state that. So the
difference, and this is as a really interesting part is
instead of talking about classicality, we could talk
about the shareability of information. So let's suppose
now that we have two agents here outside. One has knowledge k a
so this is the agent a obviously, and the other agent has
knowledge kb. And they both have knowledge about the same s.
This s is again, going to be measured, either with respect to
x or z and someone can choose and you're just asking yourself,
how well can you predict these things for either choices? Now
the, the statement that can be shown also, there's more
general version in case they're not only qubits, but the
statement that is generally true is now the one that looks
first of all, identical to the above. They'll have to add
something. So it looks like this. But the important, important
addition is that I put here a little index a, and here a
little index B. Of course, I could also, I mean, symmetric,
it's also true for the other direction and I put B here and
there here. So what this tells us is that, or, I mean, this
version of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle tells us
that while it's true that a single agent could actually know
the outcome of both possible measurements perfectly in that
sense, that is entropy zero. And if there are two agents, they
could not somehow share this information. They could not, for
example, arrange that one of them knows x and the other one
knows z. It could still be that one keeps all the
information. Let's say a just stays entangled with the system
s, and doesn't give anything to be. But in this case, of course,
this quantity here is one. And this one is zero, but the
inequality still holds. But there's no way they can somehow
subdivide the entangled qubit they would maybe have initially
that is entangled with s into knowledge k a and k b so that
each person knows one of the values. So in other words, this
very valuable information that allows you to break Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle seemingly in this naive formulation that I
have given here. And this does no longer work if you have two
persons who want to share information. So you could say
that the more channel way of phrasing Heisenberg and the
actual limitation is not a limitation that comes from
classicality, but it comes from the shareability. So in other
words, Heisenberg's uncertainty relation tells us we cannot in
general share information in such a way that we know everything
in the sense that there would be zero. Okay, so this was still
kind of an introduction and the introduction was and had the
purpose to tell you that there is. And I mean, actually two
purposes. One is that it's not unnatural in particular today
when we talk about agents who which could be quantum
computers to think of agents holding quantum information. And
the important aspect is these agents never make a measurement
of their own brain. That doesn't make sense. So quantum
computer just stays quantum. So you couldn't say, Okay, this is
true, but the agent would still have to really know it's the
agent would have to measure his own brain. No, the agent is
just quantum mechanical. And what this means is that he has a
mechanism in principle to reproduce x and he has a
mechanism to reproduce set at the same time. I mean, at the
same time means he cannot communicate it, but he knows it
internally, he could answer both questions. So the other
purpose and was really to make this connection between
shareability and somehow make the claim, which is also
something that is very well known to quantum information
series, that classical information can be shared. That's
very easy. That's when what we do when we talk, whereas quantum
information cannot in general be shared. There's also the no
cloning principle. So one can interpret this also as making
a connection between Heisenberg's uncertainty and no
cloning principle or even saying it's actually the same if you
see it in that way. Okay, but if you look at that is connection
between shareability and classicality, we could also ask
somehow the opposite question. So do we really understand or we
could ask ourselves, when is it still true that classical
reasoning that we are usually applying by usual? I mean, when
you're doing stuff like deriving the conventional Heisenberg
principle, when is this still valid? Because after all, we are
in a quantum world. And we could say, at least if we take the
perspective of someone who says that the coherence is not
fundamental, but it's just leakage to the environment. So
somehow the overall evolution is always unitary. In this
picture, of course, the world is always quantum. And we could
ask ourselves, why is it then true that in certain situations,
we can do as if we were classical? So what's really the
criterion that we are classical? And one criterion could
exactly be that we can kind of share information. Okay, now
after this introduction, I would like to make a little jump
and just discuss briefly how in this view, experiments that we
know of or sought experiments, particular those which are close
to my heart, namely Wigner's friend experiment look like in
this picture. So the picture actually looks very similar. And
I'll just have a different title, namely Wigner's friend. So we
have again, an agent. Let's call him Wigner, and he has some
knowledge. Okay. And now instead of actually just doing a
measurement of the spin himself, he lets a friend do this
measurement. That was of course, the famous idea of Wigner. So
there's a friend in a lab F. And this lab is if you like
perfectly closed. And now you could ask the friend, for
example, to make a measurement in the set direction, let's say.
And that's usually what you do in the Wigner's friend
experiment. Now, and for later purposes, I want to think of
this as the outside observer W, the Wigner, somehow injects a
spin system s into the lab. So he prepares actually the spin in
the lab. And then the lab is perfectly close. And the mesh,
the friend starts with the measurement. Now the typical thing
or the typical way the biggest friend experiment is done is
that the state that is prepared, the state phi s is a super
position between up and down. And I will just call that spin
right. So that's just omitting normalization factors. And it's
been up down, or we could also, of course, equivalently take a
spin left. And I would define this as being a superposition
with a negative sign between up and down. So that's just a
convention that I'm using. Let's now make a slight change to
this Wigner's friend experiment. So usually the Wigner just
prepares that state here is been right and then asks, what
would the friend get? Or then is this whole discussion about
the friend being the superposition between seeing up
and down? So the friend clearly measures in the up down basis in
the safe spaces and would expect he sees up or down. But we
could also say the Wigner sometimes inputs that state. And
of course, the conclusion is the same. The friend will sometimes
be in the measure, see up and sometimes down. Now, as I think
many of you know, there was an extension of the Wigner's friend
experiment, a very clever extension by David Deutsch, he
actually extended it in two ways. One of the one part of the
extension was to say that, and the friend after having
performed the measurement confirms that he has done the
measurement and that he has seen a single outcome. And he says
that tells that to Wigner, without actually revealing what
the outcome is. So it's important that he doesn't share
this information, because of course, the coherence would be
destroyed between the two outcomes. It just confirms I've
seen one outcome, but I don't tell you which one. The other
thing one can do, and which was also done in the Deutsch version
is to somehow apply a measurement in a big superposition
basis. I call this measurement an X hat measurement. So X is like
the measurement in the basis that corresponds to the state. So
one basis state is the state of the entire lab. If the input to
the lab was this spin here, the spin right, and the other basis
state of this measurement is the entire state of the lab, if
this state here was input. So in other words, if Wigner decides
to provide this state, then the final outcome here of this
measurement from the outside will be actually that it was this
state. So it will say with certainty it was the spin right
state and the same for the spin left. So it's kind of a
confirmation that the lab is still somehow in the state one
would expect it to be if the evolution was unitary. Now the
important point in Wigner's in the Wigner's friend so experiment
is that we have somehow an apparent contradiction if you
think too classically. And the apparent contradiction, which
was already pointed out by Wigner, is that clearly the friend
here will see an outcome, for example, up. But from Wigner's
viewpoint, this whole system because it's closed and assuming
that evolution is unitary will be in a superposition of the
spin being up and the friend having seen it's up and the
system being down and the friend having seen it's down. So we
have seemingly contradictory statements. And Wigner could even
confirm that his data assignment is correct by as I said before
by applying this measurement. So the situation is now in
information turns. And the one I mean, in the conventional case
that Wigner, if we ask ourselves, what does Wigner know about
the final measurement and provided from the outside to the
lab, given whatever he knew at the beginning and at the
beginning he knows which state was prepared, whether it was
prepared in this one or this one. Yeah, and this knowledge is
such that he has no uncertainty. So in other words, Wigner can
perfectly predict what comes out here. On the other hand, in
this conventional experiment, Wigner has no information about
the outcome of the friend. So Wigner thinks it's equally
likely up or down independently of whether he prepared it in
this state here or in this state here. Now let's ask before
move to quantum information. So let's somehow turn this K into a
quantum K, make it blue, and now I write things in blue. So this
is now just the quantum Wigner. This is now the deviation from
the usual way of thinking. So we now assume that Wigner is a
quantum person. And of course, now instead of preparing either
right or left, he could again ask before us in the Heisenberg
experiment, just prepare a spin that is entangled with his own
knowledge. And then as we have seen before, for exactly the
same reasons as before, I mean, he still has of course the same,
at least the same knowledge as he had classically, so he can
perfectly know what the outcome here would be. But now because
he's perfectly entangled with the spin, he also has perfect
information in this information's erratic sense that I
explained before about what the friend will measure. So this is
now kind of an interesting perspective on the Wigner's
friend experiment. We have now a Wigner, a quantum Wigner, who
knows with certainty what the friend will see. So it particularly
knows somehow that the friend gets a single value because in
particular knows the value. Again, in this information's
erratic sense that he could reconstruct, he could tell what the
value was, but he also has knowledge about the outside
measurement here or the outcome of this outside measurement. Now,
one remark about this is that if you think back about the
development of interpretations of quantum theory, for example,
many worlds, this was of course, strongly motivated by this
situation here. So many worlds is clearly motivated by the fact
that from Wigner's viewpoint, there is this superposition
between two possible worlds, one in which the friend sees up
and one in which he sees down. But now you could say that if we
were quantum agents, we would never have come up with the many
worlds because from the quantum agent's viewpoint, it's just
perfectly clear what the friend has. There's just one value. So
one could, and that's maybe a provocative statement, and I don't
want to dwell too much on that one, could say many worlds, the
whole interpretation that came out of or the many worlds
interpretation is an artifact of implicitly assuming that
agents have classical knowledge and want to bring things back
into that classical picture. But in a fully generic quantum
agent would have been in that situation and not come up with the
idea that there could be these parallel things. Very cool could
of course complain and say, but from the outside, it's still an
entanglement state. But of course, it could recursively kind
of continue in that way and say there could be even an outside
agent who has in the same way fully information about this
inside scenario and so on. Okay, so that was the kind of
provocative remark I want to actually come back to something
which is maybe not provocative, but more a challenge because
and all that I've shown now is kind of to illustrate that if you
make this step from the usual assumption of we are classical
and we are describing the world from this classical
perspective to a new kind of view where we say no agents can
themselves be quantum mechanical. When we make this step,
certain things that we are kind of used to, for example, as I
said, uncertainty relation or that there are these branching
of seeming apparent branching of the world, they look very
different from this quantum agents perspective. So, okay, I
will feel it. I mean, I don't want to say that this is
anything new so far. I just want to put that in a new
perspective and very well aware that many of you have, of
course, are extremely familiar with this. In particular, of
course, I want to mention actually just love Brooklyn who is
all the time talking about quantum agents with his own
research program on quantum reference frames. And I think
one could even say that this is somehow the information's
retic analog of that. So if you look at it more from a more
physical perspective, you should also say our reference
frames from whose viewpoints we talk are actually also quantum
systems. So that's the consequent continuation of this
approach. And that's why I really very much appreciate this
research programs going to quantum reference frames, and so
on. And that are have been started by some people here in
the audience. Okay. So now I want to somehow ask the
question, that's the challenge. When can we be certain that we
can still argue in the usual way? Because most of the things
we have developed are actually based on this implicit
assumption that we are looking at them from a classical
perspective. So that's kind of the question when is that I
call it classical ancient reasoning. And I'm still
justified. So one answer could be never because in principle,
we are here living in a quantum world. And that would be the
perspective of someone who certainly wouldn't who wouldn't
believe in a, you know, an objective collapse mechanism. And
I also don't believe in that. And so we would say, clearly, the
evolution is is unitary and decoherence is just then that
certain information gets inaccessible to us, but viewed
from the outside, everything is quantum. And so therefore, this
notion of classicality is not fundamental at all. And we should
always ask ourselves, and can we should never trust in this
notion, because ultimately, we are not classical. Okay, see,
there is a question in the chat. Let me see what it is. And from
Nicola. Okay, I don't know if you want to answer now at the end,
that's up to you. Yeah, maybe that's the more philosophical. I
mean, what does it mean that the quantum agent knows? I think
this is an extremely important question. And let's for the
moment, and let's come back into this question, but let's for the
moment really just say it's in this information's right, the
sense that the agent with knowledge can no set if this
quantity here is zero. And I said before there is an operational
meaning to that. So I can at least it's not only a
mathematical statement I'm making, it's kind of an
operational one. The question is, of course, is it statement we
really want? But that's for the moment, let's say a working
assumption that we have a good information's right, the
understanding what it means, which has this operational
significance.
The operational significance that you gave us is for classical
agents. I don't see the operational meaning for quantum
agent. Oh, so then maybe I wasn't clear. So the operational
meaning is that if I'm an agent, I mean, let's suppose I was a
quantum or okay, I'm not quantum, but let's suppose there's a
quantum computer with the knowledge k. And I would now, I
mean, this thing means how much information or in general, I
mean, if it's zero, it's different. But if I have this,
then this quantity, whatever this number is, is how much
information would I need to provide to that agent or that
quantum computer, until the quantum computer is able to
tell me with certainty what the value set is. But so this is
really quantum, of course, the answer from the outsiders, then
I'm certain that the value is this. But this k here is a
quantum system in general. So the question is how much do we
need to add to that quantum system, until the knowledge
about set is kind of contained in this quantum systems in the
sense that the agent could now answer the question and tell me
what set is. So it's kind of a game, tell me what set is and
if you can do it, then your, your uncertainty is zero. If you
can do it with probability one. But I know that this is I mean,
as I said, this is not a trivial point. And I'm also not sure
it's the best way to see that. And I would suggest we come back
to that in the discussion session. Okay, thank you.
Okay. And now back to this question, when is a classical
agent read this eight classical agent view still justified on
the rich situation? So as I said before, to put that in
formulas, let's suppose we have an agent and as before in the
agent, and now somehow, and it's really classical in the
conventional sense. So what does it mean? We are classical in
the conventional sense. There is some decoherence. So a
classical knowledge at agent knowing a value x, one could
characterize from the outside viewpoint or the quantum state
from the outside viewpoint would be the following that the
agent and so let's okay, for the moment, assume that x is not
just some value, it's now independent of whether it's a
spin or whether it's an outcome of a measurement. So let's
suppose x is in a value zero or one, and we could now ask
ourselves, and what does it mean that an agent knows if the
agent is classical. And here's the very familiar thing that we
would say, the agent, let's call the agent now for the moment
a no zero in some way. And then there is also an environment of
the agent, which is also somehow in a zero state. So this is the
environment, and the actual system x is zero. This is the
system mix. But there could even be a situation where there is
this superposition that the agent is knows it's one environment
is in a corresponding one state and the x system in one. In
this situation, which is clearly a quantum situation viewed from
the outside, again, I dropped normalization factors, but this
is clearly a superposition state, we would say from the agent's
viewpoint, or this is actually classical agent, because the
agent's information about things has completely leaked to the
environment. So it's kind of copied to the environment. And
therefore, if we trace out the environment, we get the familiar
classical state, we would say, okay, that's maybe characterization
of what it means to be classical for the agent. But as I said
before, of course, it's a quantum state. And if you look at
things from the outside, it's quantum. Now, what could be a
cry? I mean, the criterion here that it can be written in that
way, is not a very useful one. Because if I now know something,
for example, I know that if I look out of my window, the
weather is very nice, lose count. That's knowledge I have. But
can I therefore, how sure can I be that this is classical
knowledge? Of course, what I could do is to ask myself, how
does the situation look like from the outside, and then maybe
come to the conclusion that me, with my knowledge, and the
weather outside together isn't in a quantum state where this
information I have about the weather is copied. But in general,
this is very hard to do. So in general, we don't know what the
state of the universe is. And in order to be somehow decide
whether my own knowledge is classical, I don't necessarily
want to take the perspective an outside perspective, I would
rather want to have a criterion that somehow tells me that
yeah, that I'm just a half classical or that my knowledge
can be treated as classical without taking this outside
perspective. And so one candidate for this could be that we
would say, and let's just say that if we are certain about
something, then this is kind of classicality. So in other words,
if I'm, if my assignment of, of a value x is that I'm sure the
value x is, for example, zero with probability one, then one
could say, okay, that's reasonably means that from my
perspective, this knowledge is one, if I could, for example,
also verify that. So let's look at this situation again. So let's
suppose we have, I have now quantum system s. And I know,
so I know it's s tried it like that. So suppose I know s is in
state zero, for example. Then what I can do is I could in
principle, verify it. So this is verifiable. In the sense that
I could just apply a measurement and we know that this
measurement will not even change the state could apply
projective measurement and the state of the system s is still
zero. So this seems to be a very, like, strong way of saying,
I'm really sure something has the value zero. And therefore, I
could consider my, and they seem to be somehow classical. And
that's what we usually assume. However, and that's my little
final point I want to make before posing the challenge. This
is not generally going to work. So if, and if you're saying
classical reasoning is justified, whenever we are only
reasoning about things, which we are certain about in this
sense, in the sense that you are in principle verifiable
without disturbing the system. So that's even close to kind of
Einstein's view of what it means that something is real that
I can without changing the state of the system, verify or
confirm it. And this is clearly the case. As I said here, I
mean, if I know it's zero, and I project it in zero, it's still
in the zero state. So are we safe in this situation where we
can verify things? And my answer to this is no, we are not. And
the reason for that is, is to gain a weakness friend sort
experiment and not surprisingly, it's the extension of the
experiment that I proposed, together with Daniela Frauchiger,
which is by the way, quite similar to the experiment
proposed by Charles Love Brooklyn, but there's exactly an
important difference in this aspect, that all the information
that the agents have in this sort experiment is information of
the type that it's they are certain about something. I don't
want to really go through the experiment right now, that would
require much more time. And I think I'm only five minutes or
so left. But I just want to give you a flavor of what this
experiment does for those who haven't seen it, and tell you in
what sense it tells us that even that definition of
classicality is kind of problematic. So the experiment
is essentially
consisting of four agents. And I kind of now give a very high
level view of it. There are two agents, which are called A and
B. And these agents are allowed to communicate. So there are
agents like this, they can somehow exchange quantum
information. For example, A can send something to B. However,
otherwise, they're completely isolated. So apart from this
information that they can communicate, they are in boxes
that are shielded, that shield them from the environment. But
there are also other agents outside, there are two more
agents. And these agents are, let's call them U and V or W for
Wigner. And these agents have the possibility to measure the
entire labs, like in the case before, when in the German
version of the Wigner's friend experiment. And they get certain
outcomes. For example, W could get an outcome that I also call
W. Now, the whole point of this sort experiment is that the
setup, I mean, all the agents are kind of instructed to do
certain things. For example, the agent A has to do something,
let's say measure some random bit, and then depending on the
outcome of the random bits, send something to Bob, then U is
instructed to measure A in a particular way, and W is
instructed to measure in a particular way. Furthermore, all
the agents are instructed to make a prediction about the, or to
make a statement about the final outcome. So this measurement
of W on that lab is a measurement that is done at the
very end. Now, the experiment proceeds in such a way that an
agent A, so there's like in different times, and at time A,
at time one, agent A prepares something, he has some value,
which I call R. And he can sometimes make a prediction
with certainty. So for example, the statement is that if R, or
R is a coin which can take, let's say values, heads or tail.
Let's suppose if R is tails, then, so that's a statement that
A makes, then A is certain about the following. He can say, I'm
certain that W takes a certain value, and let's suppose W takes
values from the set, okay, and fail, these are just two
outcomes. And so the experiment is arranged in such a way that
A can sometimes make this definitive statement, which is
he doesn't, I'm communicated, but it just makes it for
himself. A writes it down, he has this statement. And then
there's a chain of statements that the other people can make. So
B also does some measurement in the experiment, he measures the
value set, which can take values, let's say plus or minus. And
for, okay, it's actually better to write it up or down. Sorry
for that, what to be consistent with what is actually in the
paper. So let's say it's U or D. And now, and we also have the
statement that if, for example, set is U or up, then B can make
a statement and the statement B can make is, I'm certain that,
for example, R is equal to tails. Now, see, these are exactly
the statements that are certain in the sense I said it before. So
in principle, the person could go there and measure the state
and do a protective measurement on the state, and that
protective measurement will not change the state as seen from
the party's viewpoint. So in that sense, it's really something
that he could be very confident about to somehow be classical in
that strong sense that it's verifiable. Now, the point is
that in this experiment, these agents now proceed by reasoning,
which is somehow the reasoning that we are used to do when we,
the world is really classical. Because clearly, if you're B and
you can make this statement that you're certain that R is
tails, and you also know, I mean, that's something you can infer
that if R is tails, A made this statement, then B can make
another statement, he can make this statement, I'm certain
that A is certain
that W is equal to fail. That seems safe. I mean, that's just
the logical combination of two statements. If B analyzes this
experiment and knows that whenever A is all tails, he's
certain about that. And now he's indeed certain that the
condition here is satisfied, then he can make this statement.
Now, the actual critical thing, which one could ask oneself
whether it's justified. So this is something that is still
operationally verifiable, actually. I mean, this is really not
something one should doubt, because B could go to A and ask
him, are you indeed certain that W is fail and A would confirm
and say, yes, that's exactly what I've written down. But what B
could now do is to say, okay, if this holds, then our classical
way of thinking suggests that I can now also be certain that
W is fail. So it's just essentially this fact that we
can learn from others. If I know that someone else knows that,
then I can say, okay, that's valid knowledge, at least if
everyone of us applies the same theory and the same rules. Now,
you see, at this point, by the way, A is completely out of the
picture. We can from now on forget A as an agent. So there's no
role A has as an agent any longer. And it's therefore not
problematic if we now later have steps where you somehow
measures the whole system A, because there's no longer any
statement from A expected. So the experiment proceeds like that
in a chain. And at the final time, let's say time four, I don't
do time three, but it's always the same principle. We have the
following situation that u u is certain says I'm certain that
w is equal to fail. But this is why there is a contradiction in
the salt experiment. And when actually w measures indeed, w
measures, and gets w equal to okay, which is the opposite one. So
the salt, so again, what happens here is the following four
parties reason, according to rules, which are kind of just
derived from quantum theory. So that's, these are rules that
are that could also be experimentally verified. As I said,
they could go there and verify that these things are true. But
we could be composed them in a way, which is no longer directly
verified. So that's kind of the critical step that we go from
the such a statement to that statement. And at the end, in
this particular setup, which is very artificial, but still it's
a valid physical setup, we see that the composition of these
statements led to a situation where one, one of these agents
make the statements that I'm certain that the outcome here
will be fail, nonetheless, the outcome when w measures will
actually be okay. So the conclusion from that is something
went wrong in the reasoning. And if we now make the assumption
that quantum theory is right, and all the predictions that we
could, in principle, verify experimentally are correct, then
it has to be that implication here. So in other words, and that
brings me to the conclusion of the talk. And even if it are
certain about things, and therefore saying that our
knowledge is kind of classical in that sense, because we are
classical from our own perspective. But of course, in
this situation, from the outside, we are not. And things can go
wrong in the sense that the reasoning rules that we apply in
daily life, lead to wrong conclusions. And by the reasoning
rules, we apply in daily life, I mean, such reasoning rules like
this. Okay, so to summarize what what I did is in this talk. And
I tried to kind of convince you that the way we are often
thinking about physics, like the Heisenberg uncertainty
relation, relies on a more or less implicit assumption. I mean,
it's getting more and more explicit as quantum information
develops and the assumption is that the perspective from which
we are describing the world is a classical perspective in other
words, that the agents who are making such statements are
classical. And that the same statements are no longer true for
quantum agents. However, that if they're not, of course, they
were not wrong, technically, they're just pointing out, or
they're making clear that they were special cases. And if we now
try to generalize them, we see that what is kind of seen as
classicality would, in a more general sense, be more accurately
described as shareability of information. Because if he, for
example, phrase the Heisenberg uncertainty principle in this
way, we retrieve it in, we retrieve a more general version,
which specializes, of course, to the version we are used to, in
the case of classical information, because classical
information is shareable. But somehow the converse is not
true. So we could not say that if information is shareable, in
the sense that it's, for example, also verifiable in this way
here. And that's, I mean, sounds like it's verifiable. I know
that someone knows that and they could even go there with a
projector and measure it and see that the person really knows
that this is still not sufficient as I'm, okay,
typo here, as pointed out, or as illustrated by this sort
experiment here, where indeed, the assumption is that the
individual parties are classical in this weak sense that they
have their knowledge about other things is knowledge with
certainty. But they're not classical necessarily from an
outside perspective. But that's true for us in general. I mean,
I'm not classical from God's viewpoint, I'm probably in a
big entanglement state, at least according to quantum theory,
not sure. Okay, that's at least in the theory like that. But in
the sort experiment shows that this is already a problem if
someone is from the if he's classical by his own definition,
but quantum from the outside. And at the end, we combine
statements. And we arrive at the contradiction here. So the
challenge, which I announced before is to find a better
criterion on when can we still apply classical reasoning? What's
kind of a safe criterion that is actually really applicable
shouldn't be the criterion that we are from the outside in a
classical state, because we are not and we are always probably
in an entanglement state if you use things from an outside, but
what could be a minimal criterion that would allow us to do
the reasoning that we are usually doing like this one, and still
get results that are not contradictory. Okay, with this
challenge, I would like to end and I'm looking forward to a
discussion.
Okay, I'm not sure whether anyone is talking, but if someone is
talking, he or she is muted.
I'm sorry, I was muted. So yeah, thank you for your talk. Very
interesting. And so now is the time for question. And please
manifest yourself in the messages. And the first question is
from Alexi. Yes, thank you, Renata. Of course, this last
challenge that you've presented reminds of some of the
discussions from quantum logic. But my question will be about
this jump from be certain that a certain that w equal fail to be
itself is certain that w equal fail. So this question mark you
you're talking about. Yes, so to me, this jump sounds like a matter
of trust rather than logic, because somehow be trusts that
result from a to be their result. Right. So it's not only
certainty about a it's more a matter of trust that a is as good
as an observer as I am. So to me, this is not a logical
statement. This is really a jump that contains a statement of
trust.
Yes. And I think this is an interesting point to view it from
that perspective. But maybe one should then be more, I should
maybe be more precise of what the assumptions are of of the
sort experiment. And maybe I would say, and if I make the
assumption that a priori, the agents agree among each other,
that they all apply the same rules. So they kind of agree on
the set of rules. And they, and let's say they, they are, and
you could I usually prefer to think of them almost like
computers, and then just apply these rules in a rather
mechanical way. Then an agent B, not only knows that a is
certain about that, but he would know, okay, a has applied the
same rules as I would have done, and arrived at this
conclusion. Or in other words, if I was in the position of B, I
would have arrived at this conclusion. And therefore, I
trust it. Of course, that one could still say this is a matter
of trust, because I trust somehow my other me who would have
seen something else. And this is indeed probably the question,
but it's not a trust in the sense that I think I'm like
classical agents can have this common knowledge quantum agents
may not have that kind of common knowledge you're talking about.
But okay, thank you. Maybe I'm here. Okay, that's also
something interesting about the common knowledge. I think the
common knowledge would only be that they apply the same rules.
And everything else has to be explicit. Of course, here, one
could say, if B can make this statement, that's not common
knowledge, because maybe a doesn't know about being host, but
B makes is at least certain what they have. But the common
knowledge is only concerning the rules. So they all agree, these
are the rules. And of course, that one could also question that
we can even agree have common knowledge about the rules of
quantum theory. I'm sure we don't. But a good theory should
allow us to do that.
Thanks for the question.
Okay, next question is from Philippe.
Okay.
Yeah, I wrote something in the chat, Renato. Philippe,
how she's speaking, you remember, we discussed that a lot of
few years ago, right? Yes, of course.
So, basically, I think your definition of QM that you use in
this reasoning is just not QM. It's something else. QM
doesn't work that way. In standard QM, von Neumann's thing,
you need to define a level where you make projection, let's say,
and you cannot play with this level. Otherwise, you will just
run into contradiction. And you do run into contradiction. But
what you use as a basis is sort of universal QM, which is
simply not QM, whatever you think about. So either you take it
formally from standard textbook QM, and it's not what you do is
not QM, or you use our CSM approach with Alexia, for instance,
where we have context, context are classical. And you do need
that to make sense of QM. Otherwise, you just run into sort
of a garbage.
Okay, thanks a lot for bringing this up. Yes, of course, I
remember these discussions very well. And actually, after
thinking about the discussions for a long time, in the meantime,
I also start to appreciate your point of view much more than I
did in the past. And indeed, there's something I haven't
now talked about, which is the assumption on on when is when
are the rules of quantum mechanics that I'm applying even
valid. And that was just implicitly, and taking this
viewpoint that we can always from each agent's perspective, apply
quantum mechanics to the rest of the world. So that was an
assumption. That's, of course, an assumption that is not neither
experimentally verified, nor do we have other very strong
reasons to believe in it. But that's indeed the assumption I
made. And I, I think it's an assumption that is commonly
made. And it's part, it's the it's an inherent part of many
interpretations, like Cubism, for example, they assume that
there's the agent and the world around is just quantum. And if,
for example, that agent describes the world, then this
whole thing can be seen as a quantum system, if that agent
describes the world and from his viewpoint, that is a quantum
system. Now, I understand that from, if you have an
interpretation and yours is one of those or you want quantum
mechanics, where you say, no, this is not observable, it's
rather, and that in order for a system to be a quantum system,
it needs a context with respect to which it's going to be
measured.
It is that quantum mechanics is a theory of isolated systems.
What you call a system is quantum mechanics is always an
ideally isolated system. But you can make sense of its quantum
state, only with respect to the outside and the outside is not
bounding. So you can describe that if you use algebraic
approach, you know, where you have a type three.
But let me maybe say that.
It just means that standard type one quantum mechanics,
standard textbook quantum mechanics, makes sense only if
you use it within the framework of von Neumann rules. If you want
to go outside von Neumann rules, you have to do much more
sophisticated things mathematically. And you don't
get what you tell you, you get algebras. And, and, and, and
basically you get context at the end, you get a
macroscopic commuting observables, which are context
and mathematics. If you use it properly for unbounded systems,
does not give you universal web functions, et cetera. I will
be disagree with most people in this conference by telling
that I know it. But this is what I think, I mean, it's of
course a reasonable view to say that the eight, I mean, if the
agent here wants to talk about this quantum system, then there
has to be a context. And the context is, of course, for
example, the measurement devices and the agent itself. And if
this is a context to that quantum system, and I cannot at the
same time consider pre this as a quantum system. But the point
is that you would already disagree at the much early point
in with my work, I think you would already disagree with
most of the descriptions about, for example, if Deutsche's
descriptions of his friend experiment, so
it's a return. I'm not a return at all, as you can see.
Yes. So in that sense, I would say, okay, we are saying I'm not
using quantum mechanics, I'm using, of course, I have to make
a choice. And the choice is that I'm assuming that quantum
mechanics is a valid description of any system from any agent's
viewpoint. Except that this view point is not shared by
everyone, for example, not by you.
I disagree. I know Kaslav also called that universality. I
fundamentally disagree with this view on universality. I think
quantum mechanics is universal, but not in that sense, not in
the sense of a universal way functions. But okay, I don't
want to actually disagree with that. Maybe I should make my
statement more carefully and say that if we make that assumption
that I just mentioned of universality, then we arrive at
the conclusion I stated. So you could even regard my result
actually as a confirmation of what you're saying and saying,
okay, we are running into so many problems into this
disagreement here, that the assumption that we started off
which namely the universality of quantum theory must be wrong.
So in that sense, I wouldn't want to contradict you. It's more
let's say a logical thing, a logical statement that if we
make this assumption, then we arrive at whatever I said. And
I think I should have, I should have made it more clear that I
made this assumption.
I said naive universality, this kind of extending wave
function to the whole universe, which is type one quantum
mechanics is simply does not work. But von Neumann told that
already, in the 39 paper. So why are we still trying to extend
type one quantum mechanics to everything? It simply does not
work. It is well known. And you prove it. We discussed that
also when we discuss my conclusion about your talk is
that you, your thing is supporting my point of view. Okay.
Yes, I mean, that's a valid point of view, as I say. And I, and
as I said, I'm, I'm starting to do the same. I mean, also when I
look at, for example, just love Brooklyn's work on quantum
reference frames, it also, I think reinforces my, let's say,
belief that the way you're using quantum mechanics is very
restricted. And generally, if you take into account other
things, for example, that reference frames are also
physical systems, we, we have to change something there. But
then, yeah, that's of course, something I don't have an answer
to. I'm just trying to make the point that I don't find this
unreasonable to doubt the universality, although I still
find it a good working assumption. And then of course, we may
come to the conclusion that indeed it was wrong. Okay, thank
you for this question anyway. Next question is from Kasnab.
Hi, Renato. Thanks a lot for the talk. And it was very clear. And
maybe just a reference to the previous question by Philippe is
that we don't need to assume the way function of the universe
in your example is always a way function for some observe. So
and but, but so it's really nicely shows that if you talk
about knowledge based on observations, then one should be
careful in quantum setting to take the knowledge of other
observers as your own knowledge. And now you pose this
challenge, and I don't know how to address this challenge, but
it's obviously that in all these examples, the measurement of
observers memory, or context or environment is really
important. It's a kind of different type of dimension. Then
usually standard normal bigger situations. Now, what I would
like to clarify and is your notion of quantum knowledge that
you used before that in an example of just as a very
beginning when you talk about observer being kind of entangled
with the system. And then you mentioned that, in a sense, this
observer could quantum agent could have a knowledge about
complementary observable at the same time, because it's a kind
of EPR entanglement that can be written in many different
basis. Now, there are two possible ways of understanding
this quantum agent, one would be exactly the one that I
mentioned, that you propose it's kind of internal view. The
other possible interpretation of pure entangled state that you
write down between the agent is, and the system is the is the
description of yet another external observer that can
simply confirm correlations once the measurements are performed
on the agent and the system and have nothing to do a priori
with the knowledge of internal agent, namely that this
internal agent still has just knowledge about one observer
observable, but not both at the same time. So can you comment on
this distinction? And why would you prefer one or the other?
Yes. Okay, I am this also relates, of course, to the
question that Nicola Jesus asked during the talk, what does
this knowledge mean? I'm not sure. I mean, this is something
that bothers me since quite some time. And actually, it also is
of practical relevance, by the way, in cryptography, because in
cryptography, usually, are on the safe side and assume that an
adversary is exactly an agent with this quantum knowledge, so to
speak. So, and I think the operational claim that I mentioned
already before, which is just if I went there and asked the agent,
do you know X? And he could give an answer with probability one.
That's probably the undisputed part. That's just what we could
prove. Now, I think my problem is a bit. And I mean, my problem
with giving another description is that as soon as I want to
somehow give a description of what it means, I already
implicitly bring in again, some classicality by asking myself,
what if, for example, I now measure from the outside or so. So
somehow it's very difficult to really stay on the quantum
level. But if you're taking this notion seriously, and they're
saying agents are now really generic quantum systems, they
don't have to for themselves to a measurement of their memory,
they are just quantum. That's all they are. Then and all our,
let's say intuition about this, somehow fail. So I don't
answer is simply don't have an intuitive explanation. So the
only thing I can really say is that I really restrict to this
completely operational viewpoint and say knowledge of
something means that I can answer a question about that with
certainty. And all the other things are somehow always
bring me back to someone comes in and tries to make this
knowledge again classical and then reason about it. But this
seems to be somehow the wrong approach, because if you want to
characterize quantum knowledge, why should we bring it back to
classical one? That's so, unfortunately, I really don't
have an answer in that sense, except for this operational
characterization. And that's also why I couldn't give maybe a
satisfactory answer to Nicholas question. But I think it's an
interesting question. But maybe I should briefly also comment on
the other point you mentioned that the agents are measured.
That's, of course, through we run only the difficulties,
because for example, this agent is measured by another agent. But
and it's just important for me to comment on this, because this
was also something that Scott Darneson pointed out many times
and always repeats that it's not surprising we have a
contradiction here because the agents are measured and we
shouldn't measure agents. However, I think what is important
is this timing here. So as I said, at this point, when we are
at time to the agent a is completely out of the picture. So
from then on, everything that continues in the reasoning does
not involve agent A. Of course, agent A had a role to arrive at
this statement, he appeared here. But once the statement is
made, we can forget about a a could die, if you like, and be
burned. And then it shouldn't, of course, if this guy is dead,
and now this guy measures the ashes of it, that you didn't have
an influence of whatever happened. So in some way, if you
want to say, okay, the problem was really that this agent was
measured, and, and try to come up with a kind of theory that
does not run into this problem, we would have to always keep
track of where the memory comes from. So if I know something,
and then I realize this knowledge I have only because
some other agent, which is who is dead since 200 years or so
have the knowledge, then I should no longer trust this
knowledge, because this agent now is maybe no longer in the
basis in which he derived the knowledge. So I just want to start
and kind of state that saying that, okay, the problem appears
because we measure this agent is for me, not a satisfactory
explanation to say, I shouldn't worry about this, because the
measurement really is about and happens long after the agent
somehow had a role in the whole statement. And I already have
somehow extract. So in other words, I have extracted here
the information from a and safety to be be now knows what a
new and now a can go. So I just want to say this is more subtle
in that sense, or there's not like an easy way to around it by
saying, okay, let's not measure agents.
Thank you. I think unfortunately, it's the time for the short
break. And there is a lot of questions remaining. So maybe
we can just continue the discussion here for those that
want. So the next question is equal then Alex, Lev and
Aurelian. So I suggested that you can continue here. But we
will start the next meeting at 1020.
By the way, I forgot to thank Gerard for his flexibility in
swapping the talk. So I really wanted to thank you for that.
And I thank you again for your talk and your participation.
So I guess I can ask me a question. Yes. So I thank you for
your talk. But I guess you're already kind of partially
answered. So it will be quick. I just wanted to ask you if you
think that your result can just be interpreted as the same
no good theorem from chess level, like observable in the
other facts, you have some kind of no good theorem against
observable independent facts or as you explained to fit in some
kind of way, is just that you cannot have your results could
be interpreted as you cannot have an absolute quantum
agency and quantum agency is kind of relative. So you cannot
say A, B and their friends are all agents at the same time. And
you just need some kind of agency frame to describe your
answers. And another question also. So would you say that's
because I know that a lot of people say that and sometimes I
do it or so. Would you say that your result is just some kind
of a deep paradox mixed with beginners friends or is there
more to that? Because I know that a lot of people just
consider it as this is a deep paradox. Okay, maybe I started
the last question. So maybe I could say yes in the following
thing. So actually, I should say this sort of experiment really
combines ideas, first of all, obviously from regular strength
experiment, also from Deutsches extension of weakness friend
experiment, also from Bell experiments, also from hardies
experiment, and also from just loves experiment. So it's
somehow a big combination of experiments. I could say it's
just that some people sometimes say this is just weakness friend
experiment. And then others say this is just hardest. So maybe
the first thing is to say it's a combination of those. But I
think this is not important. I think the more important thing
for me is the following that it asks a different question. So the
question that is usually asked is the question of, and is there
for example, a hidden variable or so, here, the question I'm
asking is, is it, and is there a consistent way to describe
agents who are themselves? So can I, can I use quantum
theory to describe agents who are themselves using the theory? I
think this is kind of the new question that is asked. I'm new.
And that was certainly not hard, this question, if you compare
to that. So the question, and this is a consistency question I
could ask for any theory, I could also do that in thermodynamics,
for example, I could ask myself, if I, for example, describe an
agent, and this is actually almost done if you look at
Maxwell's demons, or if I describe an agent who is itself
applying thermodynamics and reasoning about the system, do I
somehow get into contradictions? And clearly, and if you assume
that the theory is universally valid, and this was the
assumption I briefly discussed before, of course, with Philippe
Cauchy. So if you make this assumption that quantum
mechanics is universally valid, then it should satisfy this
criterion, or any theory that is a theory of the world should
also be able to describe the agents who are using the theory,
because these agents are obviously also part of the
world. So I think this is really the new aspect. And then it's
not so relevant for me, is it now hard is our witness friend or
or Bell's experiment. I think at the end, it's just a sort of
experiment which shows that if we want to do that with quantum
theory, then we run into troubles. Now, I also know that, of
course, there are different, then conclusions from that. And
that's why I want to make the statement somehow as
interpretation independent as I can. But of course, in doing so,
I have to make assumptions. And as I said, one assumption is
that we have this universal validity in the sense that any
agent can apply quantum theory about the rest on the rest of
the world. And I think this is another aspect that somehow the
assumption is not something about hidden variables or so it's
really just the assumption about is the theory applicable from
the viewpoint of agents. And I think there's an interesting
question then how this, for example, relates, I mean, I
just see left and right when I'm on the right of the picture, how
does it relate to many words, because there, we generically
don't have this view in many words, we say, no, the correct
view is always the view from the outside. So one could say, in
this whole analysis, I'm already not talking about many
words. But then I think another aspect, which is important to
me is that one could take a kind of, again, an operational
perspective and say, whatever the view is, I should be able to
come up with a consistent set of rules that allows an agent to
reason. And the rule could be, now you should take God's
perspective and analyze it from the outside, and then make a
prediction. And I think the challenge then is just really
write down the rules. And that forces people to be very precise.
So if people are awake and say, okay, from the outside, you have
to define branches of the world. But I don't know what exactly
the branches is just something way, then they cannot write down
the rules. So it's somehow for me a way to force people to really
be precise of about what they mean, when they talk about
quantum mechanics, rather than trying to push one of the
interpretations. So in that sense, it's really a difference to
these hardies and bell things, which try to make the point that
there is no hidden variables. So I think in that sense, the
summary of my answer is the purpose is certainly a very
different one from these other experiments. The purpose is to
ask ourselves, can quantum theory be applied to users of the
theory itself?
So that was your second question now.
Yeah, that was a second.
Yes.
And my first was, so could you compare it with just love no
go theorem or? Yes, yes. So I think they're closely related.
I mean, of course, the aspect now I just mentioned is probably
something that is a very different starting point. Because I
think for trust love, as far as I understand, but just has to
correct me that the question was really are there in the
observer independent facts. And for me, the question was really
can quantum agents describe other quantum actions? Now, this
has to do with each other, because clearly, if I have a
situation where I say, I'm certain, so an agent is certain
that another agent is certain, this is certain. So if there are
observer independence facts, then this implication is certainly
justified. So we'd say, in that direction, there's a clear
connection that let's say if you assume now, and the thing that
trust love proofs is not true, namely, observer independent
facts, then there is no trouble in applying this implication
here. Conversely, I'm not sure, as it doesn't go in the other
direction, because trust love kind of course, and so if you
assume observer independent facts, you can even make
statements when no agent is ever certain about another agent's
thing. So for example, in, in actually trust love's
experience, it's all probabilistic knowledge. And so we
never have statements of that type. So in order to extend
my thing to trust us, I would need to come up with a rule which
tells me if I'm 98% sure that this value that the other person
is 97% sure of something, what does it mean? So in that sense,
and there's not a one to one link between the two, but they're
related in at least in the way I tried to sketch now. But maybe
each of us has some other comments.
I can agree with this. I think that my no go theorem can be
easily extended to GF set argument, which you have the
deterministic statement still. And I feel that there is a
difference in which you talk about facts of the world. And
then you read out, or have some ignorance or knowledge about
these facts, and talking just about the knowledge. And it
seems the second is weaker, in a sense. But when you look at
the proof itself, you, in order to collapse this knowledge, and
to be used by a single observer at the end, what you use it is
just Boolean logic, which is a classical logic. So I feel like
on the level of concepts and the question, it's independent,
level on the proof is very close to each other. But yeah, I
agree.
Okay, it's good. So yes, indeed. So I didn't, I never talk
about facts. There are always kind of statements an agent makes
about how so about knowledge somehow. So all is knowledge
that don't need to be fact in that sense, in to phrase these
things. I think that's one conceptual difference. Okay,
thank you.
Thank you for the discussion. I think it's time to go to the
next speaker now. So thank you. Okay, thank you as well. What's
a pleasure.
So we will now listen to Christopher Timson. Christopher
Timson is a fellow in a future and philosophy at Brasenus
College, and a lecturer in the Faculty of Philosophy at the
University of Oxford. And today he will talk about cubism with a
talk on
