And so, thank you, everyone.
So this is the last talk before Carlos replies.
I'm happy to present Mauro Dorato and Matteo Morganti,
both from University of Roma Trem.
As I was saying, talks are usually 30 minutes.
If you need a bit more time, it's okay.
Do you want me to warn you about it?
Yes, please. Well, just do it with Matteo.
But no, please do it with me and with him,
because we have 30 minutes, right?
15-inch, if you...
Okay, 15-inch.
So just wave your hands when I'm close to 10, don't twerk.
It's okay, I'll be grateful anyway.
So first of all, thanks to the organizer
for having put together such a great group of people.
And it's actually very pleasing to me
to talk about relational quantum mechanics.
And as you see, the title is
Potentology for Relational Quantum Mechanics.
And the kind of ethical strategy that we have adopted here
is that, supposing that relational quantum mechanics
is approximately true or whatever that means.
That is a good description of the quantum world.
Quantum world is nicely misprinted by the theory.
We're trying to ask, what are the readings of RQM
vis-a-vis current attempts to uncover
the fundamental structural realities?
It's really a very big work.
But we're going to analyze quickly
the three main positions that are actually being discussed,
namely, priority monism by Schachter in Israel,
ontic structural realism,
which has been developed by Candiotto.
And finally, the last part is going to be explained
and talked about by Matteo.
This part is basically labeled
in the literature Quantum Coherentism.
And Matteo and Claudia are basically
the people that really propose.
And I'm going to touch briefly,
but really briefly on the problem of timing,
priority monism.
There are two distinctions,
that the distinction that needs to be made
between existing monism and priority monism.
Existence-bornism is really a very implausible
and metaphysical view that goes back to Spinoza or Hegel.
The idea is that the parts of the universe
are just the parts, but only the whole exists.
Or if you want it to exist in a real fundamental sense.
I think a more plausible view, it's priority monism.
The idea is that the whole is explanatory
priority to the parts.
And as you will see, what is written in yellow
is really one of the weak points of priority monism.
What does it mean?
The first question that I'm going to ask
is what does it mean to be explanatory
prior in the context of relational quantum mechanics?
My problem was, our problem was,
we need to translate this language into a physical language.
So we guess that the whole is the universe,
or at least the observable universe.
The explanatory dependent parts
are various physical systems.
And if we are referring to the universe,
we can talk about, say, the map of the weak
in some anisotrobe probe.
This is the wonderful map.
So we have a part, which is the probe,
and the part interacts with the cosmic background radiation,
which is the other part.
So one part gains information from the other part.
I'd like to say something about the philosophical background
on relational quantum mechanics,
which I think goes back to Leibniz.
And I've read a beautiful paper by Julian Barber
about the fact that according to relational quantum mechanics,
the parts of the world are really moments
that represent the universe, sharpers and ismals whole,
from a particular perspective,
which is basically in physical language one with stars.
And here I'm quoting a collaborator of Carlo Lissmolling.
The impossibility of sound descriptions
is basically corresponding to the fact
that there are no moments of the moment.
And the quote is,
each observer can only have incomplete information
about the universe,
so that the most complete description possible
of the universe is given by the whole collection
of incomplete,
but mutually compatible quantum state descriptions
or possible observance.
Now, just briefly about relational quantum mechanics,
there was a quotation from Carlo here.
The observer's O and P get the same answer from a system S.
Well, this is a meaningless question.
It's really a question about the absolute state
of the observer,
which is not, as we have said several times,
it's not a conscious observer,
but it's any system whatsoever and the part.
Well, if you consider that S in this case
is the universe or the whole in a very illiterate sense,
we should say that it's meaningless to refer
to its absolute state independently of its parts.
And this is obviously a direct contradiction
with respect to priority monosome
because the universe cannot be explanatory prior
to the parts because it is in no absolute state.
And there is no interaction independent description
of the whole.
So in this very first step,
then we're trying to take against the compatibility
of priority monosome and relational quantum mechanics.
I think that it's a significant objection.
If there are no absolute states,
then consequently there are no even definite states
of the universe except,
and maybe here we should add Richard's suggestion,
except by referring to a particular part within the universe.
So the second problem,
there is a symmetry between information exchange
and asymmetry between explanatory relations.
So unlike priority monosome in relational quantum mechanics,
the universe can only be described from within
namely from the parts P, I, P, M.
But in physical terms, descriptions we would refer
in Carlos language exchange of information
or if you want a nomic correlation
between two systems interacting
and such interactions of course are governed
by the bone rules.
Now the question is a second objection.
You, the universe cannot be explanatory prior
whatever that means to its parts
because in relational quantum mechanics,
the correlation between you and any of its part is symmetric.
But obviously I guess the relation of explanation
is asymmetric.
So there is a think an obvious conflict here
between relational quantum mechanics.
And now there is the problem of time,
but obviously only applied to priority monisms,
views, various views.
There is a dilemma here.
Either priority monos, the universe
that the priority monists describe evolves in time
or it does not.
But now suppose that it does,
which is implausible consider this holistic view,
then it seems to me the priority monism presupposes
a privilege cosmic time
or some sort of very speculative shape dynamics theory.
But relational quantum mechanics requires relationism
in terms of relations between the physical systems
and changing information to gather
a certain temporal information.
Well, then the most plausible reading here
is that according to priority monism,
the most plausible interpretation of the universe
is the so-called block view
where basically the ontological distinction
between phosphorus and the future is absent.
And the block view, I would say,
is at least partially incompatible
with an ontology of processes and events
because as Baal used to say,
in relativity events do not happen, they're just,
they just are.
This is, of course, opening a Pandora box.
But again, if there is a,
this is the teaching of relativity,
there is no universe at the time t.
If there is time in an objective sense,
it's time that is somehow measured along single word lines.
So this sort of objective time
is hardly reconcilable with priority monism,
which needs the idea that there is a universe,
it seems to me, at a certain time.
And you cannot talk about a universe at a certain time
because there are very many ways
to slice up this universe, this block.
And another problem that's cosmic time,
seems to me, raises for priority monism
is the fact that priority monism requires, excuse me,
very restricted, model-dependent,
privileged solutions of Einstein field equations.
And one last problem that I see here,
according to priority monism,
this cosmic clock must be exponentially prior
with respect to local clocks, which belong to the parts.
But in relational quantum mechanics,
it seems to me there is no external cosmic clock.
So we measure time by comparing local clocks,
namely local physical systems,
with changes in nearby regions.
So just to summarize my part,
it seems to me that relational quantum mechanics
is more liberal than priority monism.
And I see this in advantage
because in this sense, relational quantum mechanics
presupposes less from the physical structure of the universe
as far as we know it.
Why the requirements of priority monism are much stricter,
so they seem somehow adopt.
They're trying to adopt, basically,
the physical description of the world
through their own pet metaphysics.
So they need the idea that there are no closed time lock curves
so that the universe in physical diagram is causally stable.
They have to deny that there is some sort of calming
into being even at a local, in a local sense,
which I think is very reasonable in the sense
that one event is then followed by another event,
but before the later event does not exist
in any sort of sense, not even in a unrestricted sense.
It needs time-symmetric laws
because the whole, basically, the terms are near its part,
but this determination plausibly is time-symmetric.
And most fundamental laws of the universe are time-symmetric.
And finally, I'm not going to develop this.
I'm not able to explain what this explanatory priority
really amounts to because the only notion
that I know of is explanation in physics
and you have very, very many options there.
They never try to relate this metaphysical notion
of explanatory priority with physical explanation
whatever it counts for explanation in physics,
say, numerological explanation.
I think I should leave the ball to Matteo at this point.
Do you want me to advance the slide, Matteo?
I can try to share mine.
Okay, great.
Mauro, I think you have to stop.
Okay.
I'm sorry.
Can you see?
We see Gadzetta.
That's not the point.
Wait.
I see a blue car.
Thank you.
Now you can see many things.
Let me try again.
I think Mauro has to stop sharing first.
I'm ready to show mine.
No, leave it, leave it.
Okay.
No, it just doesn't work now.
Okay, then.
Oh, you can share, Matteo.
Let me try again.
All right.
Can you see it now?
Perfect.
Okay.
So I'll try to be as good with time as Mauro did.
So as Mauro mentioned,
the second option we want to discuss today
is the interpretation of relational quantum mechanics
in terms of structures.
And recently, very popular claim is that
really we should make sense of relational quantum mechanics
in terms of ontic structural realism,
which is a thesis, very popular thesis
in philosophy science nowadays.
Actually, ontic structural realism
is the conjunction of two very different thesis.
And we only care about the second thesis here.
So the first one is a sort of epistemological thesis,
trying to find a sort of formal structural continuity
across the history of science
so that we can be realistic about science
in spite of all the revolutionary changes
that we are all familiar with.
Well, we don't care about this.
The important component is not the realist component,
it's the structuralist component.
So the second thesis is the ontological thesis
according to which reality is at root relational.
It is important, very important to understand
what structuralists mean by this.
And the idea is basically that physical relations
are more fundamental than objects.
In some cases, moderate structuralists,
they claim that relations and objects
are equally fundamental, but we will ignore this.
The most popular view is that really,
what physics teaches us is that relations,
not objects, not relata, not monadic properties,
even though relational properties are fundamental.
Now, there is a bunch of arguments
which are very often run together
from quantum mechanics to structuralism.
You can find many claims in, for example,
Stephen Crench's articles.
They talk about symmetries, the role of invariance,
group theory, quantum statistics,
quantum non-individuality, and what have you.
Everything is understood in terms of relations.
In the case of relational quantum,
in the case of relational quantum mechanics,
the idea is in a way simpler.
The idea is basically that given that it makes no sense
to talk about individual physical systems
and their monadic properties in relational quantum mechanics,
and given that properties are essentially relative
to other physical systems,
then physical relations must be prior
at the fundamental metaphysical level.
This argument can be found in, more or less,
this formulation in Candiotto's paper,
which Mauro already mentioned.
In the paper, she says exactly this.
Since interactions, she says between systems and instruments
which she's potentially misleading, I think,
but forget about it.
Since interactions play a crucial role
in relational quantum mechanics,
then it is natural to interpret it in terms of relations,
objects turning out to be mere nodes
in relational structure.
So this second of the claim is very important.
Objects are really derivative on relations.
And the claim is that relational quantum mechanics
makes this sort of claim.
Now, we think that intuitively it makes sense
to try to translate talk of interactions
between systems into talk about relations,
but actually we think that upon scrutiny,
this doesn't really hold water.
And we try to express our worries
in a list of four objections.
It increase in order of significance.
So the first objection is very general.
And it doesn't have to do with relational quantum mechanics.
It's not even quantum mechanics.
It's a general objection to ontic structural reality.
It seems to us that the notion of structure
or the notion of relational structure
is notoriously ambiguous.
And it remains ambiguous in the philosophical science
literature.
In some cases, it means formal continuity
across theories in physics.
In other cases, it's about the role of group theory
and invariances in some theories.
It's really hard to pinpoint one particular meaning
of relations.
And of course, the worry is that if we don't know
what a relation, what a structure is,
then being fundamentalists, whatever it means
about relations at the metaphysical level
is not really clear what it means.
Well, forget about it.
Suppose we have a working notion of structure.
The second objection, it seems to us, is the following.
The structuralists typically say that every property,
every physical fact can be translated into a claim
which is fundamentally about relations,
including state-independent properties.
Allegedly essential properties of things
which determine the kinds of things, for example,
the kind of particles we are interacting with.
And it seems to us that relational quantum mechanics
doesn't do that, or at least it doesn't have to do that.
State-independent properties are simply not relative
to other systems.
They might be, but it is not needed to make
the explanatory work that theory actually wants to do.
And this is a big difference
because you cannot be a structuralist
if you claim that state-independent properties
are traditional monadic properties.
Of course, we can discuss it later.
Many structuralists insist that we have to translate
state-independent properties in relational terms,
but it seems to me, it seems to us that they fail
to actually prove this so far.
But again, assume that this objection can be responded to.
Now, the key point emerges.
As you remember from the quotation,
the idea is that since interactions are crucial
in relational quantum mechanics,
we need to take relations to be metaphysical fundamental.
Of course, there is a connection
between two things interacting
and two things being related.
But our worry here is that really,
catalog doesn't mean what the structuralists
want him to say by interaction.
And interaction presupposes two interacting things.
It seems to me, why for the structuralists,
relations being fundamental means, as we saw,
that objects are really derivative on relations.
So we don't have anything to begin with.
We start off with relations,
and then after that, obviously it's not a temporal after.
It's a metaphysical derivative nature of objects.
Objects come later.
So the question here is,
can we really verify interaction?
So of course, an interaction is an actual physical event.
It is physically real.
But the claim that the structuralists
are making here is stronger.
The claim is that relations are literally
the basic building blocks of reality.
Of course, this claim can be defended,
but we believe that this is not what Carlo wants to say.
And it's a stronger claim than what he needs.
And this leads me to the fourth objection,
which is immediately tightly connected to the previous one.
The point here is simply to draw your attention
to this difference.
There is a difference,
which is a deep philosophical difference
between something being fundamentally relational
or extrinsic on the one hand,
and something being fundamental as a relation
on the other hand.
Now, what we claim is that Carlo really wants
to stress the first thing.
We have sort of more or less traditional physical systems.
We can maybe use the word object.
And these objects are essentially relational.
Their properties are essentially extrinsic.
But be careful here.
What is key is the talk of objects
with extrinsic properties.
So at no point do we need a talk of relations
being fundamental.
Let me just give you an example.
What the structure is typically used
as an example of a physical relation is something like this.
The relation of having opposite spin in the x direction too.
So the structure of its claim is literally
that reality is fundamentally constituted
by these sort of things.
Having opposite spin relations.
While it seems to us that what Carlo,
what relational quantum mechanics says
is something slightly different,
the typical relational quantum mechanical claim
is that system s is, say, spin up in the x direction
with respect to system o.
So Carlo seems to presuppose s and o as two relata.
And this is sufficient for not being a structure.
Because we are not reducing relata to relations.
OK, so if you agree with us so far,
it looks like it is at least possible
to understand relational quantum mechanics
in terms of more or less traditional metaphysical
categories.
It might be objects.
It might be bundle theory of properties,
as Andrea, for example, recently suggested,
if I understand them correctly.
But we do feel that there is something more to explain.
It is desirable, at least, to say something more
about this particular label.
Why is the theory relational?
It is more or less clear from what we said so far.
But we still feel like we need to say something
from the point of view of metaphysics and ontology
to make sense of this.
In other words, we cannot just make
doing traditional bundle theories of properties.
Which properties do we have?
How do they work?
So to end the talk, we will briefly
mention this third proposal, which is, of course,
a shameless plug.
Forgive me for the self-advertisement.
But it is recent work that I've been doing with Claudio
in the last couple of years.
So I will just offer it to you as an option.
The proposal is this.
Relational quantum mechanics can, at least,
maybe it should be interpreted in terms
of metaphysical coherence.
So what it is.
I will give you very quick, rough, crash course.
The basic idea of metaphysical coherence
is that it is possible.
And perhaps it is actually the case
that relations of mutual ontological dependence
hold between different physical systems
at the same level of complexity.
The counterpart is obviously the traditional foundationalist
view of reality.
According to which realities really
are sort of hierarchy of levels in which
facts at one level can be only be explained
in terms of more fundamental facts.
Now, metaphysical coherence is to reject this idea.
It could be that physical systems
at the same level of complexity, they
are symmetrically dependent.
Because the existence of one affects
the features of the other one.
Symmetric dependence is key here.
Another thing that metaphysical coherence
departs from is the Jung-Lewis ontology
based on Jungian supervenience and this idea
of a mosaic of local quantities, which we really
think is untenable.
But many people defend it nowadays.
And it seems clear to us that relation of quantum mechanics
is really incompatible with Jungian supervenience
and the like.
But what does the metaphysical coherence actually
say about physical system?
Let me start with a simple example.
Quantum entanglement.
This is really a toy example, basically.
The idea of the metaphysical coherence
is basically that entanglement can
be understood in terms of contingent mutual relations
of symmetric dependence between physical systems.
And these symmetric dependence affects
the properties of the system.
So consider, for example, the single state.
The coherent story here is that you
have two independent systems, one and two.
Upon interactions, they become connected in a way which is not
strictly speaking causal.
It's something stronger.
There's a sort of modal connection,
which is directly mirrored in the quantum states.
So what we get is an entangled system with total spin 0.
Of course, you know that.
And what we get in turn is that given this and the loss
of physics, the interaction sets constraints
on the possible properties of one and two.
So because of the mutual interaction
and the mutual dependence, which arises
as a consequence of interaction, then one and two
can now only have some of the spin values that
were possible before interaction.
So we have a sort of modal restriction
on the possibilities, the physical possibilities that
are open to physical systems one and two.
And this is what we mean by symmetric dependence.
It's not really causal dependence.
It's something more.
It's the way in which the modal structure of things
actually is as mirrored by the relevant thesis.
Now the key thing to notice here is that it is natural here
to talk about individual systems one and two
and their monadic properties.
So it's not about relations.
It's about monadic properties that literally
belong to system one, system two, or whatever.
What is essential is that these properties are not intrinsic.
It doesn't make sense to attribute these properties
to one or two independently of the environment.
In other words, the existence of one
is essential for determining the possible properties of two
and symmetrically the other way around.
So as I said, this is not really relevant for relational quantum
mechanics.
It's a much more general coherence claim,
but it's easy to generalize, of course.
Now the claim that the coherence
would make about relational quantum mechanics
is that quantum systems are really
essentially dependent on other systems for their,
let's call it, qualitative profile,
in particular for their state-dependent properties.
What does it mean?
Again, it means that the systems have monadic properties whose
values cannot be identified in any absolute sense,
but only in a relative sense.
Again, at least for state-dependent properties.
And the relevant dependence relations
are not any sort of mysterious metaphysical addition.
They are just what we find in the theory in the quantum states.
So what we know about the states is
things that fax about their mutual metaphysical model
connections.
Two crucial points.
It should be clear by now, but let me be even clearer.
Coherent?
A couple of minutes more.
Yeah, I'm done.
Very briefly, it should be clear by now,
but it is important to see that coherentism is not
a form of monies.
Because unlike monism, we don't need
to pose it a whole, which is more fundamental than the parts.
We are positing symmetric connections
between the actual things that exist, actual physical systems
that we can find in the labs or whether.
And again, it's not a form of structuralism
because we are not using relations.
Relations don't really play any crucial role here.
Interactions do.
But difference between interactions and relations
can be mirrored by focusing on the relational features
of monadic properties.
So obviously, this is a key point.
We will probably have to talk about this difference
between relations and monadic relational properties.
In metaphysics, this is a fundamental distinction.
Let me just add, I will not go into the details here.
Of course, there is more to say about properties.
What does it mean that properties are modally connected?
Our idea is that the most natural way of making sense of this
is by adding to this coherence picture
a sort of dispositionalist view of properties
of the sort that Maurer has been working on
for a number of years now.
And I will only read the second box,
dispositions with variable manifestations.
In physical interactions, being the condition
for the manifestation of these dispositions.
And we think adding these two coherences
makes sense of all the key features
of relational quantum mechanics.
But again, we can discuss it later.
Let me just close by summarizing very briefly what we did.
We Maurer started off by pointing out
the basic features of relational quantum mechanics
and the need for a clear, understandable,
ontological interpretation of the theory.
We briefly discussed the monist
and the structuralist alternative
and we found them wanting and we ended up
suggesting the possibility of a new novel,
relatively novel understanding of relational quantum mechanics
in terms of metaphysical coherence on the one hand
and a dispositional understanding of properties
on the other hand.
Yeah, that is all.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Matteo and Maurer, both.
OK, so we have around 13 minutes for questions
so that we can take a small break.
Baptiste, you're first.
Hi, thank you very much.
What a lovely presentation, really, and a lot.
I mean, I have no strong opinion about the concept
I mean, I have no strong opinion about which
is the best between these three views,
but I was thinking during the first part of the talk
that I think there are reasons, perhaps,
to defend the priority monist approach,
or at least I was not convinced by the two arguments
that were given, right?
So the first were, I mean, so you think of the world
like a collection of monads, right,
corresponding to all the building blocks?
Another question is, is the cosmos
more phenomenal than all these things, right?
Does it go from the bottom upward or the other way around?
And I mean, I get it that we can really explain,
I mean, the order of explanation
seems to go from the interactions
at the bottom to the cosmos.
But if we are a bit more flexible about the linkage
between explanation and fundamentality or priority,
perhaps there is room to say that the cosmos is still
more fundamental than the parts.
And then for the second argument,
that was basically on the dichotomy
between having either a static time or dynamic time,
I mean, there, I guess, we should also
discuss the possibilities that space time itself
is not fundamental, right?
So there should be a third option to be discussed.
And I mean, I think we can have a kind of block universe view
in which the building blocks are some kind of dynamical building
blocks.
I mean, some people like Nathan Oglander
in the philosophy of time have some kinds of view where
relations are building up the world,
but relations are intrinsically dynamical.
So there should be also some room there
to have a kind of priority monist view.
I mean, just a bunch of thoughts.
I haven't been thinking about that,
but we'll be happy to know what you think about this.
Thanks, Baptiste, for the questions.
The problem with, I think, with this monism point of view,
they never clarify what this whole is.
If the whole is the universe laid out
in a four-dimensional space time, which I think
they're being referring to, then the problem
seems to be that there is no God's eye point of view,
so that it's difficult to describe the universe, if not
from within.
If Carlos' view is correct, of course,
I was with Matthew presupposing that Carlos' view
was the view that should be, at least for the sake
of the seminar, and also for the other reasons
that we may have, to see whether that view, Carlos' view,
was somehow strong enough to rule out priority monism.
And if we agree that there is no God's eye point of view
in the description of the universe,
because we are within the universe,
we cannot describe the universe as being a part of it,
then it seems to me that this priority monism view fails.
Can you please remind me of your second question,
briefly?
I remember the third.
The third was about the block view, right?
I mean, I'm not sure.
I thought I might have spirited the question.
But I guess maybe.
Sorry.
Go ahead.
I mean, just on that, I guess my trouble
is to understand why the fact that we cannot describe
the whole of reality, right?
I mean, it could be that the whole of reality is not possible
to describe it as a whole.
But why does this claim entail that the whole cannot
be more fundamental, right?
I mean, is it really some kind of analytic implication?
I mean, it seems to me that there is something more to say.
To, I mean, yeah, I don't know.
No, no, no.
I see your question, and it's a very good one.
If the whole is explanatory prior,
it means that the whole somehow should be explaining
any part of the universe.
But there is no possibility to describe
a part of the universe in the sense
that the part cannot give a self-description so that it's
difficult to understand what they mean when they claim
that the whole is prior to the parts.
And so if I may add something to this,
just to make it clear, as I am understanding,
our claim is not a logical impossibility claim.
It's a matter of how powerful a philosophical explanation is.
And it seems to us that basically the point is,
is it really natural?
Is it the best explanation for a physical theory that
is entirely in terms of correlations
between these systems, the claim that there
is something which is fundamental in spite of the fact
that it's not correlated to anything?
It really looks like a step that is not required.
And if possible, it makes things worse
in terms of explaining or understanding.
So it's definitely not a logical impossibility claim.
As to the third question, yes, I know Nathan's view,
but it seems to me that you take seriously the wrong view.
You don't have any coming into being.
And the coming into being is essential to the fact
that you give an explanation of what we experience in our,
say, in our basic, in our consciousness
that we anticipate the future.
But if everything is there, so to speak,
and that's what the priority monists require,
then you cannot really have somehow the possibility
of explaining our experience.
So you have to adopt the block view, which is incompatible,
it seems to me, with any dynamics coming into being.
Because somehow every event exists on a par.
While in relational quantum mechanics,
you can actually defend a local sort of becoming along
world lines.
So you have proper time.
And proper time is obviously objective,
but you cannot extend proper time throughout the cosmos.
And this is, I think, what the priority monists
require or should require.
I don't know if I actually replied to your question.
Right.
I mean, I don't think I agree, but I better
understand your point of view.
I mean, I still think we can have some kind of local becoming
consistent with a block universe view or something
in the spirit of a block universe view.
But I don't want to take too much time.
Thanks a lot.
Yeah, thanks for your question, but please.
Thank you.
And Hanok, you up next.
Thanks very much.
Thanks very much, Mauro and Matteo.
I have a question, I guess, to both of you,
but even beyond that to Carlo and others.
You mentioned the state-independent properties.
And so I was thinking, what exactly
does the relational quantum mechanics
commit itself when it talks about the place of relations?
Let's say I take 10 protons, 5 electrons,
throw them into space.
The mass, the charge, if there are other such properties,
these are not relational.
These are the relational properties
are the relative location, relative momentum.
These are relative properties anyway.
We don't need the quantum mechanics for that.
So are there any, so is anybody going
to deny that the number of protons,
the number of electrons in space, the rest mass,
the charge is non-relational?
And are there any new kinds of properties
unlike momentum, spin, and so on, which become relational
and which are not intuitively relational?
Because if not, then there's not such a kind
of a metaphysical outrage in the relational position.
So that's my question.
I wonder if you want to take Matteo and then I can.
Yeah, okay.
I think we are on the same page here.
Our basic claim is that you don't have to be a structuralist
given what we know about quantum mechanics.
And actually, if you want to do that,
you need to engage in all this sort of translation work.
I have all these easy properties.
I look at them, they are intrinsic and monadic.
And to be a structuralist, I need to make a mass,
try to show that they are structures after all.
And I've been reading the literature with care
and I think they are successful in convincing.
Apart from the fact that I don't like structuralism,
I didn't find convincing arguments
for reducing intrinsic properties to relations.
If anything, what is happening in the literature
is that structuralists are starting to realize this.
And they're starting to make more modest claims
about almost all properties.
So I add something to this fact that you described now.
Are there any relational properties
in relational quantum mechanics
which we wouldn't intuitively take to be relational?
Is there any problem there?
Because momentum spin, these are relational.
No news here.
The interpretation of that theory is the news.
But not the fact that these properties are relational.
Is there any property which you would like to say,
no, that can't be relational?
And Arkham tells you, yes, that's relational.
I don't think so, but obviously, Carlo knows better.
I don't know about number.
You mentioned number of particles
and that's a slightly different issue.
It's an interesting question.
Carlo, sorry.
Better.
I have to reply.
Maybe I'll, I'll take your question
and I'll add to my replies after I'll try to say something.
I don't disagree with you mostly,
but I would dot some mice.
Okay, thanks very much.
Mauro, I don't know if you want to add something on this.
Well, neither do I disagree.
I think Matteo was just drawing a distinction
between say mass and charge on the one hand
and properties like spin on the other.
And the idea is how to make sense
of correlations like spin correlations
without bringing in priority monism
or structuralism or bundle theories or relations.
So the idea was trying to eliminate one by one
this most discussed view
and focusing not just on mass and charge,
but basically on the correlational view.
So that's, I mean, of course,
you can treat systems independently of one another,
but the idea is that I think Carlo should say
that before the interaction, that's what he should say.
I mean, in the case of having a mass,
the interaction just basically gives you
the particular value that the system with that mass has.
But having a mass, I think,
is previously possessed by the objects.
While in many, many, many cases,
well, of course, in many, many cases,
what you measure is not what is there before.
This is what I should say or what I have to say, but.
I don't want to take more time.
So if we come to this later in the discussion,
I'll come back to that.
I'm sure we will with Carlo.
So, well, Claudio, if you want to ask the very last question.
Yeah, sure, why not?
So first of all, two things,
one with the model parts and one with Mateus.
So I think that there might be actually in the model part,
I agree with all of you said, guys,
but I think there might be even a more basic tension
where probability monism and Carlo's view.
As a matter of fact, I don't think that, for example,
Carlo's view is even committed to the existence of the universe,
like in the technical sense of the meteorological fusion
of all the quantum systems out there.
And this is extremely important in Shaffer's view,
in probability monism.
And it can even, so it has two moves,
either deny that there is a universe,
like the meteorological fusion,
and say when we say universe, right,
it's just a terms that refer plurally in the semantics,
or second, say, even if there is,
I cannot attribute any property to it.
Exactly.
Because it's even more basic.
So this is actually strengthened as your argument.
This, the part in which I found very interesting
was bringing co-authentism to the picture,
because I completely agree that.
With yourself.
There's no force.
I mean, I think, I know that it's true,
but the argument that I like X, therefore X,
I've been told it doesn't work that well,
at least with reference with me, but hey.
No, but here's, so I think it's crucial.
I think you're really doing a nice working
and distinguishing between relations,
and let's say, extremely relational properties.
Now, as a matter of fact, this was,
so for example, if you go to the structuralists, right,
I think they seem to ignore that it seems to me,
that was the point, for example, in Black's original,
in Black's original dialogue, that's very clear, right?
These are very distinct metaphysical things.
And you can do without, not relations,
you can do with extreme relational properties.
Now, but here's what I don't get now.
Like, so it's just a clarification question.
Walk me through it.
So here's a claim that Carlo, I think, should make, right?
System S1 has spinax up,
relative to, let's say, relative to system two, right?
These might be constructed as an extrinsic,
relational, monadic property of S1, let's say.
It can even be constructed also as a relation.
I don't care now.
And these underwrites, let's say,
a sort of defendants claim of S1 and S2.
S1 depends for this qualitative profile on S2.
So you cannot really, but now where's the symmetry here?
Where does S2 depends on its qualitative profile on S1?
Just in a simple, not in an entanglement case,
just in a simple superposition case, let's say.
I mean, I know that this is coming down,
but it's the second part of that, you see.
I see that they have spin up relative to Carlo, let's say.
Spin X up relative to Carlo,
and therefore I depend on Carlo, right?
For my qualitative profile.
Now, but the coherentism requires that.
Now Carlo depends on me for the same respect.
So in that, as of now, I just can't see it.
Okay, shall I go, Mauro?
Well, as to the first point, I think we agree here
because Carlo is a little bit uncertain
whether to say that it doesn't even make sense
to attribute to the universe as any state,
so that it's meaningless.
That's what he says in the quotation that I gave.
I think if I were to press him now,
he would say it's indefinite,
so there is no definite state to the universe
unless we correlate to the universe.
So if you want, by referring to your latest paper on this,
I glad you, we should say indeterminateness,
something that doesn't possess any property,
which I think shouldn't be equated with
having no property whatsoever.
And then Matteo now should have his place here.
So Claudio, okay, your basic point is that,
if I understand you correctly,
that coherentism requires symmetric dependence.
And I don't really agree with this,
in spite of the fact that we worked on this together.
So let me put it simply.
Fundationalism is the claim
that necessarily dependence is asymmetric.
Coherentism is the negation of this.
So you don't get a necessity claim,
you get a possibility claim.
So it is possible to have symmetric dependence.
So now it's about the physics.
Does the physical theory tell us
that whenever you have interaction,
you have one system affecting the other
and the other way around?
The answer might be yes or no,
but the coherentism should be happy either way.
Because if it's a yes,
then you always get symmetric dependence.
If it's a no, you get it sometimes, which is fine.
No, no, I'm perfect, okay.
So that was actually what I wanted to talk about.
In these cases, right?
Of course you don't need it in every case,
symmetric dependence.
So in this case though, you would say that,
in this particular, so in the entanglement case,
it can be symmetric,
but in this case, Carlos should say like,
I depend on you, for example,
for my, let's say, qualitative profile,
but you don't always get the comment,
I mean, the other direction.
So if that's what you guys are suggesting,
then I'm completely fine with that.
I don't know, I'm curious to hear from Carlos.
I mean, it seems to me that whenever you have
a physical interaction, it's two-way interaction,
but it might be no.
I mean, how can I measure something
without being affected by it?
In the terms of relational quantum mechanics.
But I might be completely wrong, I mean.
We can keep this for the discussion.
I think Carlos is taking notes.
Looks dangerous.
So I'm very sorry, guys, I have to apologize.
You couldn't expect anything different
from a conference organized by three Italians,
but we are six minutes late.
And so I suggest we take,
we still take a four-minute break
and we start 10 minutes, so we start a bit late.
So we reconvene in four minutes.
I'd sorry, everyone, for the delay.
And thank you again, Matteo and Mauro, of course.
