Hi, everybody, and welcome to today's session of the Spectral Geometry in the Clouds seminar,
which is a usual reminder that talk is recorded. Today, we have as our speaker Trichetane Traetor
from the University of Bern, who will talk to us about spectral problems on star graphs.
As usual, if you have a question during the seminar, you may either unmute yourself and
ask your question, or you may ask your question in chat, in which case I will relay the question
to the speaker. And while the floor is yours now, Trichetane.
Yeah, thank you very much, Jean, for the invitation to give a talk in this so nicely
entitled seminar series. So I felt inspired to choose a new title page just before like an hour
ago. So I was looking for some beautiful clouds here near Bern, but you won't see so beautiful
clouds today. It's actually a little bit more rainy. So my talk today will be based on joint
work with various people. So there will be papers with Slava Pigovacic and Natalia Roschenko on the
one hand in the more or less first two thirds of the talk. And then in the last part of the talk,
I'll talk about some more recent work with Malcolm Brown and Heinz Lager. So the common theme
in both these parts are star graphs. And in the first two thirds, it will be some more
concrete star graphs, namely star graphs made out of steel cheese strings. And so I would like to
just introduce you a little bit to this rather classical topic first of a single steel cheese
string. So the key contribution here is due to Gantmacher and Grein in 41 and 50, their book
and especially the appendix therein. So a steel cheese string is an elastic string of zero density
bearing a number n, finite or infinite of point masses. In the first part of the talk,
we will assume that this number is finite. If later on it is allowed to be infinite,
then accumulation only at one endpoint will be allowed. So in the finite case, we have n masses
sitting on such a string here. And on the boundary points, there are no masses sitting. So they are
only in the interior and L0 up to Ln are the lengths of the intervals between them. And there
are two problems that we will consider here. So on one endpoint on the left here, we will always
have a Dirichlet condition. And then on the right end point, we will either have Dirichlet or Neumann
condition. Now, I can even show you a real steel cheese string thanks to this paper of Cox,
Embrey and Hawkinson, which appeared in 2012. So they even made some experiments for inverse
problems of such steel cheese strings. So here you see six masses and all these devices measuring
stuff. And really also the article is nicely written, also giving the history of the steel
cheese strings. So if you want to learn a little bit, then I would recommend this.
Now, the equations of motion that we will now derive on the next slide, the notation is that
so we have these n masses m1 to mn and by vk of t, we denote the transverse displacements of these
masses at time t. Now for k equal to 0 and n plus 1, we have the left and the right endpoint of the
string and use the corresponding notation. Now the Lagrange equations are then as follows. So
you have these two difference quotients and then plus mk vk double prime of t equal to 0 for k from
1 to m. Now the boundary conditions. So we have these two different problems for the Dirichlet
problem. So left and right endpoint, we simply have the displacements have to be 0.
And for the Dirichlet-Neumann problem, where on the right hand side we have a Neumann condition,
this slope here has to be equal to 0.
Now as usual, separation of variables in this form vk of t equal to uk times e to the i lambda t
leads to the following system. So from the Lagrange equations, we get these
difference equations here. Here is now the spectral parameter is the lambda squared,
which comes from the second time derivative. And then here we have the Dirichlet-Dirichlet
conditions and the Dirichlet-Neumann conditions for the amplitudes uk.
Now, in the appendix of the Goppe Klein second edition, so which appeared in 1950,
there the title of this appendix has two parts. And the first part especially reads nicely in
German. It says, eine bemerkenswerte Aufgabe für eine Perlenschnur. So that's also a little
bit old-fashioned German and translated literally it means a remarkable problem for a string of
pearls. And so this is the equations that we have from the previous slide. And now what
Goppe Klein did in this appendix. So they derived a two-term recurrence relation for these amplitudes.
So, namely if we set z equal to lambda squared and solve for uk plus one in these equations here,
we get the following recurrences. So uk plus one, so this is equal to some polynomial
with an even index r2k of z applied to the u1. And this quotient here, uk plus one minus
uk over the length lk between the masses is the odd integer polynomial r of z applied to u1.
And these polynomials, sorry, r2k and r2k minus one, they are polynomials of degree k
and they satisfy these recurrence relations that you can see here. So basically each of them is
expressed by the two predecessors. The difference between the two equations is that for the odd
ones you have a coefficient minus mkz sitting in front of the next lowest. And for the even ones
you have the length lk without a z here in the recurrence relation. So if we now want to solve
the Dirichlet Dirichlet and Dirichlet Neumann problem, so first of all the Dirichlet on the
left hand side means that u0 has to be equal to zero. So in this case we can choose r minus
one of z to be equal to one over the length, the first length next to the left end point
one l0 and then r0 of z equal to one to start the recurrence at k equal to zero.
And then at the other end point we have the following two conditions for the amplitudes,
for the Dirichlet the amplitude has to be zero. So if we look up here we see that means simply
that r2n of z or of lambda squared has to be zero and this is the equation for the Dirichlet
for the Dirichlet eigenvalues lambda. Now for the Dirichlet Neumann eigenvalues we have this condition
at the right and correspondingly if we look up here so we have to have this is zero if the odd
polynomials are zero. So the Neumann eigenvalues or the eigenvalues of the Dirichlet Neumann
to be precise a problem that we consider here are the zeros of these odd index polynomials.
So now on the next slide we will consider the quotient of these two so we see that the Dirichlet
and Neumann eigenvalues will be the zeros and poles of the quotient formed out of these two
polynomials here. And this brings us to the second part of the title of this appendix in
in the Korbach-Rein second edition of 1950 book which is called und überstilte esche
Kettenbrüche in German so and on continued fraction expansions. So this is the quotient I
was mentioning from the slide before so let's call that phi offset. Now these quotients let me
just go back for a moment to the formulas to the recurrence relations so we will now look at
quotients of these two and then sorry we divide by this term here and then we see that the quotient
satisfies certain relations and we will successfully insert these relations here is the first one
and then we do it again for this quotient so once we get the ln because we had these two different
first coefficients and in the next place we get minus mnz and then ln minus 1 minus mn minus 1z
et cetera until we end up with 1 over l0 minus m1z plus 1 over l0 here.
So this phi of which the Dirichlet and Neumann eigenvalues are the zeros and the poles
has such a representation here where the ln and the mn are the masses the length of the intervals
and the masses on the Stealthier string. Now maybe we can note at this stage if we plug in zero
here then all the l's pile up to the numerator and we get the sum of all the l's which is the total
length of the string. Now these continued fractions were studied by Stealthiers in a work
dating back to 1894 and you see the title page here and even if you cannot recognize
precisely what's written there I think what you can recognize is that structure here is the same
as here the difference being that these continued fractions here are not ending so these are infinite
continued fractions in this work. Now it was only in the Kochberg-Krein appendix that these
considerations of Stealthiers on continued fraction expansions were given a mechanical
interpretation in terms of these strings which maybe because of that were then called Stealthiers
strings right. So let's go a little bit more into detail here so first of all this function
phi as we shall see has a very particular property not surprisingly it's called a Stealthiers function
and why what is a Stealthiers function? A Stealthiers function is a function that is a
Navandana function so it's a function analytic in the complex plane without the non-negative axis
mapping the upper half plane onto itself. To be a Stealthiers function in addition it is required
that f of z is greater than zero when z is on the negative axis and a subclass of Stealthiers
functions s0 functions are those for which zero is not a pole. Now this phi that we see up there
is an s0 function so how can we see that? There is the following lemma which I restrict myself
to the case of rational functions because our phi because we have only finitely many masses
is a rational function so f is a rational s0 function if sorry if this is the first direction if
f is a rational s0 function then it has a continued fraction expansion as follows so there exists a
number p and unique a0 which is the limit at plus minus infinity of this function f so this
is greater than or equal to zero and coefficients ak and pk all greater than zero such that this f
has a continued fraction expansion like that it's it's finite because we assume that f is rational
and moreover the zeros and the poles of this f strictly interlace in the way you can see it here
so it starts with alpha one then this is less than beta one and so on up to alpha p and beta p
appears in the case that a0 is greater than zero vice versa if f is rational with strictly
interlacing zeros and poles as in this relation star here and the limits at plus minus infinity
are non-negative then f is an s0 function and this is how we how how you can then see
that this phi is an s0 function now in this particular case of the phi just to recall
and to make a connection the coefficients in this still in this continued fraction expansion
the a0 it's numbered the other way around so the a0 is the length number ln so the length to the
very right of the string and the ak are the lengths ln minus k and the coefficients bk are the
masses number mn minus k plus one and the f of zero this is the sum of all the a's and in our case
this is then the sum of all the a's so this is equal to l and this is greater than zero
so therefore we have all the properties that that we need
now we want to solve the inverse problem for this steel chip string so again this was
done by gochberg and krein in this appendix so the inverse problem is as follows given is
a number n in n and two sets of interlacing strictly interlacing numbers lambda one to
lambda n and zeta one to zeta n together with a length l greater than zero and the task is
to find masses mk and lengths lk between them so that the zeta k and the lambda k are the
Dirichlet and Neumann eigenvalues of the corresponding steel chip string of length l
now this problem can be solved this is the solution so you introduce a function capital psi
you take l this is the length times the following quotient so you built these
products with the sequences zeta k squared and lambda k squared and form the quotient
then for sure psi of zero is equal to l that is one condition we want to have
because of this interlacing property and and all the assumptions this psi turns out to be
an s zero function by the previous lemma and therefore it admits a unique continued fraction
expansion this is the the continued fraction expansion and now we can read off the solution
of the inverse problem from that continued fraction expansion
right in the same way as we did it before so the ln is the a zero the lk is the an minus k and the
b are related to the masses in the same way as we had it on the previous slide
so this is the constructive solution of the inverse problem for a single steel chip string
now we will move on to star graphs of steel chip strings and here is another nice picture which
I think Marc Embraer showed this to me some some quite some time ago so there are really
instruments built from such star graphs this is a with three strings okay it's not steel
chip strings but it's a star shaped vibrating system and you can even listen to these things and
maybe just to have a little break I'm not sure and I'm yeah let's see if you can hear what I hear
if you can't I will do something else let me let me do it differently because I have another
computer next to me and I'll try to play this to you where are we I will now go down to the
microphone so that the microphone comes to the speaker and let me try if you can hear it
so I hope you could hear it because I it came through the same microphone that my as my voice
a very weird sound I think very very strange sound there are more such such examples that you
can listen to well the only thing that this system has in common with ours is well it's
somehow a planar star graph and that will also be the case in our in our new situation so a star
graph of steel chip strings here still with a finite number of masses and we will have the
following setup at all the outer vertices we will have directly conditions and then in the middle in
the center of the star there is a new element here compared to the previous setup because we can
have a mass there remember before we didn't have masses at endpoints of steel chip strings so this
is this capital M is the mass at the center it can be zero but it can be present and we will
consider in this center two different types of conditions the directly condition well in that
case you won't feel the mass anyway and if the Neumann condition is there you will feel it
so what is the notation so the number of strings we consider is q greater than two
greater than or equal to two then the strings are labeled with a j and all the corresponding
numbers nj the number of masses and the length nj the total length of the string number j
they all have this this j label here and on each string we have the masses mk and then I have to
put the j maybe in another place and the L case so as you see it in the picture the ordering of the
masses is always from the exterior counted from the exterior to the interior and then there is this
possible mass m greater than or equal to zero at the central vertex and we will consider two problems
a little bit similar as before so always directly conditions at the pendant vertices plus continuity
and then the rather trivial problem where we also put sorry a directly condition at the center vertex
this is the problem d1 and the other problem Neumann condition at the center vertex will
be called n1 the one that will be basically a little bit superfluous in this talk because
I will not talk about the other problems d2 and n2 in the paper they corresponded to the case
when this change of the condition that we have in the center of the star graph here was not in
the center but at at an outer vertex so we have also treated this problem but I would like to
concentrate just on this with the middle point as the root okay so what are the two problems so
we have the equations for a single steel just a string here that we had before now labeled with the
j in addition and then we have the two directly conditions as before so here really just
a q steel shear strings glued together and non-interacting because we have the directly
condition at the central vertex the other problem is different so the first equations are the same
the directly conditions at the outer vertices are the same now the continuity is a bit different
because they are now not zero just equal and the Neumann condition at the central vertex
now takes the form that you can see here so because we have we can have this mass capital
m in the middle we don't have zero here in general but we have m times the spectral parameter lambda
squared so as here it also appears in one of the vertex conditions in the matching condition
okay now the direct spectral problem the first before you can solve an inverse problem
of course you have to first find out what are the direct properties so that you know what the
assumptions are that you have to meet with sequences that you are given
so the directly and Neumann eigenvalues of the two problems we saw on the slide before
turned out to be the zeros and poles of a function phi q which is again the quotient
of two functions phi dq and phi nq and this if you really work it out you see that this
quotient is given as follows so one over then you have the sum over all strings then one over
the functions phi j these are the same functions phi that we had for a single string before
but now labeled for each string and then minus m times the mass the mass times z the central mass
time set and the second claim is that after cancellation of possible common factors between
the two functions here this function phi q becomes an s0 function a stilted function of class s0
now a few remarks here so the the numerator here the phi dq this is nothing but the product of the
individual functions phi j corresponding to the to the directly to the to the single string
right that we had before in the first section now the number of the directly eigenvalues you
can work out to be n namely this is just adding up all the numbers of directly eigenvalues on the
individual strings now the number of the Neumann eigenvalues let's call them again lambda k
this is different if this mass is there in the center or not it's n if the mass is zero
and it's n plus one if it's greater than zero
and now in the next result we will now prove some or formulate some properties that we
proved for these directly and Neumann eigenvalues so these sequences
well either up to n or n plus one you can always set lambda n plus one equal to infinity if you
want to formulate it in a uniform way for both problems here so these sequences of the squares
of the directly and Neumann eigenvalues or the sequences themselves satisfy the following properties
the first one is an interlacing property between them and there are a few strict inequalities in
here well first of all lambda one is greater than zero and this is for the case I have to say
that m is greater than zero right so we will now focus on that case if m is greater than zero
because that would make a difference here but then in particular the first two lambda one and
zeta one satisfy a strict inequality between them and the same here between zeta n and lambda n plus
one now the second property is a directly eigenvalue or let's rather put it like that
a Neumann eigenvalue lambda k is equal to the previous zeta k minus one if and only if it's
also equal to the next larger directly eigenvalue for all k from two to n
then the multiplicity of each lambda k cannot exceed q minus one
now what's maybe an interesting consequence of that result is the following corollary
so if you look at two neighboring Neumann eigenvalues then because of these properties here
uh one of them must be simple right otherwise you get a contradiction to the properties in
in theorem two so now we have the ingredients that we can move almost to the inverse problem
but let me maybe comment on one thing before that's not directly related to the inverse problem
let me maybe go back to make this comment so here we don't consider any dependence on
of the eigenvalues on this central mass m but if you once think back to this directly problem
so you could imagine the directly problem to be the one where this mass is infinite
because if you put an infinitely heavy mass in the center this is really nothing can move
it's like a directly condition so then you can consider the dependence of these eigenvalues lambda k
on this mass m right and so the zeta k would be basically the value of lambda k at m equal to
infinity and in fact the lambda k uh depend on m in a monotonic way namely they decrease
monotonically uh when m increases right so for example the lambda two when m grows decreases
to z zeta one and then in the limit it becomes zeta one right and the lambda one
for m tending to infinity decreases to zero and so on so this is what you see here so the lambda
one viewed as a function of the mass m tends to zero the lambda k plus one tends to the zeta k
so somehow the directly problem is the limiting case m equal to infinity of this
moment problem if you want to view it in this way by the way you can prove this property the
monotonicity property also using the some nevandlina properties of the functions involved
so now what is the inverse problem we are considering here so what is given first of all
the number of strings is given q then the total number of masses on the star graph is given
then the lengths of each of the strings is given all greater than zero
and in addition to that two sequences zeta k squared and lambda k squared satisfying
the three assumptions or I mean the properties they must have to qualify to be a set of directly
and Neumann eigenvalues of such a star graph of steel tier strings question is can we now find
the number of masses on each string and the distributions of these masses then on each string
so that these are the directly and Neumann eigenvalues and the answer is yes one can construct
the numbers nj of masses on each string and then all the masses on the strings including the central
mass and all the length between these masses so that we get the total number n the prescribed one
and the lengths add up to the total length of each string and in such a way that the given sequences
are the directly and Neumann eigenvalues of the corresponding star graph of steel tier strings
now the proof is a bit more involved than the one I showed you for the single string case so
I will not say much about it now I mentioned already that we have analogous results when this
route where we change the boundary condition between Dirichlet and Neumann is not the center
of the star graph but when the route is at a dependent vertex at an outer vertex
okay so now we go to a different setup this is now the the second part about the second paper
the more recent paper with melcom and and tines and this is very different in nature because
it's nothing concrete to start with and even the star graph that I plotted here is more symbolic
at this stage because what we will actually consider is q plus one symmetric linear relations with
equal defect numbers one they could for example be induced by some differential operators on edges
but for the moment they are just abstract and they will be joined by some self-adjoint
matching condition so by joining these we will obtain some self-adjoint operator t a b I will
say a little bit more about these these this notation with the a b in a minute now a setup like
this was considered for example already in a paper by simonov and warachek in 2014 but they
considered different questions or we consider completely different questions than they did
so what are we interested in you see already that I distinguished one edge in color
which we and also in the in the enumeration which I call e0 and we will ask the following question
for a fixed edge let's call it e0 is there a simpler system that in some sense which will
be made precise more later coincides on the e0 with the original one and secondly if all the
edges are of one type for example as we had it before all steel shear strings can then this new
part which which contributes to the simpler system be chosen of the same type
so this is of course a much different nature of questions that that we are considering here
and the answer is that well yes in in in the first case yes in the second case it depends a little
bit but in many cases also yes and to arrive at these answers I will now a little bit schematically
describe to you the two-step reduction procedure by means of which we arrive at that simpler system
and then we may make more precise what means coincides and what is the answer to the next question
so here is this star graph again with a distinguished edge and the v by the way is the the central
vertex so the first reduction step is that we will basically condense this whole blue part
into a boundary condition so after the first step we will arrive at a problem or an operator
or symmetric linear relation just on this edge e0 or just one but on this one side if you want
to view it symbolically of the edge we will impose a boundary condition which will depend
on a parameter set so the blue stuff is now all absorbed in this blue well non-standard
boundary condition with this parameter or spectral parameter dependent condition
so this is the first step right so how is this going how do we arrive at this coefficient here
so first of all let's go a little bit through the notation so we have these individual symmetric
linear relations we form a direct sum so if each of them has defect number one then the sum we have
q plus one has defect number q plus one and now we want a self-adjoint object created from this
so we need to restrict the t star the adjoint of this by some condition which gives us something
self-adjoint and you will recognize this it's very similar to the usual matching conditions that
you know from considering concrete systems on star graphs the difference here being that these
objects gamma one and gamma two they are now abstract they are coming from boundary triples
for this t star so for every symmetric linear relation you have such boundary triples
and so we have them for each tj star and for the big tj star as well because here we have to
affect one the first space in this boundary triple is one dimensional here we have to affect q plus
one so it's q plus one dimensional so just imagine this tab is now a self-adjoint restriction of
this t star by such a condition here and now we showed that these systems here are in some sense
equivalent if we choose for this n zero of set the following function so we need the individual
while titch marsh functions on these they are defined for each such symmetric linear relation on
on an edge or for the tj the phi j then we form out of all these phi j a diagonal matrix
which we call script m and then we have these two a and b these matrices from the matching
conditions defining our self-adjoint linear relation here now we do the following we have
a quotient one over a number depending on z so a function of z which appears as follows so we
take a scalar product in cq plus one namely of the following objects we multiply a with not the full
diagonal while titch marsh function but we replace the first phi zero by zero so this is mq
where we only take phi one up to phi q so then we multiply this this is a function of z we subtract
b then we show this is invertible we take the inverse apply it again to a and then to the
vector e zero which has just a one in the first component and then take the scalar product again
with e zero or epsilon zero so that's the definition of this function and we also show that this n
zero happens to be a neverlander function this will be important in the following
so maybe because this looks all a little bit very abstract let's have a look how
what we get for this n zero in a more particular case let's for example look at what you would know
as robin type matching conditions at this at this for for these linear relations or if you
think of a concrete realization what you would know as robin type matching conditions so these
are these matrices describing the robin type conditions and here we have a parameter one of
our tau so this corresponds for tau equal to infinity i haven't written down the matrices but
tau equal to infinity this corresponds to directly conditions and tau equal to zero
to standard matching conditions in this case if you work out the formula that you saw earlier
then the n zero takes this particular form actually much nicer and simpler but of course here the
a r and the b r they have a lot of zeros so they give very nice results so it's one over tau plus
the same sum that we saw already in the first part of the talk so the sum over all one over phi j
over all the blue edges right so here we sum only from one to q only the blue edges
and the phi j are the wild titchmash functions of these linear relations of the edges one to q
so this is a very nice form and this is the n zero which goes into this condition here
now the second step
is now uh yeah at least as involved because now we unfold this
boundary condition at this formerly central vertex v in quotation marks in our symbolic scheme
we unfold this to a new linear relation or if you wish on an edge just a new linear relation
which we join to the distinguished one so how do we do that well here we don't do so much ourselves
but we use a number of very strong inverse results because it is known that
since n zero is a nephan linna function uh you can we can apply various inverse results to obtain
that we can join to this original e zero and t zero the symmetric linear relation on the
distinguished edge always a symmetric linear relation t one tilde and joining here at this
v means with standard matching conditions so even if we started with something with a and b here
here at this reduced system at the end it will be standard matching conditions at v
now we can also join other things for example we can use the branch's inverse result
to get a trace norm canonical system t one tilde and in this case then the e one tilde
is nothing abstract it's really an edge for for example for simplicity of infinite length if you
like now in the particular case that our n zero happens to be not just a nephan linna function
but a still just function then we can apply an inverse result of crime to obtain the t one
tilde in the form of a crime string which is something more general than a still just string
on an edge e one tilde and in all the cases these objects that we obtained here on this newly added
part e one tilde they are all joined to the distinguished t zero by means of standard
matching conditions so this i will denote by a zero b zero somehow so altogether somehow we
reduced first this blue part here first we condensed it into one boundary condition and then by means
of all these different inverse results we unfolded this spectral parameter dependent
boundary condition into a new system and we have some influence on what type this system has
so to give you an idea um it has been quite abstract with all these linear relations so far
but what could these linear relations really be induced by so the possible types of realizations
on edges of a star graph that would give rise to such a system that we can cover is for example
a canonical system like that including also dirac systems then it could also be a crime
string here we see that this is uh more general because a still just string is a crime string
where the mass distribution m which is not the m from the from the first part here is now a step
function making steps on where the discrete masses are sitting or it could be a storm
problem that gives rise to this symmetric linear relation right and now we can ask the question
what is the structure of the reduced system if we know if we have some structure of the given
uh q plus one uh objects so first of all if e zero and everything else is arbitrary
we can always
obtain a canonical system as the added new part in the reduced two uh two path graph system right
if e zero is a canonical system and all the others are arbitrary then we can still choose
e one tilted to be a canonical system because this inverse result always applies it does need
that these q were already canonical systems before now if e zero was for example the crime string
and the other strings were arbitrary but in addition we know that our function and zero
that we constructed was a still just function then we can also choose e one tilde the new part
to be a crime string if all the e j were still just strings and n zero is a still just function
we can also choose e one tilde to be a still just string and now comes to disappointment
well if e zero or even all the e j are storm leoville we only we can only say that e one
tilde can be chosen to be a canonical system due to a lack of a general inverse result for
storm leoville unlike the others so from this kind of overview you can get already some
feeling when is this this answer well actually i think the the questions were posed in the
different order at the beginning so the structure of the reduced system when can it be chosen of
the same type you will find the answers from here what i haven't explained so far is in what sense
uh do i mean or do we prove that these two systems are equal well this is specialized in
in one of our main results um this coinciding means that for the original system which is a
self-adjoint linear relation in such a product Hilbert space here and for this reduced system
which is now only working in two Hilbert space components because we replaced the second part
by just one Hilbert space the compressed resolvents compressed to the first read to the
distinguished part coincide so this means that if you take p zero and p zero the orthogonal
projections of this big space and of the two components space in both cases onto the first
component then the compressions of the resolvents to these first components coincide
now a little bit more maybe mechanically explained so if on e zero
you want to solve the Cauchy problem on the original star graph with a right hand side
which has only one entry in the first component and also a boundary an initial condition with
only an entry in the first component then the solution coincides on e zero with the solution
of the Cauchy problem of this reduced problem where you just put a zero in the smaller second
component in H1 tilde so somehow if you imagine in the original picture if this blue part is for
example underground and only the red part sticks out of the ground and you look at some some you
apply a force to this red part then you can't tell there could be a system with the original
star graph underneath the ground or there could be the reduced system underground you couldn't
distinguish just from how the solutions behave on the on the end that sticks out of the ground
now sorry we go to a special case also to make the loop to our first part of the talk
star graphs of steel two strings now here because we were so general and we can
admit even crime strings we can also admit steel two strings but we we can only admit
the steel two strings where the masses accumulate at most at the outer vertices so there may be
infinitely many but they should accumulate at most at the outer vertices and we assume
that in the middle they are joined by a rubber type matching condition so in this case
our results give the following if all the edges are steel two strings and the phi j are the
corresponding wattage smash functions corresponding to Neumann conditions at the center v
then if the rubber parameter tau satisfies this inequality here where these are the values
the the limits from the left of the wattage smash coefficients of the individual steel
two strings then there exists a single steel two string e1 tilde joined to the distinguished edge
e0 by standard matching conditions such that the resultant for the star graph g with q plus one
edges and for the path graph g tilde with just two edges namely e0 and e1 tilde coincide on
e0 in the sense that I explained on the previous slide. Now this is just the recalling what the
stilted function was because I want to explain to you what this condition star actually ensures
this condition star on the tau ensures that our n0 which in this particular case was given by
that formula that we saw earlier is indeed a stilted function because we know the phi j are
stilted functions and if tau satisfies this condition then so is n0. So now we know that
every stilted function admits a unique continued fraction expansion even in the infinite case by
the gochberg grime appendix and so we can even find this steel two string e1 tilde with its
masses mk from this continued fraction expansion of our coefficient n0 right so we develop this
n0 in a continued fraction expansion and we can read off how this new system is constructed
from there so this is really a constructive procedure in the case of stilted strings.
Yeah I think my time is really coming to an end so here are the references about the top the part
only about the stilted strings the two works with Slava Pivovarchik and this last part
that was published last year in complex analysis and operator theory so what I would hope actually
this is maybe the final comment I mean after all locally a star graph in a in a more complicated
graph the junctions are always star graphs like junctions locally so maybe this reduction result
can help a little bit in considering also more complicated graphs and trying to reduce them
by means of such procedures. I guess there are many people in the audience who know much more
about these more involved graphs than I do and so I think this is a good point to stop and thank
you very much for your attention. May I ask a question? Yes I was going to offer to people
to ask questions go ahead. May I ask a question? Yes please. So you referred many times to some
book of Gantt-Macheren, what is it? Oscillating matrices. Yeah but this is Gantt-Macheren.
Sorry Gantt-Macheren, sorry I mixed it up you know Kochberg is a very very common name in my
other research sorry it was correct on the slides of course. This result is due to Gantt-Macheren.
Well it was correct on the slides you know. So where are we? Where is this? Where is the
here? Let's go back to the share.
Can we go home? Wait a minute.
Here. Can I ask a question? Yes please. Sounds like, wait a minute sounds like. My name is
Uzis Milanski. I recognized your voice. And it's a comment you see whatever you do everything that
you did and which I could I think understand has a very similar analog in looking at the vertices
as centers of scattering because your construction and the constructing as you said in the last
remarks that you had that the complete graph is a mix is a union of many vertices each of them is a
star is exactly the way that we are looking at quantum graph or discrete graphs but from a
scattering point of view in which each vertex is a scattering center in a sense and then you turn the
equation of the secular equation for the complete graph into a different determinant
problem and I think I'm pretty sure I don't I didn't work it out of course immediately but
also the fact that you have the Dirichlet or Neumann map is very much related to scattering
so I suggest that one of these days when we are both confined to our respective
walls we can discuss it further because it would be very interesting to look at the
connection between the two different approaches and thank you very much for a very interesting lecture.
Yeah I would immediately believe that. I mean what is maybe another point we were interested in
then really to have also constructive procedures to solve inverse problems like we could for the
steel shear string but I think really this this result has to be seen in the larger context of
more complicated graphs but yeah at the moment I haven't been working on that anymore but I'm
really happy to discuss that thank you. Thank you very much. I want to talk so there seems to be a
relation between continued fractions and the distribution of zeros and poles right. Yes yes.
So if you maybe you can if you let at least in there in part one if you just have a single string
if you let the length of a string increase go to infinity you could try to look at the
limiting distribution of zeros and poles right. Well I mean the single string thing I mean this is
really nothing that we did right this is all. So maybe someone else has done it but so it looks
like if you sort of assume that the some sort of limiting distribution some that you are generating
lengths and masses randomly or in a certain way then at least if you look at continued fraction
expansions with more somehow which do not terminate which are infinite then you look at least if you
assume that some things are integers for example then you look at the orbit of some point in the
complex plane under the action of some hyperbolic group and and you'll sort of be looking at maybe
how it accumulates at infinity or on the real line or something like that. So and that is kind
of a classical also very old question. So I'm just wondering probably if you maybe if you
rig the problem that that m's and l's are a certain special form then you could use something about
you know how points in an orbit of a fuxing group accumulate at infinity to to say something about
zeros and poles but I'm not sure if it's interesting again I'm not sure if anyone has
done it but perhaps this could be done. To be honest I can't seriously answer that but I have
another question because you mentioned something actually to you you said that the masses could
be randomly distributed on the string. That will be very interesting for one of my co-authors
if I can make that remark. I haven't studied that but yeah so that was an interesting comment.
I'm just thinking that you know if you would need to do some renormalization because the masses have
to add up to one but this so if you just look at you know like continued fraction expansions
how fast the denominators increase and things like that so this is related to like entropy of
I don't know I like Svetlana Kotok's book you know continued fraction
fuxing groups or some classical books and continued fractions so this is nice of course
I think in kind of in the classical situation the the masses and the lengths
so let's say if you look at two by two inter matrices then masses would have to be integer
or something like that but yeah so but there is some connection to this geometry of numbers
on the hyperbolic plane. Okay thank you thank you for the comment. Thank you very much for the
lecture. Anyone else has questions or comments? Alexander of her court. Yes go ahead. Michael
yeah Cristiana I'm wondering whether you have any bounds on the location of resonances.
No no I think it links to the problem I showed you at some stage sort of where we were doing
this prime with a very specific neverlena function. Yeah yeah we haven't we haven't looked at that
question. Do you mean the problem you mentioned in February to me? I think so yeah I've been
mentioning it to so many people so many times. Okay yeah yeah it would be interesting to discuss.
There is the same representation in terms of neverlena functions continuous fractions and
you're basically looking at the location of zeros and poles but you want to restrict them to
particular bounds uniformly not asymptotically with them but sort of uniformly with them.
No resonances weren't on our radar at all yet. You just mentioned the before. Yeah yeah yeah yeah
I saw some similarities but there are relations at the same top. Okay thank you.
Thanks Cristiana I have a simple question do you know if it's Alex do you know if there are
results about optimization of eigenvalues with respect to where to place the masses?
Not that I know of. I mean if you wanted to be sure maybe I would ask either Slava Pivacic
or Manfred Möller you know they wrote a book or I'm not sure is it already finished but they
are about to write or it will appear in the OT series but not that I know of.
Okay thank you. But to be on the safe side I think Slava Pivacic follows everything so even
things that are not so closely related to what we were doing so. Thank you. Anyone else has a
question or comments? Yeah I was wondering one thing I mean it might be a clear
consequence of the second part of the talk but in the first part when you were mentioning
the this inverse problem for the for the star graphs you were assuming to know that that that Q
the number of steel just string was a given right? Yes. And to me it's I mean intuitively and you
know my intuition could be very wrong it seems like this would be the first thing that we should
be able to recover from the spectrum would be the number of steel just string so are there actually
isospectral I mean two systems with the same eigenvalues but different numbers of strings?
Well one could imagine from the second part it might be possible but on the other hand this
coincidence is only on this distinguished edge so that is a bit of course this distinguished
edge will not contain all the information on the spectrum so difficult to say but we didn't study
the question of considering also to reconstruct the Q.
Yeah but definitely that is a more difficult problem.
Thank you very much Christiane. I think we will stop here for today. Thank you for listening.
Thank you for the very nice talk.
you
