Welcome to Basic Math. This is lesson one of 30 lessons that are designed to give you
a foundation in mathematics to prepare you for mathematics in school as well as in life.
My name is Murray Siegel and I will be your guide through these 30 lessons to discover
all kinds of interesting and even fun aspects of mathematics.
But besides teaching you how to do mathematics, this tape series has another much more important
objective and that is to give you a feeling of confidence that you can do mathematics.
In my years of teaching I've learned to many people, students, parents, adults, even people,
even senior citizens who are afraid of mathematics and some people are even proud of that fear.
I get parents all the time who tell me, I can't do mathematics. They're very proud
of that as if I don't think they would say that they're proud they could read.
And to me, 85% of being able to do mathematics is having the confidence that you can do it.
So one of the purposes of this series of lessons is to give you that confidence. Now, in order
to get that kind of confidence, one of the things you have to do is follow along in the
tapes and do the work. There's a couple of particular aspects of this tape series I want
to explain now and hopefully you'll follow those instructions. The first is we will have
two different types of visuals on the screen. The first one is there now and basically it's
warning you to stop the tape and to think. I'll ask a thinking question and I really
want you to stop and think about it for a while because when we discuss it, if you haven't
thought about it, then it won't be as meaningful, I think, as if you stopped and thought about
it, maybe taking 10 minutes and jot down some ideas. The second screen visual will be tell
you to stop and work a problem. And this is where I will give you a problem on the screen
and you'll stop the tape, work the problem to the best you can, and then come on back
because of course I will show you the solution. If you don't stop the tape, then that's called
cheating. Another thing you need to do is understand that if some of this material is
new to you and after watching my explanation, you still do not get it to the extent that
you'd like to, the wonderful thing about videotape is you can rewind and watch it again. And
sometimes the second, even the third time through, something will click. In mathematics
that happens a great deal. You don't understand something, but by hearing a second or third
time working the problem, whatever it is, all of a sudden it comes together. That's
very important because as I said, 85% of success in this subject is due to confidence, the
confidence that you can do it. And of course, we here believe you can do it, but until you
believe it, it does us no good. Another thing is to use our workbook. The workbook has a
series of problems designed to supplement each lesson. And I would certainly work all
those problems. The answers, of course, are included in the workbook so you can check
and make sure you're right. For those of you who are taking this course as an initial situation,
in other words, a young person who was learning for the first time about whole numbers and
fractions and decimals, et cetera, I would suggest also getting us some sort of textbook.
Again, additional exercises to reinforce that you are understanding how to do some things.
But understanding how to do something is only part of the course. One of the things I'm concerned
about is that I want you to understand why it works. One of the things that I'm concerned
about when I teach is that my students understand why each new method, each concept, works.
A lot of times in mathematics, we tend to learn how to do something. We memorize what's
called the algorithm, the method, and we learn it and we forget it. And we have to learn
it again and we forget it again. If you understand why it works, then perhaps that method will
stay with you longer. Plus, it'll make more sense. Another thing, and I'll try to do this
whenever possible, is to show you how that kind of mathematics is used in what's called
the real world. Because a lot of times we learn math, and if you ask the teacher, when
will I ever use this? Well, you'll need it to pass the test. You'll need it for the next
course. You'll need it to go to college. And to me, that's not enough. We need mathematics
to provide understanding of what's going on in the world and how to solve real problems.
Another thing that I want you to understand about mathematics is that mathematics is consistent.
That is, things we learn about whole numbers are true for fractions and for decimals. And
even when we talk about algebraic polynomials, for example, in the algebra one tape, we are
consistent. And a lot of times some textbooks and many teachers don't make that a very important
part of their teaching. I think it is a very important part for you to understand the consistency.
So when you come up to a new subject, for example, fractions or algebraic polynomials,
it's not something brand new. You can relate it to things you've understood in the past.
Now, for example, of some things in terms of consistency, whenever we talk about adding,
whenever we talk about counting, because adding is always counting, whenever we talk about
subtraction, and again, subtracting fractions, subtracting decimals, subtracting anything,
we're always doing the opposite of addition. When we multiply our multiplication, as we'll
talk about further in lesson two, multiplication is repeated addition. I don't care what you're
multiplying, you're always doing a repeated addition process. And anytime we're dividing,
we are doing the opposite of multiplication. These consistencies are very important, and
you'll see them as we go through the various types of mathematical exercises.
The first question I generally ask a class, whether it's a group of first graders or high
school students or adults who are going back and trying to relearn mathematics, overcome
their fears, or get an equivalency diploma, or be prepared for college level mathematics
is what is the most important word in mathematics? And this is one question that most people
immediately know the answer to, and that is number. Mathematics is about numbers. My next
question, the answers are generally not quite as secure, and that is, what is a number?
People will say, well, a number is like two or three, or a number is, and they get really
hung up because a number you see is an amount. It's a quantity. It tells us how much or how
many. And as long as we understand that, then when we work with numbers, we have a basis
to understand how we do what we do with those numbers. You may say, well, I knew that. The
fact is, I'm concerned with your ability to state the answers. In other words, if I say
to you, I met you on a street someplace, and I said, what's the number? I'd expect you
to be able to say without even thinking about, well, a number, of course, is a quantity. It
answers the question how much or how many. So no matter how you how you're using a number,
it is always, that's what it is. The number is a quantity. And we use numbers for counting.
And in fact, originally, that's how numbers started. I mean, ancient ancestors had to
count things. How many people lived in a cave? How many animals they killed in the hunt? How
many sons had it been since the last outdoor picnic? Whatever it was. And then eventually
they use their fingers to represent these counts so they could communicate to themselves and
communicate to others what they were talking about. Eventually these, the numbers got bigger
than the amount of fingers they had, and they use symbols, perhaps scratches on a rock or
scratches on a cave wall. And eventually these symbols became sounds, grunts, until we come
up with our modern day numbers like seven and 12 and 2,512. Our number system is based
on 10 digits. Did you ever think about why? Probably not, because most people just, that's
our number system. We have zero, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, and nine.
And all our numbers use only those 10 digits. Well, the reason is because our ancestors,
as well as ourselves, had 10 fingers. In fact, one of the synonyms for finger is digit. What
if our ancestors had been Mickey and Minnie Mouse? Now Mickey and Minnie Mouse only have
eight fingers, three fingers and a thumb. Then we would not have 10 digits. We'd have zero,
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and that'd be it. And if you think about that,
a lot of people get confused by that. But the fact is, from the time we're old enough
to understand as a young baby, we start counting and we understand one, two, three, four, five,
six, seven, eight, nine, ten. But the idea is to deeply understand what we're dealing
with, to overcome a lack of understanding of mathematics, we need to understand that numbers
are nothing more than symbols we've devised to express an amount. Now, one of the key
factors in understanding how to work with numbers is something called place value. And
as we talk about whole numbers and fractions and decimals, we will get into place value.
But to say right now, place value is telling us what we're counting. For example, if I
am counting cows, how about counting cows? Then the place value is cows. If I am counting
dollar bills, the place value is dollar bills. When we get into symbolic mathematics, that's
adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing, place value is exceptionally important. But
to remember that the place value simply tells us what we're counting. Okay? Now, the importance
of place value is that if we understand where the place value is, because it isn't always
in the same place, it will be very helpful, especially in fractions and in polynomials,
which we'll just begin to talk about in our last couple of lessons as an introduction
to algebra 1, the place value is not the same as the place value in whole numbers, the place
value we used to. But that doesn't make a difference. As long as we understand where
the place value is, it will be very helpful in terms of doing the various methods, computing
the answers, and getting the right answer, of course. Another interesting idea in mathematics
is a foundation of what we're about to do in these 30 lessons is the notion of zero.
Now, I don't think I thought about zero. What is zero? Well, zero basically is a place
holder. It also stands for nothing. And without the zero, we couldn't have our number system.
And we'll talk more about zero later on. But to say right now that it's important, because
without it, we couldn't have our number system. And also, when we later on, we talk about
negative numbers, the zero will be the separator, the thing that separates the positives from
the negatives. Okay? Enough about the basics of mathematics. Let's talk about things that
I expect you to understand. That is, this course is designed to cover mathematics typically
learned in fourth through eighth grade. Now, you may be a fourth grader. You may be an adult
going back and trying to build up your mathematical skills. But in either case, I sort of have
a sense that you know how to add subtract, although we will talk in the balance of this
tape about addition and subtraction. And the next lesson, lesson two, we'll talk about
multiplication, introduces division. But once we get into division, I'm going to assume
that either A, you've not seen it before, or B, possibly you've seen it, but you really
don't understand it. And then we'll cover fractions and decimals and integers and a vast amount
of mathematics that's required for someone to do well in algebra, algebra one, algebra
one, algebra two and beyond in college level mathematics. Okay? But let's talk about addition.
Now, generally, when I ask students, and again, those students could be first graders, fourth
graders, high school students, college students, even mathematics teachers, adults, whatever
I've asked, what is adding, I generally get the same answer. Adding is putting two numbers
together. And in many cases, that's true. But is it always true? Well, our first visual
shows you a simple problem. The problem is one plus three. And if I said what, what's
one plus three? Everybody here would say one plus three equals four. Ah. But if you told me
that adding is putting two numbers together, then as our next visual shows you one plus
three is the letter B, because I've literally combined the one and the three to form the
letter B. You say, no, no, that's not what I meant. And that's what I'm getting it. Being
able to successfully define or explain mathematical terminology is exceptionally important. And
mathematics is very precise, very definite. Addition is not always putting two numbers
together. Addition is always counting. And when we count, we can only count things that
are the same. That's very important. So for example, if I had a class of boys and girls,
and I had 10 boys and 11 girls in the class, and someone said, well, add those up 10 plus
11 is 21, but 21 what 21 boys and girls? That's not specific enough. 21 boys. No, 21
girls. No, 21 students, 21 children, 21 people. I've redefined boys and girls to be students
or children or people so that indeed I can add them. That is, I can only count things
that are the same. You may say, well, that's silly. No, it's not because understanding
that notion of adding is counting. And we can only count things that are the same will
help us understand adding of fractions and decimals and other things as we go on and
even help us beyond this course in more advanced algebra topics, even in calculus. So again,
this is a foundation course. And therefore, I believe it's very important for every student
out there to understand exactly what adding is and subtracting and multiplication division
the same idea. Okay, so let's take a look at the next visual. It shows an addition problem.
And as soon as you see it, you say, well, something is wrong. 34 plus five is 84. That's silly. Three
plus five is eight. Four is four. 84. No, no, no, that's not right. You got to put the five
under the four. Well, I don't want you to tell me what I have to do. I want to tell me why
that's wrong. Why 34 plus five is not 84. And the answer you see is very important. The answer
is that the three is three 10s. The five is five ones. And I cannot add 10s and ones. Why
not? Because adding is counting. I can only count things are the same. So if I was trying
to add three 10s and five ones, I would have to change the three 10s to 31s. Then I could
add the 31s and the five ones. But that's of course how we add we actually would put the
five underneath the four to line up the ones places. And then the three would be by itself
in the 10s place. And of course, the answer would be 39. By the way, let me ask you a
question. And this is the first time we'll ask you to stop and think. The question is,
could you give me an example of where I could add three 10s and five ones and get eight?
Stop the tape, think about it and see if you can get the same answer. I'm going to give
you in a couple of seconds here. Well, I don't know if you were able to think of what I'm
thinking of, but basically imagine I went into my wallet, if I had money in my wallet, and
I had three $10 bills and five $1 bills. And I said, what do I have? Well, I would have
$35, but how many pieces of paper? How many US currency bills do I have? I have eight. The
three 10s and the five ones are eight bills. So what I've done there is I've used a common
place value, a common descriptor, changing it from 10s and ones to bills. So three plus
five is eight. And since both the three and the five were bills, I have eight bills. So
it's really important to understand the concept that adding is counting. And when I'm counting,
I can only count things that are the same. Now let's talk some specifics about what you
should know about addition. Obviously we line up the place values. We remember that if we're
adding and our answer, let's say we add eight plus seven in the ones place. Eight plus seven
is 15. We can't put 15 in the ones place. When we put a single digit, so we put the five
down and we carry the one. Carry. Well, I know more modern names are renaming or regrouping,
but I went to school back in the old days and it's carrying. But what does that all mean?
Whether you call it carrying or renaming or regrouping, what you're doing, of course,
is you're taking those 10 ones and making it 110 and putting the 110 where it belongs
in the 10s place. Always a good idea to estimate. So when you're looking at a problem, estimate
what the answer should be. So when you finish, where you do it by hand, but especially if
you do it by calculator and we'll talk about calculators in lesson 11, it's really important
to get an estimate of what the answer should be. What's sometimes called a ballpark figure.
Very important. And the reason it's really important to calculators is most of us believe
that calculators have all the right answers. Well, they do as long as you put the right
numbers in. But what if you put a number in backwards? You could have happened. It's happened
to me more than once. The answer you get is wrong, but you don't know it because you
see the calculators never wrong. If you estimate, you'll have a sense of, well, this answer
looks okay. Or no, there's something wrong. This answer makes no sense. The reasonableness
of the answer is exceptionally important. And again, we'll talk more about this as we go
along. And especially we talk about calculators in lesson 11. Okay, well, we've talked about
what addition is. The next question, of course, is what is subtraction? What is subtraction?
Well, if you listened earlier in the tape, I said the subtraction is the opposite of
addition. Some people would say it's counting backwards. Okay, because adding and subtracting
are both counting. That's important. The rules for addition and the rules for subtraction
are very much the same because they're both the same thing. They're both counting. If I
asked you what subtraction was based on my experience, you would probably say subtraction
is taking away. I get this answer from elementary school students, middle school students, high
school students, college students, teachers, parents, anybody I ask, taking away. And sometimes
it is. But again, I want to know what subtraction always is. And subtraction, again, is counting
backwards or the opposite of addition. Sometimes it is a taking away thing. But let me give
you an example of what it wouldn't be. Now, at this point in time, I am 54 years old. Let's
say my wife was 30. And I said, how much older am I than my wife? Well, 54 minus 30. Am I
taking away 30 years and becoming a 24 year old again? I wouldn't mind that, I guess. But
the fact is, no, I'm not. I'm not taking away. What I'm doing there is I'm comparing. I'm
looking for a difference. So sometimes subtraction is a difference. Other times, we're really
looking to what we must add, what we must add to a number to get another number. In other
words, well, let's take a look at 12 minus 7. And 12 minus 7, what does that mean? Well,
to me, what it means is what must I add to 7 to get 12? Okay. Now, we've all memorized
our subtraction facts. And certainly you know that 12 minus 7 is 5. But the reason you know
that is because you know that 7 plus 5 is 12. Now, let's take a look at 8 minus 5, a very
simple subtraction problem. We all know the answer. We're going to use this to show you
the different methods of subtraction and a visual explanation that will help us later
on. We talk about subtracting integers, that is numbers with positive and negative signs.
The first visual shows you two bars, I guess you can call it, almost like a graph. One is
marked 8 and one is marked 5. The number on the right is always the second number. That's
always the number we're subtracting. So this is a problem representing 8 minus 5. Okay.
The second visual shows you the taking away idea. We have 8 and we're going to take away
until we get down to 5. And of course, it shows we'll actually take away 3. 8 take away 5
leaves 3 or 8 take away 3 leaves 5. There's two possibilities there. The next visual shows
you how we in effect add to the second number to get to the first. How much do we have to
add to 5 to get up to 8? Well, if I add 3, 5 plus 3 is 8. Therefore, 8 minus 5 is 3. And
the next visual, it shows you the difference idea. How much different is 8 from 5? And
of course, it's different by 3. Three different ways of looking at subtraction, all with the
same answer. 8 minus 5 is 3. Now, we talked about 12 minus 7. The next visual shows you
that. And here is how I'd like you to think of 12 minus 7. What do I have to add to 7 to
get up to 12? And you see the little line segment with the arrow showing you it's going up and
we're having to add 5. So the 12 minus 7 is 5. And you may say, well, gee, I already knew
how to subtract. And I assume that. But knowing how to do something, understanding what it
means as a basis for further learning is quite different. And if you truly understand and see
that 12 minus 7 is 5, because we must add 5 to 7 to get 12. And if you can visually picture
those two bars and the little arrow going up, I think you'll find that you'll have a much
easier time, especially when we talk about subtracting sign numbers, subtracting integers.
Okay, now the next thing I want to do, of course, is to talk about borrowing again in some places,
renaming, regrouping. And to do that, we're going to go to the whiteboard. Let's go ahead and go to the
whiteboard and take a look at how we do what we do when we borrow two numbers. And again,
borrowing is strictly a problem in subtraction. So here's the problem. 147 minus 63. Now 7 minus
3, we know how to do that. That's 4. That's no problem. But 4 minus 6, I can't subtract 6 from
4. If you go back to the takeaway notion, I can't take 6 from 4. So what do I do? Well, some
students, unfortunately, reverse it and say, well, I'll just do 6 minus 4. That's wrong. What I've got
to do is I've got to borrow. This is 410s. That's 1,100. So I borrow the 1,100 and change it to
1010s. So I had 410s. I now have 10 more 10s. I have a total of 1410s. And 14 minus 6 is 8. And
the answer is 84. And by the way, in terms of estimation, if I had said that's approximately
150 minus 60, I'd expect an answer around 90. And certainly 84 is a ballpark figure. And it would be
very, very important to get used to doing that estimating to ensure that your answer makes a good
deal of sense. Okay, let's try another one. I'm going to erase this. And this time we'll do it to do
315 minus 196. Okay, let's go ahead and do our estimate first. Let's say 300 minus 200. That's 100. I'm
always going for nice round numbers. Numbers in the 10s are 30, 50, 70, or numbers in the 100s like 300, 400. So
300 minus 200 is 100. So my answer should be close to 100. Let's find out. Can I subtract 5 minus 6?
Although I can't. 5 is less than 6. So what must I do? I must borrow. And I borrow 1 from the 10s place,
which gives me 0 left in the 10s place. And I change that 110 into 10 once, which now gives me 15 ones. Again,
subtraction only in the place values. 15 minus 6 is 9 once. Now I look at the 10s place. By the way, let me say
something at this point. When you look at a problem, don't necessarily look at the entire problem, worry about the
problem. Do an estimation and then just start in terms of subtraction in the ones place. Then take care of the 10s place
and then the hundreds place and so on and so forth. Rather than trying to do the whole problem at once, let's break it down
into its basic parts. Well, I can't do 0 minus 9. So once again, I've got to borrow. I have 3100s. I borrow 1100,
leaving me with 2100s. And I take that 1100 and turn it to 1010s. Adding it to the 010s, I now have 1010s,
and 10 minus 9 is 1. Of course, in the hundreds place, 2 minus 1 I can do, I get 119. Our estimate was 100. 119.
Certainly close enough to say we're right. And I believe we are. OK, let's do one more. This last one I wanted to do is 706 minus 238.
Is there anything different about this particular problem? Well, it already has a 0 in it. So we know we're going to have,
and some people have problems when you have to borrow and you have nothing to borrow from, you have a 0 there. Let's go ahead and see what happens.
6 minus 8. Can we do 6 minus 8? No, we can't. So we have to borrow. We cannot borrow from the 0. So first of all,
we've got to get something in the tens place so we can borrow it to the ones place. We'll go to the hundreds place. We've got plenty there.
We have 7. Let's borrow 1 leaving us with 6100s. We take that 1100 and turn it to 1010s, which gives us 1010s.
We borrow one of those 1010s, leaving us with 910s, and take that 110 and make it to 10 once. And the 6 becomes a 16 since 6 plus 10 is 16.
16 minus 8 is 8. 9 minus 3 is 6. 6 minus 2 is 4. And of course, if I did an estimation of 700 minus 200, I'd say the answer was 500.
And 468 certainly is quite close to 468. 468 and 500 reasonable. And that's the key thing. Anytime we're working, we want to be sure that we're reasonable.
That's the purpose of estimation. So let's see what we've learned in this first lesson. The first thing we've learned is that mathematics is something that's consistent.
If we understand the consistencies, if we understand the basic foundation of mathematics, the more difficult, the more complex can be done quite well.
We've talked about addition. That addition is counting. And that when we count or we add, it's always adding the same things.
We've got to add in the same place values. And the same thing for subtraction, which could be taking away, could be finding a difference, could be finding what number I've got to add together.
We've got to add to get the answer. So subtraction and addition, we are counting. We are using place values. And we must be consistent.
Hopefully, that all makes sense. And we'll see you in lesson 2, multiplication and the introduction to division.
