This is Lesson 16, in Lesson 16 we'll learn about integers, we'll learn what an integer
is, how to add and subtract these things called integers.
Integers are quite important and what an integer simply is, is a positive or negative
whole number and zero.
So far we've worked with zero, we've worked with counting numbers and now we'll add the
negative numbers in and work with integers.
If you look at the number line that you see on your screen, you'll notice that there's
a positive four to the right of zero, a negative four to the left of zero.
Both positive four and negative four are four spaces from zero.
They are the same amount or the same distance from zero, but opposite directions.
Negative and positive mean opposite directions.
That's very important.
In Lesson 17, we talk about multiplication, it will make something make a whole lot of
sense, I believe.
But again, the negative and positive numbers are identical in value, just opposite directions.
We can use positive and negative numbers in various real world applications.
One for example, you hear business people talking about a P and L statement, profit
and loss.
If the profit is positive, loss is negative.
Gain and loss of yardage.
When a running back runs a play, he either gains yardage or loses yardage to a positive
yardage and negative yardage.
Keeping on the sports motif, if you follow ice hockey, every player on the team other
than the goalie gets a plus minus rating.
That happens to do with whether or not the player is on the ice when his team scores
or the other team scores.
A plus is when you're on the ice if your team scores, a minus is on the ice when the other
team scores.
And obviously, a player who has a great plus number at the end of the season was on the
ice for a lot of goals, even if he didn't score very many.
And a player who has a very large negative number was on the ice for many goals scored
by the opposition.
Another example of this is up and down in physics.
You talk about a rocket that goes up or something that comes down.
Up is positive.
Down is negative.
Or actually, down can be positive and up can be negative as long as those are opposite.
Temperatures.
Now, for most of my adult life, I've lived in the South and Southwest and have not experienced
too many negative temperatures.
But many years ago, I was in the Air Force and was stationed someplace where negative
temperatures were quite usual during the winter time.
So I know what a negative temperature is, but if you live someplace that you've never
experienced negative temperatures, good, you don't want to.
But we know that negative temperatures are colder than zero and positive temperatures
are warmer than zero.
And 10 degrees above zero, positive 10, is the same distance from zero on the thermometer
as 10 below, negative, just opposite directions.
We want to be warmer rather than cooler.
Stock market.
If you watch the stock market report, the market was up plus 2.73 or down a negative
1.78 plus and minus up and down profit loss is all uses of positive and negative numbers.
Okay.
What we'd like to be able to do is compare positive and negative numbers.
So let's take a look at the this visual over here and we'll notice we see three dots and
the number three and we see the number line with a positive three.
Before we compare numbers, we've got to understand that three and positive three are really different
mathematically.
Three is a counting number.
It's a quantity.
Positive three is an amount with a direction.
In reality, in everyday arithmetic that we do, we use positive three interchangeably
with three.
But mathematicians would say that's wrong that three and positive three are quite different.
So in some books, you'll see positive numbers and other books, you'll just see three and
seven and 12 instead of positive three and positive seven and positive 12.
For the purpose of this series, we'll just say that positive three and three are the
same.
Okay.
So then we have to look at greater and lesser numbers.
The next number line shows you that positive numbers are the greater numbers.
Negative numbers are the lesser numbers.
As we go to the left, we're reaching the lesser numbers.
As we go to the right, we're going for the greater numbers.
And think of it as, again, as a thermometer, greater meaning warmer.
When you move to the right of the number line, the temperatures get warmer.
Positive 12 is warmer than positive five.
Negative five is warmer than negative two.
In fact, we want to talk about some symbols, symbols you should be familiar with.
We've used them before, less than and greater than.
Less than, the symbol looks like an L. Less than, the word less starts with an L.
And the less than is to the left on the number line.
As you go to the left, the numbers get less.
Okay.
Greater than does not start with an L. The symbol for greater than doesn't look like
an L and greater than is to the right.
Okay.
So the greater numbers are to the right.
As you go to the right, the numbers get more and more positive as you go from zero.
As you go to the left away from zero, the numbers get more and more negative.
So the lesser numbers are to the left, the greater numbers are to the right.
Now, if I wanted to compare two numbers, if I had two positive numbers, that would be
easy.
Positive eight or eight is greater than positive three.
We already know that.
We also can see that positive numbers are always greater than negative numbers.
Positive eight is greater than negative three, but it's interesting when negative numbers,
which is greater?
Negative eight or negative three?
Again, if we think of the number line, negative three is to the right of negative eight.
Therefore, negative eight is less than negative three, or if you'd like, negative three is
greater than negative eight.
Now, we want to go ahead and learn how to add and subtract these things called integers.
And we're going to develop some rules, but the rules are, again, not going to be the
kind where I just tell you, here's the rule to add integers.
No, we're going to develop it together by looking at some somewhat practical problems.
And the situation we're going to use to add integers, we're going to use north and south,
north representing positive, south representing negative.
In the first visual, we see two different travels.
In the first travel, we go, start at zero, we go seven miles north, and then we go eight
miles north.
And the question is, how, where are you from zero?
In the second problem, we started zero, and we go four miles south, and then we go six
miles south.
How far are you from zero?
I want you to stop the tape and examine those two problems and determine where you are.
North or south and how far?
Well, if we go eight miles north and then seven miles north or seven miles north and
eight miles north, either case, we are 15 miles north.
That is a positive eight plus a positive seven is a positive 15.
If we go four miles south and then six more miles south, we are 10 miles south of positive,
I'm sorry, negative four, south was negative, and negative four plus a negative six is negative
10.
We've seen a couple of examples.
North plus north is north, south plus south is south.
We are looking at the adding of two numbers with the signs of the same.
I'd like you to stop the tape and think about what the rule might be for adding two numbers
with the same sign.
We noticed north plus north was north.
That is adding positives.
Our answer is positive.
And of course, as we add more positives, the number gets bigger.
The answer is a greater number.
Adding negatives, the answer is negative.
And as we add more negatives, the answer gets more negative.
So the rule appears to be if we're adding numbers with the same sign, we keep the sign
since a positive and a positive is a positive and a negative and a negative is a negative.
And we add the numbers.
Whenever we're dealing with integers, we'll always have a process to get the numerical
value and a process to get the sign.
So again, when we're adding two integers, we take the sign, keep the sign, because
they both have the same sign, and we add the numbers.
What would happen if we're adding two integers that had opposite signs?
There's only two possibilities here.
The two numbers have the same sign.
They're both positive or they're both negative, or they have opposite signs.
One's positive and one's negative.
We know if we add zero, nothing happens.
If I add positive eight plus zero, the answer is positive eight, negative three plus zero,
the answer is negative three.
Here's another travel situation.
We go six miles north, and then we go nine miles south.
Before we go 11 miles north, and then we go eight miles south, and look at those two
diagrams and decide what the answer is for these, both addition problems that involve
adding numbers with opposite signs.
Stop the tape and come up with your answer for each of those two problems.
Well, six north plus nine south, we wind up south of zero.
The first six miles we travel gets us back to zero, leaving us a total of three miles
south.
A positive six plus a negative nine equals a negative three.
If we start off going 11 miles north and then come back only eight miles south, we have
not reached zero.
We're still north of zero, but we've gone back eight miles, so we're three miles north
of zero, which means a positive 11 plus a negative eight equals a positive three.
What I'd like you to do is once again stop the tape and think about what rule would
be for adding two integers of opposite signs.
It would seem that the rule is when you're adding two numbers of opposite signs, you
take the sign of the larger, and you subtract because they're going in opposite directions
and they sort of cancel each other out.
In fact, if I was adding positive 10 and negative 10, I'd be right back where I started
from.
It's zero.
The rule is if you have two numbers with opposite signs and you're adding, you take
the sign of the larger and subtract the numbers.
We had a positive six and a negative nine.
The nine was larger.
We took the negative sign, subtracted nine minus six and got three.
We had a positive 11 and a negative eight.
The sign of the larger was positive since 11 is greater than eight, and then we subtracted
11 minus eight is three, giving us a positive three.
Well let's take a look at a couple of problems.
Here are two addition problems, and that is negative 42 plus a positive 15 and a negative
37 plus a negative 17.
What I'd like you to do is using the appropriate rule, and I want you to think about which
rule you're going to use, add these two numbers up, these two sets of integers, and come up
with your two answers and then turn the tape back on, and we'll go over what the correct
answer is.
The first problem was negative 42 plus a positive 15.
What rule did you use there?
Well, hopefully you said we had opposite signs.
The 42 was negative, the 15 is positive, we're going to take the sign of the larger and subtract
the two numbers.
Well, 42 is greater than 15, so we take the sign of the 42 negative, 42 minus 15 is 27,
and therefore the answer is negative 27.
If we go back to our north-south problem, if I went 42 miles south and then went 15
miles north, I think it would make sense that I'd be 27 miles south of where I started.
The second problem was negative 37 plus a negative 17.
Both numbers have the same sign.
If the numbers have the same sign, to add those two integers we keep the sign, the negative,
and add the two numbers.
Well, 17 and 37 is 54, so our answer is negative 54.
And that is how we add integers.
Just two simple rules to simply determine whether the two signs are the same or the two signs
are opposite.
Those are the only possible situations unless you're adding zero, and remember adding zero
changes nothing.
Now I want to talk about subtraction.
Let's think back to, I guess it was lesson one, a long time ago, we were talking about
subtraction and I used a picture, a little graph of two bars, and I said, what we want
to do is always see how much we have to add to the second number to get to the first number.
Well now we're going to use that to subtract numbers somewhat different than what we did
in lesson one.
Look at the next graphic.
What we see here are two problems.
One problem is positive four minus a positive seven.
The first bar is four high.
The second bar is positive seven high.
And the question is, what do I have to add to positive seven to get to positive four?
Notice the adding, the direction of the adding is down, which means it's negative.
And of course I've got to go down three.
So as you can see, as it shows underneath the graph, positive four minus a positive seven
is negative three.
The second graph looks at positive six minus a negative two.
Notice the positive six is six up.
The negative two is two below two down below the line, that line representing zero.
What do I have to add to negative two to get to positive six?
Well I've got to add two to get up that zero line and six more is eight.
So positive six minus a negative two is positive eight.
The next graphic shows us two more problems.
Negative four minus a positive seven.
Again, you'll notice the negative four is four below the positive seven is seven above.
And the idea is, of course, is what do I have to add to the second number to get to the
first to go from positive seven to negative four?
I must go down, which means I'm adding a negative number.
And of course it's seven plus four, it's negative 11.
So a negative four minus a positive seven is negative 11.
In the second problem, we have negative 10 minus negative six.
Negative 10 minus negative six.
How far and how, what direction do I have to go from negative six to get to negative
10?
Well, I've got to go down.
I've got to add a negative and I've got to go down four.
So I add a negative four, which means negative 10 minus a negative six is negative four.
The question I would like you to do now is to think about a rule.
Look at those go back and look at those four problems.
We had positive four minus a positive seven equals negative three.
We had a positive six minus a negative two equals positive eight.
We had a negative four minus a positive seven equals negative 11 and a negative 10 minus
a negative six equals negative four.
Four different types of problems, but the same rule applies.
What I'd like you to do is stop, take some time, look at the four problems and see if
you can come up with a single rule that always works.
And whether you can come up with a rule or even if you just are absolutely frustrated
by it, if they haven't given it some thought, then come on back and we'll talk about what
the rule might be.
Looking at the first problem, positive four minus a positive seven equals negative three.
But as you can see, I've written a second version of that problem slightly different.
Positive four plus a negative seven also equals negative three, two somewhat different problems
that look similar and have the exact same answer.
What's different about the two lines on the first line, we have subtracting a positive
seven on the second line.
We have adding a negative seven since the positive four stays the same and the answer
stays the same.
It appears that subtracting a positive seven is the same as adding a negative seven.
Looking at the second problem, positive six minus a negative two is positive eight.
Notice what I've done.
The second line has positive six plus a positive two equals positive eight.
So the only thing has changed is that subtracting a negative two was changed to adding a positive
two and the answer was the same.
So perhaps subtracting a negative two is exactly the same as adding a positive two.
The third problem, negative four minus a positive seven equals negative 11.
The second line says negative four plus a negative seven equals negative 11.
So it appears that subtracting a positive seven and adding a negative seven have the
identical effect.
The answer stays the same in the fourth problem.
We have negative 10 minus a negative six equals negative four and negative 10 plus a positive
six also equals negative four.
So subtracting a negative six is the same as adding a positive six.
What all these problems are supposed to show you is that the rule of subtracting integers
is quite simple.
We never subtract integers because all we do is change the sign of the second number,
the number we're subtracting, and change subtraction to addition.
So subtracting a negative 12 will be the same as adding a positive 12 and subtracting
a positive nine is the same as adding a negative nine.
Now we may wind up subtracting the numbers because remember our rule of adding opposite
signs, we subtract the numbers, but we will never subtract integers.
If indeed you want to learn maybe four new rules, you can come up with four rules for
subtracting integers.
This is four different types of situations.
Suffice it to say the easy way to do this is as I said, when you come up with a subtraction
problem instead of subtracting, change the sign of the second number, make a negative
positive, make a positive negative and change subtraction to addition.
Okay, let's take a look at, well, a couple of problems.
The next visual shows you four problems and these four problems all involve subtracting
integers.
Obviously, what I'd like you to do is to stop the tape after you've written the problems
down and work all four problems.
And what I want you to do is I want you to think about the rule for subtraction.
And then after you use that rule and change the problem into an addition problem, I want
you to think about the rule for addition and then complete the computation, get the
answer.
When you've done all four problems, please come back and we'll go over the answers to
those four problems.
Okay, the first problem is negative 23 minus a positive 18.
Let's see.
Addition rule says that subtracting a positive 18 is the same as adding a negative 18.
So what I have now is my second line is negative 23 plus negative 18.
The rule of addition says that the signs are the same.
Keep the sign negative and add 23 plus 18 is 41.
So the answer is negative 41.
The second problem, the numbers are a little larger, but, you know, larger numbers shouldn't
put us off.
Adding a negative 46 is the same as adding a positive 46.
I have a negative 57 plus a positive 46.
Take the sign of the larger, since the signs are opposite, 57 is larger.
So my answer is going to be negative and subtract 57 minus 46 is 11.
The answer is negative 11.
The third problem, positive 29 minus a positive 50.
We don't subtract.
We change the sign of the second number.
The positive 50 becomes negative 50 and we change the subtraction to addition.
And now we have positive 29 plus a negative 50.
So the answer is negative 21 and the answer is negative 21.
So the answer is negative 21.
The final problem, positive 46 minus a negative 12, subtracting a negative 12 is the same
as adding a positive 12.
We now have a positive 46 plus a positive 12.
Signs are the same.
Keep the sign and add to science positive.
46 plus 12 is 58 and therefore the answer is positive 58.
We have one last thing to do with addition and subtraction of integers.
And that is, what if we had a problem with a whole bunch of additions or subtractions?
We need to talk about the order of our operations.
We're doing adding and subtracting.
And here's the problem.
Negative 31 minus a positive 47 plus a positive 18 plus a negative 22 minus a negative 61.
We want to work this and get one integer answer.
How are we going to do that?
Well, the first thing we want to do is get rid of all the subtractions because the rule
for subtracting integers is always the same.
Change the sign of the second number and we're going to do the subtraction of the second
integer is always the same.
Change the sign of the second number and change the subtraction to addition.
We will not touch any of the problems that involve addition.
So notice we have negative 31 minus a positive 47.
Instead of subtracting a positive 47, we'll add a negative 47 plus a positive 18.
We leave that alone.
Plus a negative 22.
We leave that alone.
Minus a negative 61 subtracting a negative 61 is the same as adding a positive 61.
Okay.
Now, what are we going to do?
Well, we have a negative 31 plus a negative 47 plus a positive 18 plus a negative 22
plus a positive 61.
We have a bunch of additions and there's one way to do it.
Of course, this is go from left to right and add as you go along.
But there's in a much easier way because we know we add positives, whether
there are two positives or 17 positives, we add the numbers and keep the positive sign.
If we're adding a bunch of negatives, we just keep the negative sign and add the numbers
up.
So why not, as we've demonstrated here in this next visual, go ahead and separate
the positives and negatives.
There are three negative numbers in our problem, negative 31, negative 47 and negative 22.
Hence they're all negative to add them.
We just keep the negative and add the numbers.
We get negative 100.
There are two positive numbers in our problem, positive 18 plus positive 61.
We simply keep the sign of positive and add the two numbers and get positive 79.
Our problem has now been simplified to a negative 100 plus a positive 79.
We have two numbers with opposite signs.
The rule simply says take the sign of the larger and subtract as is shown.
The sign of the larger is negative 100.
So it's negative and 100 minus 79 is 21.
That whole big mess we started with with five different integers is equal to negative 21.
Here's another problem.
Only this problem I want you to do.
So I'd like you to write the problem down, work it again, step by step, go back if you
have to and review what I just did and the problem I just completed and then work this
problem to completion and then come on back to the tape and we'll go over it step by step.
Okay, notice what we've done here.
We've changed all of the subtractions to additions.
So subtracting a negative 19 is now adding a positive 19.
Subtracting a positive 40 is now adding a negative 40.
We have not changed anything else because the other two symbols are adding symbols.
Plus for adding, we don't change the editing problems.
We now have an addition problem that involves five integers, negative 71 positive
19, negative 36, negative 40 and positive 12.
Now again, we certainly could start from the left and add negative 71 to positive 19
and add that answer to the next one.
But that gets rather confusing.
I think if you like that method, that's fine.
I prefer to do it what I consider the simple way.
Let's add up the negative numbers.
Well, negative 71, negative 36 and negative 40 are our three negative numbers.
We add them up by keeping the sign and adding up 71 plus 36 plus 40.
That turns out to be a negative 147.
The two positive numbers, positive 19 and positive 12 are added and you obtain positive 31.
Then we take the negative 147 and add it to the positive 31.
Son of the larger is negative subtract 147 minus 31 is 116 in both of these problems.
We had a certain number of numbers.
What I would expect is that we could do this if we had seven or 10 or 25 or a hundred integers,
added and it's attracted in a long string.
I would never ask a student of mine to do that, but the idea is once you can do three or four or five,
you can do as many as are possible to write because all we're going to do is change
and subtractions to addition, subtracting a positive is the same as adding a negative and then just add the positives,
add the negatives and net our answer out by adding the positive sum and the negative sum.
So you can see that adding and subtracting integers is not very difficult.
Simply having the rule, if we're adding two numbers with the same sign, we keep the sign and add.
If we're adding two numbers with opposite sign, we take the sign of the larger and subtract.
If we're subtracting, we change the sign of the second number and use our appropriate addition rule.
Next lesson, we'll do multiplication and division of integers and introduce square roots.
See you then.
