Welcome to lesson 18.
In lesson 18, we'll investigate fractional and negative powers.
We'll find out what a negative power is and how we use it,
what a fractional power is and how we use it,
and then of course we'll combine that
and look at negative fractional powers.
What is a negative power?
To understand the negative power,
we have to use what we've learned before
about working with numbers in exponential form.
Here's a simple division problem.
Six to the fourth divided by six to the seventh.
What do we do?
Well, dividing numbers with the same base,
we keep the base and subtract the powers.
Four minus seven is negative three.
So we have six to the negative three.
If we go back and look at this problem
and see what it means,
then we'll understand what the negative three power is.
We have six times six times six times six times six
in the numerator,
and we have seven sixes multiplied,
that is six to the seventh power, in the denominator.
We can cancel by dividing by four of the sixes
on top and bottom,
leaving a one in the numerator
and six to the third in the denominator.
Therefore, six to the negative three
equals one over six to the third.
Hmm.
What is that called?
What do we call the number,
which is one over another number?
I believe we call that a reciprocal.
In fact, we can double check.
Remember, a reciprocal is a number
which when multiplied by the original number,
we get one.
Six to the negative three
times six to the positive three,
we keep the base and add the power as negative three
plus positive three is zero,
and of course, six to the zero is one.
So, indeed, six to the negative three
is the reciprocal of six to the third.
One over six to the third.
In general, we can say if we have a base B
raised to a power negative A,
that B to the negative A means one over B to the A.
Now, how can we use this?
Well, let's recall back our dividing of fractions.
If we divided two-thirds by four-fifths,
we said dividing by four-fifths was the same
as multiplying by its reciprocal.
That is multiplying by five-fourths.
So, notice, as you can see on the screen,
that dividing by four to the fourth
would be the same as multiplying by its reciprocal,
its reciprocal being four to the negative fourth.
So, four to the third divided by four to the fourth
is identical to four to the third
times four to the negative fourth.
Similarly, seven to the eleven,
divided by seven to the negative three,
is the same as seven to the eleven
multiplied by the reciprocal of seven to the negative three,
which is seven to the positive three.
Okay, let's take a look at a problem
and see how we apply this knowledge of the negative power
being a reciprocal to an order of operations type problem.
Here we have a number of multiplications and divisions
of numbers all with the same base
for all raised to different powers.
What are we going to do?
Well, just as we said, we're never going to subtract integers,
and we always said,
as subtracting integers, we added the opposite.
We are never going to divide numbers in exponential form.
As long as the bases are the same,
we'll simply change the sign of the power.
That is, take the reciprocal of that number
and multiply instead of dividing.
So, you'll notice on the second line,
we've taken dividing by four to the negative three
and made it into multiplication by four to the positive three.
We've taken dividing by four to the two
and changed it into multiplying by four to the negative two.
Dividing by a base to a power
is the same as multiplying by that reciprocal,
the reciprocal being the same base
with the power of opposite sign.
And now we have strictly a multiplication problem
all with the same base.
We keep the base and add the powers.
Five plus three is eight.
Eight plus a negative seven is one.
One plus a negative two is negative one.
Our answer is four to the negative one,
which of course is one-fourth.
I hope you understood that process.
Now let's go to the whiteboard
and look at another problem.
Here's a problem.
Eight to the negative five divided by eight to the negative six
times eight to the four
divided by eight to the second times eight to the negative three.
Write that problem down, stop the tape,
and work the problem and come back when you have an answer.
Okay, how would we do this problem?
Well, very simple rule.
We're going to say we're never going to divide
numbers in exponential form
if all the bases are the same.
All the bases here are eight.
So we take each of the division problems
and change them to multiplication problems.
Eight to the negative five doesn't change,
but dividing by eight to the negative six
is the same as dividing by eight to the negative six.
We're not going to change multiplication,
so we'll leave that alone.
Dividing by eight to the second
is the same as multiplying by eight to the negative second.
And of course, multiplying by eight to the negative three
will not change.
Well, now we have a bunch of multiplications,
all of which have the same base.
To solve this, all we have to do is keep the base
eight and add the powers.
Negative five plus six is positive one.
Positive one plus four is positive five.
Positive five plus negative two is three.
And a three and a negative three is zero.
So our answer is eight to the zero,
which of course we know is one.
So it's rather interesting that this,
fairly complicated problem has a very simple answer, one.
You'll also notice I said positive at times
and didn't put positive symbols.
We said earlier that it's for our consideration,
positive six and six are identical.
Only a mathematician would probably care about the difference.
That positive six was an integer
and six was a counting number.
All right, now we maybe have a pretty good feel
for negative powers and their uses.
What we need to do now is take a look at fractional powers.
What does a fractional power stand for?
Well, here's an example.
We see we have five to the one third times five to the one third
times five to the one third.
And of course we know that it's equal to five to the one.
How do we know that?
Because the base is the same.
We keep the base and add the powers.
And one third plus one third plus one third is one.
Now we know that five to the one is five.
So five to the one third times five to the one third
times five to the one third is five.
I would like you to stop the tape and think about
what five to the one third means.
Think about it.
Come on back to the tape.
Whether you get an answer or not.
And then I will try to tell you and show you
if you have the right idea as to what five to the one third means.
Please do that now.
Well, as you can see, five to the one third times itself
times itself means five to the one third cubed equals five.
So five to the one third is a number,
which when cubed gives us five by definition,
that is the cube root of five.
Notice we have the same radical sign that we use for square root,
but now there's a three in the front of that symbol.
That's the third root or cube root.
If there was a four there, that would be the fourth root.
If there was an eight, it would be the eighth root, et cetera.
OK.
Now what I'd like you to do is look at nine to the one half power,
stop the tape and decide what is the fourth root.
And decide what is the value of nine to the one half power?
Well, nine to the one half power is not four and a half.
It is not half of nine.
The one half power is the square root.
And the square root of nine, of course, is three.
So we now could see that if we have a power one fifth power,
it would be the fifth root.
The one eighth power would be the eighth root.
But what would the two thirds power be?
Well, here's an example that might lead you to recognition
of what the two thirds power means.
Seven to the two thirds times seven to the two thirds times seven
to the two thirds is equal to seven to the second power.
Because two thirds plus two thirds plus two thirds equals two.
I'd like you to stop the tape and decide what the two thirds power means.
Well, what we did is by taking seven to the two thirds
and multiplying it by itself and then by itself again,
we actually cubed seven to the two thirds.
That is, seven to the two thirds cubed is seven squared.
Which means we have a cube root of seven squared.
That is, seven to the two thirds is the cube root of seven squared.
Or we could write it as the cube root of seven and then we square it.
In any case, what it appears to mean is that the numerator is the power.
And the denominator is the root when we have a fractional power.
So here's an opportunity for you to see if you understand this.
25 to the three halves power.
What I'd like you to do is tell me what that means.
Well, the three halves power is the square root cubed.
Or we can take the square root of the cube.
Which would you rather do first?
Take the square of 25 and cube it or would you rather take 25 and cube it
and then get the square root of whatever 25 cubed is.
The answer would be the same, but it's generally a lot easier to take
the square root first or whatever it is and then raise it to the power.
So let's take the square of 25 and then cube it.
Well, the square root of 25 is five and five cubed is 125.
So 25 to the three halves is 125.
Here's another problem.
64 to the negative two thirds.
Now, wait a second.
That's a negative fractional power.
Why don't you go back and think about what a negative power means.
Think about a fractional power means and think about what 64 to the
negative two thirds power means.
Do whatever it means and get a numerical answer.
So stop the tape and examine 64 to the negative two thirds.
The negative says take the reciprocal.
The two thirds power says we're going to raise it to the second power
and take the cube root.
So the first thing I'm going to do is take the reciprocal 64 to the
negative two thirds is one over 64 to the two thirds.
But 64 to the two thirds is the cube root of 64.
And then we square it to in the numerator, the three in the denominator
of the fractional power one over the cube root of 64 squared.
Well, as you can see, the cube root of 64 is four because four cubed is 64
and four squared is 16.
So the answer is one sixteenth.
OK, so we can see that the negative reciprocal negative fractional
power is simply the reciprocal.
Then we apply our knowledge of fractional powers, the numerator
being the power, the denominator being the root.
Now, the question comes about, can we take powers of negative numbers
and the next example would help us to sort decide whether we can do that
or not or how we do it?
We see we have negative five to the second.
We also have a negative five in parentheses to the second.
Is that the same thing?
When we have parentheses, generally there's a reason for it.
Let's say negative five to the second.
What do we do first?
Do we raise it to the second power or do you put the negative in front of it?
I believe that we, since we consider the negative as we were multiplying
by a negative, we would raise to a power.
We use the exponent before we multiply.
So that would simply be negative 25.
The negative does not affect the power.
But if the negative is in the parentheses with the five, we always do
what's in the parentheses first.
That means take the negative of five and then square it.
Well, squaring means multiplying it by itself and negative five times
negative five is a positive 25.
So it does make a difference.
If you're going to square a number and include the negative, that negative has
got to be in the parentheses and then you square it.
Well, notice when we squared it, we got a positive number.
When we raise a negative number to a power, do we always get a positive number?
Let's take a look at two examples.
Here's negative seven to the sixth and negative eight to the fifth.
The base is not important except that we know it's negative.
It's the power that's important.
Notice when we raise negative seven to the sixth power, we have six negative
sevens multiplied.
We can pair those negative sevens up and you notice we have little marks
to indicate that we each two of them are paired up.
So we each pair of those is a positive number since negative seven times
negative seven is positive 49 and a positive times a positive times a
positive is positive.
So when we can pair up all the negative bases, we wind up with a positive
number negative eight to the fifth.
Notice we cannot pair up all the negative eights.
And the reason is we have five of them.
We can pair up four of them and of course negative eight times negative eight
is 64 and 64 times 64 is going to be a large positive number.
When we multiply that large positive number by the last negative eight,
we are going to get a negative number.
So what we've discovered here, it seems, is that if you raise a negative
number to an even power, the answer is positive.
You raise a negative number to an odd power.
The answer is negative.
The question now is what kind of number, what kind of power will we have to
raise a positive number to to get a negative answer?
And I'd like you to stop, stop the tape and think about that.
Think about raising a positive number such as two to a power and getting
a negative answer, perhaps negative four.
Stop the tape.
Now think about that and come on back when you are done.
The question is two to what power is negative four?
Well, you know that a negative times a negative is a positive,
but I cannot multiply a positive times a positive and get a negative.
So there is no way to raise positive two to a power and get any negative
number.
I don't care whether you use a negative power, a fractional power,
any kind of power, you will never get a negative number.
The only way to get a negative number by raising a number to a power
is if the original base is negative and the power is odd.
Otherwise, you cannot do it.
You cannot raise a positive number to a power of any type and get a negative.
Okay.
Here's another problem for you to consider.
Negative 27 in parentheses raised to the negative four thirds power.
I want you to stop the tape and step by step work this problem out
so that you get a final answer, which is a number.
You should be able to get a number for this problem.
Do that now, please.
Okay.
Negative 27 to the negative four thirds power.
Anytime we have a negative fractional power, we take care of the negative first.
The negative power means take the reciprocal.
So negative 27 in parentheses to the negative four thirds power is one over.
Negative 27 in parentheses to the four thirds power.
What is the four thirds power mean?
Well, it's a fractional power.
The numerator is the power.
The denominator is the root.
So we're going to have one over the cube root of negative 27.
And then we're going to raise that answer to the fourth power.
What is the cube root of negative 27?
What number raised to the third power will give us negative 27?
Well, let's break that down into two parts.
What number raised to a power will give us 27?
Well, three raised to the third power will give us 27.
Now the question is how we get negative 27.
Well, it would appear that a negative to an odd power and certainly three is an odd power
will give us a negative number.
So the cube root of negative 27 is negative three.
So now we have one over negative three.
And notice the negative three is still in parentheses because working with the negative three,
we have one over negative three to the fourth.
Well, what does negative three to the fourth mean?
Well, a negative to an even power is positive.
And three to the fourth means three times three times three times three.
So the answer is positive 81.
So negative 27 in parentheses taken to the negative four thirds power turns out to be one over 81.
A relatively small fraction, but a lot simpler to look at than negative 27 in parentheses
to the negative four thirds power.
But what would have happened if the no parentheses had been there?
We were taken 27 to the negative four thirds power and gotten one over 81 the same as we got here
and then put a negative.
So if that parentheses wasn't there, the answer would have been negative one over 81.
So using the parentheses here is critical in getting the right answer.
And the fact is just looking at this problem.
Let's go back and look again at what we just did.
We had negative 27 to the negative four thirds power.
How could we know by just looking at that that the answer would be positive?
Well, you might say that we know we can take the cube root of a negative number
because we see the three in the denominator.
The fact that it's a negative power simply means they're reciprocal.
We're going to take the cube root and we take the cube root of a negative.
We're going to get a negative number and then we're going to raise it to the fourth power
because the four is in the numerator of the fractional power and a negative to an even power will be positive.
So just looking at this problem as it stands with the parentheses,
we should be able to recognize that our answer must be positive.
That's important to note because sometimes when you're doing a multi-step problem,
if you lose track of where you should be going, you might wind up with an answer.
Think it's correct.
And in fact, it would not be because there was an error in sign.
It's sort of an estimation kind of skill.
Looking at a problem and saying, should this be positive or should this be negative?
Let's take a look at negative eight to the negative five thirds.
Negative eight to the negative five thirds.
What kind of answer will that be?
Let's see what that means.
Negative eight to the negative five thirds.
Notice the negative eight is in parentheses.
We are going to take the reciprocal of negative eight to the negativeà, to the, to the five thirds,
one over negative eight to the five thirds.
The negative power is the reciprocal.
What does negative eight to the five thirds mean?
Negative eight to the five thirds says we get to take negative eight, take its cube root,
And then we're going to raise that to a fifth power.
What is the cube root of negative eight?
Well, the cube root of negative eight is that number, which
would multiply by itself by itself.
That is that number with cubed gives us negative eight.
It's going to have to be negative because we can't get a negative
by cubing a positive number.
And it's going to be two because two cubed is eight.
So we know that the cube root of negative eight is two, actually negative two.
And we want negative two to the fifth.
Notice that negative two would be in parentheses.
We have not replaced the parentheses until we raise it to that fifth power.
And negative two to the fifth power is a negative number.
The fifth power being an odd number and two to the fifth is 32.
So therefore negative two to the fifth is negative 32.
And rather than writing it as one over negative 32, our final answer is
negative one 32nd negative one over 32.
Okay.
And of course that was a negative number by just looking at the original problem.
We have a negative base.
We're going to take a cube root of it, which means we're going to have a negative
answer and then we're going to raise that to an odd power.
Thus the final answer will be and is negative.
Okay.
I'd like you to do this one problem on your own four ninths to the negative three
halves.
This is a little different because we have a fractional base and a negative
fractional power.
So what I'd like you to do is go ahead and stop the tape and work this problem
out using what you know about negative and fractional powers.
Okay.
We have four ninths to the negative three halves.
We have a negative power.
We always take care of the negative first.
Well, the negative power means the reciprocal.
What is the reciprocal of four ninths?
Well, if you said one over four ninths, that's too complex.
The reciprocal of a fraction, we just simply exchanged the numerator and the
nominator, the reciprocal of four ninths is nine fourths.
So we have nine fourths to the three halves.
The three halves says take the square root.
Well, take the square root of nine fourths.
We can do that very simply by taking the square to nine over the square root of
four and then raise those numbers to the third power.
As you see, the square root of nine is three, three to the third is 27.
The square root of four is two, two to the third is eight.
So we have 27 eighths.
Of course, what should we do with 27 eighths as an answer?
Thinking back to our investigation of fractions, we should simplify this.
And of course, 27 divided by eight is three with a remainder of three.
So this will be three and three eighths.
But in many cases, when you're doing problems involving powers and roots, if a
fraction is involved, the answer is left as a fraction.
So certainly 27 eighths will be a good answer for this type of problem, but three
and three eighths will be a good answer for this series of tapes, because we hope
that you remember how to work with fractions.
We've got time for one or two problems.
Let me clear the whiteboard here and look at a problem.
Here's an interesting problem.
64 to the one half times 64 to the one third.
Work that problem.
I'm going to show you how to work it in two different ways.
Work that problem at least in one different way and come on back, turn
the tape back on again, when you have your answer.
Well, the first way to work this, of course, is to recognize that the one
half power is the square root and the square root of 64.
We can find that out.
And the one third power is the cube root.
The cube root of 64.
We can find that out.
So we can simply go ahead and do this.
Let's see what we get.
We get the square root of 64 is eight.
The cube root of 64 is four.
And we get 32 is our answer.
Now, that's one way to do it.
Is it the only way?
No, it is not.
I'm going to go ahead and erase this and go back and look at that
problem as a multiplication problem.
We multiply two numbers in exponential form.
They have the same base.
What do we do?
We keep the base and add the powers.
Well, now we're back to adding fractions.
As I've said many times throughout this tape series, we'll need to call upon
things we learned in previous lessons.
One half plus one third common denominator is six.
Three sixths plus two sixths equals five sixths.
So we have 64 to the five sixths power.
What does that mean?
Well, that means we take the cube, the cube, the sixth root, the sixth
root of 64 and then raise that answer to the fifth power.
The sixth root of 64 may seem kind of complex, but it really isn't.
Because 64 is such a small number that when I take the sixth root of it, the
answer is going to be fairly small.
In fact, the answer is two because two to the sixth is 64.
And now we're stuck with two to the fifth power.
What is two to the fifth power?
It's 32.
So in both methods, we got the same answer.
Probably the first method is easier because we're able to take the fifth
root of 64, the cube root of 64.
We got two nice numbers, eight and four, and we multiply them.
But here we had to use our understanding of multiplication of numbers in
exponential form and recall our ability to add fractions.
Okay.
So we've seen a number of new things in this lesson.
We have seen fractional powers where the new numbers are
fractional powers where the numerator is a power and the denominator is a root.
We've seen negative powers where we have reciprocals.
That is three to the negative two power is one over three to the second or one
ninth.
We've seen negative fractional powers, which combines those two.
It's the reciprocal.
And then we take the power, the numerator being the power, the denominator
being the root.
We've also looked at the powers and roots of negative numbers.
And we can take the odd roots of negative numbers because when we take a negative
number and raise it to an odd power, we get a negative answer.
We take a negative number and raise it to an even power.
We get a positive answer.
So we've taken a look at various ways of using powers and roots.
And hopefully you've understood that.
So this sort of concludes our look at arithmetic.
And next we'll be delving into the world of geometry in less than 19.
We'll meet in geometry part one.
