This is lesson number 22, entitled Number Theory.
You might say, what is number theory?
Well, to date, we have looked at mostly arithmetic kind of problems, we've added, subtracted,
multiplied, divided, raised to powers, taken square roots, all kinds of exciting things
such as that.
And for many people, that's what they think mathematicians do.
They sit around all day, adding, subtracting, multiplying, dividing, taking square roots,
maybe solving equations, that's not what mathematicians do.
Most mathematicians are involved in looking at structures.
How things work, why things work.
Can we generalize?
And number theory looks at arithmetic and tries to get to the underlying truths about
what's happening, how arithmetic works.
And we'll just take a very basic look at some things and learn some of the things that
were developed by ancient mathematicians as they began their struggle to truly understand
this thing we called arithmetic.
First we need to learn some terminology.
The first term is factor.
What is a factor?
Well, a factor is a number that divides in evenly.
And here we see the factors of 36.
These are the only numbers that divide evenly into the number 36.
When I say divide evenly, it means they divide without a remainder.
One, two, three, four, six, nine, 12, 18, and 36.
All other numbers, if you tried to divide them into 36, you would get a remainder.
So these are the factors of 36.
So one could say, is eight a factor of 50?
And the answer is no, eight is not a factor of 50, because if you divided eight into 50,
you would get a remainder, that you get a remainder of two.
What the remainder is, is irrelevant.
Unless the remainder is zero, you do not have a factor.
The other word that is usually coupled with factor is multiple.
Here we see the multiples of 36.
A multiple is a number obtained by multiplying the number in question.
So these are numbers that are obtained by multiplying 36.
36 times one is 36.
36 times two is 72.
36 times three is 108.
36 times four is 144.
Dot, dot, dot, means forever and ever.
How many multiples of 36 are there?
An infinite number.
How many factors of 36 were there?
A very few.
So factors are limited, multiples are unlimited.
And of course, since 72 is a multiple of 36, then 36 is a factor of 72.
And we're going to take a look at some things leading us, for example,
to find a way to find the lowest common denominator,
something we talked about in earlier lessons on fractions.
So let's see, if eight is a factor of 24, that means that eight divides evenly.
And as you can see, eight goes into 24 three times with a remainder of zero.
Three times eight is 24.
Eight is a factor of 24.
24 is a multiple of eight.
And the ancients, as they were looking around at the various counting numbers,
saw something quite significant.
There were really three types of numbers.
And you'll notice on your screen, you see the first 20 of the counting numbers.
You'll notice that one is the only one of those numbers colored in green.
And there's a reason for that.
The ancient mathematicians of Egypt recognized that one was the creator number.
All numbers have one as a factor.
One has only one factor.
In fact, it is the only number that has only one factor.
And I'm talking about numbers here, I'm talking about counting numbers.
So one is very, very special.
And it's called green because it's the only one just like it.
The other numbers you'll notice are colored in two different colors.
The numbers colored in red became very important to the ancient mathematicians.
Because those were numbers that could only be factored one way.
They only had two factors, one, since all numbers have one as a factor,
and the number itself, the only way to get two, one times two.
The only way to get three, one times three.
The only way to get five, one times five.
In fact, if you think back to the first lesson, we looked at the physical
representation of multiplication as rectangular arrays of numbers.
These numbers could only be shown in one way, one times itself.
All other numbers, other than one, and these numbers that we see colored in red,
can be shown to be rectangular arrays of at least two different types.
For example, ten, you notice ten is not read on your screen.
Ten can be one times ten or two times five.
The ancients believed that these numbers, the ones that could only be obtained by
multiplying one by the number itself.
There's no other multiplication array that would work were very significant.
And they call these numbers prime, P-R-I-M-E, prime numbers.
And the prime numbers came to be very, very important.
The other numbers, numbers that were not prime, that could be divided by one and
themselves as well as at least one other number were called composite.
So we have basically three types of numbers.
We have one, all by itself, we have primes, and we have composites.
It's very interesting to note that in ancient times, quite frankly, when men were
more important to women, at least because the men ruled, it certainly isn't true today,
hopefully, but the fact is that men decided that men's names were important,
and women's names were not important.
And you'll notice that the prime numbers that we saw on the screen included
only odd numbers except for the number two,
since all even numbers other than two are divisible by two and
therefore have a factor other than one of themselves.
So all even numbers except for two are composite.
And since the rest of the prime numbers are odd, men decided that they would give
their sons names that had an odd number of letters, and women were given names
with an even number of letters.
And for example, giving one's boy child a name that an even number of letters
would be like in the United States naming a boy, you know, Marsha Sue.
Obviously, he would get into a lot of fights.
So again, this is not from experience.
I wasn't living back in ancient Egypt, but the fact is this is what I've read and heard.
And in their world, the prime numbers were considered very, very important.
You also understand that most of these mathematicians looked at mathematics
as a religion, an explanation of their being, an explanation of their universe.
So let's continue in our look at number theory and
use these prime numbers to get at some very important circumstances.
We're going to factor with prime numbers, which is called prime factorization.
On your screen, you see the prime factorization of 36.
The way we prime factor a number is to simply start with the number two.
Does two divide the number in question?
If it does, we write the two down with a little branch sticking out of the number.
As you see here, a little branch coming out of the 36.
And then we write down and the other branch to the right of the two what the other factor is.
Two times what is the number?
In this case, two times 18 is 36.
And then we ask ourselves again,
does two divide the new number?
And the answer here is yes, two times nine.
Does two divide nine?
No, it doesn't.
The next prime number is three.
Does three divide nine?
Yes, it does, three times three.
And now the remaining number three we know is prime.
And therefore 36 can be prime factored into two times two times three times three.
Or if you'd like, using exponents, 36 is two squared times three squared.
Now, this is the only possible product of primes.
Product is a multiplication answer, and we know what a prime number is.
There is no other way to get 36 through multiplying primes than two times two times three times three.
It is unique.
And in fact, it was discovered that every single composite number has a unique product of primes.
Well, here are three composite numbers, 84, 105, 111.
What I'd like you to do is using the list of primes.
If you need to go back to that graphic that lists the prime numbers between one and 20,
and use that to prime factor 84, 105, 111.
And when you're finished, come on back to the tape, and we'll work it on the screen.
OK, two divides 84, two times 42.
Two divides 42, two times 21.
Two does not divide 21, but three does.
Three times seven, and since seven is prime, we have completed our factor tree.
We completed our prime factorization of 84.
105 cannot be divided by two.
It can be divided by three.
And remember, we know that from our knowledge that one plus zero plus five is six, and since
the sum of the digits equals six, 105 is divisible by three.
Three times 35 is 105.
35 cannot be divided by three, but it can be divided by five.
The ends in five.
And five times seven is 35, seven being prime.
Our factorization of 105 is complete.
111 is also divisible by three.
It is not divisible by two, since it's an odd number.
Three goes into 111 37 times.
Now, if you tried two, I couldn't do two, three, five, seven, 11, et cetera, all the
prime numbers between one and 20, none of them would divide 37, which means what?
It means that 37 itself is a prime number, and the prime factorization of 111 is three
times 37.
So now we see the product of primes for our three numbers.
84 is two squared times three times seven.
105 is three times five times seven.
111 is three times 37.
You'll notice that those three numbers each had a factor of three.
That is, they had a common factor.
One of the things we investigated in number theory is given two or more numbers.
What is the greatest common factor, the GCF, the largest number that divides each of the
numbers in question?
How would we do that?
Well, obviously, we're going to use prime factorization.
Let's take a look at a problem.
We want to find the GCF of 84, 72, and 132, and we want to do it in a way that we can
conclude the answer is correct, a very ordered method of doing this.
The first thing we do is we prime factor each of the numbers, and you'll notice the prime
factorization of 84 is two times two times three times seven.
We already did that previously.
The prime factorization of 72 is two times two times two times three times three, and
132 can be prime factored into two times two times three times 11.
Then I go back and I circle any time as a prime in each of the prime factorizations
that is common.
So you'll notice I've circled two twos in each of the factor trees.
You'll notice in the factor tree for 72, there is a third two.
That third two is not circled, and the reason is, well, there's no other place where there's
a third two.
Each of the factor trees, in this case, all three, must be able to be circled.
So we have two twos circled in each factor tree.
We've also circled a three in each factor tree.
Because we haven't circled the second three in the factor tree for 72, nor have we circled
the seven in 84's tree or the 11 in that of 132, because these are not common factors.
So our greatest common factor is the product of the common factors.
That is, if a number is divided by two, and can be divided by two again, and can be divided
by three, it can be divided by 12.
So 84, 72, and 132 have a GCF, a greatest common factor of 12.
Let's see what that means.
On this next graphic, you can see that we have the numbers 84, 72, and 132 written as
the product of 12 times another number.
12 times 7 is 84.
12 times 6 is 72.
12 times 11 is 132.
Those numbers that are multiplied by 12, you'll notice, are the product of the remaining
primes in the factor tree of the individual number.
7, of course, is 7.
Six was the missing three and the missing two, the three and two that were not circled,
and of course, 11 was not circled in the factor tree of 132.
So we could see that there is no common factor for the other numbers, for the 7, 6, and 11,
other than one.
And therefore, the GCF, the greatest number that divides both 84, 72, and 132 is 12.
Let's take a look at the next three numbers, 38, 95, and 171.
We have prime factored those numbers.
The only common factor is 19.
If it's the only common factor on the factor tree, then guess what?
It is the greatest common factor.
The GCF is 19.
So 38 would be 19 times 2, 95 would be 19 times 5, and 171 would be 19 times 9, GCF of 19.
The next series of numbers gives us a third circumstance.
In the first circumstance, we actually had to multiply the primes.
In the second circumstance, when we just looked at it, we only had one common prime factor.
That was the GCF.
Here for 44, 27, and 175, we have no common factors.
Nothing is circled.
In fact, there isn't even a number common anyplace.
I mean, the fact is, is that there are no twos or 11s, anyplace other than 44.
There are no threes except for 27.
We don't care about that.
The fact is, we care a fact that there is no common factor.
There's no factor that appears in each of the three trees.
And therefore, you might be thinking, well, there is no common factor.
Yes, there is.
Remember, every number can be divided by one.
One is the creator number, if you will.
And therefore, the GCF, the greatest common factor for 44, 27, and 175 is one.
And we have a word, or actually two words for that, if numbers, two or more numbers
have a GCF of one, they are called relatively prime.
And later on in mathematics, well beyond the scope of this course, the notion of relative
prime is very important.
It gives us some clues as to how things work.
Right now, it's just a set of words, it simply means that the GCF is one, then the numbers
are relatively prime.
Now, remember I said we could use number theory to be able to find the lowest common denominator.
Remember in finding the common denominator, we multiply.
So what we need to find is the least common multiple of a set of numbers, the LCM, the
smallest least number that is a multiple of the numbers in question of two or more
numbers.
In our first problem, we have three numbers for which we want to get the LCM, 45, 54,
and 50.
We start with the prime number two, and we look at each of the factor trees and find
the factor tree that has the largest number of twos in it.
Well, you'll notice there's no twos in 45, and 54 and 50 each only have one two.
So I circled one of those twos, you know, we'll need a two.
Then as we see in the next graphic, after I circled the two and 50, I went looking for
the most threes that were available.
And there were two threes in 45, but there are three threes in 54.
So the most threes I need is three threes, I circled those in 54.
How about five?
Well, there's a five in 45, there's no five in 54, there are two fives in 50.
So I circled both those fives, the maximum number of fives I need is two fives.
There are no other prime numbers left, there's no sevens or elevens or anything beyond that.
So in order to find a number that can be divided by 45, 54 and 50, that is a multiple of these
three numbers can be divided without remainder with all by all three numbers.
I must multiply all the circled numbers.
The LCM is two times three times three times three the three threes times five times five
the two fives.
When you multiply that out, you get 1,350.
As we can see, 1,350 can be obtained by multiplying each of the numbers in question by a whole
number.
45 times 30 is 1,350, 54 times 25 is 1,350, and 50 times 27 is 1,350.
1,350 is the smallest number that can be obtained by multiplying 45, by multiplying 54, by
multiplying 50 by some whole number, is the least common multiple of those three.
We can do both GCFs and LCMs for two numbers, we've done it for three numbers, as many
numbers you like, the process remains the same.
Let's look at our next problem.
We have 44, 27 and 175.
We'd like to find the GCF and the LCM.
We notice as we look at our factorization, our deltree diagram with the prime factors,
we notice that there is no common factor.
There is a two in one of the trees, there are threes in the other tree in five, seven,
but there's no common factor at all, and therefore the GCF must be one.
Now, an interesting happens when the GCF is one, because now to find the LCM, you'll
notice that we circle the two twos in 44.
Notice there are no other twos.
We circle the three threes in 27, and there are no other threes.
We circle the two fives in 175, the seven in 175, and the 11, I got tired of using circles
so we have a little box around square, around 11, and in effect we've circled all the numbers.
The LCM is simply two times two times three times three times three times five times five
times seven times 11, 207,900, since there are no common factors in any of the numbers.
The actual LCM is the product of the three numbers, 44 times 27 times 175 is 207,900,
the LCM, the least common multiple of those three numbers.
Okay, so we see how to do the GCF and the LCM, and the LCM can be used to find the lowest
common denominator.
If I had two common denominators that weren't quite so simple to look at, for example, let's
say I had 45ths and 30ths, and I wanted to find the common denominator, the lowest common
denominator, to add a bunch of 45ths and a bunch of 30ths.
What I would need to do is find the least common multiple of 45 and 30, and the least
common multiple of 45 and 30, which happens to be 90, would be the lowest common denominator.
That's a lot smaller than multiplying 45 times 30 to get the common denominator.
So again, the whole idea of this number theory is to find the structure of the numbers we're
working with and use that knowledge of the structure to enable us to operate, to add,
to track, multiply, and divide, et cetera, with greater ease.
Now you may be asking the question, how did they find the prime numbers?
I mean, did they pray one night, and out of the blue, somebody came down from a mountain
top and said, here are the first 100 prime numbers.
That's not how they did it.
Obviously, one, two, three were easy to find.
Of course, one is not a prime number, a very special number.
But the question now came about, how do you find prime numbers?
Well, that question was answered thousands of years ago by a gentleman named Eratosthenes.
Eratosthenes lived way back in the BC times, and Eratosthenes did a number of interesting
things.
He was the, I believe, the first person to measure the circumference of the earth, never
having been very far from where he lived.
He used the shadows and wells, it's a long story you can read about if you want to, in
the history of mathematics, but he actually measured the circumference of the earth very
accurately.
That's very interesting when people talk about that Christopher Columbus was fighting all
these people who thought the earth was flat.
They knew the earth was round in ancient times.
It was the ignorant people in Christopher Columbus's time who did not know that the earth was round.
Well, Eratosthenes, besides discovering the circumference of the earth fairly accurately,
was able to come up with a way, a method of finding prime numbers.
And to this day, this method is in many textbooks.
It's called the sieve of Eratosthenes.
A sieve is something used to filter material through, and by filtering the numbers through
the sieve of Eratosthenes, we realize we get the prime numbers.
On the whiteboard here, you have the first 50 counting numbers, and you must excuse me.
I am one of those people who needs lines to write straight.
So unfortunately, I believe on your screen, the numbers are rising a bit as they go from
left to right, but that's okay.
You can see the numbers are lined up by their one's place values.
We have one, 11, 21, 31, and 41 all lined up one under the other.
So one is a very special number.
Let's go ahead and, well, let's just erase it.
We'll erase the one.
Now we're left with numbers that are either prime or composite.
The first number is two.
Now we know that any number that can be divided by two is not prime, is composite.
What can we do?
Well, we can simply mark all the numbers that are divisible by two.
Rather than taking the time to do that, let's just notice that these are numbers that are
lined up with two's in the one's place, four's, six's, eight's, and zero's.
All the even numbers.
Let's go ahead and just simply erase those, but we want to erase the two.
Why not?
Because the two is prime.
And now we're going to look at the threes.
And we start with three, and we know that all the numbers that can be divided by three
must be composite.
Now that those numbers have any endings, like even numbers, no they don't.
The numbers that can be divided by three are every three numbers.
Well, the even numbers are gone, the six and the twelve and the eighteen are gone.
So we have nine, and fifteen, and twenty-one, and twenty-seven, and thirty-three, and thirty-nine,
and forty-five are gone.
The next number is five, the next prime number.
Let's just erase all the numbers that end in five or zero, all the numbers that end
in zero are already gone.
So we erase these numbers that end in five.
And now we have seven left, and seven, well, fourteen, twenty-one, twenty-eight, thirty-five
are gone, forty-two is gone, forty-nine.
And guess what?
What you have left on your screen other than the dust from the markers are the prime numbers
up to forty-seven.
That is the prime numbers less than fifty.
That is how Eratosthenes found the prime numbers, and that is how we can find the prime numbers.
And in fact, we've now sort of concluded our very basic look at number theory.
We've looked at the notion of multiple and factor.
We've discovered what prime and composite numbers are.
We've looked at how to find the greatest common factor and the lowest common multiple.
The lowest common multiple is useful in finding the least common denominator.
And we've looked at the severe Eratosthenes to see how we find prime numbers.
In the next lesson, lesson number twenty-three, we will look at number patterns and discover
more interesting facts about our friends, the arithmetic numbers.
See you there.
