This is Lesson 27, where we discuss measurement, and of course, measurements use lots of mathematics,
and therefore it's important for us to know what measurements are and how to use them.
First of all, what is the purpose of measurement?
The purpose of measurement is really standardization.
We have standardized measures, and the rationale for this goes way back to when perhaps the
distance measurement of foot was the length of the king's foot.
And if you were lucky or unlucky enough to purchase something by length right prior to
the death of the king, and the new king had either longer or shorter feet, what you bought
and what you get would be two different things.
And of course, we certainly couldn't standardize the king's foot by stretching or chopping
off some of his toes, so eventually what had to happen is we had to come with a measurement
that was colder foot, and perhaps based on the length of a particular king's foot, but
when that king left us, the amount of the foot stayed the same.
And of course, the measurement system we use in the United States, which is really the
English, or sometimes called the standard measurement system, but most people call the
American measurement system, is really quite difficult to use.
Now you can say, oh no, no, it's easy.
It's this metric system that's crazy.
Well the rest of the world uses the metric system, and after we discuss more about what
measurements are and why they're important, we'll go into depth into the metric system.
Now, in this country, the notion of standardized measurements really was seen after something
called the Great Fire of Baltimore, and it blew us back at the end of the 19th century.
There was a huge fire in Baltimore, and fire engines came from all over the eastern seaboard,
from New York, New Jersey, Maryland, and when they arrived at the site of the fire, they
could not hook up, in many cases, their hoses to the hydrants.
So even though they were there, they could not put water on the fire because the connections
were not standardized, and probably many buildings burned down because of this.
Decision was made to look into standardization, and of course you know yourself that if you
go to a car dealership in California, but you're from Florida, and you ask for a spark
plug for your car, the spark plug they have there, and the spark plug you'd buy in your
native Florida would be identical, they're standardized.
And there really is a very important use of standards, and of course if it's important
we need to have some governmental agency in charge, and we do have the Bureau of Standards
as well as states tend to have organizations within the state government that are concerned
with standardized measurements.
Now why would you as a consumer care about standardized measurements?
Well the first thing is you go into a supermarket, and you buy many, many things by their weight,
produce, meat, and fish, as well as cold cuts, cheese.
How do you know when the butcher, for example, puts a steak or some chicken on the scale,
and the weight turns out to be two and a half pounds, that that is indeed two and a half
pounds?
Well, we must have standardized measurements, and someone actually comes and checks the scales,
and if those scales are too far off, I believe in many locations, the store can be fined,
because we as consumers are assuming that the measurement of those scales are correct.
The same thing when you purchase gasoline, gasoline is purchased by the gallon, and again
a gallon of milk you can actually see the milk in the, usually clear plastic jug.
But how do you see a gallon of gasoline?
It's coming through the hose into your car, you never see it.
You must trust that when the tank is full, and it says eight gallons, that indeed you
have pumped eight gallons through that gasoline pump into your car.
Again, someone has to come by and ensure that a gallon on that gasoline pump is indeed a
true gallon.
Think about buying clothing.
When you buy clothing, and you buy as whether it's a particular size, a neck size, or something
or when it's a small, medium, large, et cetera, you want to know that when you go to a store
and you say, for example, I use a 17 neck shirt, I expect if I buy a 17 neck shirt with
a 33 inch sleeve, which is the left of my sleeve, and I go home and try the shirt on,
it will fit just right.
It will fit the same as every other shirt I own of the same size.
As you imagine, if you went into different stores or in different parts of the country,
and that same 17 neck, 33 inch sleeve shirt was different, I mean, you'd have to be trying
on shirts or dresses or pants or whatever hacks, whatever you were buying all the time.
The fact is that we have standardized measurements, and typically a small or a medium or a large
is pretty standard.
The fact is, without this, purchasing items that were sold by size would be incredibly
difficult.
So we do have standardization, and in fact, we even have standardization in terms of many
of the restaurants that we visit.
You visit a fast food restaurant or many other theme restaurants that are franchised throughout
the country, and you know that when you're in a particular hamburger place or a particular
Italian restaurant or pizza place, whether you're in Oregon or South Carolina or New
Mexico or Vermont, you're going to get the exact same pizza, the exact same field parmesan,
the exact same cheeseburger, because the companies have standardized their measurements, for
example, for the amount of cheese in a pizza, the amount of spaghetti sauce in the spaghetti,
the amount of cheese that's placed on the hamburger, even the size of the hamburger
and its bun.
So one of the joys of traveling, if you want, if you call it a joy, is you can go into a
familiar restaurant, get a familiar meal that looks and tastes exactly the same as back
home, and you're 2,000 miles away.
Some people don't think that's a joy, I'll leave that up to you.
But without standardization, without standardized measures, we couldn't do that.
And therefore, as we travel the rest of the world, we have a problem, because the rest
of the world uses something called the metric system.
Now, the metric system, by the way, is the official system of the United States.
It was adopted by Congress at the end of the 19th century.
So it's been approximately 100 years, and we haven't learned.
Yes, we do have 2-liter bottles, and we do participate, many of us, in 5 and 10K road
races, and there are other measurements that might give our young child 10 cc's of medication.
But the fact is, we pride ourselves on being the only country in the world that uses this
crazy system that's based on 12 of these, and 16 of those, and 4 of these, and 2 of
these, and it's nuts.
So let's take a look at this metric system, and to see why mathematically, it makes a
great deal of sense.
The metric system is based around a series of prefixes.
A prefix is a part of a word that comes at the beginning of the word.
And here are some of the most important prefixes in the metric system.
And here are those prefixes used with the meter.
The meter is a measurement of length, and we'll talk shortly about how long a meter
is.
Now, as we see, we have a kilo meter.
Kilo means a thousand.
Whatever the measurement is, if it's kilo, that measurement, it's a thousand of those.
Centi means one one hundredth, like a cent is one hundredth of a dollar.
A centimeter is one one hundredth of a meter.
Mealy from one thousandth is a one thousandth of a meter, and as a millimeter is one thousandth
of a meter.
What is a meter?
A meter is a little bit more than a yard.
Interesting enough, I was told a number of years ago, a study was done.
And this was a time when many people were very, very excited about changing over our
entire measurement system to the metric system.
And the question was asked, well, if we go over to the metric system and we change football
fields, to be, instead of each yard marker was five yards, five meters, that was a meter.
So the football field would be 100 meters long with two 10 meter long end zones.
It was determined that the vast majority of football fields, especially those in high
schools and small colleges, could not contain a metric football field.
So it's certainly very possible if we ever went to the metric system, we'd retain the
use of the yard if only for football.
Because of course, especially in the south where I live, football is a religion, and
we certainly couldn't do away with our religion over a measuring system.
Now we would use a kilometer to measure very large distances.
And we use a meter to measure moderate distances, and the centimeter and millimeter would be
used for much smaller distances.
For example, where is the meter used?
Well, we see a 100 meter dash, 200 meter dash in the Olympics and in many track meets.
We would use the meter to measure distances, for example, like the dimensions of a room
would be in meters, the dimensions of a building would be in meters, a relatively moderate
size distances because a millimeter is approximately a yard.
So we wouldn't want to use a meter to measure the height of a human being because most of
us are more than, were less than two yards and therefore will be less than two meters.
What we would use to measure greater distances will be the kilometer.
I mentioned the 5K and 10K road race.
That's the 5 kilometer and 10 kilometer road race.
A kilometer being a thousand meters is approximately about six tenths of a mile.
And again, there are many road signs throughout the country that indicate the distance not
only in miles, but also in kilometers.
Obviously, in most other countries, the distances on road signs along highways would always
be in kilometers.
We have no problem understanding what a 10 kilometer race is, and therefore we should
have no problem dealing with kilometers as opposed to miles.
What would you use a centimeter for?
Well, the centimeter, which is one one hundredth of a meter, is approximately the width of
a paperclip, a small, not a jumbo paperclip, but a small paperclip.
And it's a fraction of an inch, and we use centimeters to measure, for example, the height
of a person because certainly if there are 100 centimeters in a meter and a person, let's
say, was approximately one and a half meters tall, that would be 150 centimeters.
You'll notice how easy it is to convert from meters to centimeters.
Well, is it that easy to convert from yards to feet or to inches?
I don't think so because you got to multiply, I see, a yard by three to get feet and a foot
by 12 inches to get inches.
In the metric system, you look at the prefix and it tells you exactly what you're dealing
with.
Now about millimeters.
Millimeters are very small measurements.
A millimeter is one thousandth of a meter.
If you took that paperclip and opened it up so you look at the wire that actually makes
the paperclip, the diameter of the wire is approximately one millimeter.
In fact, I remember years ago, there was a, a cigarette advertising campaign when they
could advertise cigarettes on TV and they talked about the cigarette being one silly
millimeter longer.
Really, it was quite insignificant in terms of length because think about that diameter,
that paperclip wire, but that was the campaign and since most people have no idea what a
millimeter was, obviously it's stuck in people's minds whether they sold a lot of cigarettes.
I don't know because I didn't smoke then nor do I now, but the fact is millimeters have
been creeping into our, our measuring system here in the United States.
Okay.
What other kinds of measurements are there?
Well there's measurements of mass and here are the measurements of mass that are most
common.
We have the gram, the milligram and the kilogram.
These are in fact quite, quite used in our, in our system and especially if you're shopping
for many products.
We'll talk about those specific product products shortly.
Now notice I said mass, really the gram is a unit of mass while the ounce or the pound
are units of weight.
What's the difference?
Well as long as we're on earth, nothing.
Your mass, you see, stays the same whether you're on earth, in space, on the moon, on
Mars or on Jupiter, but your weight would vary quite a bit.
In space, you are weightless.
You have no weight despite the fact that your mass hasn't changed.
On the moon, you would have a weight much less than the weight on earth because of the smaller
amount of gravity.
And in fact, if you recall when the astronauts went to the moon, they jumped up and down like
some silly children and in fact they could never have done that on earth.
But if you were on Jupiter and walking around, you would feel exceptionally sluggish because
the very large size of Jupiter contributes to a much greater gravitational force which
would enhance your weight to the point that you would barely be able to move even though
your mass has stayed the same.
But we are not planning to go to Jupiter or to the moon in the near future and on earth,
mass and weight really are the same thing.
Well let's see, the gram, what is a gram?
The basic unit of mass in a metric system, a gram, is the weight of that paperclip or
the mass of that paperclip.
So think about that, it's really quite light.
And let's see, a kilogram, a kilogram is used in many cases in the purchase, especially
in other countries of the United States, of food, meat, produce, the kind of things we
buy by the ounce or the pound here is sold by the kilogram.
And an indication of how confusing this can be occurred a few years ago, every summer
I teach in an honors program in rural Nebraska.
And one of the other instructors there is a gentleman from Iceland where of course they
are on the metric system.
And one evening all the instructors went out to a restaurant and the instructor from Iceland
wanted to get a steak.
He looked at the menu, there were 12 ounce steaks, 10 ounce steaks, 8 ounce steaks, 16,
even 20 ounce steaks.
Of course this is Nebraska where they raise cattle.
He was confused, what is this 10 ounce steak?
And no one else at the table besides myself could explain to him what a 10 or 12 or 16
ounce steak was in terms of kilograms because they didn't know.
I was the only math teacher there and therefore I was able to quickly indicate to him the
precise or fairly close precise size in terms of kilograms of the individual size steaks.
And he purchased the steak because he knew exactly once I told him the weight in kilograms,
he knew exactly what he wanted.
Milligrams are quite useful.
We use milligrams all the time if you pick up a package of food and you look at the label
about the nutrition in that food, you'll see milligrams of sodium, milligrams of cholesterol
grams of fat.
All this is on the label and in those of us who are concerned about excess cholesterol
or excess sodium are very concerned about looking at milligrams.
A milligram is one one thousandth of a gram.
Now think about that.
Consider the paper clip.
That paper clip was a gram.
If we took that paper clip and cut it into 1000 equal pieces, each of those 1000 pieces
would weigh or have a mass of one milligram, not very much.
But again, when you're looking at that label and you see 25 milligrams of cholesterol, that
really isn't a lot in terms of the actual amount of cholesterol.
But in terms of your intake of cholesterol, you'd be might be quite concerned and might
not buy that product.
Okay.
A kilogram, by the way, is approximately 2.2 pounds.
So if for example you go over to Europe and you want to buy some oranges and you buy five
kilograms of oranges, that would be 11 pounds.
And I hope you would truly enjoy your oranges because they'd probably rot before you ate
them all unless you had a very large group of people with you.
Okay.
What else do we measure?
We measure capacity.
We have quarts and gallons and pints.
And I'm sure most of you have memorized how many pints are in a gallon or how many ounces
in our court, et cetera.
Probably not.
Again, the metric system is exceptionally easy.
We start with the basic unit of leader and a leader is approximately a quart.
We all know what a two liter bottle of soda pop looks like.
Well, it's just two liters.
And of course we have milliliters, which would be one thousandth of a liter that we'd use
for very small amounts.
And therefore I would think based on our purchase of two liter bottles, our purchase of or actually
not more than the purchase, but actually giving dosages of medicine that involves milliliters,
I think most of us are quite familiar with those words, those measurements, and should
have no problem adapting to those.
If indeed we threw out the gallons in the courts, I mean, obviously you might want to
buy a four liter bottle of milk.
If you normally get a gallon of milk, it would be very similar.
In fact, that reminds me of a story years ago back in the late seventies, we had was
called the gasoline crisis here, the oil crisis.
And in many cases to get gasoline, you had to get guessing on odd or even days.
If your license plate ended in an odd number, you could get on odd days of the first, the
third, the 17th of the month.
And I was visiting a family in Florida and went out to get gas for the car because it
was the appropriate day to do that and got on a long line in this road leading up to
the gas station.
And at that time, the price of gas was about a dollar a gallon.
And as I was getting closer and closer to the gas pumps, it looked as if the price was
about 25 cents a gallon.
I couldn't believe this.
I mean, here was a point of time when the gas prices had risen up high.
Gas was was really restrained in the amount that was available.
People were lining up to get it restricted on when you could get it.
And yet here was gas that was about one fourth the typical price until I got closer.
The price of gas was 25.9 cents per liter, which was much more than a dollar, much more
but somewhat more than a dollar per gallon.
So it was very interesting.
And I had not seen gasoline sold by the leader in this country since then, and it's been
almost 20 years.
So but again, we would not that difficult to deal with capacity measurements in liters
and milliliters.
How about area?
We talked about area earlier, and we said that the basic unit of area is a square, whatever.
Well, for example, a square centimeter.
That would be a square that each of its sides was one centimeter.
And the area would be one square centimeter so that we would use that to measure area.
How many squares of one centimeter on a side could be fit on the surface?
For example, if I wanted to measure the area of a table, we'd measure that in square centimeters.
If I wanted to measure the area of a yard that said to buy fertilizer to fertilize my
grass lawn, I would probably use square meters.
On the other hand, if I was measuring the area, the land mass area of a town or a county,
I would use square kilometers.
Probably wouldn't want to measure square kilometers in my room on the floor.
Know what I want to use square centimeters to measure the land area of a town or a county
or a state.
How about volume?
Now volume is really different than capacity.
Capacity generally measures liquids.
Volume is measured in cubic measurements, cubic inches, cubic feet, also cubic centimeters.
A cubic centimeter is simply a cube.
All of whose sides are one centimeter long.
We use cubic centimeters in many cases because you see a cubic centimeter is exactly the
same as a milliliter.
Isn't that interesting?
Is a cubic inch the same as an ounce?
I don't think so.
But a cubic centimeter is exactly the same as a milliliter.
And the cubic centimeter of water, by the way, has a mass of one gram.
So capacity, volume, and mass are all connected very nicely in the metric system.
It's not true in our system.
How about measures of temperature?
In a previous lesson, we discussed Celsius and Fahrenheit temperatures.
Here are two thermometers with the boiling point and freezing point of water lined up.
Basically what happened, I'm told again in one of those other circumstances where I wasn't
there, that Fahrenheit, when he built his thermometer, believed that the freezing point
of water was approximately 32 degrees above the absolute coldest temperature, how wrong
he was.
He made the boiling point of water 212 degrees to separate 32 by 180 degrees.
The reason he used 180 degrees is 180 is divisible by so many numbers.
Three, four, five, six, nine, 10, 12, 15 and 20, so it was easy to make gradations on
its thermometer for other other temperatures between the boiling and freezing points of
water.
The metric system said, Hey, look, we just assume use a system based on 10 and 100.
So basically the, the freezing point of water was set at zero and the boiling point of water
was set at 100.
And we know we can get a lot colder than zero degrees Fahrenheit and it can get a lot colder
than zero degrees Celsius.
And as mentioned in the earlier discussion of this, you know, if you're over in a country,
most other countries in the world that use Celsius temperatures and you woke up and the
temperature was 30 degrees, that would be a very pleasant day.
And the reason is because 30 degrees would be quite equivalent to a temperature Fahrenheit
that you would find most comfortable on a summer afternoon.
And we talked again, if you, if you have it, if you skipped over that, the conversion
of Celsius and Fahrenheit back and forth, we talked about in the, the lesson on the
graphing in the coordinate plane.
But again, once you get familiar with the Celsius temperatures, it's no big thing.
Quite frankly, if I said to you the temperature outside was 50 degrees and I asked you a step
outside to see if I was telling the truth or not, you might not be able to tell unless
it was exceptionally hot or exceptionally cold.
If the temperature was 60 degrees or 45 degrees, I don't think you'd be sensitive enough to
recognize that it was not 50 degrees.
So we really, we think we're familiar with measurements and we're really not.
There are other some special units of measurement.
The first one I want to discuss is a light year.
A light year is not a measurement of time, despite the fact that it has the word year
at it.
A light year is a measurement of distance.
It is the distance that light travels in one year.
It is obviously a very long distance because we take the speed of light, which is approximately
186,000 miles per second, multiply it by 60 for the number of seconds in a minute, multiply
it by 60 for the number of minutes in an hour, multiply it by 24 for the number of hours
in a day, multiply it by 365 for the number of days in most years.
And we get a number that has six and a whole lot of zeros effort, 12 zeros.
That is 6 trillion miles.
That's how far light travels in a year.
And we use the light year to measure distances in space.
In fact, if we want to go someplace that was one light year away, and we were traveling
at 186,000 miles per hour, now think about 186,000 miles per hour is faster than any
vehicle we have rocket plane or whatever it might be.
But if we could travel that fast, 186,000 miles per hour, it would take us 3,600 years
to get to that location one light year away.
Now, since most of us don't plan to live that long, we would have to send astronauts out
and have them have families in space, have their children have children and many, many,
many generations and more than three and a half millennia later, they would land on
this planet.
Obviously, before we can travel that far in space, one of two things has to happen.
We have to be able to go faster than 186,000 miles per hour, or we've got to be able to
put ourselves in suspended animation.
But that's another story that's for our science classes.
But basically the light year is a distance measurement.
And one must understand when they talk about how many light years something is away.
By the way, the sun is eight light minutes from Earth.
We were told that it takes about eight minutes for light to travel from the sun to Earth.
And therefore that distance is eight light minutes.
Another measurement is the acre.
We talked about area earlier on.
We mentioned the acre.
It's one of the few measurements of area that does not have the word square in it.
And an acre is approximately, or actually equal to 43,500 square feet and is used to
measure land.
So the next time you see a sign, it says two acre lot for sale.
You'll know that that's 87,000 square feet of land.
A hectare is the metric measurement equivalent to the acre.
It's used for measuring land.
A hectare is equal to 10,000 square meters.
In case you're interested and you want to convert one hectare is 2.471 acres.
Basically if you live in a house and you have a half acre piece of land and you have to
mow the lawn, then you have an understanding what a half acre is.
But most of us acres and hectares are kind of irrelevant unless you're in the land business.
The last thing I can discuss is rates.
And we talk about miles per hour.
We go 200 miles in four hours.
We're going 50 miles per hour.
If we're going 280 miles and we use four gallons, sorry, 14 gallons of gasoline, we let use 20
miles.
We got 20 miles per the gallon.
The word per means divide out of.
If we score 237 points in 10 games, we score 23.7 points per game.
If we listen, actually if you plug our radio in any place in the United States, the electricity
is at 60 cycles per second.
And we listen to station that's located 96.7 FM.
That's 96.7 megahertz, a hertz being a cycle, mega being million.
So 96,700,000 times a second, the little electrons in your radio go back and forth.
So we've looked at measurements.
We've looked at measurements and realized why measurements need to be standardized.
We looked at measurements of length, of capacity, of weight or mass, of volume, of temperature,
of area.
We've looked at some very special measurements.
And now we've concluded this lesson and talk about next in Lesson 28, Problem Solving Techniques.
