So if anybody wants to chat at any point
or download any of the primary papers,
the data sets, the software,
everything is here at this website,
please feel free to contact me.
I'm not a clinician, I'm a basic scientist
and I'm going to talk about some aspects
of the cancer problem that I think are of fundamental
interest but also I think will have implications
for biomedicine of cancer.
And sometimes I give a talk that's focused on this question.
Why is cancer not an issue for our various autonomous
robotics and the various other kinds of things we make?
And this is a, it sounds kind of silly,
but it's actually a deep question.
And the answer is because mostly what we make
in our engineered constructs has a very flat architecture.
In other words, the entire thing might have interesting
complex behaviors, it might have some degree of intelligence
and problem solving and whatever,
but the parts that it's made of are passive.
The parts do not have agendas of their own.
There is no danger of them sort of going off
on their own tangent that doesn't merge
with the goals of the rest of the structure.
Now that is not the case in biology.
Biology has a completely different architecture.
So all the way up from molecular networks
through organelles and tissues and organs
and whole organisms and even swarms,
biology is made of layers that are problem solving
intelligent agents on their own.
They solve problems in various spaces.
This might be not just the three dimensional space
of canonical behavior,
but this might be the space of physiological states,
transcriptional space, anatomical morphous space,
metabolic space and so on.
And so we are made of a kind of nesting doll architecture,
not just structurally.
I mean, that part's obvious
that each thing is made of smaller things,
but in fact that each of these layers
has their own problem solving capacity.
In many cases, various kinds of ability to learn
from experience and the competencies of various kinds.
And this turns out to be very important.
And so a summary of everything I'm going to tell you today
is basically this,
that all cells, not just neurons,
communicate in electrical networks
that process information.
And that we think that cancer can be detected,
it can be induced,
but it can also be normalized by computational models
of the manipulation of the bioelectrical signaling
that normally keeps cells operating
towards large scale anatomical goals.
And if we boil all that down to one sentence,
it's basically this,
that like the brain,
all of the tissues in your body form electrical networks
that make decisions about anatomy
and that we can now target the system
to change the large scale decision making
of the cellular collectives.
And that has huge implications
for all kinds of aspects of medicine.
I'm going to show you some weird creatures today.
Here's our five-legged frog.
And I just point out at the beginning,
this is not Photoshop,
these are real living forms in our lab
that serve as our attempts
to test the various theories that we have.
So one really fundamental aspect of the cancer problem
is what scale do you think about it at?
So one particular kind of thing
that people sometimes ask is,
you know, there are numerous animals of the plan area
that I'll show you in a minute,
salamanders, various other creatures
that are really highly regenerative.
In other words, they lose a limb
and they regrow it, things like that.
And people ask, why do human bodies
have reduced regenerative potential?
And a common answer to this
that people will advance is that it's to avoid cancer, right?
So if you're a long-lived organism
that's going to be around for let's say up to 10 decades
or so, you don't want to have access
to highly plastic proliferative cells
because the chance of developing cancer
is going to be too high.
And so the idea is that something like a human
will then not be regenerative
because we're really keeping those kind of plastic pathways
really suppressed.
And so a perspective that's focused on specific pathways,
TGF beta, cell cycle control,
all the things that we're used to thinking about
for cancer and beyond, at the single cell level predict
that organisms with a high regenerative potential,
meaning they have easy access to proliferation pathways,
they have lots of undifferentiated cells,
that those kind of animals should have a high cancer incidence.
And specifically that cancer and regeneration
should go together.
That is, if this view predicts
that if you are a highly regenerative type of creature
that has lots of plasticity,
you should have a high oncogenic cost.
Now you could turn that on its head
and make the opposite prediction.
And you might say, actually organisms
that exert robust patterning control over their cells,
meaning they have high regenerability,
actually should have low cancer incidence
because of this ability to control cell behaviors
towards adaptive anatomical outcomes.
And so from that perspective,
regeneration and cancer should be
at opposite ends of the spectrum.
And in fact, augmenting regeneration
may then be a promising approach to normalize cancer.
And so it turns out that actually the evidence,
all of the evidence supports this view.
Animals that are good at regenerating
tend to be very cancer resistant.
And so that turns out to be interesting and important.
And I wanna show you one creature
that in particular epitomizes this.
This is the planarian flatworm.
They have a true brain.
They are similar to our direct ancestor.
They have a centralized nervous system.
They have lots of internal organs and so on.
They have this amazing ability
that you can cut them into pieces.
The record is something like 275 pieces.
So you can cut them into pieces.
Every piece knows exactly
what a correct planarian should look like
and regenerates everything that's missing.
You get a perfect little worm.
In fact, everything, the remaining piece scales down
so that everything ends up being the correct proportion
and then eventually it will scale back up.
These guys not only are regenerative, they're immortal.
They literally have no lifespan limit.
They, there's no such thing as an old planarian of this kind.
They are very cancer resistant.
And all of this in the context of a mix-employed genome.
If you look at their genomes,
the cells could have different numbers of chromosomes.
Their genomes are a total mess.
And if we have time later at the end of the talk,
we can talk about why that is, I think it's a deep thing.
But what they're telling you is that it's possible
to be a very long-lived creature,
despite having a really chaotic genome
and also be cancer resistant.
So I want to, for a little bit,
so the first part of the talk,
I want to for a few minutes just kind of think about
that broader context,
this idea of multicellularity versus cancer
and what's going on here.
So the first thing to realize is that
I think that the right question isn't why is there cancer.
The right question is,
why is there anything but cancer ever?
Because what we are made of are things like this.
So this is a free-living organism,
but this is a single cell.
This is called the lacrimaria.
And you can see that it's actually very competent
in its environment.
It's got this local,
little very, very tiny sort of a light cone
of the goals that it pursues.
And it's very competent in the control of its morphology,
of its physiology, metabolic, and so on.
And it has little tiny single cell agendas.
It's going to reproduce as much as it can.
It's going to go wherever life is good.
It's going to explore.
It's going to feed and dump entropy into the environment.
And this is the sort of thing that we are all made of.
So that raises an interesting question.
Why do these kind of creatures
who have lots of different competencies
in their own single cell goals,
why do they come together during multicellularity
to do this?
This is what happens with us.
This is a cross-section through a human torso.
You can see the incredible complexity and order.
Everything is most of the time in the right size and shape
and position and relative,
sitting next to the right thing and so on.
But we all start life as a collection
of embryonic blastomers.
And so all of these cells have to reliably get
to something like this.
And we need to ask the question,
first of all, how do they do it?
But also, where does this anatomical pattern come from?
How do they know what to build?
And the typical answer to this is,
people say, well, DNA, you've got a human genome,
so what else is it going to build?
And actually, this is very far from a satisfying answer
because we can read genomes now and we know what's there.
What's there is the specification of proteins,
the tiniest pieces of hardware
that these cells have to deploy.
But there's actually nothing in the genome
that talks about the size, the shape,
the symmetry type of the organism.
So we need to understand how this collective,
using the hardware that it's been given by its genome,
does all of the information processing
needed to build what it's supposed to build,
to stop when it's done.
How could we, of course, as workers in Regenerate Medicine,
we ask, how could we ask these cells
to rebuild a piece that's missing?
And in particular, what happens
when this amazing process breaks down
and what happens is cancer?
And I just want to point out why this genetic information
is not sufficient because you might think,
well, we've had genomics and molecular biology
for many decades now.
I mean, aren't we getting a handle of all this?
And let's just do a thought experiment.
Here's an axolotl larvae,
and baby axolotls have little forearms.
This is a tadpole of the frog that we work with.
They, at these stages, do not have any limbs.
In our lab, and this is, we actually do this,
this is more than a thought experiment,
we make something called a frog-olotl.
So frog-olotl is a combination of axolotl cells
and frog cells, and they make a chimeric embryo.
Now, we've got the axolotl genome, it's been sequenced.
We've got the frog genome, that's been sequenced.
Now I ask the question, can anybody tell me
if these frog-olotls are going to have legs or not?
And you can't.
And despite the fact that we have the genomics
and we have some understanding
of the molecular biology of these cells,
no one can make a prediction a priori
of whether these frog-olotls are going to have legs.
And that's because while we understand
the molecular components inside of cells,
we really don't understand how groups of cells
make large-scale decisions about what they're going to make.
And this is something that actually in planaria
is a very stark problem because the species
that we work with reproduced by fission and regeneration.
So they rip themselves in half and then they regenerate.
That's how they reproduce.
And when you do that, what happens is that
every somatic mutation that doesn't kill the cell,
it ends up being amplified into the next generation
as regeneration happens.
So they have somatic inheritance.
So these body mutations propagate continuously.
This is why their genome is so incredibly chaotic
because they just keep everything that happens to them.
They don't clean them the way
that sexual reproducing organisms do.
And despite all of that, despite all of this chaotic genome,
they have 100% regenerative fidelity
and they're very cancer resistant.
It's pretty scandalous when you compare that
to what we learn in basic biology
that the animal with the craziest genome
actually has the least susceptibility to cancer,
the best anatomical fidelity and so on.
And so we're getting better at the mechanisms of biology
but we really don't understand the algorithms yet.
And so what we're interested in are these questions.
How are individual cell decisions
harnessed towards large-scale anatomical goals?
And if we understood this, it's not just about cancer.
We would have the answer to birth defects,
traumatic injury, degenerative disease,
and be able to make all kinds of synthetic
living machines and so on.
So this is how we approach the cancer problem.
And specifically, we really think a lot
about anatomical homeostasis.
The most amazing thing about regeneration
is that it knows when to stop.
So here's an axolotl.
These guys regenerate their limbs, their eyes,
their jaws, portions of the brain, the heart.
They regenerate their tail, including spinal cord,
ovaries, just amazing as adults.
And what happens is you can amputate anywhere
along the axis of the limb
and they will regrow exactly what's needed,
no more, no less, and then they stop.
When do they stop?
They stop when the correct salamander arm
has been completed.
So now it's clear that this is as a collective,
this structure actually has a really good idea
of what the final steps are supposed to be.
And we know that because it stops the proliferation,
the morphogenesis, everything stops when they get there.
By the way, this isn't just for frogs and worms.
Of course, human livers are highly regenerative.
Even the ancient Greeks knew that.
I have no idea how they knew that back in those days.
Human children regenerate their fingertips.
So a clean amputation at a fairly young age,
if you don't sew the skin over,
will eventually result in a normal,
normal, cosmetically acceptable finger.
And deer, when they regenerate their antlers,
they grow up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day.
So here's a large adult mammal growing massive amounts
of new bone, vasculature, innervation, skin, and so on.
So what we really would like to do is to move
from the questions of molecular biology
and the community is quite good
at getting this kind of information,
what genes and proteins interact with each other,
to really try to understand the large scale decision making
of complex organs.
And you can think about the journey
that computer science took.
So this is what programming looked like
in the 1940s and 50s.
And what's important about this is that you can see,
in order to program this computer,
what she's doing is she's physically rewiring it, right?
The focus is on the hardware.
So she's there plugging wires back and forth.
And the idea is that in order to control this machine
and make it do something else,
you have to physically interact with the hardware.
And this of course,
the reason we have this amazing
information technology revolution
is that we've moved away from that.
I mean, some people still work on hardware,
but the vast majority of us don't need to have a soldering iron
when we wanna switch from Photoshop
to Microsoft Word on your laptop,
because we've learned to take advantage
of the reprogrammability of the device.
And so I'm going to argue that biology
is highly reprogrammable
and that this is really what we need to do.
We need to move biology and medicine
towards understanding that
because all of the current excitement in the field
is all about the hardware.
So CRISPR, genomic editing,
rewiring molecular pathways, protein engineering,
all of this stuff is focused on the hardware.
And the kind of software competencies I'm talking about
are the sorts of things that you see, for example, here.
So this is something we discovered a few years ago.
Tapols need to become frogs.
And in order to become a frog,
they have to rearrange their face.
So the eyes have to move,
the nostrils have to move, the jaws,
everything has to move.
And it used to be thought
that this was a hardwired process
that basically every organ just moves
in the right direction, the right amount,
and there you go, you have your frog.
Well, so we decided to test that idea
and to see if there was in fact more intelligence
to this process, how do you test for intelligence?
You perturb the system in a novel way
and you see if it still has the ability
to have its goals met despite starting
in the new configuration.
This is William James' definition of intelligence.
Basically it says same goal by different means, right?
How competent is the system?
So what we did was we created
what we call Picasso tapols.
So everything is in the wrong place.
The eyes on top of the head, the jaws are off to the side,
the things are complete mess.
And if all it was doing was moving each organ
in the right direction, the right amount,
the frog would be equally messed up
because you're starting in a incorrect configuration.
In fact, what we found is that these animals
make quite normal frogs
because all of this stuff is gonna move in novel paths.
In fact, sometimes it goes too far
and actually has to double back and come back,
but all of them will move around
and rearrange relative to each other
until they get to a correct frog face.
So what evolution has given us here
is not a hardwired system that makes certain movements.
It's given us an error minimization scheme
that is able to continue to operate
until a particular morphological goal has been met.
And so it has lots of different types of feedback.
And so this is the kind of paradigm that we all learned.
It's based on genetics and emergence,
this idea that the gene regulatory networks
will create proteins, they interact with each other
using local rules.
And then eventually there's emergence of complexity.
Something complex happens like this salamander.
And that's true, this does happen,
but it's only a part of the story
and I think not even the main part.
The main part is that this hardware that is produced
has this amazing ability to implement
anatomical homeostasis.
When the system is deviated by injury, by mutations,
by teratogens, pathogens, whatever, when it's deviated,
there are feedback loops that kick in
both at the level of transcription
and at the level of physics.
And this is the one we're gonna talk about
that try to get you back to where you need to be.
It's an error minimization process
like the thermostat in your house.
It's a basic homeostatic loop.
Now the thing about homeostatic loops
is that they have to have a set point.
So this is a very unconventional,
I mean, of course, biologists know all about feedback loops,
but typically these feedback loops are scalar.
There's a single numbers like pH
or hunger level, things like that.
Here, the set point actually has to be a description
of a fairly complex anatomical structure,
not to the individual cell level of detail,
but some level of anatomical description.
And in general, we're not encouraged in biology
to think about goals or final states or anything like that.
We're encouraged to think about molecular mechanisms
and what the emergent qualities are
of that complex dynamical system.
But here, the cybernetic view really forces you
to think about is it possible
that the system literally stores a set point
of what it's supposed to build?
And what it's doing is like any homeostatic system
it tries to reduce the error to that set point.
So this is what we've been doing for years now.
We've taken this very strong and counterintuitive prediction
that this thing literally knows
what shape it's supposed to grow.
And the prediction is that we should be able
to find that encoding.
We should be able to decode it, right?
So whatever biophysical medium holds it,
we should be able to decode it.
And then we should be able to rewrite it.
And if we rewrite it, something amazing should happen,
which is that in typical approach to this problem,
if you believe only in emergence,
that means that all your interventions
have to be down here.
You have to make changes here,
maybe with CRISPR, maybe something else.
You make changes down here
and eventually they percolate up.
But the limiting factor there is for complex,
beyond single gene diseases,
the question is how do you know which genes to manipulate
for a complex outcome?
You generally don't,
because this whole process is not reversible.
It's a really terrible inverse problem.
However, if there is in fact a stored pattern
that the cells are working towards,
then you've got a different approach.
You might be able to change the pattern.
The way you do in your thermostat
when you change the set point,
you don't need to know how the rest of the system works.
You just need to know how to change the set point
and rely on it to do what it does best,
which is to try to get to that set point.
So here's how we think about this,
that basically what evolution has done
is scale up using a particular kind of interaction
that I'll tell you about shortly,
scale up competent single cell systems
into something like this,
where the goals get much bigger
instead of single cell level goals
of metabolism and proliferation.
The goal here is to maintain this kind of thing.
And if you deviate from that goal,
the system will very commonly go back
and try to build it.
But there's a breakdown of that cooperation
and that scale up and that breakdown is cancer.
So this is human glioblastoma cells crawling around.
And I'm gonna make the argument
that what this kind of a process really is
is a breakdown of this coordination system
that is scaling up from tiny goals of single cells
to anatomical goal states in an anatomical morphous space.
And that process breaks down into cancer.
So that suggests that we ought to be able to,
this way of thinking about it,
which sort of weaves together embryogenesis regeneration
and cancer as a problem of information control
in particular of scaling of goals in biology,
suggests this, that if we really understood this,
we should be able to develop strategies
that don't just kill the cancer cells,
which are of course problematic
because you get that compensatory proliferation
tumor resistance and all that.
Instead of trying to kill them,
could we try to reconnect them more strongly
to the signals that normally keep them working together
towards making nice organs?
And that requires us to know what are these signals?
How do cells remember what the whole thing
is supposed to be?
Because no individual cell knows how many fingers
a salamander limb is supposed to have,
but the collective certainly does.
So the question is, how does that scaling happens?
How do you go from single cell information
to large scale anatomical goals?
And this is where we get into bioelectricity.
Now, bioelectricity is just one layer
of a complex morphogenetic field of information
that all cells have access to.
I'm gonna spend the next half an hour
talking about bioelectricity,
not because I think bioelectricity
is the only thing that matters,
all of these things are important,
chemical signals, extracellular matrix,
biophysical pressures and tensions and so on,
all those things matter.
But this is a particularly interesting and important layer
and that's the one that I'm going to talk about.
And this morphogenetic field is there guiding
the large scale system throughout lifespan
from basic embryonic development
all the way through maintenance, resistance to aging
and all of that.
So what are bioelectrical signals?
Well, every membrane, every cell,
not just neurons, but every cell in your body
has these ion channels and in fact,
there are also gap junctions in them
and these ion channels let charged molecules in and out
and as a result, you get a voltage gradient
across the membrane.
So every cell has a voltage gradient across that membrane.
Now, it just so happens that if you take
different kinds of cells,
and this is just a small sample of the data
and you put them a lot,
you sort of throw them on a scale
from depolarized to hyperpolarized,
you get a very interesting relationship.
So your mature quiescent cell types tend to be up here,
strongly polarized, your proliferative cells
such as embryonic stem cells
and other embryonic types of cells tend to be down here
as do cancer cells.
Now, this is as interesting as this is,
I always hesitate to show the slide
because people really like this
and it takes away attention from the fact
that I don't think any of this
is really a single cell level problem.
I don't think cancer is a single cell disease,
but this kind of focuses your attention
on the individual voltage of a single cell,
but it's actually much more interesting than that.
It is true that this voltage controls
all kinds of cell properties
that are important for cancer.
It controls differentiation, apoptosis,
cell migration, cell shape and so on.
But the story is actually much more interesting
than this single cell behavior
because as we start to think about
how is it that collections of cells
can store memories of what to do?
The most obvious example of that
is the nervous system and the brain.
So each of us exists as a coherent individual
over and above the many neurons that are in our brains
because of bioelectrical signaling in your brain
that serves an important function.
It works as a kind of cognitive glue.
And what it does is it allows
information processing in networks.
So while individual cells
have these voltage dynamics and so on,
what they do is they propagate those electrical states
through various kinds of synapses
such as these gap junctions to their neighbors.
And it's the movement of these electrical signals
through the network that binds them together
towards computations that can underlie cognition
and the appearance of an individual
that is more than the sum of their parts.
So this hardware allows a kind of interesting software.
This group made this amazing video of a zebrafish,
a living zebrafish brain and everything that's going on
as this animal thinks about whatever it is
that fish think about.
And you can see, you can track all the electrical activity
and there's this goal of neural,
it's called neural decoding,
this idea of being able to read out
this electrophysiology over time and decoded
so that you know what the animal is thinking.
You should be able to,
I mean, that's the commitment of neuroscience
is that from this pattern,
you should be able to recover the memories,
the goals, the preferences,
the behavioral competencies of this animal.
They're all encoded in this electrical activity.
But it turns out that actually every part of your body
has these ion channels,
most cells have these electrical synapses
with their neighbors.
And so we wondered,
could we extend neuroscience beyond neurons
and ask the same neural decoding kind of question,
except outside of the nervous system,
let's say in an embryonic tissue or in a nascent tumor,
could we read out the conversations
that these cells are having
and try to understand what the collective is going to do?
By tracking the individual voltage states of each cell.
And so this is not a model,
this is actual data of a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye.
This was a technique first developed by my colleague,
Danny Adams, who made this video
of an early frog embryo developing
and the idea is to be able to decode
what the collective is going to build.
And so I'm gonna show you here,
this is grayscale, but it's the same idea.
It's a voltage reporting dye.
And you see here, this is a time lapse
of a frog embryo putting its face together.
And there's all kinds of interesting things happening.
This is one frame from that video.
What you see in that frame is that long before
the genes come on to pattern the face
and long before the anatomy of the face is established,
you can read out the pattern
that it's going to make in the future.
Here's where the eye is going to be,
here's where the mouth is going to be,
here are the placodes.
We call this the electric face.
It is literally the pre-pattern or the tissue memory
of what a correct face is supposed to look like.
If you perturb this pattern at all,
you change the gene expression
and then you change the anatomy.
This is instructive, it is required
for the normal face to take shape.
This is a pathological pattern,
which we'll talk more about this momentarily,
which is when we inject human oncogenes
and they make a tumor and eventually it starts
to metastasize, you can detect this process
as long before it actually happens
by tracking the voltage of the cells.
And you can see here that these cells
have already electrically decoupled from their neighbors.
And when they do that,
they're basically reverting to a single cell,
a unicellular ancient past.
As far as they're concerned,
then the rest of the animal is just environment to them.
All they're going to do is the unicellular goals.
They're going to proliferate,
they're going to migrate to where metabolically favorable
and so on.
And so you can detect this breakdown of multicellularity.
So what we've been doing is developing tools
first to track and characterize these bioelectrical gradients,
lots of computational modeling to link them
to the ion channels and pumps that are there.
And the most important thing of course
is the functional tools to rewrite the pattern.
It's one thing to read it
and be able to see what the electrical states
in the collective are,
but critically you have to manipulate them
and try to write in the language of neuroscience,
you're trying to incept false memories into the tissues
or change the electrical pre-patterns
that guide their activities.
So the way you do that,
we don't use any kinds of applied fields.
There are no electrodes, there are no magnets,
there are no electromagnetic waves or radiation,
nothing like that.
What we're using is we're exploiting the native interface
that cells exposed to each other.
This is how the cells program each other natively
in the body.
They're using this interface of these ion channels
and these gap junctions, and we can use them too.
We can use pharmacological, molecular genetic,
or in fact optical with optogenetics.
We can control the gap junctions
and we can turn the channels on and off in spatial patterns
and thus we can imprint new bioelectrical memories
into tissues.
Now the next question is well,
what happens when you do that, right?
What's the evidence that these patterns
are actually instructive for anything?
Couldn't they just be a readout of housekeeping physiology,
you know, an epiphenomenal?
How do we know they matter?
Well, we know they matter
because now that we have these tools,
we can start to rewrite the pattern.
I'm gonna show you what happens
when you rewrite the pattern.
So one thing you can do,
I showed you the electric face
which has a particular kind of pattern
that determines where the eye is going to be built.
Well, we can recapitulate that pattern somewhere else.
We can put it anywhere on the embryo that we want.
When you do that, so you inject,
in this case, we inject an RNA
for a specific potassium channel
that sets that little voltage pattern.
And wherever those cells get that information,
they will build an eye.
For example, they might have been gut cells before,
but if you tell them to build an eye,
they will build an eye.
Now, those eyes will have all the right lens,
right now optic nerve,
all the right stuff that belongs there.
Note the incredible modularity.
This is, we didn't provide enough information
of how you build an eye.
We didn't try to control gene expression levels
or all the different stem cells that need to happen
or all the different morphogenetic movements.
We didn't say any of that.
We provided a very simple bioelectrical pattern
that serves as a subroutine call.
All it does is it encodes for the rest of the cells.
It encodes the information, build an eye right here.
And in fact, so this is a cross section
through a lens created this way.
What happens is the blue cells
are marked with beta galactosidase.
They're the ones we actually injected.
If there's not enough of them to build an eye,
they will actually recruit their neighbors.
All this other stuff out here
that's making this nice lens
was never manipulated by us in any way.
It's only the blue cells that we targeted.
So you see one of the competencies here,
not only is there a subroutine
you can call to make a complex organ,
but actually if you don't hit enough cells,
they will have a conversation with their neighbors
and recruit them the way that another collective intelligence,
for example, ants will also recruit their buddies
if they come across something
that's too big of a job for the few of them.
It scales to the task at hand.
Automatically, we didn't have to do anything for that.
The body already does it.
We tell these cells to make an eye
and they tell their neighbors
that you guys need to participate
so that we can all make a properly shaped lens.
So if you do that, you can make a topic for brains here.
This is what a normal frog brain looks like.
You can make extra limbs, lots of extra limbs.
You can make a topic beating hearts.
You can make otocysts,
which are inner ear sort of balance organs.
And you can even make fins.
Now that's interesting
because tadpoles aren't supposed to have fins.
That's more of a fish thing, but we'll talk about that.
And you can also use this technique to repair birth defects.
So just kind of very briefly,
this is the pattern that indicates
what a frog brain should look like
and the size and shape of it.
And it's got a very particular voltage characteristic.
If you sort of scan along this line,
it kind of looks like this bell curve.
And what we figured out is that
there are many teratogens, for example, nicotine, alcohol,
think fetal alcohol syndrome, things like that.
But what they do is they ruin this nice pattern.
So they'll flatten it out either here or here.
And in either case, you get severe brain defects.
And so we made a computational model of this process
as in what happens to the bioelectrics
under various perturbations.
And we asked the model,
if the bioelectric pattern is wrong, how would we fix it?
In other words, what channel would we open or close
to get the pre-pattern back to the right place?
So keep in mind, this isn't, at this point,
what we're doing here, this is rational repair.
We're not taking random shots in the dark.
We're not trying to ruin an existing pattern.
We're actually trying to use our computational simulator
of bioelectric gradients to ask how to repair
a complex organ when it's been damaged.
And this model proposed one specific thing,
which is this very interesting channel called HCN2.
And when you activate these HCN2 channels, sure enough,
an embryo that's been,
here's what a normal brain looks like,
forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain.
This is an embryo actually now.
Now, this is much worse than being hit with a teratogen.
This is a mutation in a gene called notch.
Notch is a really important neurogenesis gene.
If you mutate notch, there is no forebrain,
the midbrain and hindbrain are a big bubble.
These animals have no behavior.
They just lay there doing nothing.
On top of this mutation,
if you impose the right bioelectrical pattern,
and this was done by opening the HCN2 channel,
which in turn was suggested by the computational model,
you rescue brain shape, you rescue brain gene expression,
and you even rescue their IQ.
So they're learning rates.
We check their IQs by learning and training
on the various assays to get their IQs back.
So this is quite amazing.
You can do this molecular genetically,
meaning put in new HCN2 channels,
which would be gene therapy,
or you can do it with drugs that open existing HCN2 channels.
So these happen to be two anti-epileptics
that open the HCN2 channel and you can do this rescue.
I'm not claiming that this will work for everything,
but the amazing thing about this example
is that there's a hardware problem.
They literally have a mutant notch signaling pathway,
in which case things go terribly wrong,
but that hardware problem is fixable in software
by going back in and telling these cells
what the correct pattern is.
And I think that's very powerful.
And so that's an example of repairing birth defects.
Here's an example of some of our regenerative work,
because frogs by themselves do not regenerate their legs
after they lose them,
but we've come up with a cocktail
that actually induces a pro-regenerative blastema
with MSX1, and then eventually by 45 days,
instead of nothing, you start to get toes and a toenail,
and then eventually a pretty respectable leg
that's touch sensitive and motile.
This whole interaction with our ionophore cocktail
took 24 hours, and then the leg can grow for a year and a half
without us touching it.
It's not about micromanaging where the stem cells go
or what the pattern is.
It's about communicating to the cell collective very early on.
You're going to take the path through morphospace
that goes towards leg building,
not the path that goes to scarring and a stump.
So we are now, and I have to do a disclosure here
because Dave Kaplan and I are co-founders
of this company called Morphosuticals,
where we're trying to apply that same strategy to mammals
and hopefully eventually to human patients.
Of course, we're quite far from that still,
but okay, so the summary of everything that I've said so far
is that like in the brain,
the mechanism that binds cells
towards large scale common purpose,
meaning to create and upkeep against aging,
against cancer, complex organs
are specifically bioelectrical networks.
Modifying the information processed
by these electrical networks
offers some really high level,
meaning creating new organs,
fixing complex organ shapes and so on,
control over growth and patterning without genomic editing,
without bottom up trying to engineer all of the pathways
that are involved in this.
We're harnessing the competencies of the system,
like recruiting other cells like size control,
shape control and all that.
And so now, and so now here we get finally to,
and you can read about all the details here,
but we're finally getting now to the part
that's directly about cancer.
So if these bioelectrical signals are important for cancer,
then four things should be true.
First of all, there should be some implication
by molecular data of ion channel pumps
and proteins in cancer.
Bioelectric signatures should be a viable diagnostic tool
for detecting tumors early.
We should be able to induce cancer-like phenotypes
by disrupting proper V-MEM gradients.
And best of all, cancer-like phenotypes
should be suppressable by the modulation of V-MEM gradients.
So these are all predictions of this view
that bioelectrics is the mechanism
that binds individual cells towards organogenesis
and away from the kind of single cell behavior
that we see among cancer cells.
So these data now are actually quite old,
and I should update this, but even by 2016,
it was already seen there's this kind of very rapid rise
of the number of papers implicating various ion channels
in cancer, and there are lots of bona fide oncogenes
implicated in both in human patients and in mouse models,
and of course, in frog and zebrafish and so on,
that are pointing to a direct functional role
of various ion channels.
So this is the kind of molecular biology data.
You can scan databases.
So here is from a geodatabase
that looks at the expression of certain channels during,
and so you can see here's a particular ion channel,
and here it is in normal cells and benign evi,
and then boom, by the time you get to malignant cells,
it tends to be shut off.
So yes, there's evidence implicating ion channel genes
and so on in the process of cancer,
but the genes aren't key, and this is really important.
We cannot just think about oncogenes
the way we think about transcription factors
and growth regulators and cell cycle checkpoints and so on.
It's the physiological state that matters here.
And so what I mean by that is,
I've shown you that we can induce,
we can take different kinds of oncogenes,
human oncogenes throw them in a frog embryo
and they will create tumors.
You can detect them early by using this voltage dye,
and we were of course working on this
as a diagnostics modality,
because you can see immediately
that the first thing these oncogenes do
is they shut down the electrical connectivity
between cells and their neighbors.
As soon as that connectivity is shut down,
these cells are out of the network
and the process is large-scale information,
like, hey, you should be part of a nice liver
or skin or whatever,
and they're back to a local, tiny set of goals
that their unicellular ancestors had.
And so contrary to a lot of models
of cancer and game theory and so on,
these cells are not more selfish.
It's not that they're more selfish,
it's that their self is tinier, it's much smaller.
It's now down to their computational boundaries,
now down to the size of a single cell,
whereas before when they were electrically connected
into this network,
they were part of something
that was working on much bigger projects,
you know, these anatomical constructions.
And so you could imagine,
and this is an artist's rendering,
but this is one of the things that we're working on,
this is kind of like augmented reality device
where you can imagine during surgery,
the doctor's wearing these goggles
and the surgeon can see the area, of course,
but overlaid onto the anatomy
is an AI-processed probability landscape
that shows based on the electrical signaling.
So there's a voltage sensitive dye in there.
And these are generally very well tolerated, these dyes.
And so you should be able to look down and see,
okay, here's where the major tumors,
but actually these cells up here
are leaving the collective as well
and you better get them.
So, okay, so that's our story
of the diagnostic potential of this.
Now, here's the second thing I promised,
which is can you actually induce a cancer phenotype
by disrupting the bioelectric?
So this is a normal tadpole head.
These little black cells are melanocytes
and here's what normal,
the normal complement of melanocytes looks like.
And what we did was we disrupted
the electrical communication
between a very specific cell type,
we call them instructor cells
for obvious reasons you'll see in a minute,
and these melanocytes.
There are no oncogenes here, there are no carcinogens,
there's no mutation, no DNA damage,
there's nothing wrong with the hardware of these animals.
They haven't been exposed to any carcinogens,
there's nothing wrong with them, except that
we've temporarily perturbed the communication
between these pigment cells and this other cell population.
When you do that, the pigment cells go completely wild.
They over proliferate, you can see here,
they've taken over like this normal periocular space
that's normally quite clear,
they've taken over there everywhere.
In fact, these animals turn pitch black,
there's melanocytes everywhere.
If you take a section through them,
this is the neural tube here,
and you can see one, two, three, four,
these small numbers normally in normal embryos,
small numbers of these nice round little melanocytes.
Well, when the bioelectric signals aren't there
to tell them what to do, they go crazy,
they revert back to their original kinds of behaviors,
they change shape drastically,
they acquire these long projections,
they're exploring their environment,
they're digging into the neural tube,
to the nerve tissue itself,
to the lumen inside the space,
they just invade all the organs here,
you can see the blood vessels,
so normally quite clear these blood vessels.
Here we go, the melanocytes are hitting the vasculature
and propagating through it.
This is basically a full-on metastatic melanoma
in these guys.
There's nothing, there are no genetic defects,
there are no, if you were to sequence the genome,
you would not see any mutations, nothing like that,
although by this stage, you will see things like markers
of epithelial and mesenchymal transition
and things like that.
Now, and so this works also in human melanocytes
exactly the same way, they will go completely crazy
if you disrupt their bioelectrical state.
Now, here's the most interesting thing to keep in mind.
Here's again, the cross-section
and here are these crazy melanocytes that are digging in
and taking over the brain and so on.
These are not the cells that we manipulated.
These blue cells out here are the ones that we manipulated.
This is not a cell-autonomous event,
meaning that the thing that goes crazy
is not the cell whose voltage has been perturbed,
it's other cells in the environment,
it's the importance, and of course I'm not the first person
to talk about the importance of the microenvironment,
but in particular, the bioelectrical properties
of the microenvironment are the switch
that leads from normal melanocytes
into this crazy converted melanoma-like behavior.
And the way it works,
and I won't have time to go through all this,
but it's actually a serotonergic signal
that normally goes from these instructor cells
to the melanocytes.
And if you perturb the bioelectrics
of this instructor cell,
that serotonergic process goes awry
and these melanocytes are left on their own
and they do what they do,
they do what every amoeba does,
they over proliferate,
they crawl wherever they feel like,
they take over the environment.
And we've studied in great detail
on this whole serotonergic pathway
and the downstream gene expression
and the gene regulatory network and so on.
But the importance of this part of the talk is this.
This one way to get cancer,
I'm not saying it's the only way,
but one significant way to have a carcinogenic transformation
is to have cells that are isolated
from the electrical information
that normally keeps them orchestrated
towards proper functionality and morphogenesis and so on.
And oncogenes trigger this,
but there are other ways to trigger this.
Okay, so the final thing I wanna show you
is the thing that we actually want,
we don't want to create more cancer,
obviously we want a treatment modality.
So here it is.
So one of the things we can do
is we can inject these oncogenes,
even nasty K-RAS mutations and so on.
The oncogene is labeled with fluorescent red protein
in this case, tomato, so you can see it.
Here it is.
And what we know is that if we co-inject
a particular ion channel, RNA,
that we've chosen to resist, to basically fight.
So what this oncogene is gonna do
is it's gonna try to tell the cells to depolarize
and disconnect from their neighbors.
This ion channel is gonna dominate that.
It's gonna say, fine, you have the oncogene,
but you're not gonna be able to depolarize.
We're gonna keep you connected to all of the neighbors.
So this is the same animal.
So here's the bolus of where the oncoprotein was expressed.
In fact, it's all over the place.
If you sequence this and you say, wow,
this thing is full of this oncogene,
definitely gonna make a tumor and there is no tumor.
Because what drives the outcome
is not the genetic state, it's the physiological state.
And if you manage, now I've already shown you an example
that I've shown you in the frog brain, right?
You could have a notch mutation
and if you sequence it, the prediction would be,
why are you gonna have terrible defects?
But that's not actually what drives.
What drives is the bioelectric state.
And so you can override this hardware defect
with a particular physiological state.
And then these same cells, they're not dead,
they don't die, they just continue participating
in normal morphogenesis.
Now you can do this with light.
Here's an example of optogenetics.
So we just used optogenetic technology
that we took from neuroscientists
and you can knock down the incidence of these tumors
significantly by using light
to trigger the right kind of channel.
In fact, here's a normal tackle and here's the tail.
Whether you get a tumor and these kind of metastatic events,
whether you get a tumor or whether you get an ectopic eye
is determined by the amount of sodium in the medium.
Because in this case, we were using a sodium ion channel
to do this and the sodium ion channel,
it's not like a transcription factor
that always has the same effect.
It's a physiological, it's an element of physiology
that in part its activity depends on how much sodium there is.
So whether you get a tumor or an eye
is actually determined by a physiological parameter,
namely how much sodium is in the medium,
not at the level of DNA damage or anything like that.
And so putting all this together,
our kind of our framework for addressing all this
is this idea of electraceuticals,
of using existing ion channel drugs
with our computational models
that tell us what's going to happen
when you open and close certain channels.
You know which channels there are
because of course, human tissues are extensively profiled.
So that feeds into the model.
The one thing that is largely missing today
is the physiomics of what are the correct
by electrical states for all the organs.
We actually have no idea for humans
and we only know this for certain animal model systems.
So this is where a lot of the work has to happen
is actually to understand what the correct
by electrical state is.
But then we have a simulator that can tell you
how to get from the wrong state to the correct state.
And that helps you pick from existing,
from a huge library, something like 20% of all drugs
are ion channel drugs.
And it's potentially a huge library of electraceuticals.
And so you can play with this a little bit.
This is online kind of the beginnings
of this platform.
It's freely accessible.
You can pick different types of tissues.
You can pick either cancers or normal.
It will tell you what channels there are.
If you pick specific channels, it'll tell you what drugs
because you can search a drug bank and so on.
It'll tell you what drugs you might want to use.
And so we've begun this process.
So now moving this from frog and so on,
this is our first paper on human glioblastomates in vitro.
And what we're using is some of these drugs
that were picked by this process that I just told you
on glioblastoma cells.
And there are all kinds of interesting effects
in terms of preventing proliferation,
in terms of partial reprogramming,
so differentiation, possibly normalization.
So stay tuned.
This is very much work in progress.
And of course, we need in vivo experiments.
But we're slowly moving now into mammalian context.
So here's the summary of the whole thing.
Cancers are fundamentally a disorder
of the scaling of cellular competencies.
Individual cells can get certain goals met,
for example, overgrowth and migration.
But in normal bodies,
they are kept harnessed towards much larger,
sort of grandiose anatomical goals,
but this process can break down.
And that process is mediated by bioelectrical signaling,
which is why bioelectrics can be used to detect,
induce and reprogram cancer cell behavior.
Just like in the nervous system,
we can instruct cell behavior
without having to change the genome.
This is also true in learning
and all the amazing things that nervous systems do.
They don't, you don't need to change your genome
to learn new things or to acquire new goals and so on.
And we are now developing pharmacological
and optical strategies towards discovery
of electroseuticals for normalizing cancer.
And there's a huge role for machine learning and AI and so on,
but also for getting this physiomic data
that basically has been neglected
in favor of transcriptomics and proteomics and so on.
So the future directions what we and our partners
are working on is to refine that physiological signature.
So optical noninvasive diagnostics for pre-cancer
and also tumor margins and surgery
to refine control methods for voltage in mammalian systems.
And specifically the bigger picture here
is to crack the bioelectric code
to induce normalization towards normal tissues and organs
using ion channel drugs that are already in human use,
meaning they're already approved.
So I will stop here.
I want to thank the students and postdocs
that did all the work, our many collaborators,
technicians, our funders.
I have to do two disclosures.
So Morphosuticals is the limb regeneration company,
Estonishing Labs is a company that we're doing
all the cancer diagnostics with.
And most of all, thank the animal model systems
because they do all the heavy lifting.
So thank you and I will take questions.
