Ilya Prigogin was born in Moscow in 1917 and his professor at the Université Libre de
Bruxelles and the Institute of Statistical Mechanics of Austin, Texas.
He directs over 100 researchers in a wide diversity of disciplines from biology to statistical
mechanics.
He is the founder of the so-called Brussels School and a pioneer researcher in the modern
thermodynamics of irreversible processes.
Thanks to his work we have a new conception of the role of chance in physics and biology
and he has coined inescapable essential concepts as we have seen in the debates on determinism
and indeterminism, order through fluctuations, dissipative structures, bifurcation theory
and so on.
His impact on philosophical thought has been evident since the publication of his texts,
La Nouvelle Alliance and Only an Illusion.
In 1977 he won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry.
He is indispensable here today.
Professor Prigogin, thank you very much.
It is a pleasure to be here.
I am sorry to arrive so late but it was just impossible for me to be here earlier.
I want to say that I am very happy to be here and one of the reasons I am very happy to
be here is to be in the Dali Museum.
Since my youth I have been always a great admirer of Dali's work and I believe that some of the
teams which seem to me essential in the work of Dali, the relation between space and time
on one side the pluralism of our vision on the other are also the most important or between
the most important scientific subjects of our time.
One of the very famous writings of Dali is La Conquête de l'Irrationnel.
The question is therefore what is rational and what is not and once we are asking even
this question we are immediately in the middle of the problem of time.
It seemed that the problem of time had been solved once for all by classical science.
As everybody knows classical science presents us a vision of the world which is both deterministic
and time-reversible.
Deterministic once you know the initial conditions you can predict what the future will be like
you could retroject the past if you want and time-reversible which means precisely that
it makes no difference if you consider the future or the past.
More closely to us this I would say statement has been put in a very strong form by Einstein
himself who has said as everybody knows that time as irreversibility is an illusion.
I was always very impressed by this statement which expresses a deep belief in the value
of symbolic thinking.
Everybody knows that time is for everybody of us and essentially mentioned.
Everybody feels time going feels become older and still Einstein was saying that irreversibility
is the main component of existential experience is an illusion.
It is very remarkable that at the beginning of the century there was an agreement between
some of the greatest thinkers, philosophers about the fact on the fact that indeed irreversibility
could not be the subject of science.
I already mentioned Einstein's view which was expressing the fact that our personal
experience of time had to be transcended, had to be purified to become the time of science.
Bergson in a sense reached the same conclusion from an opposite point of view.
He was thinking or estimating that the scientific time was a poorer time.
It was a time reduced to space and to understand existential time you had to go to the concept
of duration which Bergson has been discussing.
Heidegger again came to the conclusion that time was outside the province of science and
in fact Heidegger's analysis was based on one of the most profound analysis of time
which was ever written and that is the analysis of Aristotle written 2,300 years ago.
Aristotle came to a very subtle conclusion, Aristotle came to the conclusion that time
is motion in the perspective of the earlier and the later.
That is a rather complex statement.
In other words, the watch time, the motion of the arrow is not time and indeed it's true,
it's periodic motion.
Therefore it's four before five, four before five, depends on the way in which you think
you look at it.
It is we who have the concept of time because we have the concept of the earlier and the later.
Therefore the question could be answered immediately.
Who gives us then this difference, this feeling for the difference between the earlier and the later?
And already Aristotle discusses the two possibilities.
Either it is the word as a whole some anima mundi which gives us a feeling of the earlier
and the later, or on the contrary it would be the soul, it would be us, the soul who
counts in which it reduces time into a timeless universe.
In other words, the question was very clearly asked, is time uniting men to nature or is
time opposing men to nature?
And what I find so fascinating is that I think in this second part of the century we begin
to be able to give an answer to the questions which have been put so clearly by Aristotle
two thousand three hundred years ago.
Everybody knows that this century has started with two outstanding important new concepts,
conceptual breakthroughs in physics, quantum theory and relativity.
And in some way relativity and quantum theory continue the tradition of classical physics.
In some way I want not to go into details here, even quantum mechanics is a deterministic
theory from the point of view of the wave function.
It is in fact in the second part of the century that the situation has changed and I would
say changed from all directions at the same time.
Who would have thought a few decades ago that all particles with the proper mass would probably
be unstable?
Who would have been imagining that you could speak about a cosmological evolution?
And who would have predicted all these new structures which arise in far from equilibrium
conditions?
Everywhere we see, we see I would say the constructive role of time.
Everywhere we see diversification in stability.
This of course has to change our concept of a law of nature.
Let us not forget that the concept, the western concept of a law of nature has been formulated
in the 17th century, the century of absolute monarchy and the century also of an almighty
God.
And I think we can just not separate the classical idea of a law of nature from its social and
religious connotations.
For God, of course, there could be no difference between past and future.
He knows everything.
It is in the scientist was the representative of God on earth and he also, through science,
would be susceptible to make predictions or to unveil the future as he could unveil
the past.
I think the main content of what I would like to tell you this afternoon is that what we
see emerging now is a different concept of a law of nature.
It is a law of nature in which we as human beings have only a window on reality, a window
of reality which does not, in general, except for very simplified situation, permits extrapolations
to infinite past or infinite future.
I just mentioned that in classical science was essentially related to periodic phenomena
motion of the earth, around the sun, of the moon, around the earth and corresponded, you
could say, to a negation of time.
In the 19th century appeared thermodynamics.
It was the outgrowth of the industrial age.
Everybody knows what are the two laws of thermodynamics.
So the idea of the second law is that there exists a function, the entropy, which is quite
unique properties.
It is the sum of the change of entropy is due to the change of matter and energy with
the outside world, that the entropy flows, and then you have irreversible processes
inside the system which create entropy.
Entropy is a fall like a liquid whose mass would not be conserved.
It increases time going on.
But the second law of thermodynamics was a very unexpected outgrowth of the industrial
age.
It was not formulated by the great mathematician or physicist of the 19th century.
It was formulated by very modest people, physical chemists, engineers, practitioners.
And therefore, it was very natural that immediately, next one, people try to, I would say, to minimize
the second law, to minimize its impact, to consider the situation in which this direction
of time, as it appears in the second law, would be of no importance, and that is equilibrium.
The classical study of the second law was first limited to the end result, to the result
where there was no more any evolution, where all irreversible processes would have stopped,
where there would be no more any privileged direction of time.
That is equilibrium thermodynamics.
And that was really, ah, see the entropy is a function of time, finally the entropy
from isolated system is maximum, and that was really what was studied for a long time.
It is only in the 20th century that people became interested in what happens here.
And the first step was to study the behavior of small deviations, small deviations.
And of course, when you have small deviations in respect to the equilibrium situation, you
can linearize in respect to the deviations.
Everybody knows that when you have linear equations, you have at most one solution.
Therefore, the real interest started only once one became interested in what happens
far from equilibrium.
When the deviation from equilibrium allows, that is the word of non-equilibrium, of strong
non-equilibrium, and far from equilibrium and non-linearity are very connected concepts.
Today, the importance of the far from equilibrium phenomena is well known.
Let me therefore be very brief.
There have been many contributions to this field made by Spanish physicists and chemists.
A very classical example, which I just want to mention for the people from other fields
is the so-called Benarin stability, next one.
An instability which arises when you heat a liquid from below, and at some point you
have the formation of patterns.
You see, when you heat a liquid from below, at some point you have the formation of patterns.
Now the formation of patterns corresponds to supramolecular correlations, correlations
which involve billions of molecules.
So in a sense, you can say that the heat, the energy which you give to the system is
transformed into organization, into space-time pattern.
This is in fact very unexpected, because from the classical point of view, each molecule
could see only the next ones.
Somebody was emphasizing the short range of molecular interactions, but in Benarin stability,
like here, or in chemical-ossiating reactions, in biochemical reactions, which I know very
often, very much studied, you see collective behavior, coherence, appearing as a result
of the far from equilibrium situation.
This is most unexpected.
And today much effort is made in this direction, and I must say that I am still extremely astonished
by the variety of behavior, by the variety of space-time patterns which may appear.
In a sense, once you go to the far from equilibrium condition, you break euclidean invariance,
no more two points play the same role, no more two instance play the same role.
Let me simply emphasize one aspect, next one.
And that is the problem of attractors.
If I take the sun, let's say the earth, and I take a comet, and I take a comet coming
close to the earth.
Of course, the position, the trajectory of the earth will be changed, and once the comet
will go away, the earth will keep the new trajectory.
Therefore, the stability of classical dynamical systems is very limited.
On the contrary, if I take a pendulum, and if I take into account the friction, the pendulum
stops at the point, and that is the point attractor, which is really the simplest example
of strong stability, you see, which people know since many, many years or centuries,
I would say, in this case.
Now one of the discoveries of non-equilibrium physics was the appearance of other type of
attractors.
One of the type of attractors, that was the point attractor.
But another type of attractor is an attractor which is no more a point, but is a trajectory.
Wherever you start, you come here, and that is a limit cycle, and that is the basis of
chemical periodic reactions, biochemical regulation.
And in the last years, there is much more interest in even another type of attractor.
Very briefly, speaking, an attractor which combines ideas of stability and instability,
in which part is that nearby trajectories go away, and still they cannot go away forever,
they come back in some way.
Next one, attractors which, in a sense, I could try to imagine as many, many points
forming a volume or something like that, when it speaks about fractal attractors, but it's
of no importance here, you see?
And therefore the system is all the time jumping from one point to another here, and the general
aspect is an aspect which is not very different from fully developed turbulence, let's say.
Next one.
Now, for example, here's an image of such kind of attractor, you see?
In respect to this point, you have instability, the system is going away, but then it comes
back again, and of course, by going away and coming back, the system is mixed all the
time.
And what I found most remarkable is that in the last two, three years, most interesting
application of this type of attractors have been presented to very different fields, be
it meteorology, or be it brain waves, electrical activity of brain waves, and so on and so
on.
For example, I have taken just an example which has been studied by my colleague Nicholas,
and people interested can find the paper in Nature six months ago or so.
Next one.
You see?
Consider, for example, the temperature, that is the temperature of a million years as recorded
from the depths of the ocean, and you see it is widely fluctuated.
Now, what would be the vision of a classical physicist?
The classical physicist would have said temperature is fluctuating because the temperature is
a result of 100 variables, each of them obeying the simplification, but as many of them, well,
it gives the appearance of high regularity.
But we have no methods due to Ruel, Tachens, Procaccia, and many other people which permit
to analyze the type of attractor, which is below, I would say, this type of time variation.
And the result is that this comes, this time series can be understood as being generated
by deterministic system of only four variables, four variables, therefore, this complicated
variation is not due to a kind of law of large numbers in which there are 100 variables.
It is intrinsically complex, intrinsically unpredictable.
This changes really, I would say, our way of understanding nature around us.
And I just can mention, I have no time to go into this, that also very recent results
have shown that the electrical brain waves in full, in deep sleep, correspond also to
a kind of endogenous, high dimensional attractor.
However, when we are awake, when we look on something, on a painting, then of course
you cannot hope to describe things in terms of a deterministic unstable system, because
then there is an input coming all the time from the outside world.
What is very interesting is that this instability is very complex, which means that we begin
to have the idea that there may be a dynamical evolution in biology leading to very high
dimensional attractors.
Because if you think, for example, let me explain why I think it disturbs, if you think
about an insect, it makes music, but the music is very, very simple.
Of the type of a limit cycle, it's certainly not of an attractor of high dimensionality.
In other words, it may well be that the dynamical structure of the electrical activity has been
evolving during biological evolution, and that the brain, which is high in stability,
is precisely the origin of, I would say, creativity, and so on, coming from this background instability,
which can then be amplified by external, I would say, small changes.
Exactly like here, very small changes in the position of the earth, and so on, can bring
in a new glaciation.
But there is another aspect, and here I come to one of the main themes of Salvador Dali,
the relation between time and space.
Essentially, and I would like to illustrate this very briefly on two examples.
Essentially, how have you to understand a biomolecule, BDNA or whatsoever?
Obviously, a biomolecule is a system which has an order which is with a broken time symmetry.
The broken time symmetry is obvious because you have to read the code in one direction.
They are starting and stopping points, which means that you have to read it.
Exactly you have to read a book or something like that.
Therefore, it's a broken symmetry.
The question is, however such a broken symmetry could have arisen in a natural object, and
that is exactly what I mean by saying we have to understand the inscription of time in space.
The exactly like or in a more complicated situation, for example, is the situation which
I have explained, mentioned a few minutes ago, when I was speaking about the Benarin
stability.
There, the patterns are really the expression of a broken time symmetry.
Now, we would like to understand DNA, let's say, as an expression of a broken time symmetry
and understand how this broken time symmetry has ever arisen.
Now, I cannot give an answer, but I would like to show some very recent result obtained
by a few people from our group, Subaraos and Nicholas and so on, which have essentially
made the following experiment, which is now beginning to be repeated in a real situation
in the United States, in which may have the next one.
We consider a chaotic reaction, and every time one of the variables goes beyond some
threshold, we suppose that it is put in on a polymer, on a polymer chain, and we look
on the structure of the polymer chain.
Now, this structure can be analyzed, and one can show that it is quite remarkable.
It corresponds to a Markov chain, which is oriented, contains an incompressible information
once you know part of the chain you cannot predict what the other part will do, and therefore
it has already many features of biomolecules.
And let me now briefly ask another question.
How do we have to consider cosmology from the point of view of thermodynamics?
Now, you know that the history of cosmology is one of the most dramatic histories of
dissension.
You know that Einstein applied general relativity, came to the idea of the universe as a geometric
object, and you know also that his first model was a static model, and that the first idea
was that his model could not be valid because of Hubble's law, and instability of Einstein's
equation, which showed that you have to go to the metric type of equation of an expanding
universe.
So the first, I would say, drawback of Einstein's static geometrical ideas was to go to a geometrical
changing to a universe which is changing from the geometrical point of view.
Now the next dramatic step was, of course, the discovery of the black body radiation.
Of the black body radiation, which shows that the evolution was not only a geometrical
evolution, but was a thermal evolution.
I regret that I was not here this morning.
I'm sure that Professor Schatzman has spoken about this much better than I can do.
But let me simply remind you what probably has been said.
Therefore, the next step was the idea of an evolving universe with an entropy content.
Next, please.
And then you come, therefore, to the traditional idea of the, I would say, orthodox theory
in which the temperature when I go into the past is increasing all the time, and in which
essentially the entropy of the universe which is here below is a constant, and this going
down comes from the adiabatic expansion of the universe.
Now many people, and I'm not an exception, believe that this cannot be a satisfactory
theory.
Why?
Because it is very difficult to imagine that the universe has started with this strange
high entropy structure which is reflected by this strange, I would say, structure of
the physical universe in which there are photons which are end products.
They cannot do anything.
They cannot be transformed into anything, and variants which are essentially unstable.
The universe is essentially a strange two-component system, one being like the base product and
the other like the carrier of irreversibility, because the protons or whatsoever are either
in metastable state, but they are certainly not decaying, but they are certainly not equilibrium
objects.
Therefore, the view which I would like to advocate, let me give you a very simple example,
next one, would be a view, let's say first I take a very simple example from a physical
chemist point of view.
Suppose I have two components, and I heat one and I cool the other, and because of the
difference of temperature, I have also one component, the black one, predominantly here,
and one component, the white one, predominantly there.
Now suppose I stop the heating, then of course I would have the heat which is already there,
the photons, let's say, and I would have first too many black hairs and too many white hairs.
Therefore I would have one component which is already the base component, and the others
would be slowly going to equilibrium, and that is essentially the view of the physical
universe, in which we have two components, one which is already a base product, in which
there is no arrow of time, except of the change, the geometrical change of the universe, and
the other in which there is still an arrow of time, and the question is then, can we
give a simple interpretation of this strange situation?
Well, in a paper which will soon appear, I've tried to do so by reconsidering the formulation
of the second law of thermodynamics.
In the discussion I can answer questions, I have all the reprint here for people who
are interested, but let me try to schematically express what's going on.
The idea is, well, I think that is too complex, you see, let me give you simply the idea.
The idea is that in Einstein's equation we have two types of realities which are coexisting,
spacetime and matter, and Einstein's equation express a relation between the spacetime and
matter.
Now, while they express a relation between the two, they don't say that the entropy
of matter is equivalent to the entropy of spacetime.
Spacetime can be considered as a much more coherent structure than matter.
You can imagine matter as defects in spacetime structure, if you want, a kind of defect of
all kind of types you can imagine, and therefore you can imagine that in the early stage of
the universe there may have been a transfer of gravitational energy into matter leading
to a burst of entropy.
Now this burst of entropy would then create a large number of waste products, exactly
like my heating in my example two minutes ago, and create organized matter with the breaking
of symmetries, a little like in the Benard instability.
And then in our present stage of the universe, this part which has been created in this burst
of entropy is then slowly decaying to equilibrium.
One has to be careful in the formulations, one has to go to well-defined type of coordinate
systems, next one.
And the result is essentially the following, that now the temperature starts with zero
and the entropy starts with zero.
And here you have a kind of phase change corresponding to what I have just said, and one can show
that this phase change is only possible if it leads to the right ratio of variance to
photons.
In other words, and it appears also at the right time, it is essentially a plank time
or something like that.
And the entropy is, you see, what is the reason of the temperature here?
This is the state of the self-heating, and this is the state of the adiabatic expansion.
The self-heating corresponds to a transformation of the initial geometry of the universe which
was non-nucleogen into the euclidean local structure which we have present.
And this you can study in conformal coordinates for the specialists.
That is really the origin here of this increase of the self-heating.
You can imagine the self-heating as being the transformation of gravitation into heavy
particles which then decay into photons and variants of the type we know today.
The entropy now starts at zero and increases to its constant value corresponding to the
adiabatic evolution we know today.
Now this type of vision seems to indicate that the two famous theories which have been
so much discussed in the past, creation of the universe or steady state universe, are
in fact not so different than what we are thinking.
Because essentially it shows that the space-time structure as we can conceive it today, let's
say, the Minkowski vacuum, is unstable in respect to formation, simultaneous formation
of curvature and matter.
In other words, that irreversible processes may proceed in the vacuum, or better to say
in philosophical terms which I hope Salvador Dali would not have disapproved, time precedes
existence.
Time precedes existence in the sense that every time the conditions would be the right
ones, a new universe could start.
But as the times get involved, maybe perhaps 100 billion years, I really don't know what
it means.
Is 100 billion years very long?
Is this very short?
I really don't know.
You know that there are some civilizations like the Christian civilization which speak
always about very short times.
And you have other civilizations like the Indian civilizations, the Mayas, which speak
about billions of years, I mean.
And finally, I really don't know what is the meaning of time in this connection.
But anyway, whenever you begin to have an explanation of a phenomena, and the two most
striking phenomena in our experience are probably life and the universe, and the classical
perspective, both life and the universe appear nearly as transgressions, as something which
is there, but there was no reason that it would be there.
And then she said life was permitted, not in contradiction with the laws of nature,
but not really expressing the natural laws of nature, how it could be if the laws of
nature would be the motion of the moon around the earth, life has nothing to do with that.
And in the same sense, the existence of the universe appeared to be a unique event in
the perspective of an eternal kind of equilibrium.
Once you go away from this type of concepts, you can conceive on situations which describe
an eternal universe which at the same moment is not static.
It is more similar to a relaxation of theater, which starts, increases the case, and another
part starts somewhere far, increases again, and decays.
So essentially, I think that is the first, at this end, I would say, the first part and
the largest part of my lecture, which is just trying to give you another view on the role
of irreversibility.
It is obvious today, and I hope it will become obvious to all people, that irreversibility
plays a more and more important, constructive role, beat on the level of biomolecules, beat
on the level of meteorology, beat on the level, probably, of cosmology.
In other models, I have no time now to enumerate all models of cosmology, but I can invoke
other type of phase transitions, gauge symmetry breaking, and so on, which don't give a simple
interpretation of the zero temperature, zero entropy, starting condition.
But therefore, we have now to ask then the following question.
If then, if then the world is very much dependent on the idea of irreversibility, how then to
introduce this idea of irreversibility on the basic level?
In other words, what is the reason for the existence of irreversibility?
We all believe that Newton has discovered, really, some of the basic roots of science,
where irreversibility is playing a role.
And the recent outcome shows that the answer is very clear.
Irreversibility is an aspect of instability.
Instability appears at the point where the idea of a trajectory and the quantum mechanics,
I would say, an idea of the wave function becomes irrelevant because of instability,
because of the fact that two initial conditions, as close as you want, give rise to divergent
trajectories.
I can illustrate this on an example which has already been discussed by Poicaré himself.
It is just the example which is illustrated here, the dice or whatever, domino or whatever
you want.
When you throw a dice or a piece of money and you look, you find that half of the time
it falls on one side, half of the time it falls on the other, what is the law of nature?
Half and half, half and half, you could say no, of course not.
I know it's a deterministic system, being a deterministic system, it's one or zero.
It's not one half, one half.
And that is really the stumbling block which many people have not understood because it
would be true to say yes, it is a deterministic system if we could realize the conditions
for the deterministic system with any finite precision, but that is not the case.
For a really unstable dynamical system, whatever the uncertainty on the initial condition, it
will still be one half, one half.
I can increase uncertainty, it will still remain one half, one half.
It's only on the limit, on this limit I can never reach, in which it becomes one or zero.
Let me illustrate this on very trivial examples.
If you take, you look on the length of a circle, you could say, well, since Pythagore or other,
I know how to do it.
I put a polygon and I count the length of the polygon and that's a very good matter,
why?
Because already for a finite number of sides, you see, I have already a good approximation
for the length of the circle, but if I take, ask a question, what is the curvature?
Obviously, whatever the number of the sides of my polygon, the curvature is zero, but
the curvature of my circle is not zero.
Therefore, the polygon will never be a model for my circle.
Or in other words, if I could only construct polygons, I could never use the circle as
an image from the point of view of the curvature of the polygon.
In other words, the statement which I try to make is the following.
If the formulation of laws of nature require an infinite precision or an idealization which
can never be reached in reality, then it is no more an appropriate way of treating such
kind of situations.
And that I would like to illustrate on the example of classical dynamical systems very
briefly.
Next one.
First of all, what is a classical dynamical system?
A classical dynamical system is something very, very simple.
It is a phase space and contains a trajectory going from one to the other, and it contains
a conserved measure.
What means a conserved measure is that if I take here my points inside the circle or
whatever this is, time going on, this can become a longer line or can be even broken
into pieces, but the volume remains constant.
In other words, the classical world is a museum.
Everything is conserved.
If I take a piece of paper, you see, by analogy, I could throw it in pieces, but the pieces
I could put them into a corner, you see, but they would lie around, and I could ask somebody
to bring them together and you could start again.
In other words, it's like a wind, like an uragan, which breaks things, but keeps them
at least fragments as fragments intact.
Now this is, of course, very far from the idea of processes or reversibility, which we see
now to appear in our basic description.
Next one.
Now an idealized system, which I like to use for illustration, is the so-called Baker
transformation in which I take a square and I flatten it and I put the right part above.
And this is an example of unstable dynamical systems, and unstable dynamism is one direction
here being the direction of contraction, and one direction being the direction of dilatation.
In that it's very important, is that for such systems, whatever my initial finite precision
will be, after some time I will no more know where the point will go.
Next one.
You see, that can be very nicely illustrated by writing the coordinates, the coordinates
of the point in the, in my square in terms of a binary expansion.
I write simply x equal Sn over 2 exponent n, let's say.
In other words, Sn, I just write the digits in the decimal, in the dual system.
And then one can show that this shifting, this scratching and putting above of the Baker
corresponds to what's called a Bernouy shift, not shift, of course, the shift, in which
the digits are changing.
Now what this means is that the main digits, where of course the digits are 1 over 2, 1
over 4, 1 over 8, that were the main digits.
The digits 1 over 2 exponent 2,000, of course, doesn't play metrol in the beginning, and
whatever my finite precision, it is something which I don't know.
But the position is not the same.
After one change, instead of being 2,000, it becomes 1,999, and it shifts to more and
more closer and closer, and its importance becomes larger and larger.
As a result, whatever the finite precision, which you know in such kind of system, at
some points, you will not know what it will do.
And the question is not to stay, to simply stop at the question of undecidability, like
mathematicians like to call it, but to develop a coherent dynamical scheme which corresponds
to the realistic situations in which indeed we never know more than a window.
We know a number of the CISN, we never know an infinite number of them.
And then what you can show is that this corresponds to the idea that as you can never know all
of them, you never know what the trajectory is.
What you know is only bundles of trajectories, collections of trajectories having some temporal
window in common.
And these bundles of trajectories satisfying the same observed part of the behavior correspond
to a semi-group, no more a dynamical group, which goes in both directions, but a semi-group
because information is flowing out and disappearing.
If you would take the Baker transformation and try to verify the classical statements
of mechanics on the conservation of phase space and so on, you can never do it.
There is no computer on which you can do it because every computer has a finite precision
whatever it is.
And after some time, you will see that the entropy is increasing instead of remaining
constant as classical mechanics months.
Have you then to say that classical mechanics is correct?
Yes, it is correct for the type and what I mean correct experimentally verifiable for
the type of systems for which it has been invented, which are essentially periodic systems.
But it is no more applicable, I would not say incorrect, for situations for which it
was not made.
And the situations for which it was not made are the situations of high dynamical instability.
Next one.
And very recently, one of my co-workers working with Professor Zebehele, who is a world expert
in celestial dynamics, and the problem of three bodies, has discovered a most remarkable
example of such a situation in astrophysics.
No more the poor Baker transformation, which is after all a very poor example.
You imagine you see no appeal to no pretension to any realistic situation, but a very simple
example in which essentially you have the doublet, which is here, sun, Jupiter, and you
imagine that a comet is coming closer on a parabolic motion.
I take a very simple example, there are many others, and I take the restricted three body
problem, I suppose all the three bodies are in a plane.
Now what is so interesting in such a situation is that the parabolic motion is at the border
between elliptic motion, capture, and hyperbolic motion, in which the comet would be ejected.
In a sense, you can even find these situations in simpler examples, like the elastic pendulum.
You can take a pendulum, but I consider an elastic pendulum, you see, a spring together
with a pendulum.
Then in the neighborhood of the difference between vibration and rotation, very small
differences can bring the pendulum from one region to another, and that has been called
the stochastic layer.
Here you have the periodic motions, and here you have the rotational motions of the pendulum.
Now this problem can be solved rigorously, that's a problem which can be solved rigorously
by methods which I have no time to explain, I have a preprint here, if somebody is interested.
And that comes out as a following.
I can try to calculate the rotation time of the comet, I mean suppose it is captured,
and I calculate how many times it will go around.
I can calculate this.
It depends on the phase of Jupiter in respect to the Sun at the point of closest approach.
Next slide.
And the type of figures which you obtain when you calculate this are the following.
Here the calculation is made changing the accuracy over 10 digits, and calculating for
various initial conditions the revolution number, you see, versus accuracy, versus accuracy.
You see that you obtain 757, 38, 236, 44 revolutions, 12, 157, 7, 8, 143, 17, and you can make this
for various initial conditions.
Now what this means is a following.
An improvement of the precision of the initial in which you calculate is of no importance.
There is not the slightest indication that the series will ever converge.
Therefore, you can just not predict the revolution time and the revolution number of the comet.
In other words, instability and stochasticity, which is the basis of irreversibility, is
now a celestial dynamical problem.
You see it in the sky, you don't need to go to quantum mechanics, you see it in the sky.
But you can calculate this problem from the point of view, and the reason for this is
very simple.
Because the motion is very slow, and therefore you can never calculate the exact phase.
You have to calculate the sign of phi t, let's say, for times which are very, very long,
and that's just impossible to do, whatever the final accuracy will be.
Now if you calculate on the contrary the stochastic behavior, the statistical behavior, there
is no problem.
Next one, there is no problem.
You can calculate, you can calculate, well it's not very clear to see, the dimension
of the comet cloud, and even some fine structures, and you can see how it moves, you see, in
the restricted problem.
And Professor Zebehi and Petrovsky have also calculated in this way, I cannot answer any
questions about that because I'm not an expert, the odd cloud of a comet.
And they found a very good agreement with experiment.
This will come out in physical review, I think, next month.
So you will find the details about this calculation.
What I find really fantastic, I would really say, is that therefore by going from two-body
to three-body, in very simple cases, you see already the conceptual change which is proceeding.
Instead of finding a simple generalization, you find really a completely new type of behavior.
Therefore we see now that in a sense we go to what I believe are really new formulations
of dynamics, dynamics in which you can never deal with single events, the dynamics in which
you have to deal with collective events like the chance events which are represented here.
Of course, this leads to various consequences also in quantum mechanics and general relativity
which I have no time to discuss now, to which I can come back in the discussion.
Let me conclude.
Essentially I believe that this incorporation of time and instability in physics has far-reaching
consequences.
Indeed, it was as I explained already at the beginning, the problem of time which was essentially
the basis of the famous two cultures.
When I was a young man, I had the privilege to know rather well Schrodinger, and of course
I was reading all that Schrodinger was writing and was going to see him, and I was also reading
of course his last book which was called My World View.
Some of you may have read it, it was published in 1953, that was his last book.
And here he was dealing with the problem of human existence, essentially with the ontological
problem.
How have you to understand the fact that we are a subject embedded in the collective world?
This is of course the whole problem of vision, it is against the problem of one of the central
problems of art.
And as a start of his book, Schrodinger made a very strange for me as a young man statement.
He said, I shall discuss this problem without speaking about quantum mechanics, uncertainty
principle, dynamics or whatsoever.
Because he said, I am not feeling that this will bring any light into this problem.
And in fact he was discussing this problem in his book in purely philosophical terms,
very much inspired some decades before by the Vedas, so before Capra and all the kind
of books which appeared today have become very popular.
Now I found very strange that here is a problem which interests everybody, our human existence.
And science is some of the main characteristics of western civilization.
This is really true, that science has nothing to say about that, is this possible?
And I believe that we come at least a little close, I would not say that we have now solved
the problem, please don't misunderstand what I am saying.
I am saying simply that we can at least say that our vision of the world inside us and
the world outside begin to converge.
I want simply to say that we can now begin to see the conditions on individualization.
I spoke about the Benin, the Benin has inside it because of the great heat of temperature
and inside space which is different from the outside space.
In other words, the very idea of what is a natural system different from the outside
world is inherent in the bifurcations which occur in the system.
Moreover we know that the system can evolve even if we have a very poor idea and come
to the complexity which I mentioned about the electrical waves of the brain.
So at least the ontological problem becomes no more a foreigner in this perspective.
It is no more that we deal with contradictory words, that we deal with problems which have
to be looked at by in many ways, which have to be seen by through many, many declarations
like to say that I am tired, my English becomes poor, you see, therefore it is becoming no
more such a conflictual problem.
Thus I may conclude by reminding that Freud has written that science has to be seen as
an aggression against human being.
Indeed Copernicus has shown us that we are not at the center, geographical center of
astronomical center of the universe.
Darwin has shown us that we are an animal like others, Freud himself has shown us that
our conscious activity of which we are so proud is only a very small part of the general
neural or subconscious activity.
I would like to invert this position.
I would like to say that if really the world contains essential components, irreversibility
and instability, then the creative activity of man as manifest in art, in music is really
the proof that man is no more an exception to the laws of nature, but represents this
laws on a unique way.
Thank you very much.
Let me first congratulate you for this brilliant description of the universe from the Benard
cells to the Big Bang.
I would like just to make one remark about the symmetry breaking which you mentioned
which in fact is somewhere behind the stage concerning this increase of entropy.
To mention that there has been a number of attempts for describing universe with domains
of symmetry breaking with opposite sign and that there is even presently an analysis of
the space-time distribution of the quasars which leads to a model of the universe which
is spherically closed and has two domains, one of matter and one on antimatter and we
sit in the matter side but not naturally in the center somewhere with respect to the interface.
So I believe that this problem of the high entropy per bar in the universe which I expressed
this morning in other terms, I didn't use the word entropy, may present in during the
coming years new aspects especially with the new results concerning the space-time distribution
of quasars which will come out from the results given by the space, by observation from space
with the space telescope where there is a large program of observations of quasars.
So whereas I think that this model where you start with zero temperature and have the burst
of entropy is quite appealing. Now this may have taken place at different places with different
sign if not with different sign but with different sign as far as baron and anti-barons are
concerned leading to a very complex universe. I would I shall if the discussion leaves time
later on to come to a completely different question. Yes, well I have really nothing to
answer I mean I agree with you that the questions first of all are not at all solved. However,
I found very stimulating the question as a possibility of having insight general relativity
view in which there is an intrinsic phase transition leading from an open universe to a
locally Lorentz type universe. If the universe would have started as a flat space universe this
phase transition would not have been taking place therefore it is not at all a trivial thing. I
would like to add the following thing in general relativity the idea is that the basic reality
is the geometrical element. However if you believe in the importance of unstable dynamical systems
this cannot be so because then the general I would say transformation would mix stability in
stability therefore I expect also a change in the formulation of general relativity.
You showed a curve of the temperature as a function of time which looked Gaussian like.
Not necessarily Gaussian. No well I mean just it had a maximum somewhere. If I understood you
correctly this is a model of how the temperature changes the temperature of the universe changes
in time. Now, can you tell me what is the time corresponding to the maximum in this model?
Very early very early you see it's difficult to know exactly the time it may be a multiple of
Planck's time. It would be very close 10 to 6 times Planck's time. Now what I plot there you see
the new formulation of the second law which I have given includes the effect of gravitational field
and it appears that it's possible to formulate the second law using a new definition of internal
energy which is the old definition multiplied by a factor depending on the gravitational state
of the universe. I could write it down I don't know if it's the right moment and therefore it
there is but at the moment at the present this factor tends from the start of the universe this
factor tends rapidly to 1. Then we recover the usual formulation of the second law. In other words
the interest of the formulation which I try to give is that the formulation of the second law
depends itself on the cosmological state of the universe. Precisely my question now is really how
much do we know of the thermodynamics in presence of extremely strong classical still classical
gravitational fields? That is a very good question the classical answer which I don't which I don't
agree is that there is no influence why because you can formulate the second law in local Galilean
coordinates and then you write it in a covariant way and then there is answer. I object against
this procedure because the second law of thermodynamics is not a local law it is the
selection of a semi-group out of two possible semi-groups using asymptotic conditions therefore
you cannot formulate it in the local Galilean coordinates therefore I have formulated it
with my co-workers in a way in which the system is going to Lorentzian frame for a long time
asymptotically then I noted the second law is valid therefore it is essentially a kind of
internal extrapolation formula for strong gravitational fields. Thank you just another
comment this time I like your example about the circumference which is which has a finite
curvature in which you approach with the polygon but but you should have sent that there are a
finite number of points where the curvature of the polygon is infinite. That is true that is
completely true. I agree. Okay well I enjoyed your talk as usual very lively experience for us my
comment is related to the ones we've already heard it seems to me the new the particularly new
element in what you have told us but you haven't given us the details is how to include gravitational
entropy in some formulation of cosmology I think that's very interesting and of course my co-countryman
Penrose as you know has spent a lot of time trying to see whether it is the vial tensor or
how one should include the gravitational entropy in in cosmological models and perhaps you might
want later on to say a word about the relation between your way of looking at it and this
Ritchie tensor way of doing it or vial tensor I'm not quite sure which combination he used or he tried
to use because I think he did not in fact succeed so far. I did want to make one other point about
the hot big bang now we have seen from your curves what we might call the cold big bang now in the
hot big bang you can of course also increase have an increase of entropy with lapse of time you
showed us a curve where the entropy is independent of time for the normal let us say the hot big
bang but I think perhaps one ought to observe that only holds as you probably will agree for one
phase if you have a two-phase system then in the expansion of the universe from a hot initial
state the two phases say matter and radiation will get out of equilibrium they will both expand
adiabatically and their temperature will become different because they have different adiabatic
laws and as a result of this difference there will be heat transfer between these two phases and so
the entropy will in fact increase but that is only possible in a two-phase situation and then with
very coarse approximations you can of course track down the increase of entropy with time and even
possibly going from one cycle to the next and you can then verify that the entropy actually increases
even in an oscillating universe during the contracting phase it still goes up and then it
goes up in the next cycle again there are such very simple model universes but of course I
imagine that on your view they would not be allowed because the assumption there is that you are
starting with a hot initial big bang which is a sort of standard model I mean I have not much
to answer there is no relation with Penrose model it is a completely different approach Penrose
viewer but however the common element I would say is the interest in the problem and I admire
greatly the work of Penrose but the technicalities are completely different now the second question is
of course trivial I mean I have when I wrote the entropy the constant I meant I would say the large
scale entropy they are all the time a reversible process going on in this room biology all this is
irreversibility therefore I was thinking about the overall picture and my emphasis is of course on
the possibility to give a universe to give a model of a universe which starts with a zero entropy
and binds it up in itself to the type of entropy which we observe today so a self-creating or self I
would say a catalyzed effect and that is really the important element I could speak of us cause
hours about various aspects of this which I had no time to do here and the main point is of course
that the fact if you start with a hot big bang it is a very unpleasant situation that you have to
understand why matter what's ever created with this special entropy with this special temperature
what's this due to quantum fluctuation what's due to quantum tunneling or whatsoever there are many
views as you know about this therefore I thought interesting that the relatively simple thermodynamic
view could be developed at the including however a generalization of the second law of thermodynamics
in which now the second law refers to a very defined state gravitational state of the universe
I think this by the way may be a rather rather interesting example of a law of nature which
itself depends on time because the gravitational state is changing this time therefore the law
of nature is no more reflecting something eternal but something relative to once one specific
situation it in a sense it has some ideological elements in common with the old attempts by
dirac and so on when you spoke about the variation of constants but here it's not the variation of
elementary particle of elementary constants but it is a variation of the law itself more in the
spirit of what has been anticipated many years ago by great american philosopher fears
any more questions while we are waiting for the next question i will try again to get the
discussion to get to the bottom of things by framing the issue as follows one of the subjects
of this meeting has been the simple question is chance a product of ignorance or is there
an opening through which nature may enjoy randomness in professor pregon genes well known view
there are instabilities that can decide the future of the system do these instabilities
these before cation resemble a window a one of opening through which chance can slip onto the
scene or must we continue seeking for knowledge at these points more finely tuned knowledge such
as what we look for in quantum mechanics but i would like to say that obviously instability
the reversibility are the result of well-defined dynamical structures essentially people have
proposed i would say two types of classification of dynamical systems in two types very roughly
speaking one would be essentially periodic type and there of course there is no chance and there
is no reason to introduce instability reversibility and so on on the other hand if the information
which you need increases all the time and if therefore no finite information whatever it is
can predict the long time behavior of the system then a new situation appears and that is this new
situation which is related then to instability and reversibility to the formulation of semi-forms
okay professor garrido
professor pregon gene about 10 or 12 years ago you came to ciches and you were and you and your
group were defending at that time that time irreversibility was a consequence a consequence
if i remember well of the magic no never well and then i
i said i as far as i remember you had uh three plus one plus one plus one minus one
that is a classical metric but i haven't never said that this is related to reversibility
mass pregunters
so paniker
uh i would like to ask the professor pregon gene
yes yes is the translation working i would like to ask professor pregon gene a question
i'm from a different field so i apologize for not using scientific terminology with due rigor
i would like to underline the problems jorge wagonsburg has raised which i believe more over
of brought us together here i would put the question like this
would you admit that these points of instability represent a total absence of any type of natural
law this seems to me to be a sort of almost buddhist almost eastern ontological nihilism
which might perhaps form the core of the concept of creativity
well i believe the problem of creativity is much clearer formulated in in the recent
terms in which my lecture was given than in classical physics after all a piece of music
starts from silence and goes to silence in other words the starting of a piece of music
is a kind of bifurcation if you want to use rather loose language therefore the starting
of novelties the novelties are really related to the type of systems which present bifurcations
and the bifurcations even on the macroscopic scale are themselves the expression of some basic
dynamical instability therefore finally the outcome of all this is that the scheme of the world as we
see today is very different from the time of the formulation of kepler's law it is very natural
after all three centuries have gone the kepler's law newton's law the classical epistemology
was basically related on periodic phenomena and that's very natural because since neolithic time
and perhaps even since paleolithic time men was very sensitive to periodic variations in climate
to periodic recurrences and so on and so on and therefore the temptation it was to put this
as a basis of a scientific epistemology and in a sense this is still a very valid important field
that nature is just not patterned according or not only patterned according to this type of
recurrent phenomena you see some years ago if you would have asked a physicist what is the
relation between physics and biology you would have said obviously one day physics will give
an interpretation of biology and that's true physics is giving more many many important contributions
however if you think about the spirit of biology the spirit of biology was always an evolutionary
spirit darwin is 19th century the spirit of classical physics was an intemporal view and in
a sense you could say physics today becomes more closer to biology becoming more closer to biology
becomes also more close to human enterprises and finally to artistic activity and that was
something which i wanted to emphasize in my lecture i do not want to seem too insistent
professor prigogine but there was something in your reply to george wagensberg's question that
surprised me considerably and stimulated my curiosity you explicitly avoided uttering the
word chance on the other hand you mentioned something i found very subtle you clarified that at the
moment that a description let's say finite does not allow us to know or predict the position or
what will happen at that moment we have something new i find this very attractive but i would also
like to ask you whether you intend to use the word chance or not one of the most remarkable outcome
of modern dynamical theory is that some of the unstable dynamical systems are as random as bernouy
bernouy games of chance the isomorphic to bernouy systems you remember perhaps on
one of my slides it was even written bernouy shift therefore and there is a bernouy measure involved
therefore your i can answer very openly your question yes chance becomes a fundamental
element of dynamics the question that is chance i would say from the definition to the point of
view i don't know i i have no definition and most are not very inclined to verbal discussions
however what i would like to say is a mathematical theory of chance as was presented by people
who played games you see is now used in the dynamical in the dynamical theories
when you have a strange attractor you cannot predict what will happen you can predict some
correlations you can predict some global behavior but not that will behave that will happen in the
in an individual realization therefore we in many fields deal with a new approach to science
and to our dialogue of men with nature it's a classical ambition that's to have a kind of
transparent nature in which we could decide in every single event that will come out and we see
this was of course no more the situation in quantum mechanics but we see that science more and more
deals with mass phenomena this repetitive phenomena in which we can deal with something we can say
something which is neither pure randomness neither simple deterministic systems i believe that i'm
concerned that we're only at the beginning of the game i fact if i could use the word game here in a
different sense it is so easy to understand what a bernoulli scheme means and it's so easy to understand
what a simple periodic motion means but the real world is in between somewhere and it's between
something and there are elements of randomness in DNA but it's not pure randomness it's not why it
knows and many of the recent attempts would be precisely to give them more quantitative meaning
to the word randomness but it means exactly for example in paris not a long time ago there was
a meeting of economists and the economists have been looking that is for example i take an oversimplified
view what are the rules of the stock market now you know in neoclassical economy the idea is that you
have a i would say a well informed universe and that therefore stock market could only be a pure
white noise because if there would be no white noise somebody would have already used the deviation
from the white noise to become wealthy now today with the new methods of analyzing things you can
really see what is the dynamical content of some time series in in economy and the remarkable
outcome is that there is a lot of structure and that the idea of white noise is not true the idea
of periodic behavior obviously is not and we have to begin now to have the vocabulary necessary
to characterize the intermediate situation it is i think as i said at the beginning of my lecture
we are in a new at this period of dialogue with nature and this new period involves that we are
also at the beginning of something at the beginning of something you see at the beginning of something
and for me it is such a remarkable coincidence that at the very moment where there is this transition
in the demography of the world where the world is going to a new dimension in the population
with new requirements on energy and so on and so on science is following in some sense science
begins to to be able to approach this highly non-linear interactive processes there is a big
project in x2 called global change such a project involves also non-linear mathematics
involves also amplifications relations between various data and i think it's so remarkable
that all these things happen nearly at the same time and i think that is really what gives the
a kind of cultural unity to our so diversified and so fragmented period
professor lancer reaches to say something only if nobody else wants to speak because i've had one
say well i the reason is that i want to speak again is that i am very interested in this
question of not being able to predict which uh professor prigudine suggested because now the
fact is if you have your strange attractor realized in nature the system will in fact execute a
definite motion now when one says one cannot predict it is the statement meant to be that we
will never be able to say that this motion which we've just observed uh can be explained
that is a complete misunderstanding and misstatement of what i've said no i was a question no it was
not as it was a question obviously no and i'm also not interested in the question if nature knows
what it does or not i'm not speaking about what nature knows or doesn't know what nature
is ontologically doing i'm only speaking about our intellectual models of the universe in which
we are living the question is simply are we able knowing the this type of equation knowing the
baker transformation knowing a finite information to know where the point will be in the baker
transformation after an arbitrary time which in fact can be even estimated and the answer is no
in the present day of mathematics the system will of course execute a specific motion and
it obviously and it is it would be disappointing for scientists if they were unable if they had
to admit that they would never be able to it is the same story you can ask i think that's a
misunderstanding of what science means i mean in quantum mechanics you're also not able to predict
where is the position of an electron with respect to the nucleus it you can only predict this on
collective on collective on repetitive experiments is this a you can say a kind of failure of of
the human intellect i don't think so because it is simply we have to adapt our intellect
to the conditions of the world the world could have been a very nice collection of periodic
motion then this question would not arise but probably we would not be around here to discuss
these questions i am not sure if professor tom yeah alphando professor pre-gauging on
very simple question do you say any logical connection between the sensitive dependence
on of initial data which you have described and time irreversibility or reversibility
one has to make a distinction between the sensitive dependence on initial condition
in time symmetry broken systems and in time symmetry unbroken system the baker belongs to one
category the meteorological system which i mentioned belongs to the other in the first case
the fact to consider instead of because of the sensitive sensitivity to initial condition a
collection of trajectories lead to the formulation of a semi-group theory and therefore to a breaking
of time symmetry in the second case like the meteorological case or the cases which i mentioned
in my lecture this is not so because in this case you start already this equation is broken time
symmetry so so am i right if i say that there is no logical connection at all between sensitive
initial sensitive dependence on initial condition and time reversibility or irreversibility no you
are not right i'm not right no then explain why because as i just have mentioned i can only repeat
what i just said in the case in which you start with a time symmetrical system the sensitive
initial conditions of the type of the k flow the consideration of this type of system can be transformed
into the behavior of a symmetry broken semi-group and the way in which this is done can you can
read my paper so i can give you some reprints if you are interested no of course if you start with
a system which is not defined by an homeomorphism by a map then it's obviously you have obviously
i don't need you have a symmetry on the beginning not i have no symmetry in the beginning i can
start with continuous system of this map that makes no difference anyway i would just i with
a final observation what you said earlier you should very carefully distinguish between what
belongs to mathematical theory and what becomes what belongs to real systems mathematics has nothing
to to say to reality that's your point of view it's not mine
rolf if dynamical systems simulate so nicely randomness do you think that this could
lead towards a new understanding of the stochastic character of the quantum measurement process
i hope so but i think so but in a sense but here i have to be rather vague because it would
be take too much time you see the main problem of quantum mechanics for me i don't know i mean
i can take very many point of views and i would like to say that i'm working on this problem
that i hope to come to some result very soon so i'm a little making a little extrapolation
i believe that indeed the wave function corresponds to a potentiality the outcome of the measure to
an actuality and i believe that the transition from potentiality to actuality is precisely due
to irreversibility the difficulty was that before irreversibility was very difficult to define in
terms of quantum mechanics now i can define irreversibility in quantum mechanics through an
appropriate formalism super operators entropies and super operator not in the hillbatt space and so on
and therefore i can now show and i think i can even explain it to you without any mathematics
the reason is the following that once i have irreversibility as the result of instability
i can no more deal with single wave functions i have to deal with collections of wave functions
and these collections of wave function exactly a collection of trajectories no more satisfy
the initial Schrodinger equation that they no more conserve pure states because there are
no collections of wave functions which i observe over a window of time and for this reason the
measurement becomes simply a veil in which we express the collective character of the
of the object which you observe it is of course a rather strong statement because what i'm saying
is that in classical mechanics the basic object is no more a single trajectory it is no more
a Gibson symbol because a Gibson symbol can be reduced to a single trajectory to a pure case
it is now a time-oriented non-local semi-group objects which is no more admitting a solution
the single trajectory because whatever the duration of the observation it will never be
observed of the complete i would say phase space in which it is embedded in a sense my the point
of view which i am advocating from this rather technical point of view is the following the
classical view of unstable systems was to compare them to the dynamics of systems which i can
really observe over infinite times my point of view is simply to say let's now include the
finiteness of our observation and show that whatever the finiteness of observation independently
of the approximation beat long short million of years 20 minutes that's of no importance
there is a common formalism corresponding to all this type of situations i'm perhaps a little vague
last question professor schatzman
this is not a real really question and probably will not answer what i'm going to to say
uh we live i can say in a very unstable world full of bifurcations and this reminds me a cartoon
i have seen in the new yorker something like 25 years ago where you see a giant computer
in front of which there are two scientists and one says to the other what does he say
and the other one says he says we should make peace now more precisely there has been in nature
a couple of papers which were inspired by this non-linear dynamics about the way
in which arms race can finally lead to war and there has been discussions in the same journal
whether the assumptions which which were made by the first authors were correct or were not
correct now i'm coming to my question nowadays where we have not only on one side this fantastic
storage of weapons with something like 50 000 megatons of nuclear power that we have these new
strategic defense initiative and you know certainly quite well probably even better than i
what the american scientists have written on it would you think that there is a possible aim
of dealing from the point of view of the dynamical system about the danger of the arms race
and possible to tell we are reaching the point where the human humanity and civilization is in
danger but let me not go into a strategy proper but let me say that i believe the problem which
you rightly bring out is closely related to the view which is being developed i mean at the moment
you see too and let's say it is it is connected in some way in the vein which i see the connection
is the following the classical view of the world that's that reality and rationality was the same
only one rational reality or one reality which is rational today we see a pluralistic world
we see a world of you mentioned of instabilities of many possible realization
and therefore the question we have to begin to think in a non-linear way we have to understand
that the world is more rich than one of the realization which in which we can live now
you know to give first a simpler example take the problem of psychoanalysis the classical
view was that you have to go to the psychoanalyst and he will tell you why you behave in this way
or another i think more and more family therapies becoming familiar today in other words you have
to go together and the therapist will try to find but as a relation in this unstable dynamical system
which is a family and which brings into some complication for a member of the family and then
he will say perhaps there's a reshuffling necessary you see and then perhaps something better can
arise and i would say that we need this family therapy on the level of nations in other words
what i like to say is that values are often often related to homeostatic reactions to a given
i would say realization of a bifurcation and it is not my chance i think that most of the most
difficult problem in our time are no more conflicts about territory or about even economic resources
but much more about ideologies and ideologies are value systems around a given bifurcation
a given realization a given branch if we begin now to think in a non-linear way we may conceive
whichever we may conceive about situations in which we perhaps have to to probe these ideologies
of which many in this case come from the 19th century and are a little obsolete you see therefore
i would say my answer to this is not only let's carefully look on the disarmament problem but let's
look carefully on the tolerance problem on the tolerance problem is really the problem of our
time the tolerance problem is to understand that there are many realizations of the of the cultural
world and that we have to live in this multiple world if there is any value in science it is
finally that we hope if i'm a scientist i hope that science will give to the world finally a
more multiple way of realization after a less linear way a less constrained way of realization
i i feel this i think i'm it is a very common feeling between european scientists you see as european
i believe we are all living at the intersection of value system as european we are all
proud that the the science project has started in europe and very close from here partly and also
that the idea of democracy was started in europe and there were there were two rationalities
you see the scientific rationality and the and the social and humanistic rationality
and what is really i think the problem is to bring them closer together but to bring and i think
all that i try to tell you is for me if it has any value at all it has the value of bringing
together to closer these rationalities in a sense we can apply it also to human situations
and see really in this way having really in this way a more tolerant and more multiple view on human
civilization thank you very much professor prigozine in 15 minutes we will begin the debate
so
