Lecture 8 Newton's Discovery
Welcome to lecture 8, Newton's Discovery, a title which has a double meaning because
we shall talk both about what Newton discovered and we shall talk about the discovery by Europe
of Newton's accomplishment. Note well by the way the homage paid by the 20th century
to the 17th. If you think of our cutting edge technology computers we have just lectured
on Pascal who has given us a 20th century name for a computer language and now Newton
whose apple and indeed the Newton itself are hallmarks of his 20th century technology.
The context of the emergence of Isaac Newton upon European consciousness is not uninteresting.
Throughout Europe by the mid 17th century, young men for women are not being educated
formally in the 17th century. Young men are drawn to societies of mathematically and mechanistically
oriented empirical natural philosophy. What we in the 20th century would term science.
And these societies exist almost always wholly apart from the universities of Europe. All
throughout the 17th century and well into the 18th century, the European universities
continue to teach in Latin the curriculum of the early 17th century. It is as if Copernicus
and Galileo as if the great figures in anatomy and physiology of the early modern world never
had written. There were received authorities they continue to be taught. The European universities
are dominated by Aristotelian physics with its qualitative and its teleological concerns
about motion and about the order of the physical world. Such that those who are drawn to the
new ways of looking at nature and reality and knowledge and the acquisition of knowledge create
societies and institutions apart from academic life. Much in the same way that in the 20th
century in certain fields of the social sciences one sees think tanks right left and center doing
a different kind of social research or policy research from what is being done at the universities
in the 17th century far more dramatically. The dominance of Aristotelianism, Scholasticism at
the universities, leads to these extra university institutions that become the scientific societies.
In England from the 1640s on and throughout the English Civil War, which pales in comparison
in terms of its historical influence to what emerges from the work of the British scientific
societies, there are meetings of students, tutors, professors from London, Oxford and Cambridge
that are meeting informally outside of official structures. They share a common interest in
non-Aristotelian, indeed anti-Aristotelian natural philosophy, which they call usually
experimental philosophy or the new philosophy. They are a generation excited both by Francis Bacon
and by the progress of the mechanistic and quantitative sciences. This poses an interesting
problem for historians of science who have spent an extraordinary amount of quite valuable
time demonstrating why Bacon is not at the heart of the scientific revolution because
Bacon does not look to quantitative, to mathematized views of nature. If you think back to our
lecture on Francis Bacon, Bacon was deeply concerned about the mind's tendency to fly toward
order, not to move gradually from generalization to generalization. And many historians of science
and philosophers of science want to say that Bacon's vision in the New Organon had very
little to do with the mathematized quantitative science that emerges later in the 17th century.
The problem is that almost all of those quantitative scientists called themselves Baconian. They
read Bacon. They were excited and inspired by Bacon. They believed that what they were
doing was observing nature, framing generalizations as Bacon urged, testing those, and reaching
higher and higher levels of generalizations. And whatever 20th century historians of science
or philosophers of science want to say in the lived historical reality of the 17th century,
the devotees of the New Philosophy saw themselves as Baconian and saw themselves as drawn to
quantitative, ever more mechanistic explanations of nature and saw absolutely no conflict between
those two inspirations. By 1660, the English group is meeting weekly for the pursuit of
what it now termed, and it's a wonderful 17th century phrase, quote, physical, mathematical,
experimental reasoning. They wisely choose as their president a member of the Royal Council
in the newly restored Stuart monarchy, which opens up a flood of patronage to the new scientific
society. And in 1662, they are chartered by King Charles II as the Royal Society with
approximately 130 members. The attitude of the members of the Royal Society is that which
Galileo had expressed so well in his debates with the Aristotelians. Don't look in books
to understand nature. Don't look at the written word to understand nature. Observe nature.
Frame your hypotheses from observations of nature and test those hypotheses in nature
itself. The activities of the Royal Society are above all two. They engage in, on the
one hand, experiments and observations of the Royal Society. They engage in, on the one
hand, experiments and observations, and two, fulfilling Bacon's vision that the new learning
must be dynamic, cooperative, never static, never the work of one person, one genius,
in reports. They communicate their work, and they communicate their work not only amongst
themselves, but to the broader public and to similar societies devoted to the new philosophy
that are emerging all across the European continent. In 1664, the Royal Society, the
Royal Society divides into committees that express the interests of members and that
organize the work of the Royal Society. They divide into eight committees. The first is
mechanical, the study of matter in motion, what we would think of as physics. The second
astronomical and optical. The third, anatomical. The fourth, chemical. The fifth, agricultural,
fulfilling the vision of Bacon and indeed Hobbes and indeed Descartes, that knowledge
can be applied to the immediate needs of the human condition, the most fundamental issue
of want and scarcity on the one hand or the application of knowledge and the production
of bounty on the other. The sixth committee is on the history of trade and much of it
is also concerned with navigation. The seventh committee, and I will give you its name because
it reveals so much of that sense of discovery that is so central to the 17th century. Think
back on Kepler sense. Had not God himself waited 6,000 years for someone to gaze on
his work with understanding, that sense that with proper method, one was looking for the
first time with understanding on the world in which one found oneself. The seventh committee
of the Royal Society was a committee quote to record phenomena of nature unrecorded or
hitherto unobserved. And the eighth committee was a committee on the history of trade and
the committee of correspondence. The influence of Bacon upon the Royal Society scarcely can
be overestimated. By 1670 Bacon's utopia, the new Atlantis, with its portrait of the
house of Solomon, the natural philosophers at the center of providing essential knowledge
and understanding to a society had gone through 10 additions. And for the Royal Society it
is a work that defines so much of their self-image. On the first publication of the transactions
of the Royal Society, reporting their experiments and observations to the world, the front of
the work gave us a portrait of the King of England surrounded by two figures, the President
of the Royal Society and Francis Bacon, who is labeled quote the Restorer of the Arts.
Arts means applied human knowledge. That's why we have faculties of arts and sciences.
We use the medieval and early modern meanings. Science with systematic understanding, the
organization of knowledge. The arts was the application of human knowledge to the world
in which we found ourselves. The English public eagerly awaits publications of the transactions
of the Royal Society, which are a wise combination from the standpoint of patronage expanding
interest and expanding membership of scientists and what were known as virtuosy, so that next
to each other you would find articles that were path breaking in foundational sciences
emerging in the 17th century. Optics, physics, mathematics, next to it a recipe for mulberry
wine by a country squire, a gentleman, who now felt himself a part of this new community
of learning and applied knowledge. There were those who satirized the history of the
world, who were recognized the reports of the transactions and in that combination of
works on physics, works on navigation, many of them central to the history of western
science. Observations and measurements of height, barometric pressure, there are scores and
scores of people publishing simple measurements, improving our knowledge of the natural order
designs for pumps, for clearing minds of water that are applying the frontiers of our knowledge
of barometrics and pneumatics and hydrology to human productivity and indeed redness of
recipes for cider and advice on animal husbandry. The publication in the transactions of a work
by a largely unknown man, Isaac Newton, his optics was both a major event in the history
of western science, it gave us our modern theory of light and for almost all readers
their first introduction to the man who would become Sir Isaac Newton, the most celebrated
natural science scientist of his or perhaps of any age.
Newton was the son of a Lincoln Shafama born in 1642 and from his early education it would
appear that his father had destined him to be a well-educated farmer. But in 1661 Newton
entered Cambridge University. Cambridge was dominated by the Aristotelians but Newton entered
Trinity College of Cambridge University where alone the Cartesians were strong and influential.
And the young Newton is introduced to Descartes' analytic geometry and to higher mathematics
in general. Newton, although he will overturn as we shall see, the physics of the Cartesians
had early ties and debts to Descartes' system and he was taught by a man named Isaac Barrow
who was the most distinguished mathematician in Britain and who held the most prestigious
chair in mathematics. In 1665 Newton received his Bachelor of Arts degree but then Cambridge
emptied because of the great plague of 1665. When people would leave, who could afford to,
would leave population centers and get themselves to the relative safety of the countryside.
And Newton spent 18 months thinking in Wool's Thorpe, his family's country home. What was
Newton thinking about for those 18 months? Well, he was thinking about, among other things,
the motion of the moon and the problem of a swinging globe as shown by the great mechanistic
scientist Christian Huygens. If you think about the problem of a swinging globe, what
you will understand, what underlies so much of the drama of what Newton is doing. You look
at the world, you look at the heavens, you look at whirlpools and circular motion, inertial
circular motion appears to be a natural motion. The heavens, the planets, the moon remain
in circular orbit around the earth. Only Kepler had hypothesized elliptical orbits, he could
not prove that. Huygens focuses upon the problem of a swinging globe. You get a globe swinging
and then you let go of it. And what happens? It does not persist in circular motion. It flies
off in linear motion. While thinking about this, an apple indeed did fall. That part of the
Newton story is absolutely true. And Newton begins to think about what would be a force that
would draw the apple to the earth and assuming inertial linear motion that when released
from the force of that string or chain, when one swings the globe, the object achieves linear
rather than continuing in circular motion, what would be the force that not only would draw
the apple to the earth, but would preserve the same force, the moon in orbit. The easiest
way to conceptualize this, a force that would serve as an unseen string on the swinging globes
of the heavens. Many people were thinking about this problem and Newton arrived at a calculation
that no one else had been able to derive from the problem or from the data. That the pull
of the earth diminished according to the square of the distance of any object from the center
of the earth. But Newton did not have his college books with him and the figure that he used
for the circumference of the earth to calculate distance from the center was slightly less
than that. And as he wrote, he quote, pretty nearly, end quote, proved his calculation.
In fact, he had discovered the law of gravity, but his proof slightly off, he set it aside
and mentioned it to no one. Finding it difficult to work with multivariables of space, motion
and time with only Newton, Descartes, with only Descartes analytic geometry, Newton developed
the integral calculus. Leibniz was doing the same thing simultaneously on the continent.
Thinking about motion and about Galileo's law of falling bodies, he posited the three
laws of dynamics of motion that dominate classical physics, that lay the foundation of all subsequent
physics. How do Galileo's abstract mass and force behave? Newton posits the law of inertia.
A body in motion continues in a straight line until acted upon, unless acted upon by another
force, a body at rest remains at rest unless acted upon by another force. He posits that
force as a ratio, velocity equals time times acceleration, and he posits that for every action,
there is an equal and opposite reaction, a law of motion that is true at all times except
when I play billions. Newton, during those same 18 months, thought out the nature of numerical
series and with the prism discovered the composition, the nature of light. In short, in the 18 months
that followed his receipt of a bachelor of arts degree, and at the age of 23 to 24, which
is very late in those days, but there had been a civil war in England, Isaac Newton had formulated
the law of gravity, formulated the essential laws of mechanics that would govern western
physics, created the infinitesimal calculus, laid the foundation of modern optics with his
experimental discovery of the composition of light, and done major work on numerical
series. Now, typical of Newton, who often forgot to eat, he communicated not a word of all of this
to anyone. When later in the 1660s, he showed his work on mathematics to Isaac Barrow, Barrow
did something that has never happened before and will never happen after in the history
of the academic world. Barrow immediately resigned his chair in mathematics and insisted that it be given to Newton.
If you're one of my students, don't even think about it. But no one knew of Newton's work on gravity or on the
laws of motion. In 1684, some 20 years later, there is a meeting in a coffee house in London
of three of the greatest minds in England, Edmund Haley, the celebrated astronomer, Christopher
Wren, the great architect, and Robert Hook, astronomer, mathematician, and the first great
discoverer and theoretician of the mechanical laws of the elasticity of mass. At that coffee
house, the three men are discussing the problem of Huygens pendulum and the swinging globe and
the moon and its orbit. Newton had seen the connection 20 years before.
Hook proposes the inverse square law. Christopher Wren thinks about that and wagers that it could
not be proven. Haley and Hook, who are brilliant mathematicians, set to do that and are unable to
provide a mathematical proof that the inverse square law would account for. The heavenly motions,
the orbit of the moon, or in any manner be consistent with what we knew about laws of motion in general.
Frustrated about their inability to get a mathematical proof of the inverse square law, they send Edmund
Haley to Cambridge to solicit the views of someone who is simply known as being one of the finest
mathematical minds in England, Isaac Newton at Cambridge. And Haley, when he is left into the chambers
of the great mathematician Newton, puts a question to him. He says, what would be the curve produced
in a satellite if there were a force that diminished according to the square of the distance between
two bodies? Without hesitation, Newton immediately answers an ellipse, the elliptical orbits of all the
heavenly bodies and of the moon as Kepler had argued in his laws of planetary motion. Haley is stunned,
but how do you know that? And Newton said, oh, I worked it out some 20 years ago or so, but it was a
bit off. It didn't correspond to the actual center of the work. Where are those papers, Haley asks?
Newton begins rummaging through his drawers for them. As one historian of science famously put it, all of Europe
was looking for a law of gravitation, and Isaac Newton had lost it. Newton finds it, Haley reads it,
and Haley immediately sees the era of calculation as to the exact center of the Earth, and Haley understands
that with the geography of the Earth corrected, the whole solar system falls into place.
Kepler's laws of planetary motion are confirmed, and Newton has the mathematical proof of the nature of the
universe and system and forces of the world. At Haley's urging and at Haley's private expense, Newton
works on his discovery. He integrates it into his general system of the laws of motion, and Newton
publishes it in Latin in 1687, the philosophie naturalis principia matematica, or the title is wonderful, the
mathematical principles of natural philosophy, or as it simply would come to be known, the
Principia. It took him 18 months to write, and it changed a culture and a culture's way of understanding the world,
and a culture sense of the relationship of the human mind to nature. Thank you.
Thank you.
