Lecture 2, The Dawn of the Seventeenth Century, Aristotelian Scholasticism
Welcome to Lecture 2, The Dawn of the Seventeenth Century, Aristotelian Scholasticism.
If we are to understand the nature of the intellectual revolution of the seventeenth
century, we need to understand what the seventeenth century is revolting against, what its education
was.
So the purpose of this lecture is to gain an overview of the intellectual inheritance
of the seventeenth century, what is being taught to the educated world.
If you were a student entering a European university in the year 1600, what would you
learn about the world in which you found yourselves?
Every intellectual world asks certain common questions, either explicitly or implicitly.
When should I be convinced?
What should I find persuasive?
When must I say, yes, I have to believe that.
At the dawn of the seventeenth century, the answers were given by a system that dominated
quite dramatically and formally the educated world, a system we call Aristotelian Scholasticism.
That is to say, the philosophy of Aristotle as interpreted and adopted by the Christian
schools of Europe.
So Aristotelian because the philosophy of Aristotle and the fancy term Scholasticism
now demystified, it dominated the schools of Christian Europe.
Seventeenth century Aristotelians often wrote as if Aristotle always had been the central
Greek philosopher of the Christian tradition.
This was not the case, the process of the Aristotelianization of Christian thought is
something that begins in the late 12th, intensifies throughout the 13th century and comes to dominate
the university world from the 14th century on and then is established quite dramatically
as authority throughout the 16th century.
The handbooks given to most students entering European universities everywhere in Europe
in the 17th century warned them to follow Aristotle and authors who agreed with him
and not to depart from the thinking of the Aristotelians.
But by the seventeenth century, the dominant Christian synthesis in theology was that of
Saint Thomas Aquinas and his disciples and his interpreters who had utilized Aristotelian
philosophical language and conceptualization to explain in natural terms the mysteries
and truths of the Christian religion.
And once that linkage is made, the natural philosophy of Aristotle allows one to explain
and understand the truths of the Christian faith.
The association between Aristotle and Christianity becomes quite profound and there are a significant
number of Aristotelians in the 17th century who argue explicitly that God had sent Aristotle
into the world to prepare the human mind for the receipt of the Christian revelation, to
give it a philosophical language in which to understand the Christian faith.
We can begin to understand the educated Aristotelian scholastic world of the early 17th century
by knowing what it thought persuasive and how minds within it won or lost honest arguments.
Examinations and the exposition of arguments occurred in a format that was called the disputatio,
the disputation.
It is a form of argument, a presentation of conviction in both sentences, what you believe
and what you are going to persuade someone of and it is at the core of Aristotelian scholastic
ways of thinking.
The disputatio emphasized three factors that compelled belief.
And starting with the most important, these were authority, reason and experience.
First of course there is supernatural authority.
If something is given to you by God it comes from an indubitable source and the main supernatural
authority of course is scripture but scripture as correctly understood by appropriate authorities.
Then there are natural authorities and these dominate the education of European minds.
And to understand the 17th century's sense of natural intellectual, philosophical authority,
one must understand their sense of the presumptive authority of the past.
It is of the essence of a traditional society to believe that it possesses things that have
stood the test of time.
This is how you raise children.
This is how you grow crops if you don't want people to starve.
This is how you defend a town.
This is how you think about the world.
Authorities have stood the test of time.
They've been examined for centuries or millennia.
If there were errors in these authorities those errors would have been discovered early
on or at some point before the present.
Now this is not a wholly foreign way of thinking even today.
If you found yourself in an introduction to geometry class and the teacher said let's
look at Euclid's axioms and the person seated next to you raised a hand and said, you know
people give so much presumptive authority to Euclid most of you would go, oh no are
we going to have to put up with this all semester?
For thousands of years people have looked at Euclid's geometry and this freshman next
to me has seen the flaws.
We have our own sense of authorities that have stood the test of time and not merely
in mathematics.
I dare say that if in astronomy 101 or physics 101 someone presented Kepler's Laws of Planetary
Motion, Galileo's Laws, Newton's System of Gravitation and the freshman next to you said
you know there's so much deference given to the presumptive authority of the past.
What you would think is without being at the frontiers of astronomy you know if there'd
been a flaw in the second law of planetary motion someone would have found it.
Not the person seated next to me.
Well it is at the core of the disputatio that we are the beneficiaries of authorities
that have stood the test of time and these are above all else the Greeks and their interpreters.
And there is a special added authority to all ancient authors and texts integrated into
Christian theology and intellectual life.
Thus for example the astronomy of Ptolemy is seen to coincide so well with the Christian
faith that it adds to its authority.
The second aspect of the disputatio is reason.
From the Greeks on there is a certain western compact with reason.
We are rational beings.
If someone says to you two times six gives you twelve and you say yes I know that and
a bit later someone says two times six gives you fourteen something in you says because
you are heirs of that rational tradition you can't contradict yourself.
One can't be both a and not a.
If I show that thought leads to a logical contradiction I have invalidated it.
The West has simply believed we are not wild beasts when it comes to the mind.
We are disciplined.
We will not contradict ourselves.
But there are two primary modes of reason as the West thinks about it.
One is induction.
Induction is drawing general truths from a large set of particulars.
From a large number of particular pieces of data one infers one induces a general theory
a generalization that is true of all that data.
The second is deduction.
Deductive logic is one begins with something known to be true and one logically deduces
from it other truths that follow.
Just think back to the way you had to prove things in geometry and you have a perfect
case of deductive logic.
What follows from certain axioms and premises being true?
Well if we can begin all of our reasoning from received authorities who give us principles
known to be true then the appropriate model to the practice in the early 17th century and
the reason that is there in the disputatio is deductive reason deriving what follows
logically from things that are known by authority.
The third and least important part of the disputatio is experience which is not an
inductive logic a learning from the particulars of nature what is true in general nor a systematic
means of inquiry but above all an illustration of things known by authority and logical deduction.
Once you know something to be true from a deduction by Euclid you can give an example
of it in the world an illustration and indeed many professors in the sciences today at our
universities rather than leading students through the inductive experiments that led to something
being deemed true in chemistry or astronomy will merely illustrate what they already know
to be true and the function of experience in the disputatio is to illustrate things known
to be true by authority and logical deduction from authority and there is the added burden
that one should be able to account for the phenomena that what one has shown to be true
should account for the world as we observe it and indeed it will be the difficulty of
the received astronomy to account for the phenomena known increasingly to the 17th century
that will open one of the major avenues of criticism of the received system of knowledge.
The Aristotelian accomplishment is quite extraordinary in the minds of Europe Aristotle had taken
a world that seemed to us kaleidoscopic without order random without interrelationship and
reduced it to coherence found system made sense of it found order in it and central
to that was the Aristotelian system of causality that gave to Europeans an understanding of
how and why what things happen and what those things are.
There are four components to the Aristotelian system of causality.
Let me list them and we'll go through them material cause, formal cause, efficient cause
and final cause.
Aristotle asks in effect what has to be in order for the world to be as we observe it
and one obvious answer is there must be something from which the particular things of the world
are made.
If we want to give an explanation of a marble statue of Alexander the Great, there must
be marble.
If there were not marble, if there were nothing that could hold a shape, if there were only
liquids or gases, there couldn't be statues.
The material cause tells you what is the stuff of which something is made.
In the case of our marble statue of Alexander the Great, the material cause is the marble
of the statue.
Now note that marble is a set of potentials, a set of possibilities, a set of powers to
be potentials, but though that block of marble could have been made into thousands and thousands
of things, it was made into something very special, a statue.
So there must be, in addition to the stuff of which something is made, a form that that
stuff takes, a form that is actualized, realized out of the set of possibilities of that block
of marble.
The particular form, the statue of Alexander the Great, is the being actualized from the
stuff of the material cause, the marble.
We can talk about human souls this way as well.
In order for there to be a soul, there must be spirit.
Being incorporeal, non-bodily.
But spirit can be many things.
Among other things, angel, devil, there are incorporeal things.
One possibility of spiritual substance, of incorporeal substance, is realized in a human
soul, and what gives it that particular form is its formal cause.
Demons and the devil are ineluctably moved toward evil.
Angels are ineluctably moved toward the good.
The human soul is that spirit which is free to choose between good and evil.
That is its formal cause.
Its material cause is its spirit, its substance.
Now we could have that block of marble, and there could be the possibility of the form
of a statue, but nothing happens.
Being must actualize the form.
Something must actually bring that form into being.
In this case, the sculptor with his hammer and chisel.
Without the sculptor and his hammer and chisel, the efficient cause, the form, the marble
statue of Alexander the Great, could not be actualized from the substance, the matter,
which is marble.
Now to understand the wonderful fit of an Aristotelian worldview, in which nature is
seen as purposeful, and a Christian worldview, in which God does everything with a reason,
we need to understand final cause, the reason or purpose of the action.
The sculptor, the hammer and chisel, the marble, and the possibility of the form of
the statue of Alexander the Great, all of those are there.
If the sculptor does not have a reason to act, an end in mind, that's why final cause,
an end in mind, a purpose, a goal, the marble statue of Alexander the Great, never is brought
into being, never is actualized from those potentials of marble.
And given that we are talking about, for Christian Europe, a universe created by an
infinitely powerful supreme being, the study of final causes, the name of which is the
science of teleology, from telos, purpose, end.
The science of teleology asks, what is the end served?
The purpose of something being brought into being under the plan of God.
So Aristotelian scholastic understanding wishes to know the stuff from which something is
made.
That's important.
Something bodily or spiritual, that tells you a lot about its value, its nature.
What form, think of the difference between having gold and choosing to make an assassin's
dagger or a cross, right?
Four matters, spirit is an extraordinary substance, but what a difference between saint and sinner.
Four matters, efficient cause with something made by a human being or by God.
What a striking difference we have in our knowledge and what is the purpose, the end
served?
What does teleology teach us?
In distinguishing among material causes and formal causes, there are operating principles
in Aristotelian scholasticism that allows us to distinguish among the essences brought
into beings in the form, because we have a scale of perfection.
We know what is perfect, God is perfect.
And those qualities shared with God, love, spirit, not body, wisdom, those things shared
with God are more valuable.
The Aristotelian scholastic thinks in terms of the perfections inherent in any material
cause and formal cause.
One way to think of perfection as something that exists is imagine light in a room with
a dimmer.
The real perfection, the real quality, the positive thing is the light.
There's no such thing as darkness as a real thing, it's the absence of light.
You turn the dimmer, you diminish the light.
Sound is the real thing, you turn down the volume and you get to silence.
We have the qualities of God and we have the things that God has created and we have
their absences.
And that gives us a scale of being on which we may place everything in the world by how
close it is to the qualities of God and whether it has more or less of positive things.
So for example, God is immutable, unchangeable.
The immutable is higher and more important than the mutable.
We know that.
So the Aristotelian scholastic looks out at the heavens, they're unchanging, looks out
on earth and everything changes.
And it tells you a truly great mind should think about immutable things, God, or at least
the heavens, astronomy.
But what kind of person would think about crops or rocks?
You have a goal of contemplative understanding and appreciation of the perfections and purposes
of things.
From teleology we know that under God's design all things strive for God's order, for the
fulfillment of His purposes.
The world is a great chain of being, a hierarchy of perfections.
Given the mutable things of the earth and the immutable things of the heavens, there
is a fundamental divide between the sub-lunar world beneath the moon and celestial beings
and phenomena.
And there is an essential hierarchy of souls that govern things.
God is all perfection actualized, angels less so, pure intellect, incorporeal, but imperfect.
Hence the phrase, man is but little lower than the angels.
Now you understand where that comes from.
We have a reasoning soul but a corporeal body.
We have free will to choose between good and evil.
Beneath us the animals.
They have senses and non-rational learning but no freedom of the will.
Beneath them the plants.
They're capable of purposeful growth but no reproduction, no learning, no choice.
Then there are stones, holy body and lacking soul in its behaviors, at infinite remove
from God.
Why did God create both angels and stones?
St. Thomas Aquinas said his love was infinite and he brought all things into being.
Now what follows from being educated in such a system?
What should a mind capable of study and reflection know?
First, obviously it should have deep knowledge of the system as a whole and its lessons.
For example, there is the dramatic lesson, if you understand the chain of being, that
human beings can follow their body and fall further from the immutable perfection of God
to the basis center of earth, the location of hell, or escape their body and rise to
the immutable celestial heavens.
It's built into the system and one should know the system is a whole and its implications
for the meaning of life.
Two, a mind should have knowledge of perfections and purposes.
Above all, contemplative classification, one is not going to change the order of the world,
yielding wisdom of God's creation and of our place within it.
And the mind above all should dwell on higher, not lower things.
What we think of as the sciences of the modern era, with the exception of astronomy, would
all be the study of the baser and lower things.
This profound underlying conceptual system directs people to a sense of what a deep mind
should know.
This Aristotelian scholasticism is the system that had emerged officially triumphant after
all of the intellectual wars of the Renaissance and the 16th century, and it is enshrined
in the official curriculums of the secondary schools and the universities of Western Europe.
And with Francis Bacon, the subject of our next lecture, will begin the momentous assault
on the predominance of this system of thought, and in many ways the intellectual revolution
of the 17th century writ large, a reordering of the categories of the disputation, displacing
the presumptive authority of the past, moving from deductive to inductive reasoning once
stripped of authorities and the dramatic revaluation of the role of experience in human knowledge.
The overturning of the presumptive authority of the past will be one of the most profound
developments in the entire history of the West, and for any revolution will depend upon
it the separation of natural philosophy, the study of the natural world from theology
as two separate spheres.
That project will strike at the heart of the Aristotelian scholastic synthesis.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
