Hello. I'm Tom Rollins, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part
of the Superstar Teachers Series. They are produced by the Teaching Company. The lectures
on these tapes are titled The Birth of the Modern Mind, the Intellectual History of the
17th and 18th Centuries, Part 2. The lecturer is Professor Alan Charles Kors. Professor Kors
received his bachelor's degree from Princeton University and his master's and doctoral
degrees from Harvard University. He has been teaching history, specializing in the intellectual
history of Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries at the University of Pennsylvania since 1968.
He is the author and editor of several books, including Atheism in France, 1660 to 1729,
The Orthodox Sources of Disbelief, and Anticipations of Enlightenment in England, France and Germany.
His latest publication, The Shadow University, The Betrayal of Liberty on America's Campuses,
was co-authored with Harvey Silverglay. Professor Kors is also the editor-in-chief of the multi-volume
Oxford University Press Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment.
In addition to his teaching and publishing, Professor Kors has served as a member of the
Council of the National Endowment for the Humanities and on the editorial boards of
several scholarly journals. He has received post-doctoral fellowships from institutions
including the American Council of Learned Societies, the Davis Center for Historical
Studies at Princeton University, and the Smith Richardson Foundation. Professor Kors has
received two awards for distinguished college teaching and an award for the defense of academic
freedom.
Lecture 13, The Moderns, The Generation of 1680 to 1715.
Welcome to lecture 13, our introduction to the 18th century, in which we are going to
look at the generation within educated Europe from 1685 to 1715, one of the most revolutionary
generations in the history of European culture. Because it is a generation that intensifies
and that embodies a fundamental change of attitude toward the means of knowing the truth.
When this course began, we looked at the form of the disputatio that governed the communication
of knowledge, the persuasion of other human beings, the test of one's own knowledge as
the 17th century dawned, with its values of the presumptive authority of the past, deductive
reason from those authorities, and experience as illustration of what already was known
from deductive reasoning from received authorities. If we look at those categories of the disputatio,
we understand the profound transformation that has occurred within the educated European
reading public by the end of the 17th century. In terms of authority, there simply is no
longer the presumptive authority of the past. To the extent that our modern culture, in
which we find ourselves, is one that can be defined by its sense of the dynamic expanding
free acquisition of knowledge, new worlds always to be discovered and learned, that sense
of the past does not have presumptive authority lies very close to the heart of the transition
to the modern. Theological authority is still respected, but in the sphere of authority.
And there is this growing awareness within Europe that it does not wish theological authority
to intrude itself where it does not belong. So one sees a great movement in domain after
domain of knowledge away from theological authority to the rights of natural reason
and natural knowledge. The Western compact with reason remains in force, but in terms
of acquisition of knowledge, Western thinkers have shifted from a reliance upon deductive
knowledge of what logically follows from certain premises derived from authority to
inductive logic, the logic of inference from experience, of learning from the particulars
of nature. And it is when we turn to experience the least important part of the disputario
and we observe its elevation to the top of the system of persuasion, conviction, what
is deemed reasonable belief by the end of the 17th century, European thinkers are accustomed
to thinking of the book of nature, not the books of ancient Greeks or Medieval doctors.
And that sense of experience is linked to experiment in which it is not merely the inductive
logic leading to generalizations about nature on the part of the observer that determines
what we believe about the world in which we find ourselves. It is an experimental knowledge
in which experiments are designed precisely to test allowing nature and experience, not
the human mind alone to decide the nature of the real causes of natural phenomena.
There must be and the drama of the 18th century will be precisely that there is an analogy
emerging in more and more minds from the 17th century revolution in natural philosophy to
the means of new knowledge and re-examination of all claims of truth. If the past no longer
has presumptive authority in astronomy, in physics, then the principle of the presumptive
authority of the past has been broken and that increasingly will be true in thinking
about society, in thinking about politics, in thinking about all aspects of human and
natural life. How not to feel the powers of this model of natural inquiry by the end of
the 17th century when one looks back on its accomplishments. Kepler on planetary motion,
Galileo on mechanics in motion, Harvey on the circulation of the blood, Gilbert on magnetism,
Hook on elasticity, Torricelli on air pressure and the vacuum, Boyle on pneumatics, Huygens
on the pendulum and centrifugal force, and Isaac Newton on motion and optics and universal
gravitation. These issues are not just theoretical for the late 17th century. They believe that
they have seen the accomplishments of the new method of knowledge and that is central
to the new generation. A belief that Europe had acquired something that would alter both
knowledge and the human relationship to nature. Method that for the first time human beings
on this planet understood something about the proper methodical use of the human mind
in the acquisition of knowledge. Rightly or wrongly from our 20th century perspectives,
the generation from 1685 to 1715 increasingly associates the awesome accomplishments of 17th
century natural philosophy, science with induction from nature, ordered by reason into laws as
general and as universal as possible, confirmed by rigorous experiment and experience and
wherever possible put to the use and the benefit of humankind. People in this generation speak of
themselves explicitly as new philosophers and equivalents of that term exist in almost every
vernacular language of central and western Europe. The self-image of the new philosophers is seen
in their emerging heroes. So having examined much of 17th century thought, let's pause here and ask
what sides of our 17th century authors have become the legacy for the 18th century. It may be that from
the perspective of 20th century philosophy there are mutually exclusive schools of thought emerging
out of the 17th century's intellectual revolution, but historically it is simply a matter of fact
that this generation and the early 18th century in general found in all of these authors, sides,
aspects of thought, ways of looking at the world that they now began to merge together
as the new philosophy. From Bacon they took the assault upon authority above all his doctrine
of the idols of the theater, that we had worshiped falsely before philosophers rather than learning
humbly from nature. They took from Bacon a sense that induction moving from particular to general
and testing by experiment was humble learning from nature and they took from Bacon as well
the belief that the freedom of natural inquiry meant freedom from religious and theological
interference with the attempt to understand God's creation. They took as well Bacon's vision that
knowledge was a human power that could enhance the well-being of the species and reduce the suffering
and helplessness of humankind and they took from Bacon his central metaphor of method as more
important than genius. It was not for them that Newton was more a genius than Aristotle.
Who could be more a genius than Aristotle? It was that as Bacon had argued, genius was like
fleetness of foot, method like the right route from one place to another and genius on the wrong
path just sped more quickly away from truth where even plotting on the right path when arrived more
and more closely to knowledge of nature. From Descartes the new philosophers took the absolute
right of philosophy to begin in doubt. There was nothing that had to be believed absent
rational conviction. They took from Descartes as well the quest for order and clarity that the
world could be understood could be made clear and in the study of natural phenomena they took
from Descartes as part of this a belief in the mechanics of the natural world that we could come
to understand the laws the mechanisms governing the natural order. From Galileo they took the
desperate need for the freedom of natural philosophy and the catastrophe of any interference
with that freedom. They took from him his admonition that one must look in the books of
nature not in the books of man and that the language of that book of nature was mathematics
and that we must mathematicianize our view of nature to arrive at those general and universal
laws that would allow us to understand the real causes of the phenomena around us. From John Locke
they took the dramatic epistemological claim that all knowledge arises in and is bounded by
experience that where there is no experience the honest human intellectual response is an
admission of ignorance and they would take pride in admitting ignorance of areas and issues and
questions on which there was no experience from which to draw. They also took from Locke his sense
that all complex knowledge was constructed from confirmable units of simple experience and that
all claims of truth upon us may be indeed must be examined in such a light and from Newton
they took nothing less than the deep belief that nature was lawful and designed that the human
mind was able to see into its laws and designs to see through nature to nature's god. They took
from Newton wonderment that three laws of motion and the law of gravity that there was a force
gravity that varied directly according to any two masses whatsoever in the universe and inversely
according to the square of the distance between them and that with such a mathematical formulation
both celestial and terrestrial physics fell into place. Newton gave them the very model of the
power of an inductive system of empirical natural inquiry. Now much of how we characterize this
generation we do from hindsight. If we stop the clock at any moment between 1685 and 1715
and looked at the universities, looked at the educated, looked at the learned journals,
it certainly would not have been obvious what was emerging that would so dominate and shape
the 18th century. For this period between the 17th and 18th centuries is still very much a mixed
intellectual world but the new philosophers are emerging, they are increasingly setting the terms
of debate and they are increasingly winning the affections of the growing reading public of Europe.
If we looked at the universities it would not appear that way. Their tradition reign supreme,
Aristotelian scholastics and their texts still dominate the universities of Europe.
The influence of Pascal and Bale are still large and deep in religious senses. Skepticism and
fideism are vital forces but fideism has been condemned in Catholic Europe which insists upon
rational and natural proofs of the essential preambles of the faith, the existence of God,
indeed the goodness of God, indeed the immortality of the soul and fideism and skepticism are about
to be swept away in the wake of the Newtonian and general scientific revolutions by the new
confidence in the natural philosophy. The new philosophy in this period from 1685 to 1715
has achieved profound theoretical strength and concrete accomplishments and these are linked
in the public's mind. First there is John Locke whose theory of knowledge, whose epistemology has
given to Europeans what seems a lucid, coherent, compelling account of how the mind works and what
use of the mind made possible the extraordinary discoveries and new understandings of the 17th
century's intellectual revolution and then there is the concrete accomplishment of all of those
individual natural philosophies whom I enumerated early in this lecture but above all of Newton
and his Principia, his system of the world that people now read not only as the first true
understanding of nothing less than the system of the world, Newton's phrase, but as the embodiment
of how the mind can know the system of the world. This generation as well with the universities
still so dominated by the Aristotelian scholastics gives rise to new locations of change and influence
among educated Europeans, the reading public, authors, these outside of the clerical orders.
One sees throughout Europe the rise of scientific and learned academies and societies.
One sees extraordinary growth in the publication of new learned journals in which the new
philosophers communicate with each other. One sees as well in major metropolitan centers
new coffee houses where people need to sit and discuss the new knowledge and the new world of
learning and one sees and it shows up in sales and what publishers will publish a growing secular
reading public with an insatiable will to know. Understand the full drama of being a part of
that moment. What people had believed for thousands and thousands of years had been swept away by
the intellectual revolutions of the 17th century. There were by means of these new methods, there
were by means of the new philosophy, worlds, new worlds to know, a universe to explore,
a thousand questions to re-examine from the beginning. That accounts for so much of the rapidly
growing appeal of the new philosophy. The exhilaration with which 17th century new philosophers
end and this is a very dramatic sign their popularizers are being read. So much of the
intellectual revolution of the 17th century occurs in highly complex, dense, abstract theoretical
works or in works requiring deep knowledge of mathematics and mechanics to understand. Between
the late 17th and the early 18th century there is a burgeoning industry of popularization,
of explaining these discoveries to a broader reading public, of translating from the most
learned to all the educated what the 17th century had wrought in terms of changes in human knowledge.
And one sees in that reading public and its changing tastes an alteration of attitudes
toward tradition, toward knowledge, and toward nature. For example, an impatience with witchcraft
belief and witchcraft persecution, a hostility to anything that can be labeled superstition.
The new philosophy is beginning to change attitudes not only about knowledge but about
knowledge linked to religion as well. Its dramatic currents include empiricism that
all issues are open to inquiry from experience, that real knowledge is quantifiable in terms
of the operations of the natural world, that we may naturalize a worldview and not attribute
the causes of phenomena to things beyond nature when there is so much to know in nature that
will explain our world. The location of God's providence not in miracle or divine interventions
but in the very natural laws that increasingly are seen as reflections of God's wisdom, power,
and design. It produces virtually a new religious aesthetic. Who would be more admirable?
A clockmaker who built a clock in the town square that frequently breaks down and the
clockmaker runs into intervene and people say, oh, how awesome this clockmaker is. Look at his
interventions in what he has created or a clockmaker whose very design of the mechanism
fulfills his will, his design, his wishes without further intervention. This relocation
of religious awe in the self-governing mechanisms of nature rather than in divine intervention
poses profound problems for the Judeo-Christian commitment to miracle as the mark of our deepest
encounter with divine providence in this world. No wonder the 18th century will be so revolutionary.
The location of God's will in the natural order and laws of nature means as well that that mechanism
governing human behavior that we seek happiness, that we flee suffering increasingly is seen as
God's design for the world and thus the new philosophy yields a new and revolutionary
secular moral criterion of human happiness. In both England and France at the end of the 17th
and the dawn of the 18th century, we witness extraordinary struggles in the learned world,
in mutual refutations, in scores and hundreds of volumes of the ancients versus the moderns.
Where does wisdom lie? And while many hold that there is not necessarily an aesthetic progress
from the ancients to the moderns, Greek tragedy may be better than modern tragedy. The new philosophers
are winning the struggle for public opinion in the belief that knowledge and science
are cumulative, that there is a progress in human knowledge, and that that knowledge is
capable of producing a progress in human affairs. The ancients are not from this perspective
the wise elderly minds of humanity. They came first. They are the children of humanity. We are
the elders of civilization. We are those who have learned cumulatively and added to the storehouse
of human understanding. And central to the new philosophy is the vision that the more we know
about the real causes of things, the more we may change the world according to the heart's
natural desire for human happiness and ease from pain. Across Europe, the learned impose
often upon a frightened populace an end to witchcraft persecutions because they no longer
believe that crops fail for supernatural reasons. But for natural reasons that we may understand
and affect cattle don't die because of diabolical or demonic agency. They die for natural reasons
we can understand. People don't become ill or undergo changes of personality as a result of
possession or supernatural agency. We are in a natural world. We may understand these things
and understanding them. We may alter them. This changes so dramatically. One's experience of
the world. What is it to live through a crop failure that one believes a punishment from God
or a crop failure that one believes is an understandable phenomena that may be altered
by human knowledge and the application of that knowledge. And so as the 18th century dawns,
the view that a mechanized empirical inquiry into nature with rights of free inquiry will lead
to and it is a dramatic word for the 18th century, utility, the increase in well-being,
the reduction in unnecessary suffering becomes a part of central consciousness in the European
mind. There are so many problems that accompany it. Miracle, Descartes, dualism and the problem of
what to do with soul in natural knowledge. But there is an emerging consensus that we must remove
theology from areas not properly in its sphere and we must devise a theology that is consistent
with and evolving with increases in natural knowledge. These are both revolutionary phenomena
that will further secularize the West. In so many of these aspects, we stand at the birth
of modern consciousness, scientific, secular, inquiring, seeking a principle of authority
apart from mere tradition and repetition of the past, but tempted by skepticism and leaps of faith
and the above all critical and for certain confused by the range of choices it has created
for itself. For better or for worse, we are, like the 18th century, the heirs of the 17th
century mind living in its light and living in its shadows. Thank you very much.
