Welcome to lecture 14, our Introduction to Deism.
Deism is a subject we will be addressing a great deal throughout the 18th century.
So in this lecture we will attempt to come to some fundamental understandings of what
deism is.
But it's important to understand the full drama of the deistic moment of the 18th century.
Europe has been for so long by the 18th century a profoundly Christian civilization.
Through it has been challenged militarily on its fringes by Islam, both initially in
Spain and well into the late 17th century by the Ottoman Turks in the Balkans and indeed
to the very gates of Vienna.
It also has had Christian heresies that it has suppressed time and time again, culminating
however in the Reformation that divides religious Europe, but divides a profoundly and fundamentally
Christian European civilization.
It has always suspected that there are underground traditions of paganism and ancient Greek belief,
that these are limited either to the superstitious folkloric rural poor or to a handful of erudite
who are believed to be keeping certain traditions alive in private.
Europe is a profoundly and uniformly Christian culture with the handful of exceptions of
other sects and other religions that, for example, is in the case of the Jews, it tolerates
to greater or lesser degrees.
The 18th century witnesses nothing less and less dramatic than a full scale assault upon
the foundations of Christian belief in European culture.
Judaism is the beginning of a process of what well might be called from much of the
European intellectual world and by no means all, to say the least, the de-Christianization
of European civilization.
So it is a very profound phenomenon at which we are going to look.
It is also an appropriate time therefore for me to remind you, as I said I would do every
six or seven lectures, that nothing that I do is a question of advocacy, everything
that I do appear I do as an intellectual historian.
My goal is to make historically comprehensible and real, to make you understand from within
various ways of thinking.
In this case, deistic thinking and the deistic assault upon Christianity.
Let's begin with some simple definitions of deism from which almost all other aspects
of deism follow.
One deism is belief in a God who has created and whose providence governs the universe,
but disbelief in the Judeo-Christian revelation and tradition about that God.
A second way to think about deism is it is the complete, the categorical naturalization
of providence.
God's love and power and concern for the creation, for the deist, is manifested only
in nature and the laws of nature.
A third way to think of deism is that it is the complete generalization of providence,
a rejection of particular providence.
God governs the universe through general laws that apply to all of nature.
Gravity is not something that keeps Christians alone from spinning off the earth.
The law of falling bodies does not apply only to pagans or heretics who fall from cliffs.
The laws of nature or general God's providence is general.
The antithesis of such a view would be Calvin's view of particular providence in which Calvin
had argued not a blade of grass grows, not one leaf falls from one tree except by the
express particular will of God.
For the deist, God does not enter into particular relations with the creation.
His providence is general and universal.
From such a view of God, there follows the absolute rejection of revelation which would
be a particular providence manifesting itself by God, giving knowledge to one time and one
place not available to others, miracle which would be both a supernaturalization and particularization
of providence and indeed of any particular relationship to God whatsoever.
God is the author of nature.
That is the majesty of the divine will made manifest to us.
God has created us in a natural order which is sufficient to divine purposes.
He has created us in a natural order through which we shall know all that there is to know
about God and about the moral law.
The roots of deism are obviously in the naturalism of the 17th century, the more that one comes
to locate the wisdom, the providence, the goodness of God in the general design, laws,
mechanisms of nature, the less prone one is to identify the majesty of God in exceptions
to those very things whose universality and generality prove his magnificence, his absolute
dominion over and through the natural order.
The roots of deism lie in the 17th century's critique of authority and tradition and the
presumptive authority of the past.
The invitation never made explicit but implicit in the rejection of the principle of authority
that all questions are open to reexamination by the human mind according to new method
and without obligation to the beliefs of the past.
Deism is indebted ironically to the fideistic Pierre Baill and to his own critical scholarship
in which the comparison of the supernatural and the natural and the argument for the incompatibility
of the two is made in an age that increasingly sees God in the natural order.
It is indebted as well to a movement within radical Protestant theology then called Sosinianism
now called in the 20th century Unitarianism that engaged in anti-Trinitarian thought.
So Sineons are Christians but they believe that Christ is the Messiah, not part of the
Trinity, not participant in the Godhead.
And they direct a large number of arguments against the divinity of Christ and the notion
of the Trinity that will be embraced by deistic authors.
Traditionally, historians and students of religion have distinguished between two sides
of 18th century deism though in fact they are profoundly interrelated.
But for analytic purposes the distinction is useful, they have distinguished between
positive deism, deistic theology, its teachings about the existence and goodness of God and
how it links to God through nature and on the other hand critical deism.
The deistic rejection of all claims of revealed religion and in the case of the intense drama
of 18th century Europe the rejection of the Judeo-Christian tradition.
Positive deism asserts and teaches the knowable existence of a universal God acting through
universal providence, the laws of nature and known to us by universal faculties, the sense
experience and reason with which God has endowed us and known in a universal, medium nature.
Compare this to knowing God through supernatural faith or grace on the basis of Scripture
available only to those who possess that Scripture by means of particular providence.
For the deist we know God through the laws of nature of whom, of which he is the author.
And that universal God of nature has given every human being senses and reason.
Those are the universal faculties and we know God through those and we do not have to seek
out this or that time or place.
We do not need the accidental fortune of being born in a house that teaches us this or that
holy book.
We know God through the universal medium in which he has placed all of his children nature.
How is that God known to us from his work, from his acts, that nature which is open to
our examination by means of the faculties with which God himself has endowed us.
Thus, God is not the author of this or that tradition known by fortune to this or that
particular people.
He is God the creator and providential law giver through the structure and mechanisms
of nature and those laws link us to God's will.
Look again at the crucial issue of ethics for the 18th century.
We know by the study of nature that we are governed by seeking pleasure and fleeing pain.
Thus, we know from nature that God has intended us for the pursuit of happiness.
It is self-evident.
That is known to us rationally as well.
The English dais, Matthew Tyndall, whose one work produces 110 critiques and most people
discover Tyndall through theologians making their reputations by writing refutations of
him.
They find the refutation so interesting they go and find Tyndall to read.
Tyndall argues about our knowledge of our right to pursue happiness on the basis of God's
perfection, God's self-sufficiency.
God is a perfect being, whole, complete.
God lacks nothing.
That means God did not create the creation for himself as if he had a lack or a need
before the creation.
But if God did not create the creation for himself, then he created it for the creation,
for the happiness of the beings he brought into being, the happiness of the creatures.
In our case, the happiness of human beings is the goal of God's creation.
All of these are the themes of positive daism.
Negative daism is, above all else, the critique of revelation, the critique of scripture.
It criticizes scripture on historical grounds.
What are the books of scripture?
What are canon?
They were books chosen among many by groups of human beings in the ancient world who picked
and chose, who voted on what was from God and what was not, and then declared their choices
divinely guided.
And even with those choices from among books, they could not avoid the loss of veracity
and truthfulness.
Scripture contradicts itself.
It contradicts history as known from other sources and from other peoples.
Look at chronology.
The Chinese have a chronology of themselves, a recorded history that goes back before the
date of creation possible from the chronology of the Old Testament.
They criticize the sources of knowledge of scripture as knowledge that was available
to barbarous and ignorant peoples at barbarous and ignorant times.
They criticize the science of scripture, which has been amended and corrected by the scientific
revolution.
Who are these people who believe that God is more ignorant than the philosophers of
the 17th century, who dare to attribute these books of error not to men, not to peoples
in particular times and places, but to God, the author of nature itself?
Their criticism of revelation is also moral.
Look at the Judeo-Christian God and his particularity.
How could there be a chosen people given the universal God of all creation of all nature?
Look at the moral quality of that God projected by the human beings who wrote scripture.
Joshua is commanded by God to slay every man, woman, and child of tribes in the ancient
Near East to take women into slavery.
What kind of being does revelation offer us when we compare that to the universal God
knowable through nature, who loves and wills the happiness of all beings?
They criticize revelation in terms of the very function of the mysteries it contains.
Who benefits from mysteries in religion?
Only those guardians of the mysteries, priests, clergy, who gain power, influence, and wealth
by claiming that they alone can interpret the mysteries inaccessible to others in holy
books.
The ultimate perspective of the dayist here is that human beings have been separated by
scripture from their divine natural birthright, their senses which they are asked to deny,
their reason which they are asked to deny, their pursuit of pleasure which they are asked
to deny.
As we saw in Locke's, the reasonableness of Christianity, Locke is part of a new apologetic
movement in Christianity that argues on behalf of the divinity of scripture by means of empirical
proof for miracles and fulfillment of prophecy.
That broader movement in English theology, by the way, is called Latitudinarianism.
Its critics give it the name.
They take too much latitude in dealing with scripture and religion, but the name sticks.
And the argument is miracles and prophecies prove revelation, therefore the content of
revelation, though mysterious, is true.
Being true in the Word of God, it is blasphemous to deny or to question it.
But the dayists will attack these proofs by miracle and these proofs by prophecy.
And what stakes we are dealing with?
For Europe is asking itself the question.
Do we, in fact, or not, possess a book unlike all other books from God himself that transcends
all other knowledge?
Do we believe this in the 18th century?
This response or that the content of something known as true cannot possibly be mysterious.
For that which is not understood cannot be known to be true.
And that scripture in addition poses a profound theological problem.
The content of scripture is linked by Christians to divinity, but God is the author of our
minds and he is the author of nature.
And these are linked by reason, a truth of logic and evidence.
And true religion must agree with natural reason and evidence.
True scriptural knowledge would have to be coterminal with natural knowledge.
And if that is the case, what possible need for revelation when God created nature and
minds capable of understanding nature and what God intends for us through nature?
Who profits from any other claim only the clergy, the mysterious guardians, the self-appointed
keepers of the secrets?
And they tell us that what we owe God is a sacrifice of our freedom of thought.
But the dais argue freedom of thought is always essential because even the decision to obey
authorities is a decision one makes, a choice one freely makes, so that at any level free
choice is a necessity.
We are told to give obedience to the church.
Which church?
Catholic, Lutheran, Calvinist, Islam, Jewish?
Which church?
We must inquire which act of obedience.
What hypocrites the dais claim, Christ's audience was not told to believe whatever
their fathers had believed because humility was what one owed God.
They were told to think for themselves and believe new things.
Missionaries don't preach humility before tradition and the presumptive authority of
the past when they go abroad.
Communities invite new thinking and breaking with tradition.
And how are we to resolve disputes among and within sects?
Freedom of thought alone gives value to one's beliefs and choices.
Who profits from its denial again only the priests?
And if we freely inquire what do we find?
The English dais argue that in fact the prophecies did not come true, that there is an extraordinary
lack of historical knowledge and scholarship in the widespread uncritical acceptance of
such a claim.
The alleged accomplishment of the prophecies of the Old Testament and the new the dais argue
is accomplished only by the most metaphorical and allegorical interpretations of biblical
passages and such a method could prove anything.
The English dais, Anthony Collins will argue that if one reads St. Matthew on the conception
of Mary as fulfilling Isaiah's prophecy about the virgin birth.
If one looks at the original Hebrew, the Hebrew word meant young woman.
It didn't mean virgin in the sense in which we now use that term.
And it indicated simply that a human savior was accepted.
And further, Collins claims Isaiah was talking about such an event occurring within his own
lifetime.
Correctly understood by means of scholarship, Jewish belief in the mortality of the soul,
its idea of a chosen people, contradictions in the early history of the church, the precariousness
of and the human decisions involved in the creation of canon that accounts for the incompatibility
of fulfillment of prophecy with scholarship.
As those who chose what were the canonical texts of the New Testament made their decisions,
they sought books that seemed to fulfill prophecy, but they did not even know enough
to bring them into harmony.
The dais thus offer an historical and linguistic critique of the claims of fulfillment of prophecy.
They also charge the authors, the human authors of scripture with anthropomorphism, giving
us a God in human form, a God with human qualities, portraying God in states of rest, anger, jealousy,
and so on.
With pre-scientific superstitions, Moses goes to the Pharaoh's court and the Pharaoh's magicians
throw down staffs that become talking snakes.
That is science, that is rational ground for belief, and indeed the dais will argue the
Jews and the Christians and their alleged holy books projected vile human traits onto
the deity, a deity who commands the slaughter of innocence.
When they invest God with uncommon ignorance, Christ saying that a seed must die before
it could bear fruit.
Why an illiterate English farmer knows more about nature than the God described in the
scriptures?
The best example of negative dais and perhaps is Thomas Woolston who will die in prison
for his work, his discourse on miracles.
Woolston tries to protect himself by saying, I want allegorical, not literal interpretations,
mystical interpretations, but all of them are based on the impossibility of the supposed
miracle and on the greed and fraud of the clergy, even in what he counts as a miracle.
Woolston lists as one of the miracles of Christ, the expulsion of the money changers from the
temple.
Yes, imagine that, there we are in Jerusalem, capital of a Roman province at its center
of commerce with police and guards, and Christ comes in and expels the money changers from
the temple.
Why it's a miracle?
Obviously it couldn't happen literally.
Try that one in the center of London or Paris, one man at the center of trade.
No, it's an allegory that one day truth will expel a corrupted clergy that seeks only
profit and that stands between us and true knowledge of God.
He will address the issue of the gathering swine.
Are we to believe that God stopped this swine herd and transferred demons from a human being
into these pigs who plunged off their cliffs to their death?
Think about the poor swine herd going back to his boss, Woolston writes, and say you'll
never guess what happened.
We're not to believe this is a miracle.
What it means is the truth about God will drive the swine-ish clergy to their destruction
when that truth is known among mankind.
Look at the woman with the bloody issue, the miracle of the bloody issue, she's been bleeding
for a dozen years.
Any doctor now will tell you it can't be very serious as an illness, and we know all about
the history of psychosomatic illnesses above all related to sexuality.
Are we to believe that that is a miracle?
No, give it an allegorical interpretation that we have been paying our money to greedy
false doctors of the church and will be cured only when we abandon them and know the actual
truth of God.
And then we have the miracle of Christ smiting the fig tree because it won't bear fruit.
That is God, the author of nature, expecting a fig tree to bear fruit out of season.
And there he is again, as in the case of the gathering swine, destroying someone else's
property.
What does this have to do with God, the magnificent universal author of nature?
What Wolston is really saying, as his contemporaries understood, is that the literal miracles
did not occur.
But if that were true, then what becomes of the proof of revelation by scientific evidence
of miracle?
The day is to conclude in body a striking hatred of the Christian clergy and their role
and a contempt for the Judeo-Christian portrayal of God in this alleged holy book of Scripture
that has been written by wicked and ignorant men.
God for the day has revealed himself to us in nature.
There has been no new revelation, no new morality, no new truth beyond what we know in nature.
There is no need for a grace beyond nature, nor for interpreters of a mysterious being.
God in his loving creation has made mankind self-sufficient with reason and knowledge of
the duty to pursue happiness.
What has kept us from this?
Those who deny reason, who deny the natural faculties and inclinations, who deny the natural
right and moral criterion from God himself of human happiness via applied knowledge in
this natural world.
In short, we have been kept from God's intentions by the Christians.
An astonishing issue has been joined, and our culture has never been quite the same
since that occurred.
Thank you very much.
