Hello, I'm Tom Rollins, President of the Teaching Company.
These lectures are part of the Superstar Teachers Series.
They are produced by the Teaching Company.
The lectures on these tapes are titled The Birth of the Modern Mind, the Intellectual
History of the 17th and 18th Centuries, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Alan Charles Kors.
Professor Kors received his bachelor's degree from Princeton University and his master's
and doctoral degrees from Harvard University.
He has been teaching history, specializing in the intellectual history of Europe in the
17th and 18th centuries at the University of Pennsylvania since 1968.
He is the author and editor of several books, including Atheism in France, 1660 to 1729,
The Orthodox Sources of Disbelief, and Anticipations of Enlightenment in England, France, and Germany.
His latest publication, The Shadow University, The Betrayal of Liberty on America's Campuses,
was co-authored with Harvey Silverglade.
Professor Kors is also the editor-in-chief of the multi-volume Oxford University Press
Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment.
In addition to his teaching and publishing, Professor Kors has served as a member of the
Council of the National Endowment for the Humanities and on the editorial boards of
several scholarly journals.
He has received post-doctoral fellowships from institutions including the American Council
of Learned Societies, the Davis Center for Historical Studies at Princeton University,
and the Smith Richardson Foundation.
Professor Kors has received two awards for Distinguished College Teaching and an award
for the Defense of Academic Freedom.
Lecture 1, Introduction, Intellectual History and Conceptual Change.
Hello and welcome to our course on the birth of the modern mind, the intellectual history
of the 17th and 18th centuries.
I'm Alan Charles Kors, Professor of History at the University of Pennsylvania, where I
have been teaching for 30 wonderful years.
Since we will be talking with each other for an extended period of time now, the accent
is from Jersey City, New Jersey, with a touch of every other place I have ever lived.
Our course, being a course on intellectual history, let me talk a bit about intellectual
history as a discipline and as a way of thinking about the world.
One of the hardest things to convince students of in general is that ideas and ways of thinking
and ways of understanding the world have a history.
When we think of great historical changes in human affairs, we tend to think of political
history, social history, economic history, military history, and in contemporary times
of gender relations and sexual history.
But if you think about it, all of the higher species have relations of power.
They have social organization.
They organize their own means of production.
They engage in struggles with each other.
They are wars for the means of survival.
And they certainly engage in relationships of gender and sexuality.
We are not different from the other species in that regard.
What makes our history remarkably different is that we are thinking beings of a different
order.
In addition to humor, perhaps one of the more singular human characteristics, we are distinguished
from the other higher species above all else by our capacity for abstract thought.
We mediate our relationship to nature by means of our thought and our understanding.
And that is why we as human beings have more than a biological history, than an evolutionary
history.
We have what we think of as a living history, in which major changes occur not across geological
and evolutionary time, but across decades, centuries, and millennia.
If one looks at the life of termites, birds, raccoons, squirrels, cats and dogs, 500, 1,000,
2,000, 10,000 years ago, they are essentially the same.
Their political history, their social history, their economic history, their sexual relations.
But if we look at human life, all of these aspects of our own lives have changed precisely
because we think about the natural order.
We think about the world in which we find ourselves.
And we change our behaviors, our relationships to nature, our relationships to each other,
our expectations, our senses of what is possible and impossible, what we may or may not do in
this world based upon that thinking.
And that is what lends the uniquely human aspect to our history.
Such that if we are to understand our economic, social, political, military, sexual history,
we have to understand the changes in the history of human thought, for it is on the basis of
the way that we think about the world, that we organize our relationship to it.
One of the hardest things to make people understand as an intellectual historian is that human
thought has a history, that the way we think now, that the way we understand the world is
not the way people always have understood it or thought about it, that some of the most
revolutionary, I would say the most revolutionary changes in being human have occurred precisely
because we have changed the way in which we think about the world.
In particular, we change our thinking about the natural order, about what is out there
to be known.
And let's give you a fancy word for that, ontology, the theory or science of being existence.
What is out there?
What is possibly out there to be known?
What's the stuff of the world?
What's it made of?
What can and can't be in the world in which we find ourselves?
You do not think the same way as your forebears do about ontology.
We change our thinking about why things happen, that is to say about causality.
What makes things occur?
What changes things?
In brief, why do things happen?
You do not think the same as your forebears about that essential issue.
And we change our thinking about knowledge itself.
What is it to know?
When should I be persuaded?
What's a good argument?
What's an awful wall argument?
At what point do I have to say, yes, he or she is right and I'm wrong?
At what point do I say, that's advice that I should follow.
That person knows what he or she is talking about.
And the fancy term for a theory of knowledge is epistemology.
The theory or science of knowledge.
Most people rarely stop to think that they live in the midst of a history of abstract
human thought.
That they are the products of changes in that history of abstract human thought.
That they are the inheritors of a philosophy, of an ontology, a theory of causality and epistemology.
Even people who do not think formally about aesthetics talk prose.
They may not know that they're talking prose, which is a category maybe distinguished from
poetry, but they are nonetheless talking prose.
You are thinking philosophically whether or not you are aware that you are thinking philosophically.
Or you have received from historical change theories of being, theories of causality,
theories of epistemology, and debates and divisions on those subjects that in fact govern
your lives, govern your behaviors and account for so much of what is unique to the particular
moment of history in which you find yourselves.
The history of abstract thought then is not some arid, detached, ethereal subject, though
there's nothing wrong with arid, detached, ethereal subject.
It is very much an essential part of understanding ourselves as historical phenomena.
Changes in our thinking and understanding alter our very relationship to nature, including
to social phenomena.
What we do to stay alive, to feed ourselves, to protect ourselves, all of these things,
how we organize our societies, what we think of as right and wrong, all of these things
are products of changes in human ways of thinking.
The challenge for any intellectual historian is that every generation and every civilization
tends to think of its own way of thinking about the world and about thinking itself.
That's true, what's false, what's plausible, what's implausible, as somehow natural.
As if, by genetics, everyone at all times and places surely has thought the way that
we think.
Intellectual history, however, the study of human intellectual behavior over time teaches
us that our thought has a history of which our own ways of thinking are the product.
And learning that history, we see our own thought in our own lives and times in relationship
to the origins of those ways of thinking.
And my deepest hope for this course is that you will see, in effect, the birth of the
modern minds.
You will see, in the 17th and 18th century, modern ways of thinking emerging, being born
as living historical phenomena.
And we will also see how often our thought has arisen as an unintended consequence of
its origins, that debates often unique to the 17th and 18th centuries, with meanings
unique to the 17th and 18th centuries, gave birth to ways of thinking that then had lives
of their own, and produced consequences that would have astonished the thinkers associated
with those new ways of thinking.
If someone from the 20th century were transported back in time, 300, 500, 1,000, 2,000 years,
I think he or she most easily would learn that other times relationships of power, production,
and social organization would most easily learn relationships of gender and how the sexes
relate to each other.
You would figure out what you had to do to appease power, obey who needed to be obeyed,
earn your living, keep yourselves alive as best one could in that world.
What would seem most foreign to you in any prior time would be that past culture's way
of thinking about the world and about thinking itself.
Saying to people, but that's impossible, and having them say, but no, that's the way
the world is, saying, but you can't know that, and having them say, but no, we do know that.
That is where you would find yourself most a stranger, because that is where the world
has changed the most.
And other changes that seem so dramatic, science, technology, medicine, expanded senses of the
possibilities and limitations of human life, these arose above all else because we changed
our ways of thinking.
Now, let's talk a moment about what intellectual history is and is not.
It is not the analytic or judgmental history of philosophy in which we ask the question
who was right and who was wrong, who was wise and who was foolish or fatuous, who made good
arguments and who made bad arguments.
There is a place for those questions, and analytic philosophers doing the history of
philosophy pose those questions brilliantly and usefully.
But intellectual history has as its goal an understanding of the past as the past.
It is not our task to summon thinkers of the 17th and 18th century to the bar of 20th
century wisdom and say who was right, who was wrong, who was deep, who was shallow.
Imagine if one were studying 13th century Tibetan Buddhism, and the question one asked
was does this conform or not conform to what's being taught in Yale philosophy or science
departments in 1998?
Whatever else you would or wouldn't be doing, what you would not be doing in that case would
be exploring Tibetan Buddhism of the 13th century.
This can be true in political history as well to attempt to understand kingship patterns
or tribal patterns in Europe in the 5th or 10th or 12th centuries and say but that's
not democratic theory might well be true but it wouldn't leave us historically rich, historically
informed about the nature of human life on this planet before we came along.
So the philosophical history of philosophy rightly asks about the truth value or power
of prior ways of thought.
But intellectual history explores the past and the spirit of the cultural anthropologist.
Not to judge of its merits or its demerits but to understand it as much as is possible
on its own historical terms.
To attempt to understand something about the most mysterious other in the world, human
beings, same flesh and blood and genetic components as we who lived before us in other times,
other places and behave differently in this case behave so differently with their minds.
And to attempt to understand moving out of ourselves and into their world to know them
that that's what history is to know them to understand their ways of thinking and the
changes to which they gave birth.
So we shall not ask in this course who was wise or foolish to say the least you can make
those judgments without me.
The world according to course is not a course that you would be attentive to.
The intellectual history of the 17th and 18th centuries is taught by someone who has spent
his life studying their education, studying their debates, indeed opening their mail and
their correspondence in general to understand their ways of thinking.
That allows us to enter into the world of another time.
So my point of view always will be historical in this course.
How are people educated?
What debates did they engage in?
What changed in their ways of thinking?
What were the consequences of those changes?
How authors were read in their own times and by the immediate generations that followed
whose reading and adaptation and extension and application of earlier thinkers gave rise
to the modern world in which we find ourselves.
And if we succeed, we should observe and understand more deeply, nothing less than the birth of
the modern mind.
The intellectual revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries was profound in its consequences
for the human condition, far more so than any political or social revolution of that
period of European history that historians label the early modern period.
And that intellectual revolution itself contributed crucially to revolutions in European life.
Think upon it this way.
If a culture changes the way that it thinks about truth, about nature, about the knowable,
about the possible and the impossible, about the causes of things, about what it may have
mastery over and what it must be fatalistic in the face of, that culture will alter its
expectations and behavior in almost all areas of human life.
If a culture changes the way it thinks about using mind properly, what's persuasive?
How do you know something?
How do you distinguish between ignorance and a human conquest in the world of knowledge?
It changes the way it thinks about everything.
A conceptual transformation is not contained to areas of thought alone.
For example, one of the most dramatic changes that we are going to observe in the course
of these 24 lectures is a transformation in the European attitude toward received intellectual
authority.
The breaking down of the notion with which the 17th century begins of the presumptive
authority of the past.
But to change one's evaluation of inherited intellectual authority is to change one's
whole attitude toward authority in general to the weight of the past in general.
If one of the principles that holds you to the old astronomy, for example, is not astronomical
reasoning but above all the sense that the past is presumptively right, that tradition
is presumptively right, and you change your thinking about astronomy or about how one
recognizes the truth in a manner that no longer makes sacred the authority of the past, then
you change your whole attitude to authority in general.
If there is not presumptive intellectual authority, if the past was wrong in your view about the
most crucial questions of human knowledge, reality, causality and possibility, then what
makes it right about political structure, about social structure, about economic transactions,
about the possibilities of organized human life?
This occurs in the course of the 17th and 18th centuries, and we are the heirs of that
transformation, perhaps the most dramatic transformation that has occurred in all of human history.
Our course will look at the 17th and the 18th centuries.
The 17th century was the scene of a conceptual revolution that is often very philosophical,
very abstract, thinking formally about ontology and causality and epistemology, but it initiates
a struggle for who shall be the teachers of a civilization, the bearers of the authority
of the past, or thinkers with dramatic new ways of understanding the reality in which
we find ourselves.
And it will initiate a struggle over what lessons shall be taught to the minds and above
all the educated minds of European civilization.
In the 18th century, that conceptual revolution of the 17th century will become a revolution
in culture marked by the popularization of the conceptual revolution of the 17th century,
its translation into easily accessible and popular forms, and marked also by an extension
of its consequences to new areas of human thought and activity.
Let's take one brief example to understand how deep the issue of conceptual change can
be.
In the inherited system of the 17th century, to which we will turn in our next lecture,
the things of this earth, the things of this nature below the heavens were deemed to be
radically imperfect things, so often far removed, we shall see, from the perfection
of God.
In the course of the intellectual revolution of the 17th century, above all what we call
the scientific revolution, the 17th century will come to believe that the laws of nature
that in its sense of things it has discovered are orderly and wondrous, and that they reflect
the design, the intentions, the wisdom, the providence of God.
Once that happens, the most commonplace observation about human beings that we seek pleasure and
flee pain, an observation often used to condemn us as selfish and immoral creatures, now comes
to be understood as a mechanism of nature, but mechanisms of nature come to be understood
as reflections of the will and providence of God.
Well, if it's a law of nature that we seek happiness and flee pain, what follows?
To give you a sense of how dramatic that is, one sentence you all know well.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are endowed by their creator with
certain inalienable rights, and among these, dot, dot, dot, the pursuit of happiness.
Among other things in this course we shall discover how the intellectual revolution
of the 17th century produced that dramatic change in the expectations about human life
in the 18th century.
So the thinking group is small, in a subsistence economy very few are freed from labor to study
and to think.
But travel is expensive and dangerous, paintings few, there are no media, and one's window
on other times, places, and minds, one escape from one's own life is the text, the book.
And people who could read focused on the book with an intensity difficult to imagine today,
they loved close reading and logical argument and took pride in erudition and formal thought.
That will be our window onto early modern culture, their texts and the debates around
those texts and dramatically the consequences of those debates.
Thank you very much.
