Lecture 23, Rousseau's Descent
Welcome to lecture 23 on Rousseau's Descent.
So much is different about Jean-Jacques Rousseau, his artisanal background, his self-education,
his Geneva Protestant origins, and a Catholic French enlightenment.
His sense of himself is a solitary man in an age of sociability.
Rousseau is a fervent daist, but even there he strikes a dissonant chord.
He had met in the salons of Paris the atheists of the French Enlightenment, including Dieterot,
and he has a deep, almost visceral aversion to the atheists' disproves of God.
His own arguments, he claims, for he has had difficulty in arguing with the atheists, require
good faith and feeling as well as intellectual force to understand the truth of what he says.
And Rousseau has a deep and abiding distrust of the motives of most of the philosophes,
whom he sees as seeking their own personal glory and reputation.
He is convinced that while reason is the liberating agent, it also can be the enemy of truth and virtue.
And he is convinced that what the philosophes call progress can be the enemy of truth and virtue as well.
Rousseau explodes onto the European intellectual scene in 1749 with a prize-winning essay,
his discourse on the arts and sciences.
The question he was addressing that everyone expected everyone to answer yes in response to
was, does moral progress coincide with progress in the arts and sciences in civilization?
Rousseau argues, both from history and from rational analysis, that progress in the arts and sciences
has led us away from virtue, lessening rather than increasing it.
Rousseau offers historical reasons that evidence teaches us that moral decadence always accompanies cultural progress.
He argues that since the Renaissance, polite and cultivated European society has lost its ancient virtues.
He insists that our social frenzy in the 18th century covers a profound depravity such as that which overtook Egypt,
Greece and Rome after their transitions from simpler societies to more cultivated and cultured ones.
For Rousseau, the simple rural Swiss and the tribes of American Indians compare favorably, to say the least,
to the most cultured Europeans, both in virtue and in happiness.
And the cultured Athenians became too selfish, too depraved to sacrifice themselves for their community.
They lost their civic spirit, whereas the simpler Spartans retained both civic virtue and moral superiority.
For Rousseau, analysis shows that there are reasons why there should be a link between cultural progress and moral decadence.
The arts and sciences, in addition to whatever else they do, create and then satisfy new and artificial vices
and new and artificial sources of human pride, serving our luxury and vanity, not our natural needs.
Natural human beings need food.
Cultured human beings need food with exquisite sauces served on gold plate by servants in brocaded clothes.
And to satisfy those wholly artificial needs, they devote the energy and passions of their lives.
And progress in the arts and sciences lead to laziness and to boredom as it becomes simpler and simpler to satisfy a human need.
Think of the satisfaction after a successful hunt for food.
And compare that to the human emotion of having someone deliver a side of beef to your kitchen staff.
The drama of Rousseau's themes can barely be overstated.
Given the enlightenment and given the debates about human nature and culture ever since,
Rousseau raises questions that have had a permanent place in the Western debate.
From the 18th century to the counterculture of the 1960s to the remnants of that counterculture
and its new forms in new age models today, think about the Rousseau's themes and their permanence.
The celebration of the primitive and simple over the complex and cultured.
That human culture is a decadence that leads us away from a simple and satisfying nature.
And that there is a distinction to be made not merely between the natural and the supernatural,
but a distinction to be made between the natural and the artificial.
The natural, from Rousseau's sense, that is from God in nature.
What really is to the artificial, what human beings have done to deform their world.
For many historians, these themes of Rousseau exist as independent political themes.
It is my position, and there are wonderful scholars who would disagree with me,
that to understand the development and importance of these themes in Rousseau,
which will lead to some of the most significant literature of the French Enlightenment,
we must first understand Rousseau's deism and his defense of providence,
which you heard in part in his letter on providence against Voltaire's poem on the Lisbon earthquake.
So let us encounter first the Rousseau whom the Philistofs met at mid-century and thought
as one of themselves, Rousseau the fervent deist. Rousseau has a passionate positive deism,
and unlike most deists, he has met atheists, and he wants to offer a compelling defense
of the existence of God and of the goodness of God. His proof of God is from motion,
that Newton teaches us that matter is lifeless and inert. If matter is lifeless and inert,
then the source of motion cannot be itself material, and motion must be acquired by matter
from something immaterial. And we observe a matter that not only has acquired motion,
but has acquired it in ordered and lawful movement. And from that Rousseau argues,
we must infer that the material world has been ordered by an immaterial will that is intelligent,
and because that nature acts to the benefit of mankind, a will that is intelligent, wise,
powerful, and good. Order cannot be the product of chance, there is an intelligent will,
and from a system that makes life possible, a system that makes the world in which we find
ourselves with its possibilities of well-being and happiness and survival possible, we must infer
that that supreme will is good. But then how explain against not only Voltaire,
but how explain against the atheists the origins of evil? Why do we suffer if God is infinitely good
becomes an essential question for Rousseau's passionate dayism? And his answer is that we
are the cause of our own ills. God gave us something that made us king of nature. It is a gift
beyond gifts. He gave us the freedom to choose between good and evil. None of us would prefer to be
automatons, robots, who could only do certain things. We all recognize the magnificent gift
of freedom, but we abuse that freedom, and the abuse of that freedom which makes us supreme in
the creation leads to our doing evil, and human beings not God are the source of evil. Rousseau
believes he must always carry that argument at the core of his dayism. So he presents us
God's ongoing love and providence and mankind's ongoing wickedness. We do ill although we know
the good. God has engraved conscience in our hearts. We see a play, and even if we cheat,
we know who the honorable and dishonorable people are in the play, because we know on our
conscience the difference between right and wrong, good and evil. Conscience is universal.
Look at the codes of all religions, all nations, and they honor and they punish and they forbid
the same things. Conscience points us to the general will seeking the happiness of all,
rather than to the particular will seeking our happiness at the expense of others.
Self-interest is insufficient to explain human behavior. Self-interest never will explain why
there are human beings who lay down their lives for their neighbors, their friends, their country,
but society has made us all self-interested. It has suppressed the natural man, and we must
restore him to the greatest extent possible. Rousseau's dayism is not a minor part of his
philosophy. At the height of his popularity in France, his critical dayism, his attack upon
Christianity, earns him a banishment from Paris. He wanders without a place to stay. He goes to
Protestant Switzerland, and then in Neuchâtel, a Protestant minister, organizes the stoning of
his home. He is taken in by admirers and lives a solitary life on the whole. He pays a terrible
price for his dayism, and it is a passionate critical dayism. He argues that what we know of
God, we know from nature and reason alone, both of which are universal and from God. Any error
could ask me to submit to prove my humility, so I must have reasons to submit. Revelation always
defends itself by claims that God required such a means to teach us how to serve him,
a revelation, a scripture, a holy book, but the diversity of cults and revelations in the world
belies the efficacy of such a means. If God chose a means by which we should know him,
the least successful has been the claim of particular revelation, for it has divided us
religiously by nation, by time period, so dramatically.
All particular claims of revelations are barriers to a natural understanding of God
through the universal medium of nature. Christianity, Russo writes, confuses the
ceremony of religion with the interior adoration of God, but God does not care about ritual
only about virtue and sincerity. All revealed religions give God human passions, unworthy
of a supreme being, and individuals, a Christian, Muslim, Jew or Buddhist, merely by the accident
of birth and education, a pure matter of chance, is that how an infinite God would reveal himself
to us? All religions claim extraordinary means to prove themselves, miracles, prophecy, grace.
It would take a lifetime of scholarship and knowledge of all dead and living languages,
a lifetime of scholarship of comparative religion to evaluate such claims. Is that how God would
reveal himself? Russo's conclusion is, be part of your nation, God does not care about ceremonies,
they are matters of indifference, you need not offend people, but in your heart and mind,
know God through reason and nature and work for that truth. The only area of no compromise
through Russo is toleration, because killing or harming on behalf of God would violate our entire
relationship to him. It is a passionate dayism, it is argued both against skeptics such as
Jung and Voltaire, and it is argued against the atheists, and at its heart is its need to solve
the problem of evil. How could there be an infinitely benevolent being on the one hand,
and human suffering and misery on the other? Russo's second discourse on the origins of inequality
published in 1755 advances that argument. In a further justification of God's created
natural order against the human deformation of our world, Russo addresses the question of whether
inequality, that scourge of mankind, that major source of human misery is natural,
and he answers that question in the negative. Russo draws a lyrical picture of primitive
pre-social humanity that informs us of what we have lost as a result of the civilization
that human beings, not God, have created. In the state of nature, we were vigorous,
naturally healthy, morally sound, governed by an ideal mechanism of self-love and compassion.
It is not in the forest that one human being walks over another human being lying in pain,
it is only in the civilizations of man. We lived only according to natural instinct,
without the torment of the passions or even fear of death. Essentially, we were neither good nor
bad with our social terms because we were isolated and asocial. We were human, self-interested,
compassionate, autonomous. There was no ownership, including no ownership of women.
Natural inequalities were all physical and without serious consequences. If one person
were taller than another, he might be able to grab a higher apple or pear, but there was enough
fruit in the forest of the world. Someone might be faster in hunting game, but there was enough
game and enough fish. It made no sense to force another person to gather fish for you. The moment
you were asleep, the person would leave or strike you and leave. Natural inequalities led to no
serious consequences. There was the ideal state of mankind, but we think we need our modern society.
What would we do for our ailments without modern society? But it is civilization,
Russo argues, that gives us that produces those ailments. There are many early deaths in nature,
but those who lived will wonderfully fit and those who died at birth did not suffer.
Just as American Indians are healthier than the Europeans, if you don't believe that,
Russo says, put an Iroquois and a Parisian in a forest together and see which one of them
emerges. Russo senses that there was a great tragedy in human history, that out of some
perceived ephemeral need, some threat, some drought, some natural catastrophe, human beings
created a society and that form of social organization, social living, proved permanent.
Society, as opposed to the isolated autonomous individual, is a dominant, coercively triumphant
form of human life that sweeps away the morally superior, primitive forms of human being.
And that continues on a relative scale. The more advanced society, which will always be more wicked,
sweeps away, permanently conquers the more primitive and the simpler society.
And society introduced unnatural forms that had nothing to do with the nature God created,
that create unnatural relationships, property, the division of labor, social inequality,
the imposition first of the strong, then of the rich.
Arbitrary power creates and maintains social injustices that we think are natural,
that society teaches us to think of as natural, but that are wholly the creation of culture.
And then we blame God for them. Dependency is one of those unnatural relationships,
but both master and dependent are slaves of the situation, are the victims of its unnatural needs
and of the social insecurities it produces. The attempt to satisfy artificial needs,
to have not shelter but the best house, to have not sexual gratification but the most attractive
partner who never leaves one for anyone else, to have not food but the finest meal served on
the finest table. These wholly artificial needs become our life and motivation in society,
stifling our conscience, stifling our natural compassion, and breathing selfishness and
mutual alienation. And we are separated from our real, that is to say, our God-given nature
as a species. In the wake of Rousseau's analysis of our ills, the question is, what do we do now?
For Rousseau, there are two means of partial reparation. Education and setting a new moral
foundation to politics. In education, Rousseau writes his treatise on education,
the Emil, to seek to create the greatest immatural learning and inoculation against
social depravity. The goal of education should be the most possible direct education by nature
itself, not by men or things. Education, Rousseau argues, begins in infancy. We swaddle our height
in swaddling clothes, and by doing so, we teach them slavery and obedience. Let the child learn
natural freedom. We farm out our children to wet nurses the moment we have enough money
to do so. No one of any standing raises infants herself or himself. And we stifle natural
affections. Mothers breastfeed your children, Rousseau will write. Restore as much as possible,
learning real relationships through the realities of nature. Learn by experience,
not by rote or books. Let the child recreate the sciences, drawing inferences from nature according
to need, not through memorization. There is only one book I would ever have a child read, he said,
and that is Robinson Crusoe, for it teaches how to be self-governing and autonomous and how to learn
from nature. Form strong bodies and senses and develop confidence in these. Develop the intellect
by observation and promoting reasoning in the service of real needs. Do you want to teach
geography? Take the child out into the woods and get lost when the child is hungry. The child
will learn quickly about on which side moss grows and how streams flow and where the sun
is at what times of day. Let the child learn from nature. Let the child learn morals from
natural consequences. Is he careless about property and breaks windows? Let him sleep in a
cold room. Let the child learn the relationships of honest labor from natural consequences.
Have him plant his favorite food, his favorite vegetables and fruits in a garden someone else
has tilled and arrange so that the gardener comes and says, how dare you plant these in my garden
that I worked and he rips them up. Young Emil cries and they work out a deal. You till the soil
let me plant my crop here and you have half and I'll have half. The gardener agrees. Let the child
learn not from memorized lessons but from lived experiences. Let there be no religious education
until adults of life and teach the child a useful honest trade not a career. Inoculate the student
against social depravity and send the most natural possible person into the world of men.
For so the second means of reparation is government and in his work the social contract he
articulates a vision of the social contract of Cesare Becariah but he argues that a proper
understanding of the nature and basis of government can make us moral rather than depraved citizens
taking advantage of the social state. Unlike in Becariah's model Rousseau's social contract
insists that all individual freedom is given to the state all of it and once that happens
one can only pursue one's happiness by pursuing the happiness of the whole society. Think of the
model of a corporation. We pool our money and now the only way I can profit is if the corporation
profits. I can't have an interest different from my fellow shadow of society. We have pooled all of
our freedom and to work for my happiness I must work for the happiness of the larger society.
What that means is one under such an understanding of political life and it is not a political blueprint
it is not a constitution it is a moral analysis of the nature of moral government. In such a construct
one's self-interest only can be pursued by pursuing the well-being of all others. Society
now has given you the general will to care about the well-being of all. Society now can become a means
to overcome selfishness and to permit moral beings to exist in a civilized society. Only that general
will that seeks the happiness of all has political authority. In one sense this is profoundly
democratic. The general will must arise from all and apply to all but the general will is not
the sum of the majority of votes in a society for there is no legitimacy to private interest
and if you are governed by a majority of selfish wills you are illegitimately governed. Only the
general will is sovereign but that makes us subject to our moral selves the general will
and forces us to be free moral and unenslaved to our own or others artificial power even while in
society and to preserve such a situation Russo writes we must have no factions no gulf between
rich or poor and no society too large for democratic self-governance in conclusion think of how that
Russo's legacy is always present and always active nature versus civilization our loss and
discontents we have made ourselves happy there is a species nature which we must restore and freedom
is being governed by the general not the particular by virtue not self-interest and thus certain
liberal traditions and indeed the jackabins and indeed the marxists and indeed the counterculture
all may lay claim to Russo he very much is with us still thank you very much
