Lecture 5, Descartes' Dream of Perfect Knowledge
Welcome to Lecture 5, Descartes' Dream of Perfect Knowledge.
What an extraordinary figure Rene Descartes is.
In the 17th century, the struggle in European thought is above all else,
the struggle between Aristotelians and, as they are known, Cartesians
from Cartesius, the Latin name of Descartes, under which he publishes.
Rene Descartes sought nothing less than to reconstruct all of human knowledge
and to give us perfect knowledge of all things knowable.
And it is his work above all that becomes the great challenge
to Aristotelian scholasticism in the 17th century, above all on the continent.
In Western philosophy, there has always been one ultimate vision,
that one could know things in themselves as they really are,
a vision of final and perfect philosophy.
In Plato's Republic, Plato gives the human race as sitting in a cave
and real things pass outside of that cave door
and the sun reflects their shadows upon the walls of the cave
and all we know are the appearances of the shadow.
The philosopher in that image is the person who steps outside of the cave,
who looks at the real things as they are in the world.
And if he is not blinded by the sun, he sees them as they really are,
though when he returns to the cave, chances are people will speak of him as a madman.
Descartes' dream was that we indeed could leave that cave
and achieve perfect knowledge both of the nature of being and of the nature of causes.
Descartes' appeal was across the spectrum of disciplines and thought in 17th century Europe,
not merely Catholic, Protestant, but equally to mechanistic scientists working on the new mechanics
or on physiology and to mystical theologians and religious contemplatives.
His appeal is outside of Aristotelian circles, one of the most universal appeals of the 17th century.
When that happens, when a thinker comes to define the options of an intellectual age,
it is almost always the case that many vital or troubling aspects of the period intellectually converge in a thinker's work.
And that is the Cartesian drama, that in the minds of so many drawn to him from so many different deep dilemmas of the 17th century,
he provides satisfying answers and arouses extraordinary enthusiasm.
What are the problems converging in the 17th century mind to which for his contemporaries Descartes responds?
First, there is the epistemological crisis posed by the Reformation itself.
Before the Reformation, there is an ultimate authority in the intellectual world, the Church.
And that Church in the end, because it is the infallible embodiment of the apostolic succession, it is inspired by the Holy Spirit,
that Church is able to be a final arbiter, a final court of appeal.
The Reformation, if you think about it, raises a remarkable question. Here we have two and then more than two churches,
each claiming to have a correct understanding of God's truth and revelation.
Obviously, it begs the question to say we will give final authority to one or the other. That's the very issue in dispute.
So the question is, and this is the epistemological crisis bequeathed by the Reformation,
what is a criterion of truth that allows one to determine the truth or falsity of mutually exclusive claims?
Very much as a part of that crisis, there is as well in the 16th century a great revival of classical ancient Greek skepticism.
Skepticism in philosophy has a very formal meaning, namely that nothing may be known with certainty,
neither from experience or logic. Nothing may be known with certainty.
In the 16th century, the revival of Greek skepticism, which precedes a pace in the 17th century,
is a striking event both in the world of publishing, it's a great success, and in intellectual life,
and the heart of the revival of Greek skepticism is on the problem of criterion of truth.
And it can be stated simply, I ask you how do you know something is true and you give me your criterion.
I know something is true when it meets that set of circumstances.
And I say, but how do you know that your criterion of truth is true?
And now you need a criterion for a criterion of truth.
But then I merely ask, well, how do you know that your criterion for a criterion for a criterion of truth is true?
And we're in a problem of infinite regress. Every claim of truth entails a criterion of truth,
but how do you know your criterion of truth is true?
And you're in an infinite regress culminating in skepticism.
That skepticism, as one might imagine, has extraordinary appeal among the young in Europe.
Students at universities love to take the standard arguments of the Greek skeptics
against certainty from the senses and against the problem of criterion of truth
and direct them at their knowledgeable professors.
It's a great experience to apply Greek skepticism to someone who might know more than you.
And European intellectuals and teachers, professors and clergy write with increasing frequency
and a certain anxiety, if not anguish, about the appeal of skepticism to the young
and they associate it with the desire to be free of all authority.
It's given the name libertinism and it takes a particularly dramatic form because of the revival of one Greek skeptic,
a man by the name of Piro, hence the school of thought known as Pyrrhenism,
which argues that not even the skeptical proposition that nothing may be known with certainty is certain.
In short, Pyrrhenism is skepticism taken to an ultimate degree.
So we have the epistemological crisis of the Reformation, the revival and appeal of classical skepticism
and the specter of what is known as Pyrrhenism and Libertinism.
How do we fix in an age of contentious debate a criterion of truth?
Fourth, we have the neo-Pathagorean revival, the sense of truth to be known by a quantitative,
not qualitative understanding of physical phenomena.
And fifth, we have, as you've seen already from such a diversity of schools of thought, the assault upon Aristotle.
Descartes' work responds to all of these converging obsessions of the 17th century.
In two works, his discourse on method and his meditations on first philosophy, Descartes electrifies a generation of readers.
He is convinced that thinkers attempting to defend the notion of truth have not gone far enough.
They beg the question. They don't, they say in effect, well, we know it's true.
They don't give skepticism its full due.
And he is convinced that the only way to overcome skepticism is to state it even more dramatically,
to doubt even more dramatically than the skeptics would doubt.
What is known as Descartes' hyperbolic doubt.
And so he argues, one, in terms of sensory knowledge, the senses are deceptive, a twig looks straight out of water, bent in water.
But even if one thought of overcoming those, we can't even distinguish between when we're dreaming and when we're awake.
And we've all had the experience of dreaming and saying, but I'm awake. This actually is happening.
If one can't distinguish between dream and wakefulness, how in the world establish any truth on the basis of experience?
But what of logic? What of logic?
Well, Descartes says in here he goes yet beyond the skeptics in providing a skepticism that he wishes to overcome.
How could I be wrong in logic?
And Descartes says in his ultimate answer, imagine that there were a supreme evil genius,
a supreme wicked being who devoted omnipotent powers to deceiving you.
Even adding two plus two, could he not make you inattentive before you give the final answer?
Could a supreme evil being not lead to even errors at the most elementary levels of logic?
How to overcome that doubt?
For Descartes, the only way to overcome that doubt would be to find a proposition that literally could not be doubted.
And then if we found an indubitable proposition that could not be doubted, if we found out what made it true, what made it indubitable, we would have our criterion of truth.
Well, I can doubt the two plus two equals four. I can doubt whether I'm sleeping or waking.
I can doubt whether I'm really here or not here.
I could doubt whether I exist or don't exist that I myself could be a dream to me.
But wait a minute. If I'm wrong, I must exist to be wrong.
If I'm right, I must exist to be right.
If I doubt, I must exist to doubt.
In short, if I think, I must exist.
Kogito ego sum. I think therefore I am.
It cannot be doubted.
There is no hypothesis whatsoever, not even the evil demon hypothesis, that can overcome the indubitability of I think therefore I am.
Now, I don't know if anything else is true, but I know that I exist as a thinking being.
I may not have a body. That might be all illusion.
There might not be a world out there. That might not be all illusion.
But I exist because I think therefore I am.
What makes that proposition true?
They can't analyze it to the conclusion that two things make it true.
One, it is clear by which he means it is self-evident.
The moment the mind addresses it, the mind must acknowledge its truth.
You can't even come up with a hypothesis that would make it false.
It is self-evident, and two, it is distinct.
It is dependent on no other thing being true.
There's nothing else that it depends upon.
So if I want my criterion of truth to be at the foundation of my reconstruction of the knowledge, my knowledge of the world,
I need a series of clear and distinct ideas, self-evident and independent of any other proposition.
Now Descartes shockingly at the beginning said, I even can doubt of God.
And he introduced the major moment of doubt in his system.
With the hypothesis that there could be a supreme evil being.
So for Descartes, the next test of his system of clear and distinct truth is, does it prove the existence of God?
And Descartes offers two proofs of the existence of God.
And he believes that both are self-evident and indubitable and independent of any other truth they cannot be doubted.
His first proof is that an idea has two aspects.
One, it's a modification of a human mind. It's a thought we have.
And two, it represents something to us in the way that a painting is a painting of something.
An idea has an object in the way that a painting has an object.
He calls that the objective being of an idea.
The idea of God is the objective, right?
Gives us the objective being in our mind of an infinitely perfect being.
They caught reasons since there must be as much reality in a cause as there is in an effect.
That you can't have an effect that has more reality than a cause.
The idea of an infinitely perfect being could not come from anything finite.
It couldn't come from anything imperfect. It couldn't come from anything errant.
It could only come from a perfect being.
Hence from the idea of God, we know that there exists a perfect being.
Secondly, Descartes asks the question,
what are the necessary properties of things, whether or not they exist?
For example, whether or not a unicorn exists has one horn.
In fact, the only way to know if there are unicorns is since you know a unicorn must have one horn,
you can look for things with one horn.
You don't have to know whether a unicorn exists to know it has one horn.
A triangle on the far side of the moon has three angles, the sum of which is 180 degrees,
whether or not a triangle exists on the far side of the moon.
So we know its entailed properties, what it is necessary that that entity has
without even knowing if the entity exists, right? Unicorn must have one horn.
A mountain must have a valley beneath it.
We don't know if there are mountains or valleys yet, but a mountain must have a valley.
That's what a mountain is, whether or not it exists.
Well, now we ask, what are the necessary properties of a perfect being,
since we find this idea of God in our mind, an idea of a perfect being?
Would a perfect being be pretty smart or infinitely wise?
A perfect being would be infinitely wise, otherwise it wouldn't be perfect.
It must be infinitely wise.
Would a perfect being be pretty good or infinitely good?
Perfect being would be infinitely good.
Same way, a unicorn has one horn.
A perfect being would be infinitely good.
Would a perfect being exist or not exist?
Well, an existing perfect being is perfect.
A non-existing perfect being would not be perfect.
So with the same force that a square must have four sides,
a triangle must have three sides,
a mountain must have a valley,
a perfect being must have existence.
And what is it to say logically that something must have existence?
A perfect being must exist.
Now, those are Descartes' proofs for the existence of God,
which are debated throughout the 17th century
and which anti-aristatelians love
because they are so far removed from the proofs from the world,
from the data of the world,
favored by Aristotle and favored by St. Thomas Aquinas.
But remember now, we have real knowledge of the real nature of two things.
I exist as a thinking being
and God exists as a perfect being.
So I know that there exists a substance whose essence is thought, mind.
Once I eliminate the possibility of a supreme evil being,
I have seen with my proof of God
that there exists a perfect being, infinitely good.
A perfect being can't be evil.
A perfect being must be infinitely good.
I know that my evil demon hypothesis is out the window.
And now I say to myself,
everything that I sense, everything about the world,
makes me feel I'm not alone,
that there's a real world out there,
tables, people, paper, trees,
that there's a real world out there.
God would have to be a deceiver, a deceiver,
for there not to be a real world.
But God is a perfect being, I've proven that.
And a perfect being would not play tricks with us,
would not be a deceiver.
So I know that in addition to mind,
which requires nobody whose essence is thought,
and God, a perfect being,
there exists something that is a world,
something that is not mind and that is not God.
And I need to know what that is,
what is the distinction between God on the one hand,
immaterial soul on the other,
now I'm going to give us three hands,
and a world that is neither God nor immaterial soul.
Descartes says, take a bowl of wax in your hand.
What do you think you have there?
You say something yellow, something hard,
something that smells a certain way,
you define it by its sensory properties.
But now you walk over to the fire,
closer to the fire with the bowl of wax,
what was hard becomes soft,
its color changes, its smell changes.
So the wax was not any of its sensory appearances to you,
that was not the essence of the wax.
And Descartes asks, what is it that must exist
for there to be something that can be yellow,
that can have smells,
that can have these and those appearances
and physical properties.
And he answers extension in length, width and breadth.
In short, there are three fundamental entities
that constitute reality.
God uncreated the perfect being,
who has created two distinct entities.
One immaterial, not occupying space,
you can't push it, you can't cut it in half,
mind, thought.
And two body, which is wholly quantitative,
the essence of soul is thought,
the essence of body is extension in height, width and depth.
Now what can be known about extension?
Here Descartes reached the same conclusion
essentially reached by Galileo.
The physical world is dimension, motion,
and the mechanisms of matter touching
and communicating force to matter.
That which occupies space can only be affected
by that which occupies space.
The physical world is matter, communicating force
and motion to matter.
Indeed Descartes makes a further metaphysical deduction.
He says God being a perfect being
and matter being in motion, communicating motion,
mass to mass.
God set matter in motion
and God has a fixed immutable will.
Hence nature operates by matter in motion
according to fixed mechanical laws
from which without a single experiment
Descartes deduces inertia.
Things at rest remain in motion
unless acted upon by another force.
The task of a new science then is to discover
the laws, the mechanisms and the effects
of matter in motion.
The appeal of this system worked out further
in metaphysical works and in physical works
and in physiological works is something
singular and extraordinary in the 17th century.
It leaves us with the profound Cartesian legacy
of his work, many aspects of which remain
vital parts of contemporary thought.
First dualism, the belief that we inhabit
a universe that is composed of two distinct realities,
two distinct substances, mind and matter.
Body and spirit.
Two, that in what pertains to matter,
all matter whatsoever, there are natural mechanisms
such that the goal of a science other than theology
or metaphysics is understanding the mechanisms
of matter in motion.
Three, it bequeaths to Western philosophy
the mind-body problem because it follows
from Cartesian philosophy that mind and body
should not interact, but in human beings they do.
Watch, my independent will says up,
and there goes matter, up.
My independent will says down, it goes down.
I can be perverse, up, and I move it down
because I have freedom of the will.
That interaction of mind-body known in philosophy
as the mind-body problem will haunt
Western philosophy after Descartes.
And fourth and crucial to understanding Cartesianism
in the 17th century, it is part of Descartes' legacy
that there will be a ferocious assault on all beliefs
that are premised upon matter being affected
by immaterial things.
The Cartesians will lead the assault on what they see
as superstition and witchcraft belief.
For a Cartesian, what happens in the mind and will
is of immaterial spiritual nature.
But what happens in the world of matter and motion
is purely physical.
Crop failure is not from a charm or a curse or a prayer.
Illness and health are not from spells and witchcraft.
Poisoned wells are material events.
Comets are not omens of things of which we should be afraid.
Comets are matter in motion.
The implications of Descartes for authority are dramatic.
He overthrows Aristotle in the minds of his followers
and he invites metaphysical philosophy to begin
with absolute doubt, giving human reason an absolute right
to seek certainty before belief.
And he invites the reconstruction of all of our knowledge
of the physical world based upon the mechanics
of matter in motion, demanding a plant physiology,
an animal physiology, a physiology of the body,
and a pure physics of natural phenomena
and denying that anywhere except in the human being
matter and spirit interact at all.
He leaves his followers with a great dream
of perfect knowledge, complete and evident.
He leaves them with a sense of metaphysical certainty
and he leaves them with an open invitation
to construct a material, mechanistic, quantitative science.
He is the stunning voice of anti-Aristotelianism
in the 17th century.
Thank you.
Thank you.
