Lecture 3 The New Vision of Francis Bacon
Throughout the medieval period, education is above all else, devoted to the education
of clergy. And one of the ironies and unintended consequences of early modern Europe is that
an exponential growth in education throughout the 16th and 17th centuries fostered almost
solely and uniquely by the churches of Europe, so that there would be educated clergy and
laity in the debates of the Reformation. And the opening up of new careers in administration
in increasingly centralized states leads under the churches to a growth in education that
will produce a new kind of student, a new kind of educated mind, a new kind of reading
public, not directed toward a lifetime career in defense of the faith, in the clergy, but
moving into the world of government, of commerce, of ordinary life, but now with that precious
commodity, formal education. This coincides with something that further accelerates the
extraordinary opportunities for that new reading public and dangers to the existing system
so dependent upon links between natural knowledge and the faith, and that is publishing. If
you think of the difficulty of copying book by book by hand, how precious they were, chained
in libraries where you brought them through a reader's shelf, if you contrast that to
being able to set type once and then produce copy after copy of a new book, you have a
sense of the excitement of this growth in both education and in the reading public and
in the amount of things that can be produced to satisfy the natural hunger in the early
modern period that educated minds have for things to stimulate their minds, for things
in short to read and provoke. Francis Bacon and this third lecture is the new vision of
Francis Bacon. Francis Bacon is a good example of the change occurring in the audience of
higher education. The son of an eminently successful tutor politician, his father Nicholas
Bacon, had risen to become Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England. And Francis Bacon
found himself at Trinity College, Cambridge University in the late 16th century, encountering
the traditional Aristotelian education, but brimming with worldly ambitions, curiosities,
and concerns. He entered Cambridge University, as was true of most undergraduates, at the
age of 13. There was no extended adolescence in the subsistence economy of early modern
society. The official college charter of Trinity College, Cambridge, warned that, quote, all
students and undergraduates should lay aside their various authors and only follow Aristotle
and those that defend him, close quote. It forbade, quote, all sterile and inane questions,
departing or disagreeing from ancient and true philosophy. A contemporary of Bacon's,
Raleigh, wrote that Bacon told him that it was at Cambridge that he, quote, first fell
into the dislike of the philosophy of Aristotle, being a philosophy only strong for disputations
and contentions, but barren of the production of works for the benefit of mankind.
In the early 17th century, Bacon began his momentous assault upon the traditional philosophies.
In several works written between 1602 and 1608, Bacon argued that the European philosophical
tradition stood condemned on several essential grounds. It had mixed religion and natural
philosophy to the confusion of both. It had substituted concern for words in the place
of concern for things. Instead of learning from patient, humble observation of God's
actual creation, European thinkers had devoted themselves to verbal and rhetorical tricks,
skills designed only to win personal fame as a disputant. They masqueraded Bacon, wrote
a few commonplace observations mostly untested as genuine inquiry, and where we needed a
philosophy, a knowledge of nature that could alter the human condition for our abetiment,
we had only sophistry and debating techniques. In a metaphor among many Bacon adored metaphors,
crucial to his thought, he called for a marriage of the human mind, quote, with things themselves
in a chaste, holy, and legal wedlock, end quote. Instead of the unholy alliance of minds
and words, human creations, we needed a marriage of minds and the things of God's creation.
And that marriage should be chaste by which Bacon meant without ornamentation and flights
of fancy. It should be holy by which Bacon meant with proper reverence and humility and
motivated by Christian charity. And it must be legal by which he meant according to rules
and proper method. For Bacon, European thought had become enslaved to the systems of five
or six Greeks who had devised pretentious and overreaching systems of thought that were
devoid of the fruits of charity. These systems, he wrote, had infected Europe's relationship
with nature and had cast the shadows of empty theories and systems between humankind and
the objects with which we lived. But how Bacon had to ask himself, does one convince thinkers
to reject a tradition of thought when their very criteria for accepting or rejecting systems
of thought were based upon the very philosophy that you would have them reject? Aristotelian
method was taught in a work that all students passed through and mastered in European schools
and universities, a work called the organon or instrument of knowledge. Bacon, in an age
in which the noun innovator was almost always preceded by the adjective rash, a rash innovator.
We had received those things that had stood the test of time and innovator was almost
always a reckless person. Bacon audaciously wrote a work that he entitled the new organon.
And he addressed the problem that he faced dramatically, quote, I cannot be called upon
to abide by the sentence of a tribunal which is itself on trial. Since he wrote, quote,
my disagreement is upon first principles and upon the very notions and even forms of demonstration,
close quote, he appealed not to philosophy itself, but to the consequences of thinking differently.
Bacon appealed to two non-philosophical sides of his readers' minds and souls. One, the human
desire to be less helpless and less passive in the face of nature. The end of knowledge,
the goal of knowledge that Bacon proposed was the expansion of human empire over the
phenomena on which our suffering or well-being depended. If that were the goal of knowledge,
then new kinds and methods of knowledge must be sought. Secondly, Bacon appealed to the Christian
ethic that for the Christian knowledge must be in the service of charity. You shall know things
by their fruits and the fruits of knowledge must be those of charity, things useful to mankind,
things that reduce our suffering, that enhance our well-being, service and ministering to one's
fellow creatures. He wrote, quote, there is no sign more certain and more noble than that of fruits.
In religion, we are warned that faith be shown by works. It is altogether right, he continued,
to apply the same test to philosophy. If it be barren, then let it be set at naught. So there
we are, Bacon in the early 17th century arguing, let all prior philosophy and knowledge, if it does
not meet the tests of useful knowledge capable of ministering to the species, to be set at naught.
Let us break with authority and let us have a new beginning to human science or systematic
knowledge. From this point on, Bacon set for himself a monumental task which he did not live to
complete. What he termed the great instauration that is the great new beginning. Its most essential
work and one of the most influential texts of the early modern world was the new organon,
the new method for acquiring useful knowledge. There are four great themes to Bacon's work.
One, that knowledge is human power. Knowledge of rivers is not contemplation of their perfections,
their place in the great chain of being. It is not in terms of scientific knowledge. The
theological inferences that a theologian rightly might draw from rivers about the purposes and
kindness of God. It is the ability to predict their behavior, to understand the causes of their
behavior, to apply knowledge of causes and forces in ways that enhance the human condition and minimize
human suffering. Bacon's second essential theme is the separation of natural philosophy, what we
today would call science. Natural philosophy in early modern meaning is the study of the natural
world by the natural human faculties. The separation of natural philosophy, science from theology.
Bacon wrote that one must give to faith those things that are faiths. But if the question is what
is the nature of God's creation, then it is not human fancy that must be consulted. There is one
place to learn the nature of God's creation, and that is the study of that nature itself.
The third great theme of Bacon's work is the method of induction. Let me say a word about Bacon
in method and then turn to his teachings about induction. For Bacon, method lies at the heart of
successful human knowledge. He constructs a wonderful metaphor. Genius, he says, is like speed. It's
like being fleet of foot. Method is a path that takes you in the right direction, where you want
to go. Plotting and moving slowly along the right route from one place to another, one gets there.
Genius on the wrong path merely moves more impressively and dramatically away from truth,
from what the object of human inquiry should be. Genius is so much less important than proper use
of the human mind, proper method. And that proper method for Bacon is not deduction from authority,
but induction from the particulars of nature. For Bacon, there is no other route to human knowledge.
One must observe the particulars of the world and form tentative generalizations about those
particulars. And then one must test those generalizations against nature itself. One must design
tests that would show if one is right or wrong. And when one has generalizations, one wants to then
make generalizations about one's sets of generalizations, moving to ever higher and higher
levels of generality, always tested by experiment and always open to correction. Bacon always wrote,
honestly, that he was not an empiricist, meaning we observe nature and the truth becomes known to us.
He said, I call for a marriage of the empirical and rational faculty. We form generalizations
inductively from nature, but then the human mind must proceed rationally. If I am correct,
what would happen in nature under the following circumstances? You devise the experimental
test. The mind devises the experiment. Nature determines its outcome, and we learn from nature.
But the method of induction is at the heart of Bacon's ferocious assault upon authority
and deductive logic from received authority. And the fourth of Bacon's great themes is that human
science, natural philosophy, is a dynamic cooperative and cumulative enterprise. We will always be
learning from nature. We can have no static knowledge. We must always be seeking inductively
new generalizations, new tests. It is a cooperative venture, for no single mind can embrace the whole
of nature in a brilliant scheme. How impressed we are by systematic thinkers, but no human mind
may inductively infer what is true about nature and test it. We are overly impressed by genius,
inadequately impressed by the fruits of proper method, which means that science also
is a cumulative enterprise. What we believe to be true in the 17th century will always be tested by
new knowledge and new experiment found one thing amended, corrected, added to.
Bacon offers a metaphor of the ant, the spider, and the honeybee. I don't know if he's
entomologically correct about insects, but it's a wonderful metaphor. The ant is the mere empiricist,
simply piles up little bits of data about nature and leaves them there. The spider is the pure
rationalist, the system builder, spins out the most exquisite webs. One is awestruck by the symmetry
and beauty of the web, but the web has been spun from the stuff of his own insides, from the stuff
of his own mind, not from the things of nature. Rather, he says, the goal of science is to be
like the honeybee that takes from nature, combines it with what is best within, and produces something
that is sweet and useful to mankind. For bacon, the human mind was inherently prone to error,
and it needed to be weighted down by induction and experiment. It needed to be weighted down
by proper method. How we like to fly to the farthest possible conclusion on our first
impression of something, but that was human arrogance, human vanity, humility, and an
understanding of the difficulty of knowing nature led us to see that the mind needed to be weighted
down, and again he appealed to the religious side of his readers. Christians were strictly enjoined
not to worship false idols in the place of the Creator. It was one of the worst human sins idolatry,
but for bacon we had substituted as objects of our awe, not the actual creation by God
open to our gaze, but what he termed the idols of the mind, our own creatures that we substituted
as idols for the things of God. There were four kinds of idols of the mind. There were idols of
the tribe, that is to say, sources of error inherent in human nature, simply by virtue of
being human, the fact that our minds flew too quickly to order and generality, that we were
self-interested, unlike those of us hearing these lectures, that most people tended to
believe theories that either were useful to them personally, or to which their names already
were attached. Bacon saw to the heart of one of the central sources of human error. We were
affected by sudden experience, not patient observation. Our senses were deceptive. We were
affected by emotion in our intellectual judgments. Then there were idols of the cave, the idols of
the individual human being, our own peculiar particular biases and predispositions arising
from physiological, psychological and educational differences, hence the need for collective effort,
the need to test each other's work, to verify and attempt to confirm each other's work. Then there
were the idols of the marketplace, the currency with which we dealt in knowledge, the ambiguity
and equivocation of our words. For bacon, we use in natural philosophy and science words that have
multiple meanings, ambiguous abstractions, precede and control our observations. Instead,
words should be devised to apply precisely to rigorous and methodical observation.
And finally, there were the idols of the theater, our entire received philosophical tradition,
above all Aristotle, but indeed the whole notion of authority. We worship those idols on the stage
before us rather than nature. We look to their books rather than to nature. But why should we
think bacon wrote in the New Organon? Why should we think that what is preserved in time for us
is what is truest and wisest? Rather, he wrote in another of his wonderful images,
it is probably time like a river. What is truly profound sinks immediately. What is
absolutely light and empty remains on the surface and is born down to our own time by the river
of history. Bacon's vision is that the proper use of the human mind could produce a new relationship
between humankind and nature in which human beings actively could seek for their own
betterment in the world. That was knowledge and that was charity. He wrote a celebrated
utopian work, The New Atlantis, in which mankind governed its relationship to nature and to society
on behalf of humanity's own interests. And the instrument of that governance was knowledge.
Knowledge neither speculative nor magical, but methodically drawn from nature by patient
observation and experiment, producing verifiable and serviceable truths about the behavior of
the things of this world. Marlowe's Dr. Faust had wanted magical knowledge that would make him
a demigod. Bacon called for useful knowledge of the world that gave us a power to reduce human
suffering and to enhance human well-being. At the center of the New Atlantis stood an
institution called the House of Solomon, where the natural philosophers lived and worked,
on which was written its goal. Quote, the end of our foundation, the goal of our foundation,
is the knowledge of causes and secret notions of things and the enlarging of the bounds of human
empire to the effecting of all things possible. What a dramatic alternative to a static and
contemplative view. And as the century progressed, it was a vision that would gain and gain disciples.
Thank you very much.
