Lecture 17, Voltaire, Bringing England to France
Welcome to lecture 17 on Voltaire, Bringing England to France.
Ten years after Montesquieu's Persian letters exploded on the scene in France, electrifying
the reading public, if that is not too mixed a metaphor, Voltaire's philosophical letters
in the 1730s caused an extraordinary sensation.
Historians frequently said in the course of the 20th century that Voltaire's work was
the opening salvo of the French Revolution, the first systematic assault upon the old regime
in France.
That seems to me to read far too much of what later will happen in France into this moment
that is quite remarkable on its own terms in the 1730s and also in terms of the themes
that it leaves alive and vital in French life for the decades to follow.
It also used to be said that Voltaire left France a poet and returned from England a
philosopher, but we know now that while he was indeed a celebrated poet and playwright
before his travel to England, he also was someone whose intellectual formation had
made him a deist, a new philosopher, a free thinker before he ever set foot on British
soil.
The circumstances of Voltaire's trip to England also reinforced Voltaire's philosophical
commitments toward free thought, the new philosophy, and against arbitrary authority.
Voltaire was born François-Marie de Arouet and he gave himself the more aristocratic
sounding name de Voltaire.
When he became celebrated as a poet and playwright, he also became very close to aristocrats
who were his patrons and seeming friends.
And very much in public one day he was discussing things during an intermission with a group
of French aristocrats when a crusty old blue-blooded prince from the famous Roan family came by
and said to Voltaire how interesting it must be, how convenient to give oneself a new name.
And Voltaire, who was never at a loss for wit or words, immediately replied to him better
to give oneself a new name than to disgrace an old one.
The next night, Roan had Voltaire beaten up by his lackeys on the streets of Paris.
And when Voltaire complained to his aristocratic friends, it made perfect sense to them not
to intervene.
What could a commoner expect if he'd insulted a blue-blooded aristocrat like that?
When Voltaire began to take fencing lessons and was challenging Roan to a duel, thank
goodness Roan had too much high status to even consider dueling with a commoner.
We would have been deprived, I assure you, of the extraordinary life's work of Voltaire.
Roan decided to have Voltaire locked up and simply had the crowned place Voltaire in
the Bastille, which, despite a tale of two cities, was not a terribly uncomfortable place
to be.
But Voltaire was not about to be let out until he promised that he would have nothing further
to do with Roan, and he was not about to make that promise, and it appeared that he would
be there indefinitely, until he accepted an agreement that he would go into exile in England
for several years, in return for his release from the Bastille.
So there is Voltaire avoiding the Bastille for having offended a princely aristocrat,
and going to England, where he is received with honors by the leading lights of English
political, artistic, cultural, scientific, and philosophical society.
The work that he produces while he is there is ultimately known as the English letters
or the philosophical letters, and they cause a genuine sensation in France.
They are Voltaire's celebration of English thought and political life, and they are
an assault upon what Voltaire sees as an orthodox, absolutist, and aristocratic France.
So let us in this lecture take a close look at a text that so many see as one of the first
great essential works of that movement that will be the French Enlightenment, and let
us understand as well the full scope of contemporary reaction.
The work is a bestseller, but it also produces a torrent of horrified condemnation of Voltaire.
Voltaire attacks upon him in clerical, learned journals, calls for his persecution, and indeed
Voltaire is formally prosecuted.
The book, the philosophical letters, is burnt in front of the Palace of Justice.
Voltaire quips to a friend, well we appear to be making progress in France, they used
to burn the author, now they merely burn the book, but Voltaire is banished for the
rest of his life from Paris.
And he will not return there until the year of his death, 1778.
Banishment from Paris needs to be put in perspective.
If one is a poet, playwright, philosopher, a man of letters, there is Paris, and then
there is rural North Dakota.
That is the seeming choice, and Voltaire is banished from the center of French intellectual
and cultural life for this work, which we now shall examine.
For a French audience, Voltaire holds up the example of England, both to increase their
sense of relativism and difference in the world, and to offer them an absolute and superior
set of perspectives from which to judge their own political, social, and intellectual culture.
Voltaire's style in the philosophical letters is a veiled one that involves a transitional
voice.
The narrative voice of Voltaire in the early letters is that of an innocent, naive, pious
French Catholic.
By the middle of the text, he is a self-confident, new philosopher, and by the end of the text,
he is lecturing France directly and frankly.
It is also part of Voltaire's method to work always with irony, with the ideal of producing
laughter.
If you laugh at something you had held in reverence, if you laugh at something that had
been a sacred object for you, your relationship to that is altered.
Voltaire also will use irony to allow the reader to draw his or her own enlightened conclusions.
Voltaire merely contrasting this or that perspective, setting it up in such a way that any thoughtful
reader must draw a certain conclusion, but Voltaire doesn't draw it so often.
He permits the reader to draw that conclusion and think of it as his or her own.
We have stressed the crucial issue of the relationship of the new philosophy and religion,
and Voltaire not only begins his letters with the religions of England, but with a cult
that the French audience finds particularly odd and bizarrely unorthodox, the Quakers.
It would be as if in the 20th century, one began a presentation of the American people
by spending four chapters on the unification church of Reverend Moon.
Voltaire begins with something that captivates his French readers as one of the most bizarre
sides of English religious toleration.
But Voltaire takes those Quakers and makes them paragons of relative virtue.
Thus, in the first four letters, he introduces his French readers to a new religion and
to an increase of a sense of the relativism of religious belief.
For example, Voltaire asks the Quaker if the Quaker has been baptized.
The Quaker says, well, no, I have not been baptized in Voltaire, so then you can't be
a Christian.
Christians are baptized.
Christ was baptized.
And the Quaker says to Voltaire, are you circumcised?
And Voltaire says, no, I'm not circumcised.
And the Quaker says, well, Christ was circumcised.
You are a Christian without being circumcised, I without being baptized.
It plants a seed about the relativism of religious belief, depending upon the tradition in which
one is born and educated.
Voltaire's Quakers are also Christianity without ritual.
They are simple Christians who are shocked at the ceremonialism of other religions.
They have no priests.
The Quakers are a foil to criticize the established churches of Europe.
The simplicity, the earnestness of their lives, their ethics, their sense of the equality
of human beings, and above all for Voltaire their religious tolerance, their view that
Christianity is a religion of peace.
Voltaire introduces as French readers to William Penn's striking document of religious
toleration, the charter of religious toleration in the colony of Pennsylvania.
The Quakers are also, however, a foil to criticize revealed in supernatural religion in general.
Voltaire takes light jibes at the religion of the Quakers, at their enthusiasm and inspiration.
At a Quaker prayer meeting in their cold Quakers, because touched by the Holy Spirit, they shake
and tremble and fall to the ground.
That's where the name comes from in their own sense of themselves.
They're the society of friends.
Voltaire presents the Quakers and all of their enthusiasm and inspiration at their meetings
They wait for visitation by the Holy Spirit, being touched by the Holy Spirit.
They babble in tongues.
Voltaire asks a Quaker, isn't it difficult to distinguish between the presence of the
Holy Ghost and madness in the Quaker?
Yes, that's very difficult, but Voltaire is far gentler in his tone talking about the
Quakers than he is in his usual sarcasm concerning particular creeds.
He also uses the letters on the Quakers to assert the dominance of the social over the
religious, of custom over creed.
He points out that young Quakers are turning to the Anglican church in larger and larger
numbers and he offers a purely secular and sociological analysis of why young Quakers
are doing that.
That barred from honorific jobs, Quaker families are making wealth.
That having wealth, young Quakers don't want to be thought of as marginal and out of fashion.
As Voltaire puts it, they are becoming Anglicans to be in style.
This is one of those forests that one doesn't want to miss for the trees in Voltaire's
philosophical letters.
It is dramatic that Voltaire is treating religion as a phenomenon that is not the result of
God and the devil, of truth and temptations into spiritual era, but is phenomena that
can be studied in wholly natural terms.
When Voltaire turns to the established Episcopal Anglican church, the Church of England, in
so far as the Church of England resembles the French Catholic Church, it is satirized
and criticized.
In so far as it deviates from the Catholic Church, it is gently, if ironically, praised.
So the Episcopacy is attacked, the institution of the hierarchy of bishops and archbishops.
Voltaire stresses the intolerance of the clergy and their role in the wars and civil
strife of England's past, but there is praise for the clear legal preeminence of the state
over the Church in England, and there is praise, though it is sardonic, for the better morals
of the English churchmen, who are merely men and most imperfect men at that.
He compares them to the French bishops and archbishops.
He says, well, we reward the upper class, the aristocracy.
We have bishops of 14, 15, 17.
In England, you've got to wait until you're older to become a bishop.
The English don't have much interest in women anyway, so unlike French bishops, they're
usually content with their own wives, and they're raised at Oxford or Cambridge, far
from the corruption of the capital.
They become bishops at an age where they're only real vices, avarice, extreme greed, no
longer lust, as in the case of other churchmen.
And he says, being Englishmen, when an English bishop or archbishop becomes drunk at a tavern,
unlike his French counterpart, he becomes drunk in the manner of a perfect gentleman.
The foreign foil here is so useful to Voltaire for the purposes of criticizing the French
church.
But what does his tone do to any awe or respect toward the institution of the clergy itself?
Letter six of the philosophical letters is one of the most dramatic moments of the new
philosophy, Voltaire's letter on the Presbyterians, the church in Scotland.
He stresses their puritanism and their zeal, their intolerance, their role in the bloody
English Civil War of the 17th century.
If it were up to the clergy, Voltaire writes, the Presbyterians and the Church of England
would still be slaughtering each other, but in England, the people have become better
and wiser than their clerics.
Voltaire pens an astonishing conclusion to letter six that marks nothing less than a
revaluation of civil society itself, celebrating the toleration and the moral and civic value
of that toleration, shown by a commercial, secular and religiously diversified state,
a clear message to an officially intolerant, anti-commercial France where only the Roman
Catholic Church is tolerated and where birth is valued so much higher than merit.
At the end of his letter on the Presbyterians, Voltaire invites the reader to join him, going
to look at another building, and he writes, quote, enter the stock and commodities exchange
of London, more reputable and eminent than many royal courts.
You will see there assembled representatives of every nation for the well-being of mankind.
There, the Jew, the Muslim and the Christian treat each other as if they were of the same
religion and apply the name Infidel only to those who go bankrupt.
There, the Presbyterian trusts the Anabaptist, and the Anglican accepts the word of the Quaker,
leaving these free and peaceful assemblies.
Some go to the synagogue, others to drink, yet others to be baptized in a great font
in the name of the Father, by the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
Yet others cut the foreskin of their sons and murmur above the child words in Hebrew,
of which they understand nothing.
Still others go to their church and await the inspiration of God with their hats on, and
everyone is satisfied.
He concludes, quote, if there were only one religion in England, there would be despotism
to fear.
If there were two, they would cut each other's throats, but there are thirty, and they live
happily and in peace.
That celebration of a tolerant, secular, commercial society is an extraordinary moment in the
history of European thought.
Voltaire ends his discussion of religion by talking about what he terms the Church of
the Sages, the Sosinians, what we now would term, as I noted, the Unitarians.
Of all Christians, these are closest to the Daists, and Voltaire admires them, but he
notes that they will never succeed in founding a major religion.
Why?
Because Voltaire explains only fanatics and only at opportune historical moments form
great sects.
Not even the wisest men can make a successful sect of their religion in an age when commerce
flourishes, people are gainfully occupied, and the nation wants peace.
Voltaire next turns to English government and society, and uses England as a foil to
criticize the despotism and unenlightened government of France as he sees it.
But he does so in a manner that marks a profound change from earlier criticisms of the old
regime of the monarchy of Louis XIV in France.
Voltaire abandons what had been the practice of an appeal to an idealized, medieval, feudal
past, and instead he appeals to what might be brought into being in the future, a modern
vision of a society in which laws rather than men's wills rule, in which civil liberties
are every citizen's right regardless of birth or rank, in which religious tolerance puts
an end to civil strife and the fanaticism of persecuting churches and sects, in which
commercial freedom and prosperity allow the individual to serve his own interest in a
way that enriches the society at large, in which the arts and sciences flourish and are
free.
All of these are interrelated for Voltaire.
Each feeds the other, and the comparison to an aristocratic intolerant, anti-commercial
France in which indeed French aristocrats lose their aristocratic status if they enter
into commerce or trade.
Those comparisons are manifest on every page for the French reader.
Voltaire indeed idealizes English life, but he does so to make his criticism of France
even more effective.
He stresses the constitutional nature of the monarchy, the liberty that flows from a government
of law not whim, the equality of taxation, the honorable status of commerce, the comfortable
lot of the English yeomen under English economic freedom, the greatness, prosperity and peacefulness
of a tolerant, secular England under liberty and law engaged in productive commerce.
It is the glorification of an open and religiously pluralistic bourgeois England as opposed to
an intolerant, anti-commercial aristocratic France.
Voltaire invites his readers to consider English philosophy by introducing them to the practice
of inoculation in England.
It is a remarkable placement in the text, for it is the philosophy of the Enlightenment
and Outline.
Reason and experience determine us to employ a method learned from experience that saves
lives and reduces suffering.
We may move via science from understanding to increased happiness.
Voltaire inaugurates a 40-year struggle in France for inoculation.
A struggle that will be opposed by both the church that claims it is a tempting of providence
and the faculty of medicine that claims that it violates the traditions of medicine to
give a disease.
Voltaire is no illusion that inoculation began in the Middle East and Circassia because people
wanted their daughters not to be poxmarked so that they could sell them into slavery
for a higher price, but Voltaire urges, don't judge by original motive.
Judge everything by its effects upon human well-being.
And what is the system of knowledge that the French need to embrace?
He invites them to embrace the philosophy of John Locke.
He argues the absurdity of favoring Descartes simply because he is French when empiricism
has shown itself so superior to rationalism as a means of gaining knowledge.
Locke Voltaire will write as a man who studies the mind instead of vainly theorizing about
it.
We need to acquire ideas, not make up ideas that we call innate.
Everyone argues that Locke is a dangerous materialist because he said that God could,
if he chose, make matter think in rejecting the necessity of accepting Cartesian dualism.
This is not materialism Voltaire argues, but a recognition of the limits of human knowledge.
Who knows what the soul is?
In a dramatic phrase he says, I am proud to be as ignorant as Locke.
I am proud to be as ignorant as Locke about this unknowable matter.
Let us leave such speculations to metaphysicians who over thousands of years have never convinced
each other of anything.
Let us admit our ignorance and study ourselves and the world through the limited faculties
that we do possess.
God's power in nature is not a matter of conjecture, but of empirical study, of concrete
experience, of learning from the creation itself.
Theologians, Voltaire argues with indignation, claim that Locke and such philosophers are
dangerous to morality and to society, but in fact it has been the theologians who for
centuries have bred discord and war in their unanswerable arguments with each other, while
the philosophers peacefully think and communicate with each other and reason on the basis of
evidence and logic.
In Voltaire's philosophical letters from England, philosophy is given a very wide range of subjects
indeed, and the extraordinary effort of translating the conceptual revolution of the 17th century
for the ordinary 18th century reader has begun.
Thank you very much.
