In 2016 and 2017, journalists noticed that YouTube was serving kids videos of famous
characters in baffling situations.
Usually these videos were cheap animations, but sometimes they started real people, just
as Elsa or Spider-Man or whoever, acting out storylines that were always incoherent and
sometimes disturbing.
The characters would get pregnant, get in car crashes, commit crimes, in some cases be
buried alive.
The scandal became known as Elsa Gate, and it was possible in part because kids are a
pretty passive audience.
A video could be a procedurally generated mishmash of characters and songs and bright colors,
and they would still watch all the way through.
My introduction to Elsa Gate was a great article called Something Is Wrong on the Internet
by a writer named James Bridal, which pointed out that even beyond Elsa Gate, the entire
culture of children's YouTube was troubling.
Some of the most popular videos around were product unboxings.
Kids would watch adults open up kinder eggs or play with toys to the tune of hundreds
of millions of views.
In an article for New York Magazine, one mom described how toy videos affected her two-year-old,
saying,
Plus, there's something about seeing your kids sitting still and watching a video of
somebody playing with toys instead of actually playing with toys themselves that makes you
feel like the victim of some awful irony of modern life.
The flood of stories was awful PR for YouTube kids, which had just launched a couple years
earlier and was still trying to win over parents in new markets.
So weirdly not my market.
YouTube Kids isn't available in Quebec.
Never has been.
Almost everywhere in North America, just not here specifically.
Francophobia aside, I think YouTubers responded to this scandal pretty well.
They removed thousands of the offending videos, maybe hundreds of thousands, and gave parents
the option to only show channels that had been manually approved by YouTube staff.
Although I can't verify this because YouTuber Cowards who fear the Kibbutz people, my impression
is that online video isn't a much better place these days.
I'm glad to say we've left this in- I'm glad to say-
If you spend a lot of time on TikTok or anywhere that likes complaining about TikTok, you've
probably seen a video like this one.
At the most basic, these videos comprise a clip from a show or movie played next to some
unrelated, visually stimulating footage, sometimes a person playing with slime or cutting
into soap, but most iconically, screen recordings of the mobile game's subway surfers.
This genre of video is often called sludge content, for the way it combines different
pieces of media into a pre-digested slurry, where no one component can really be considered
on its own merit.
Other most chaotic sludge videos feature three videos playing side by side, plus a caption
describing the main video, plus subtitles in English and Chinese, plus grating royalty-free
music playing over top, potent enough to tranquilize a cow or kill a German philosopher.
Over the past few months, these videos have gained a reputation as being one, creatively
bankrupt, two, incredibly overwhelming, and three, almost impossible to look away from.
Sludge videos flood people's feeds and rock up millions of views because as widely disdained
as they are, they're also incredibly easy to watch.
They put viewers in a similar headspace as the Elsa Gate stuff.
I almost want to say hypnotized, like watching them isn't our choice.
A couple weeks ago, I made a sludge video as a joke for my Patreon, and even though I knew
exactly what it was going to say, I still watched it like four or five times all the
way through.
It's hard to put the experience into words.
When I watch sludge videos, I'm not enjoying myself, I'm not getting anything out of it,
but it would be tough to say I'm not engaged.
I mean, I'm watching the whole way through with my eyes glued to the screen, despite
none of the interest that would usually keep me around.
It's like something about these videos bypasses the thinking part of my brain and connects
straight to the reward center.
If you think such busy videos would be pure sensory noise, like totally impossible for
any human being to parse, but they do a couple things to stay at least kind of legible.
First off, each type of clip that gets used is familiar to anyone who's been on TikTok
or it's competitors, and each one follows a reliable formula.
When you start watching, you know the soap is going to be sliced or the subway is going
to be surfed, so the little side clips don't require your full attention.
A lot of the time, you even know what's going to happen in the show or movie because a text
overlay spoils it for you.
Having that context means that every video kind of feels the same, but it also makes
them easier to digest.
Of course, more clips also means more stimulation and more payoffs, which is probably the real
reason for this format, even though you know what to expect there's a lot to anticipate.
Those oddly satisfying type videos offer quick and easy payoffs while you wait for the main
clip to resolve.
They keep you watching even if the main clip isn't especially interesting.
On the other hand, a lot of the game footage that gets played never really pays off.
They tend to be from endless runners that you can actually win, like subway surfers, or
those Minecraft stages that are just a series of tricky jumps.
They offer a baseline of visual interest, but since they never actually finish, since
they never resolve, I'm always left unsatisfied.
Question content sludge is joylessly waiting around for nothing in particular.
I guess the big question there is why, right?
How did such a weird genre take form?
How did it get popular?
Obviously, the answer is money, right?
No one would make this stuff unless they were making money, but even knowing that it's
still kind of baffling, it's like finding out that 5% of your country's GDP comes from
professional jugglers.
How does this, of all things, generate revenue?
This game works by exploiting a couple quirks of the TikTok platform.
First off, with the possible exception of music, TikTok is shockingly lax on copyright.
As far as we know, they don't have any systems in place to screen videos for reposting shows
or movies.
This attitude sets them apart from their biggest competitors, Shorts on YouTube, Reels on Instagram
and Facebook, all of which are actively monitored for copyright.
On TikTok, stolen videos run rampant because they can only be taken down by manual reports.
And I'm told even those are kind of a joke.
Like Philip from the channel Volksgeist was telling me about a guy who's racked up 70,000
followers on TikTok by reposting his videos with these stomach-churning, zoom-arc-war-fast
edits.
At some points, this account has actively pretended to be the guy in the videos.
It seems to me like a pretty open and shut case, but Philip reported them to TikTok and
never heard anything back.
So it's feasible to pirate an entire TV show or movie or YouTube channel or whatever and
rerun it on TikTok for easy money.
On the off chance, you do get caught and your account gets banned.
Who cares?
Just start another one.
Second, TikTok is exceptionally good at keeping viewers around.
The algorithm's main goal is to maximize viewer retention.
So it pushes videos that people watch to the end and then stay on the app when they're
finished.
Better retention equals more visibility, equals more views, equals more money.
Retention is a really common metric to measure video quality.
YouTube's waited in some capacity for over a decade now.
And if all the options available, I think it's a pretty good one.
Consider the options here.
If videos got pushed based on the ratio of likes to dislikes, then bragging could easily
tank people's careers.
If went by comments, then inflammatory videos might be pushed over more thoughtful stuff.
In YouTube's case, retention means videos are rewarded for following through on their
promise.
Watching a video to the end implies you got what you came for.
It's also the reason some videos are like seven hours long these days, which honestly
not everyone can pull off.
I come on here with like one big take every two months and that feels like a bit much
sometimes.
Any recommendation system will change what kind of content is rewarded, and therefore
what kind of content gets made.
I don't want to go all first year film student.
The medium is the message on you here, but I only did one year film school.
So I'm going to do it anyway.
If you're willing to sacrifice your creative voice and make whatever a platform rewards,
it's more than possible to min-max your way into success with extremely watchable garbage.
That much became clear in the 2010s, when small production studios realized that kids
under 5 watch basically anything you put in front of them, as long as it has eye-catching
visuals and familiar songs or characters.
So they started pumping out thousands and thousands of nonsense videos made of reused
assets Frankenstein together in every possible configuration.
Kids that young aren't really capable of choosing one video over another.
So the videos didn't need to be good.
They just had to hold their attention.
The scope of this problem was limited because the strategy only worked on babies.
But on TikTok, we're all babies.
On TikTok, we don't choose what to watch.
Instead, we watch what's presented to us by the For You page and judge it mainly on
whether it holds our attention.
It's a drastically different experience.
And as anyone who's been hypnotized by sledge videos will tell you, content that holds
your interest when presented to you isn't necessarily content you consider worth watching.
In fact, sometimes they're opposites.
TikTok is overrun with videos that take ages, fucking ages to get to the point.
Videos that are all build-up, no payoff.
Theandering storytimes that give three minutes of backstory no one asked for and then never
actually deliver the goods.
Until you get to the end, you can't know if a video will be worth it.
And once you do, your opinion no longer matters.
The video has extracted what it needs from you.
This isn't always malicious.
Often the TikTok algorithm amplifies regular people who are trying to tell their friends
a story and just did a kind of bad job.
A theoretical better-telling of that story that got to the point right away wouldn't
perform as well, so you probably wouldn't have seen it.
Videos like that suggest that there's a gulf between what kind of content is optimal and
what kind of content is good.
I think TikTok's sledge represents that gulf at its absolute widest possible, because
it's fantastically optimized to hold your attention, but it doesn't care at all what
you think about it.
A sledge video is worse than the song it plays, it's worse than Subway Surfer, it's definitely
worse than whatever movie it's rebooting, but it's better than any of those three at
keeping you around, because if ever you lose interest in one, there's so much to fall
back on.
Content sledge ignores human taste and appeals to less conscious processes, like our absolutely
dismal attention spans, which have been running the show the whole time.
Personally, mine's pretty shot from years of always doing two things at once, cooking
while watching a TV show, playing a game while listening to a podcast, whatever.
I suspect it's also partially a trauma thing for me, like even 10 minutes of total silence
will send me into a tailspin.
It's not something I'm proud of, I think it's one of my bigger weaknesses.
And sledge is the rare media that just indulges that.
It demands basically nothing of me, and offers basically nothing in return.
So it's easy to fall down a rabbit hole and watch 10 episodes of young Sheldon or whatever
without even noticing.
The thing to understand is that TikTok doesn't reward videos made for human beings, it rewards
videos made for human attention spans.
And the more video targets our attention spans, the less priority it can give to other facets
of the human experience, like intelligence or emotions or physical comfort.
Everyone can tell something's wrong with these videos.
All the pieces are familiar, but the way they're arranged doesn't conform to any human perspective.
This is what some people do assume that sledge videos are made by AI, and I don't think they
are.
That would add a lot of complexity.
AI would have to download the clips, choose where to cut the scenes, understand which
videos to play next to each other, notice which components do well, and adapt future
videos to match.
Meanwhile, a human could easily crank out 40 of these videos in a day, and most they
might use some coding to swap out clips, but that's not AI.
I can't blame people for assuming though.
These videos feel like the AI art we were seeing a couple years ago.
It's like what algorithms would imagine humans want to see, and in a roundabout way it is.
While sledge videos are probably made with human input, they might as well not be, because
they're produced to the exact whims of recommendation algorithms.
A content firm spits out a handful of videos, some do well and others flop, so the humans
try to figure out why.
Maybe this game was good for retention, maybe this show doesn't really hold the audience,
they learn what works, then they make videos that are incrementally more optimized for
the platform.
An operation on this industrial scale has no reason to consider taste, and really no
way to measure it.
Views are the only metric that counts for anything.
The humans making sledge videos are effectively tools, acting out the wishes of an unknowable
machine.
No offense.
The resulting genre joins a growing movement of post-human art, where human involvement
is incidental and transient.
We're just around to do whatever grunt work can't be pwned off onto AI yet.
You've seen this stuff before.
Elsa Gate was an early warning with its stiff animation and nonsense storylines, YouTube
thumbnails with enlarged eyes and faces, grotesque but oh so clickable, articles written entirely
by the rules of search engine optimization, running thousands of words and barely answering
your questions.
While humans produce content sledge, the artist is the algorithm, and while humans consume
content sledge, the audience is also the algorithm.
Content sledge is AI-generated art that just happens to be made by humans.
And people aren't stupid, they can tell they're being exploited, even if they don't know
exactly how.
Part of what makes content sledge so off-putting is that most art-considers will experience
it from the perspective of our human bodies.
Like Mad Max Fury Road famously puts everything important in the middle of the frame, so your
eyes can follow the action through a million rapid cuts.
Content sledge, my eyes dart around helplessly, am I meant to watch all three things happening
on screen, or just one, or any of them even, or like Chantel Ackerman's movies are really
slow, famously slow, but it works so well.
It gives you time to interpret each shot in several ways and kinda get lost in your thoughts.
And then when she cuts to a new scene it snaps you out of your days, and it ends up being
surprisingly thrilling.
My friend Sasha, who helped out on this video, describes Ackerman's movies as a collaborative
effort between the filmmaker and the viewer.
When I watch content sledge, it's like I don't exist.
If I'm thinking or feeling anything, I couldn't tell you what it is.
The amount of sensory noise coming my way crowds out any deeper awareness.
At most, I can maybe describe the plot of the movie, but I can't tell you anything
about the performances or the themes.
The thing only takes up half my little screen.
The actors' faces are as big as like a kind of small grape.
So I watch all the way through, but it's a one-way experience that barely feels like
an experience at all.
My heart speeds up, my pupils dilate, but who cares?
The room might as well be empty.
Back before, optimism felt like a cruel joke.
We used to say that the internet was democratizing culture.
The explosion of YouTube, blogging, and photo sharing created new genres and forms that
were basically free to produce in and had no pre-existing rules.
All of a sudden, teenagers were getting famous from their bedroom.
Regular people were getting six-figure book deals.
The narrative was that the internet took power away from the gatekeepers, their radio stations
and film studios, and returned it to the people.
And that's fair.
Culture does feel pretty participatory now, and it's easier than ever to get your art
in front of people.
But no democracy would create art that's so anti-social, so hostile to human experience.
If the public voted on what kind of media was rewarded, journalists would still have jobs.
Musicians could make a living.
And tech talk honestly might not exist at all.
It's true that these days, regular people create a lot of the most popular art.
But what we create, the actual content of it, is molded by a very small number of companies
whose interests often go against our own.
Tech Talk alone decides who they'll end up platform.
We should think about what kind of messages that fosters.
To me, it seems like Tech Talk's goal is to convince you it's the beating heart of
modern culture, where everything interesting happens.
Beyond the literal content of a video, it's the variety you get while scrolling.
It's the sheer number of niches, telling the viewer they can have a little bit of everything
all the time.
And Tech Talk is where they'll find it.
I think content sludge is a perfect, like objectively perfect, carrier of that message.
It presents us with two or three drastically different videos at once.
A level of variety no other media can touch.
It offers us a chance at pure consumption.
Or what's being watched is secondary to the ritual of staring at a screen.
Each component substance is kept to a minimum, offering as little as possible to grapple
with.
To draw all our attention to the fact that we don't have to choose between the satisfaction
of a slime, the excitement of a mobile game, and the intrigue of a drama.
That as long as we stay right here, we can have it all.
And I guess what I'm trying to say with this video is fuck that.
We can't have it all.
We don't need it all.
The health of a media diet is not measured in total amount consumed.
We've been trained to accept whatever stale popcorn the algorithms toss our way.
Like, we can't tell the difference between filler and nourishment.
But some part of us does know, even as we're asked to forget our bodies.
Some part of us knows and hungers.
The larger problem here is not one you or I can solve.
We don't run TikTok.
We won't convince them to make their algorithm less effective.
And I'm not big on individualist solutions for this kind of problem that's just capitalism
doing its thing.
But if content sludge isn't going anywhere, I think we need to at least learn to make
ourselves less miserable.
Personally, my life became a lot more enjoyable when I started being intentional about my
media diet.
So no watching whatever an algorithm sticks in my face, no following trends for the sake
of it.
Instead, I've been paying attention to what speaks to me and actively seeking it out,
even when it's challenging or boring.
And it is boring sometimes, at least according to my busted attention span.
I'm realizing books are like really long.
For the past six months or so, I've been going to some local film screenings at museums
or small festivals.
I've seen like dozens of good movies, most of which you can only watch in person.
And I do live in a good city for that stuff.
But basically, no matter where you live, there are probably movie nerds putting on screenings.
There are probably art galleries you can walk into and find something totally moving.
There are probably local bands who'd love it if you went to their shows.
They're not usually very good, but that's not the point of a local scene.
It turns out most music is kind of bad.
If these things aren't feasible for you, don't worry about it.
Platforms like Rate Your Music and Letterbox are also great for getting under your bubble.
A lot of libraries have digital rentals now.
And hey, now that I think of it, there's always Nebula nailed it.
Since last year, I've been developing a movie podcast with my friends and fellow creators,
Lola Sebastian and Lady Emily.
When the show starts coming out, which is soon, not sure exactly when, but it's soon,
Nebula will get episodes a full two weeks early, plus some fun bonus episodes that won't be on streaming.
Honestly, if it weren't for Nebula's support, we never could have taken the time to make this weird, risky new thing.
But it's been so much fun just like hanging out with my friends, talking about movies.
We've put quite a lot of work into it, and I'm so glad it's coming together.
Nebula is a curated streaming service owned by its creators, including me.
It gives us a little more freedom to do our own thing and trust that people will find it if it speaks to them.
On Nebula, you'll find some of your favorite creators' catalogs free of ads or sponsorships,
which makes for a remarkably chill experience.
The interface is nice and clean, lots of choose from, but it never feels overwhelming.
One thing I really like is that we don't have a recommendation algorithm.
Everything you see on the homepage is handpicked by the Nebula team, and often there's a fun theme to it.
Like, right now we're highlighting our videos about women's history and the future of the human species.
If you sign up with the link right back there, you can get a discount from yours truly.
You can save 40% on an annual membership,
meaning you only pay like $2.50 a month to support me and over a hundred brilliant creators.
Head over to go.nebula.tv slash Lilly Alexander.
And now, as a thank you for sticking around to the end,
let me roll the credits up there and serenade you with the dulcet tones of this melodica I'm kind of okay at.
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
If you tell anyone I'm blocking you.
