Now that we've spent some time exploring the ocean basins in all their vast richness,
I'd like to take some time to think of them in terms of habitat, what they are as an environment
for life to live in in the ocean. Because just as on land, life in the ocean depends
on habitat, and it ranges from the seemingly limitless volumes of open water, with just
absolutely no boundaries, to very specific seabed environments from the surf zone to
the deepest and darkest of the ocean trenches. The ocean is the original habitat on earth.
As we're going to see in this course, life's been around on the planet for well over three
billion years, but for almost all of that time it was exclusively in the sea, and in
fact no life existed on land for something like 75% of the earth's history.
Well just the definition of habitat is very simple, right? It's the physical environment
that's occupied by some organism, the place where it lives and grows. So the geology,
the physical and chemical conditions of the water, and of the bottom, define marine habitats,
basically all of the different things that make up the environment in which an organism
has to make its living, has to live and grow and live out its lifetime and reproduce.
So we can think about what some of the key ingredients for any living organism are anywhere
on the planet, and then apply them specifically to what's in the ocean. Every living organism
on the planet needs an energy source. That's primary. We all basically depend on being able
to use energy to keep life going. And so there's a primary energy sources that are things
like light, or perhaps even chemical energy that are used by some organisms especially
in the ocean. And then there are secondary energy sources, meaning all of the food that
we consume. We as human beings are not so good at generating our own, using our own primary
energy, but we're very good as consumers. We take up energy that's been turned into food
by other organisms, and then use that to get along. Life on Earth also needs a whole
variety of chemical nutrients, basically the chemical building blocks for the metabolic
processes that go on in our bodies, or in the bodies of any organism, whether it's at
sea or on land. And then finally, the key ingredient for a lot of living organisms involves that
physical environment, right? The temperature, the pressure perhaps, especially if we're
talking about in the ocean. And for some organisms, a substrate, a physical space to live to
attach itself. But for others, the water itself, or the fluid medium, is in substitute for
a substrate. Well, when we think about the marine environment
specifically then, we want to classify it in terms of the different environments that
the ocean basins afford for life on Earth. We're going to explore life in a lot more
detail a good bit later on in the course. But for the moment, let's take a look at what
those physical environments are, what those habitats are that are defined by the ocean
as a medium and as a place on the planet. So there's two ways of dividing up the marine
environment, and we can think of it as sort of the physical location versus just simply
dividing by depth and the availability of light, which is directly dependent on depth.
So let's take that depth consideration first. Basically in depth, the ocean we can think
of almost as just simply a two-layered system. There's basically a shallow, warm, sunlit
layer, a layer through which the light penetrates. The energy from the sun warms the surface
waters and it also causes currents to form because of mixing of the water due to the
temperature variations and things like that. We'll come back to that later on. But initially,
let's just consider this shallow zone that's sunlit, the photic zone. Photic, just like
photography or from photos, meaning light, so the lit zone of the ocean is the photic
zone. Well, everything else below that is just, by contrast, the aphotic zone. So the
vast majority of the deep ocean's depth, that thousands of meters of water, is dark,
in fact completely dark, except for light that's generated by organisms themselves.
And then it's also, of course, colder and the pressure goes up and up and up as you
go down through the water. So we refer to it as simply the aphotic zone, the zone that
doesn't have any light, because light is really the defining feature. Why is light the defining
feature? Well, as we're going to see, many, many of the marine organisms are dependent
on light for photosynthesis, just as on land. Okay, a second way of classifying marine environments
then is to just think about what the sort of proximity to the coastline is, and also
what the proximity to the bottom of the ocean is. So we have the open water environment,
where you're out in the open ocean, you're not near the bottom of the sea. We call that
the pelagic environment. Pelagic or pelagos is just from a word meaning the open sea,
the open water. In fact, the term for a group of islands out in the open sea in archipelago
has the same root. So in the open water mass of the ocean, then many different things live
and they're not really bound to the bottom or to the shoreline or anything else. We call
that the pelagic environment. But we break the pelagic environment down into two provinces.
We have the neuritic province, which is the water that lies over the continental shelves,
the shallow water and near the shores. For the most part, this is part of the photic zone,
although not absolutely entirely. But this neuritic province, near shore province, is
all the open water that lies over the continental shelves and generally is in shallow water.
By contrast, most of the rest of the vast volume of the ocean in the open water, we
refer to as the oceanic province or in fact oceanographers commonly just use the term pelagic
as a sort of shorthand for it. So open water that's off the shelves, far away from the
land and is nowhere near the bottom of the ocean perhaps, but just somewhere in that
column of water that oceanographers refer to as if it were just simply a column, although
of course it's a vast volume, between the bottom and the surface. So that's the oceanic
province in contrast to the neuritic province. Okay, but there's a second way of classifying
marine environments, as I said, and that is thinking about basically organisms that use
the bottom versus use the open water in general. So the benthic environment is the environment
that's in, on, or maybe just associated in some way with the sea bottom. And again we
can break it down into the sort of the near shore and coastal and on the continental shelf
regions versus the deep water and offshore regions. But for this benthic environment,
benthic again is from benthos and just means something having to do with the deeps in the
bottom in fact of the ocean. And so we talk about the coastal and shallow zone, the beaches
and the near shore surf zone, the rocky tide pools, estuaries, seagrass zones, reefs, all
the places along the continental shelf are areas that are in proximity to the coast.
Portions of those that are the benthic environment then are referred to as the beach itself or
the kind of standard sea level and the tidal high and low tide zone. So we talk about the
benthic literal zone. Literal, another word for beaches, essentially we have the super
literal zone, so the zone that's actually sort of out of the water, most of the time
out of the water except perhaps at the highest tides or in big storms. And then the literal
region which is the typical beach itself and the sub-literal zone which would be the just
immediate offshore in the kind of low tide and just below region. Now these same zones
are sometimes referred to instead of as literal as just super tidal, sub tidal or tidal regions.
It all comes out to the same reference. It's basically the transition zone between the
land and the offshore on the bottom and material that or organisms that reside in proximity
to or using the bottom in some way. Now if we go into the deep water and we move off
the continental shelf and out into the open ocean then we go through different benthic
zones that are just simply defined by their depth itself. And so we include, we have zones
that are referred to as bathyl, abyssal and hadal. These are wonderful words that really
evoke the great depths of the ocean. We heard the word bathymetry talking about depth.
So the zone once you leave the continental shelf at a few hundred meters and down to
a few thousand meters, down the continental slopes and rises are referred to as bathyl
depths, great depths of the ocean. And then the open deep sea floor, I've already
referred to a couple of times as the abyssal plains. And you know the word abyss I think
to us almost evokes a sense of limitless depth, something dark and bottomless that
we cannot even know. But of course to an oceanographer the abyss has a very specific definition.
Abyssal depths are depths between about three thousand to six thousand meters of water depth,
which is in fact the depth that encompasses the large areas of abyssal plain of the open
sea floor that we've already defined. And so when we talk about benthic habitats we
talk about abyssal habitats and most of the ocean, something close to fifty percent of
the earth's surface is abyssal benthic habitat. But of course there's an even deeper zone
in the ocean. It only amounts to a few percent of the total ocean floor where the deep sea
trenches lie. But from six thousand or so meters on down to the maximum depth at the
bottom of the challenger deep of eleven thousand meters is a zone that's the greatest depths
in the ocean. And so they've gotten named to this term, hadal, just like they're the
zone from Hades, the depths of hell perhaps at the bottom of the sea. Now it turns out
that for organisms as a habitat, the hadal zone and the abyssal zone and even a lot of
the bathyl zone are not all that different. They're all associated with the bottom of
the ocean. It's certainly cold, it's certainly dark, and it's very high pressure and the
pressure is greater the deeper you go. So a hadal benthic zone has a higher pressure
than an abyssal benthic zone. But for organisms as we'll see later on, pressure is not one
of the really key factors that governs where they can live, so much as temperature and
chemistry and availability of nutrients and things like that are, and availability of
light. Well let's take a tour of just some of the organisms that live in some of these
different zones. So we can talk about the pelagic photic zone, you know, so the open
water but where the sunlight shines on the water. And again, we have the neuritic and
the oceanic zones. And this is where a lot of the big scale organisms that we're used
to seeing swimming around, you know, the tuna fish, the sharks, the skates and rays and
things like that out in the open ocean swimming there. And of course it also includes all
of the more microscopic organisms that live in the, in the photic zone as well. The ones
that photosynthesize various kinds of plankton and things like that that we're going to see.
So that actually evokes that there are some different kinds of organisms that live in
the open water in the pelagic zone. Let's take a look at what those are. Basically
we can break all the organisms down without even talking about specific species or anything
else into either plankton, I just mentioned, or necton. What's the difference between plankton
and necton? Well plankton, as I said, are, many of them are fairly microscopic. And when
you think about plankton, you think about something that's just sort of floating with
the water. It's drifting with the seas and basically just controlled by the water as
far as its movement. In fact, that's the definition of plankton. They're passive floaters in the
water or drifters. They have a limited amount of locomotion. So many examples are things
like what we call the phytoplankton. And we'll return to these later on, but the diatoms and
dinoflagellates that do a lot of the photosynthesis on the planet and are the basis of the marine
food chain. We also think though about what are called zooplankton, like think of the
word zoo, they're animals, right? Zooplankton include krill, small shrimp, other organisms
like jellyfish and ones you've maybe never heard of like copepods and tenophores. All
of them are small enough that they're essentially drifters, so therefore they're defined as
plankton. In fact, there's even bacterial plankton that we'll see later on in the course, some
of which are also an important part of the photosynthetic system. But we can contrast
the plankton with the necton, and the necton is just the biological term for the active
swimmers, the organisms that can actually move about independent of currents and actively
determine where they're going to go. So we have all kinds of pelagic fish that are well
known to us, salmon and sharks, tuna and herring, basically all of the big swimming fish of
the sea, or in fact small swimming fish of the sea, are all necton. They're active, independent
movers in the water. Also the marine mammals, manatees and dolphins and whales and things
like that, and marine reptiles like sea turtles. Most of the necton are large because in order
to actually swim through the water and fight the viscosity of the water and be able to
have enough power to move yourself, you have to be of a certain size. On the other hand,
not all of the plankton are necessarily very small. Some of the jellyfish and some of the
soft jelly organisms that live in the water can get very large, can get in fact tens of
meters in length, as we're going to see later on, some really unusual looking organisms,
and they're drifters in plankton too, so you don't have to be microscopic to be plankton.
Well the pelagic zone is also zoned with depth, and I've only defined the photic zone near
the surface. That extends to just a couple of hundred meters below sea level. It depends
on the clarity of the water, as we'll see later on, how deep light can actually penetrate,
but it never penetrates more than a few hundred meters into the water. Well we've said the
average depth of the ocean is 4,000 meters, so most of the water is not the photic zone,
but is the aphotic zone. And this deep pelagic zone, and we can break it down into different
depths like bathy pelagic and abyssal pelagic, but those are sort of splitting hairs at this
point I think, at least for the purpose of our course here. All of that deep water zone
is high pressure, dark, and it's populated with organisms that literally live in a world
without walls. There are no boundaries. There are very few or no currents to speak of. Any
currents that move through the deep ocean tend to move very slowly, and so there's literally
no hard objects to bump into. There's nothing to define space in a sense. They live in a
world that to them is essentially a limitless three-dimensional volume, and perhaps except
for the teeth of some predators that might want to eat them, they really have nothing
hard to run into, and so therefore very unusual to us, forms of very soft organisms that can
spread out over even large areas with just a sort of protoplasmic kind of shape, various
jelly-like creatures. An example is an organism called a terrapod, which is a soft snail. It
has absolutely no shell, or some of the terrapods at least have absolutely no shell, but they
live swimming by flapping the thing that's evolved from the snail's foot in the water
to move about through the water and find food or find other terrapods with whom they need
to mate. This deep pelagic zone also includes many invertebrates and fish that inhabit the
dark abyssal depth. We're going to come back and explore these in a lot more detail later
in the course, but I think once again, because of the unique habitat that they live in, we
see forms that seem strange and alien to us completely. We'll see how many of these fish
and invertebrates of the deep water have to generate their own light. They use bioluminescence
in order to find others of their own species or to avoid predators that are trying to find
them or just maybe to confuse them. Many of the organisms that live in this deep pelagic
zone have only been discovered and known to science over the course of the past two decades
or so. It's really been the era of deep submergence vehicles that has found these organisms.
And there's a really interesting reason why they weren't known before. When we had the
Challenger Expeditions and all of the early oceanographic explorations, they tended to
try to catch organisms by dragging nets through the water at different depths in the water to
see what they could get. And very often they would catch some fish and many of the fish perhaps
were very unusual organisms like these angler fish shown in the images. But the nets would
always be filled with beyond some of the fish and organisms that actually had some skeleton
or hard parts, just a lot of jelly-like goo. And the goo was sort of undifferentiated masses.
So they really didn't know what to make of it and perhaps thought even there were theories
that all of this was just a protoplasm that lived in the sea and was sort of a kind of
a formless organism of some kind. But it wasn't formless at all and the submersible images
have shown us that there's very complicated and in fact very beautiful forms for many
of these organisms. But by dragging a net through the water and then hauling it up to
the surface, those forms were absolutely obliterated.
Well let's take a look now at benthic habitats. And the benthic environment is certainly much
more variable than the pelagic environment because instead of being defined by the open
water, it's defined by being on in or near the bottom. And so the habitats are very
specific to the kinds of environments we see, ranging from things as I said like the rocky
tide pools and sandy beaches and salt marshes, to the coral reefs in the open deep sea floor,
to the surfaces of in fact sea mounts on the sea floor, and then ultimately even to the
very exotic environments that have only recently been discovered, like the abyssal or even
hathal deep sea hot spring vents or oil seeps on the sea floor where natural hydrocarbon
is coming out of the ocean floor, deep water mounds where deep water corals form their
substrate themselves by depositing limestone. Benthic organisms then are bottom dwellers
by definition. But we can break them down too in a couple of different categories. Biologists
love to categorize things and so this is no different in the ocean. So we have epiphana
that live on the sea floor, epi meaning on top of. So epiphana are all the organisms
that use the sea floor and perhaps graze the sea floor but don't live within it and swim
about just at the surface of the sea floor like flounder, halibut, hake, and the deep
sea fish called rat tail fish which are ubiquitous around the abyssal plains of the world, but
also invertebrates like mussels in shallow water, snails, sea anemones which actually
dwell both in very shallow benthic habitats as well as very deep habitats. And then finally
plants like seagrasses that live in very shallow water as we'll see later on because
they need access to the photocycle zone and light, or seaweaves which similarly are photosynthesizers
that need access to the photocycle zone. In addition to these epiphana then there are
whole classes of organisms and in fact thousands or hundreds of thousands of species of what
are called infana and just as the word implies they live in the bottom in some way, buried
within the sediments, grazing through the sediments in order to find scavenge up enough
food to make a living and that includes things like clams and worms and even bacteria that
live within the seafloor itself. The environment and the substrate of the seafloor governs these
benthic habitats from the literal zone all the way down to the abyssal and hadal zones.
And so we can see all sorts of contrasting examples depending on the physical environment.
For example on a sandy beach washed by waves the sand itself is a difficult environment
to live in. The waves and the tidal energy swoops back and forth and organisms need
to be adapted to be able to either move quickly or burrow deeply in order to avoid the power,
the erosive power of all those waves. So horseshoe crabs, clams, etc. that are living on a beach
are the kinds of organisms that do well in that environment. Contrast that with the deep
muddy seabed where everything is a little bit more static, there's not as much current
energy and wave energy and you have whole communities of organisms that are well adapted
to living down there. The Holothurians and sea cucumbers living on the seafloor, brittle
stars which are a form of starfish that again are very ubiquitous across the ocean floor
and many different kinds of worms that process that seafloor mud. The wide and sunlit continental
shelves host the most abundant benthic ecosystem certainly including things like coral reefs,
kelp forests, seagrass forests and things like that. So when we think of photosynthesis
we tend to think primarily of plants and trees on land but as we're going to see later on
it's equally important in the ocean habitat and an equal amount of photosynthesis is going
on at sea as on land and in fact photosynthesis evolved in the ocean. So coral reefs live
near the surface of the water because the corals host photosynthetic algae that actually
provide most of the food for the corals as just one example. The phytoplankton or another
example of the basis of the marine food chain being dependent on that shallow water light.
Corals in fact produce huge areas of the continental shelf geology at least in tropical regions
because the reef building corals build up over millions of years massive banks such
as the great Bahama banks shown here where the corals are growing up to remain in the
photic zone even as the land subsides or sea level goes up and down the corals grow
in just such a way as to stay in that photic zone and this can build up thousands of meters
of accumulation of those banks which ultimately builds the continental shelf out. So the habitat
is what's required for the biology but the biology also in this case actually constructs
the habitat and given enough geological time large parts of the world the continental shelves
in particular are modified and constructed by biological processes.
One more great example of ecosystems that are benthic but depend on access to the sunlight
are the shallow water kelp forests that dominate actually many regions of the world that don't
have coral reefs in shallow water. Off the coast of California if you go to central California
then you can see many many places where if you look out from the sea cliffs or the beach
you'll see huge expanses of kelp out there. These kelp are rooted down into the seabed
anchored down with what are called holdfests something like roots but kelp are not plants
they're actually algae they're seaweeds that are algae and there's something called fiatto
fights we'll learn about them later on but they anchor into the seafloor and then grow
as much as 30 meters high to reach up to the sunlight growing at the fastest rate of any
organisms on the planet actually.
Benthic environments include tide pools and the high energy and periodic drying and wetting
of a tide pool has created a unique and challenging environment for organisms to live in but one
that washes nutrients in all the time and provides access to sunlight such that it's
among the most rich environments on the planet the highest density of different species the
highest biomasses of many different environments on the planet and so sea anemones and starfish
have adapted to both living underwater in the tide pools but also daily drying out and
they can close up and conserve the water that's in their tissues until the next high tide comes
in and washes over them. Another example of a very specific marine environment causing
very specific biological adaptations.
Well if we go down to the deep benthic zone then this is perhaps the most unknown zone
of all in the ocean the deep and completely dark continental slopes and abyssal plains
hosting this surprising diversity and abundance of life including many organisms again that
were only recently discovered to science only in the years that we've actually been able
to get to the seafloor and investigate it and once again just like in the shallow water
the substrate the rocky versus muddy or sedimented regions exerts a primary control on the ecological
communities that live there and so different organisms can live given different substrates
different geological substrates. For example a rocky substrate such as is found on the tops
of sea mounts in the ocean so these volcanic edifices that have been built up on the seafloor
that aren't covered with sediments provide lots of nooks and crannies in the rocks for what we
call sessile organisms meaning organisms that don't move around some of them surprisingly
perhaps are actually animals but they're sessile like plants so they anchor themselves in and
don't move. Things like crinoids and seafans that anchor themselves down to the rock and then
extend of fronds up into the water that are basically designed to catch passing particles
as currents waft particles of something they can consume food in the water so they're scavengers
of the water but they're sessile organisms that that grows something like the more familiar plants to
us on land. At these bathial depths things like deep sea sponges soft corals again the sea anemones
and crinoids live in great profusion and in ecosystems where they're balanced with each other
and also in competition with each other to take up to take up these regions and depending on the
strength of the ocean currents in a given environment you get either richer or or sort of more barren
habitats for these organisms to live so these particular examples actually come from Davidson
seamount which is off the coast of california in a region where it extends up in the water but
still is at a depth of many hundreds of meters below the surface and yet the ocean currents
sweeping along the california margin bring lots of nutrients to those organisms.
A soft and muddy sedimented substrate by contrast favors a completely different
set of organisms the scavengers and burrowers that essentially live on all the organic matter
that's raining down from the the open ocean in the water column above. It was long thought that
this environment was pretty barren and almost devoid of life or maybe had only a few species
living in it but as we'll see in a later lecture huge numbers of species and great diversity actually
live in this deep sea floor abyssal plain muddy supposedly featureless but actually incredibly
varied environment. Perhaps the most unusual habitat of all in the ocean floor is one that
was only discovered in 1977 a really special environment surrounding the volcanoes of the
mid ocean ridges themselves and those are these things you may have heard of called the deep
sea hydrothermal vents or black smokers. We'll look at them in a lot more detail in the next lecture
but the deep sea vents they host entire ecosystems that are not based on photosynthesis and the sun's
energy which is the foundation of virtually all life on the planet except for in these regions
where significant chemical energy is coming out of the earth's earth itself and its plate tectonic
energy literally the heat and chemical nutrients coming out of the earth that fuels these complex
ecosystems that are now discovered to be living down there. So in 1977 marine geologists diving to
an area near the Galapagos Islands along the east pacific rise in the pacific were looking for
evidence of volcanism on the sea floor but what they found were vast profusions of tube worms
and clams and crabs and a strange sort of snow-like particles drifting through the water
out of these hot seeping vents in the sea floor. All of them were an ecosystem that was based on
bacteria that do something called chemosynthesis that we'll explore later on and that means they're
living directly off of the chemical energy coming out of the earth. So we've looked in this lecture
then of the ocean as a habitat and in fact it's all part of the earth as a habitat we can think
of the earth as a set of interconnected systems sometimes people describe this as earth system
science the biosphere meaning all of the biology on earth is connected directly and interacts with
the geosphere which means the rock and the geology but also the hydrosphere the water of the ocean or
of the freshwater on land the atmosphere and even the cryosphere meaning the the ice volumes on the
planet the areas that are dominated by ice on the planet and they're all linked by the flow of energy
and water and in fact of carbon and other nutrients that are essential for life as we'll see through
the entire ecosystem and that ecosystem is a intimately interlinked set of systems between
all of these different parts of what makes up our planet as a whole.
So we've seen I think that the specific geological and oceanographic conditions create habitat for an
amazing variety of life in the ocean and the thing about life in the ocean is that's distinct is that
it's fully three-dimensional the open water pelagic environment is 3d habitat on land is mostly 2d sure
we have some burrowing organisms that go down in the ground and birds that fly in the air but for the
most part everything on earth lives kind of on a plane and in a narrow zone a certain amount of
associated with the ground but the ocean is just not like that it's more more completely
three-dimensional and volumetric. In addition we see that the benthic zones and the pelagic zones
both vary with depth in the ocean the near surface is extremely important environment but so is the
deep sea floor and in fact the shallow from the shallow sea floor all the way down to the mid-ocean
ridges light temperature pressure and chemistry control so much about what habitat is like in the
ocean along with access to energy the light and chemical energy that drives all life on the planet
and finally the substrate the conditions on the bottom determine what kind of life can live in
a given region so in a lot of the rest of this course we're going to explore all these conditions
we're going to return again and again to this tight connection between the geology the state of
the water the state of the nutrients in the chemistry and the marine life that depends on it as a whole
