At the end of the previous lecture, we saw that the ocean floor has been created over
just about the last 180, 190 million years or so, and all of the continents were formerly
closer together, no Atlantic Ocean.
So this raises the question, you know, if the ocean crust is created at these ridges,
what happens?
Does that mean the planet has been getting bigger and inflating like some kind of balloon
over all of that time?
It was once all the continents compacted on a smaller planet and the whole thing is just
blowing up?
Well, no, it turns out that that's really physically not possible to do, although this
idea actually had a lot of adherence in the mid-1960s.
At that time, the evidence for seafloor spreading had gotten really very clear, and I think
the scientific community had accepted it, that it was pretty obvious how the Atlantic
Ocean had formed, how the Atlantic Ocean Basin had formed, and the Pacific as well.
So there was this thing that I mentioned just at the end of the last lecture called the Expanding
Earth Theory that supported that idea.
But in fact, for that to happen, the Earth would actually have to gain new mass somehow,
and there's no source of mass.
The Earth has stayed approximately the same size over that amount of time.
In fact, it stayed exactly the same size.
So instead, all of that ocean floor that's being created at the mid-ocean ridges must
also be consumed elsewhere in exactly equal amounts to keep everything the same on the
planet, except for this cycle of creation and destruction of the ocean floor, or in
fact, of plates on the planet.
So let's take a look at the map of the ocean floor age again and look for clues to this
destruction part of the cycle.
Well we took a very close look at the age of the ocean floor based again on the magnetic
striping and radiometric dating of the rocks for the Atlantic Ocean, and we saw a very
simple picture really, a mid-ocean ridge that has very young crust, the new volcanic processes
creating it, older and older crust symmetrically on either side, and the oldest crust closest
to the continents on either side.
But if you take a look instead at the East Pacific Rise, swing over to the Pacific Ocean,
and we see a very different story.
The East Pacific Rise doesn't run down the center of the Pacific.
It's much closer actually to the west coast of South America and North America, and it
even meets the coast of North America in the Gulf of California, and in fact up through
the San Andreas Fault.
To the west of the East Pacific Rise, we see a progression of ages of the crust from
young to older and older and older all the way over to the oldest crust near the Japan
Trench or the Tonga Trench on the far side of the Pacific Ocean.
But by contrast to the east side of the East Pacific Rise, we see the crust is getting
older and then abruptly sort of seems to disappear underneath South America.
It looks as though South America has literally run over the ocean crust that was created
at the East Pacific Rise.
Well that's exactly true.
That's just what's happened.
South America literally has run over the crust that was created at the East Pacific Rise.
Central America too, and in fact in North America, we see that not only has it run over
that crust, but it looks like it's literally run right over the actual spreading center
itself.
We see the spreading center going right up into the Gulf of California, rifting the continent
apart there, and then disappearing into North America.
So what's going on?
Well these are features that are associated with the deep ocean trenches, and they are
the places that are called subduction zones.
Harry Hess recognized these actually in that original 1960 paper, member of the essay in
Geopoetry, where he talked about the formation of crust at the mid-ocean ridges, but also
the destruction of crust by disappearing down the deep ocean trenches.
And it turns out that just as with our ridge story, there's a lot of different lines, disparate
lines of geological evidence and seismological evidence, as we'll see, that really showed
that this had to be so.
But the answer was in the Pacific Ocean, again because the Pacific, distinct from the Atlantic,
has both a ridge, actually a series of ridges, and a series of deep ocean trenches.
So these are the locations where the ocean floor is recycled deep back inside the Earth's
mantle.
The ocean trenches are these long, relatively narrow features.
They're not very wide, but many tens of thousands of kilometers long, and they were discovered
even, as we said, going back to the Challenger expedition when it was recognized that a few
places in the ocean were very, very deep water.
The ocean trenches get up to 11,000 meters deep, almost three times as deep as the average
depth of the ocean.
Most of them are located ringing the Pacific Ocean, a few in the Indian Ocean, and a few
small pieces of ocean trenches in the Atlantic.
But there are sites where the ocean floor is plunging into the mantle, they've been
given this name, Subduction Zones, and that's because of the specific process, Subduction,
something that you conduct or something that you carry, and then sub-meaning below.
So it's a place where the ocean floor crust is carried below the continent, or in fact,
sometimes carried below another piece of oceanic plate.
Now the Subduction Zones are associated with very specific features.
We have the deep ocean trenches that are these long and linear features in the sea floor.
Behind them, in a belt that sort of parallels the deep ocean trenches, are a series of volcanoes
that are associated either with volcanic islands in the ocean, for example the Lesser Antilles
in the Caribbean, or the Mariana's Islands in the Pacific Ocean down towards the Philippines
region, or they're volcanoes that are on land that parallel the deep ocean trenches, like
the volcanoes of Japan, or the Cascadia region, the Pacific Northwest of North America.
All of these volcanoes are representing another piece of the Subduction Zone puzzle.
Putting that puzzle together though required looking at earthquakes and seismological data.
Now in the 20th century, actually in the late 19th century, seismometers had been developed.
So from about the 1890s on or so, there were enough seismometers around the world to start
to actually locate the locations of earthquakes.
And over the next few decades, up into about the 1930s, various seismologists were making
maps of all the earthquakes around the globe.
And what they found, and what has certainly been confirmed ever since then, is that earthquakes
don't happen in random locations on the planet, they happen in very specific places.
If we look at a map of all the earthquakes that have occurred above a certain threshold
of earthquake magnitude.
So all the earthquakes above magnitude 5 for a 10-year span on the planet, we see this
incredible pattern emerge.
There are a few earthquakes dotting the interiors of the continents here and there.
But by and large, they're either right along the mid-ocean ridges, you can see the mid-ocean
ridges picked out by the small dots on this map as a very specific zone of seismicity,
or earthquake generation.
But 90% of the earthquakes, almost all of them, actually happen in these belts that
are right next to the deep-ocean trenches, and in fact between the deep-ocean trenches
and the volcanoes, typically speaking, of those volcanic arcs.
And those earthquakes have another characteristic, which is that when their depths are plotted,
the depths of the earthquake's focus, or the origin point of the earthquake, they make
a progression from the shallow earthquakes at the trench to deeper and deeper earthquakes
moving away from the trench as we go down.
Let's look at a cross-section.
And this was recognized actually all the way back in the mid-1930s by two different seismologists,
one in Japan named Wadadi, and another one working in California named Benioff.
And so these Wadadi-Benioff zones, as they are known, are these belts of earthquakes that
plunged their way down into the earth.
And both of these seismologists recognized that these were the signature of something
going on in the mantle of the earth.
In the 1960s, as the plate tectonic story was coming together, they were further recognized
as the signature of the sea floor that had been created at the mid-ocean ridges, plunging
back down into the earth's mantle.
So 90% of all the earthquakes on the planet happened in these bands that are descending,
literally hundreds of kilometers into the earth in the trenches.
Now most earthquakes all over the planet happened just in the upper, oh, 10 or 15 miles or so,
about 20 kilometers on the planet.
We call them all shallow earthquakes.
But just in these Wadadi-Benioff zones near the trenches, they can actually progress as
deep as 600, 660 kilometers into the earth.
These are the signature of basically the destruction, the redistruction of that oceanic plate that
was created at a ridge and has gone down a subduction zone, ultimately to be reincorporated
into the mantle of the earth.
The process by which this happens is almost certainly driven by the density differences
between different types of rock on the planet.
So the oceanic material that was created at the ridge starts out hot, it cools as it
moves away from the ridges, it starts to subside because it's cooling and becoming denser,
and ultimately it becomes so dense that like an anchor pulling the plate down, it slips
back into the mantle of the earth.
Subduction zones are, tectonically speaking, the most dynamic environment on the planet.
At some level, the mid-ocean ridges get a lot of the press, but the subduction zones
are where the action is really taking place and where a lot of the driving force for plate
tectonics is going on.
One of the really dramatic manifestations of that are the great subduction earthquakes
that create the biggest tsunami on the planet.
And we've seen, of course, a number of these tsunami in recent years with the 2004 subduction
zone earthquake off the coast of Indonesia, where the sea floor plate that's at the bottom
of the Indian Ocean is subducting beneath Southeast Asia and generated a magnitude 9.1 earthquake
on December 26, 2004, that created the tsunami that devastatingly killed so many people in
that region.
And then again, in 2011, another very large subduction zone earthquake happened creating
the tsunami that devastated northern Japan.
These are all direct manifestations of the plate motion at subduction zones, and we call
them convergent margins, because they're plate margins, they're the boundaries between
two plates, and they're a place where one plate is literally converging on the other
plate and carrying it down, and the plates stick together for a period of hundreds or
even thousands of years and then pop forward in an earthquake.
You'll look in another lecture at how that generates a tsunami wave and what the processes
are that makes tsunamis so devastating themselves.
But these are the largest earthquakes on the planet.
These are really where most of the seismic energy is released, and this is where the
plate tectonic motions are both the most dramatic and the most devastating.
Okay, so we have a few different types of plate boundaries that we've defined so far.
We have spreading centers, the mid-ocean ridges or the continental rift zones, places
where new oceanic crust is created, and that new oceanic crust is formed and moves away
from the mid-ocean ridges progressively getting older with age as it separates.
A name for those systems then is a divergent plate boundary, divergent because the plates
are diverging from each other, moving apart, and new surface of the earth is literally
being created at those zones.
They all start out as continental rifts, just like the original rift between Africa, North
and South America, and develop into ocean basins as we outlined in the last lecture.
So then their counterpart are the subduction zones associated with the deep sea trenches,
the earthquakes and tsunami, and the arc volcanoes.
And these are regions that we give the name convergent plate boundaries.
Convergent plate boundaries are converging on one another.
The oceanic plate that has been created at the mid-ocean ridges is being destroyed and
ultimately recycled back into the interior of the earth.
Sometimes the plates that include continental crust on them collide with one another at
convergent plate boundaries.
And so we have a special name for those which are called collision zones, and these are
the sources of some of the largest mountain ranges on earth.
For example, the Indian plate, the Indian micro plate that was a separate plate from
Eurasia for a long time, collided with Southern Asia about 30 to 50 million years ago and
built the Himalayan mountains through the collision of those pieces of continental crust.
And the reason that that builds a mountain range, instead of simply doing the same thing
that a subduction zone does, is that the continental crust, as we said before, is sort of the lowest
density material, remember the scum floating to the top of the interior of the earth.
And so when that collision takes place, the continental crust neither side wants to actually
go down.
Neither side can be subducted back into the mantle because it's simply not dense enough.
And so instead they pile up like a head on collision.
Another example of continental collision zone is actually going on today with Northern Africa
closing the Mediterranean Sea and slamming into the sort of southern margin of Europe.
So the Alps and the mountain ranges that extend from the Alps through the Middle East are
representation of the collision zone between Africa and Eurasia in that region.
Well, okay, so we have divergent plates and we have convergent plates.
We need one more ingredient that links them together because we have a spherical planet
and we have a lot of different plates that form this sort of patchwork mosaic on the planet.
In fact, there's about 10 to 12 major plates, things like the Eurasian plate, the North
American plate, South American plate, Pacific plate, Antarctic plate, and so on.
And then a whole slew, depending on who's defining them, of minor plates or micro plates
that are sort of the shards that are in between some of them.
So it's a complicated map pattern and if you think about it, we can't fit them all together
unless we have one more ingredient that links them.
And that's something called a transform plate boundary or also known as a strike slip fault.
And the difference between a transform boundary and the other plate boundaries is that the
oceanic crust, or in fact any part of the Earth's surface plate, is neither created
nor destroyed, but they're simply moving side by side relative to one another.
So these transform boundaries, these transform faults as they're known, are accommodations
basically of all the geometric irregularities of the plates on the surface of the Earth and
they link up the ridges and the subduction zones completing the plate tectonic system.
We can see these transform boundaries very sort of graphically if you look at the maps
of the seafloor now and take a look at the mid-Atlantic ridge or the East Pacific rise
are really any of the ridge systems and the pattern you see is that the ridge segments
look fairly straight in that pattern.
As the crust is pulled apart, the ridge splits apart, volcanic material wells up in the middle
and it makes a nice linear break.
But to fit that onto a globe, we kind of need a way to offset those ridge segments.
So instead of sort of smoothly curving ridges, we see little straight segments that are bounded
by very sharp lateral transfer zones and those are the transform faults of the ocean.
The transform faults has a very interesting and special kind of morphology.
If we look at them, if we look at two pieces of the ridge segments, between them is a transform
fault where the pieces of the crust are moving laterally side by side.
If the ridges are offset in this kind of manner, then the crust is moving that way from that
ridge and that way from that ridge and therefore the crust is moving side by side.
If we move beyond the place where the two ridges are offset from each other, so for example
in the kind of block diagram view off to the right or let's maybe say the east of the lower
ridge, then you can see that there's this trace of the sort of former transform boundary,
a scar of it, but all the plate motion is happening in the same direction on both sides
of that boundary.
And so we call those oceanic fracture zones.
A fracture zone is kind of a dead fault or a fossil fault.
It no longer has the lateral movement because it's not between two ridge segments, it's
off to one side of both the ridge segments.
But these fracture zones can extend many thousands of kilometers across the ocean.
If we look at the Pacific Ocean Basin, we see huge fracture zones, most famous of which
is one called the Mendocino Fracture Zone.
It extends from Cape Mendocino in California all the way across a very large part of the
Pacific Ocean floor, and it's the scar or the mark of plate tectonics.
These fracture zones were really important actually in developing the theory of plate
tectonics because they're a trace of how the plate motions have taken place.
So they actually show you the direction the plate has been moving over all the history
of that plate.
The main thing then about the transform boundaries again is that they neither create nor destroy
any new lithosphere, but just accommodate that motion.
Okay, well so now we've built up our plates, we have all of our different plate boundaries.
Let's look at the one more aspect of the main volcanic features, the main features of the
bedrock geology of the sea floor.
And that's the innumerable, just the thousands and tens of thousands of seamounts and islands
that have formed through volcanic processes on the ocean floor.
And the Pacific Ocean is dotted with seamounts, the Atlantic is as well, all the world's oceans
are.
For the most part these forms volcanoes and they form in two kind of key settings in
the ocean that I want to tell you about.
The first setting is at the mid ocean ridges, volcanism is happening, there's a lot of
upwelling of lava along the rifts, and sometimes that kind of concentrates into a particular
zone and builds up a volcanic edifice, a volcanic mountain or island if it extends all the way
above sea level.
The mid ocean ridges are high, they're at a depth that may be thousands of meters down
in the water, but much shallower still than the main abyssal plain of the ocean floor.
So the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, for example, is often at about 2,000 meters where the deep
ocean floor is at 4,000 meters.
This builds volcanic islands up over the ridge where it's hot.
As the plates separate and move away from the ridge, they cool and they subside through
that cooling and densification so that the sea floor gets deeper and deeper.
That's the reason for that pattern of depth in the ocean floor.
Well as they carry these now dead or extinct volcanoes away from the ridge, once they get
away from the source of magma that fed the lavas, then those volcanoes start as maybe
islands and subside to become seamounts.
That's the formation of a lot of the seamounts.
A specific type of seamount was actually recognized and named by Harry Hess after all those echo
sounder expeditions across the Pacific that he did during World War II and in the years
after the war.
And that was a seamount that it actually formed as an island, well I should say that's actually
a seamount that has a particular shape which you could think of as a mesa or a table mountain.
It's a high ridge but with a very flat top.
These are very common in the Pacific.
And Hess correctly interpreted these as actually ones that had once been islands that extended
above the water line, had been eroded and planed off by waves and then it slowly subsided
beneath the waves as they rode the crust away from the mid-ocean ridge.
He gave these special sort of table mountains the name Geo's and they're called that today
and the only reason they're called Geo's is because he was a professor at Princeton
University and he missed the geology department back there at Princeton which was in Geo Hall,
hence the name Geo's for all of these islands or all of these table mounts that dot the
Pacific Ocean.
A second type of seamount that's really important doesn't form at the mid-ocean ridges at all
but forms at a source of volcanic energy, a source of lava and hot magma from the Earth's
mantle that sits in a particular place with a plate moving over the top of it.
And that's a location that we call a hotspot.
A great example of a hotspot today is the Hawaiian islands and the Hawaiian islands including
what's called the Emperor Seamount chain, not islands but seamounts that extend away
from Hawaii in a line that extends sort of northwest across the Pacific Ocean over thousands
of kilometers.
As people were able to go out and dredge rocks up from these seamounts they knew that the
island of Hawaii itself with Kilauea and Mauna Loa volcanoes was essentially an active volcano
today and in fact none of the volcanic rocks are older than a few hundred thousand or a
million years or so on the island of Hawaii.
As you go back over the other Hawaiian islands Maui, Oahu, out to Kauai the rocks get progressively
older and older, several million years old as you move to the northwest.
If you look at the other islands like Midway and out beyond in the Pacific Ocean including
the seamounts in that region you find that they keep getting older and older and older
all the way along that chain of islands in a very regular progression from one to the
other.
Well the theory of these as something called hotspots then was also one of the things that
came together at the time that plate tectonics was being accepted.
They were recognized as having formed from basically a stationary source of new magma
in the mantle, some reservoir in the mantle that was given the name mantle plumes.
The idea that an especially hot part of the Earth's mantle was upwelling and adding extra
heat in a particular place and so it would create a volcano.
But then the plate is shifting over the top of that and so it would create another volcano
and then the plate shifts some more and creates another volcano.
It's as if you held a candle flame and passed a piece of paper or something over the top
of it.
It blackens the piece of paper and then moves on and blackens it some more and blackens
it some more.
And so they create a track line that literally is showing you the track of how that plate
is moved if you assume that the hotspots have stayed stationary in one place.
Now for a very long time, decades, it was thought that these hotspots were absolutely
stationary and it turns out there are a number of them all over the planet and they really
help us track out the plate motions over time.
Recent research has shown that these hotspot locations can actually move in the mantle.
Sometimes they've been described as blowing in the mantle wind which is a little bit extreme
because it takes tens of millions of years for them to really move very far at all.
The mantle wind is a very slow blowing wind, it's very viscous material.
At any rate, in at least over the sort of short geological timeframe, the mantle plumes
are stationary, the plates are moving over them and the hotspot volcanoes are a signature
of that plate motion over these mantle plume regions.
Well, let's return now to Alfred Wegener's problem.
Why didn't people accept his continental drift?
And as I said in the previous lecture, you know, the problem was understanding the idea
of how do you plow the continents through the ocean floor?
How do you manage to shift the continents around on this planet where the ocean floor
is not something soft and gooey but it's hard rock, it's basaltic lava and it's underpinnings
and it was clear that this was pretty rigid, it generates earthquakes, seismologists knew
from the passage of seismic waves through it that it was relatively rigid.
The answer to this question is that the tectonic plates are not plates of the Earth's crust,
the ocean crust and the continental crust, but there's something much thicker that includes
a big portion of the upper mantle of the Earth as well as the crust that overlies it.
The seismological observation showed as the imaging of the Earth's interior got better
that the outer 100 to 200 kilometers of the Earth, including both the crust and the upper
part of the mantle, could be treated as pretty rigid.
It's stiff material, it's going to break, not flow and so that got given the name lithosphere
for the sphere of rock, litho is, you know, a root meaning rock.
But below that is a region where the seismic waves slowed down and showed that this idea
of viscous, the cold molasses on a winter day I described before, really applies.
So below that is something called the esthenosphere.
Below is a root that means weak in Greek, so it's the weak sphere of the Earth.
It's less rigid.
It's still not molten.
It's not a giant pool of magma down there, interior of the Earth.
In fact, until we get to the core of the Earth, much, much deeper, there is no liquid part
of the Earth, but it's just weakly, partially melted enough to flow.
And that flowing part of the mantle, that weak part of the mantle called the esthenosphere,
is what the plates are riding on top of.
So we now see the tectonic plates as being made of lithosphere and those plates are rigid.
They just have boundaries where most of the earthquakes happen, but otherwise they translate
or move around on the Earth's surface as rigid blocks of riding on top of this weaker esthenosphere.
Let's take a look at what that actually looks like if we look at a cross-section of South
America separating from the African continent and the upper part of the mantle.
As we look at that view, we can see South America separates, the Atlantic Ocean starts
to form and moves apart, and meanwhile is overriding the Nazca plate in this region,
which is subducting beneath South America.
So South American plate can be seen as a plate that includes the continental crust of South
America as well as the oceanic crust of the western part of the Atlantic Ocean.
Let's look at the animation one more time, and you can see that there's sort of the darker
red region, which is the crust, and then the lighter red region, which is the whole lithosphere.
And that lithosphere starts at the mid-Atlantic ridge, includes South America, and runs all
the way over to the subduction zone where it's overriding that other plate.
So the continents don't plow through the ocean floor.
The continents are just along for the ride on a much thicker block of the Earth's exterior,
which is the tectonic plate itself.
What's driving all of this?
Well fundamentally, it's convection due to heat in the interior of the Earth as the primary
driving mechanism for these plate motions on the surface.
But the plates are the rigid block at the surface of the Earth that, as I said, changes
in density from the hot part of the mid-ocean ridge down to the dense materials slipping
down the subduction zone.
You've probably seen diagrams of the interior of the Earth that looks like a boiling pot
of oatmeal or something like that, a sort of big convection cells rising up at the mid-ocean
ridges sinking back down at the subduction zones.
It turns out that that picture was an early idea of plate tectonics, and it's not really
the way geophysicists think of plate tectonics working at this time anymore.
It's more complicated than that.
A lot of the upwelling material actually comes up at the hotspots, and the parts that separate
at the mid-ocean ridges are actually sort of surprisingly more of a passive response
to subduction dragging the plate down.
So it's just that as the plate gets dragged down, it kind of cracks and pulls apart somewhere
else, and that's what the mid-ocean ridge is.
And actually being over an upwelling portion of one of these convection currents.
So convection in the Earth is driven by the subduction side of the cycle, the downwelling
part of the surface of the Earth, and the rest of it is moving about in the mantle in
complex ways that don't form simple, large convection cells, and this is actually an
area of really active research today in plate tectonics.
Well, we've seen now all of the ingredients of the plate tectonic system, and maybe we've
also seen how it took a whole bunch of different sources of evidence, including new technologies
that all involved understanding what was going on beneath the ocean in order for this story
to come together.
Ideas of continental drift had been around for hundreds of years, and yet even after
being really put forward in a very kind of coherent way in the 1920s, we're just not
accepted by the scientific community until all this evidence came together.
And then in a period between 1960 and about 1968 or so, there was a total revolution in
understanding of Earth science and of how the oceanic crust formed, and boom, plate
tectonics was not just beginning to be accepted, but was actually what became the dominant
paradigm for Earth sciences as a whole.
But just to show us that there's nothing completely new under the sun, I'd like to
read you a little quote, and this quote was made actually in 1782, and it says, I therefore
imagine that the internal parts of the Earth might be a fluid more dense and of greater
specific gravity than any of the solids we were acquainted with, which therefore might
swim in or upon that fluid.
Thus the surface of the Earth would be a shell capable of being broken and disordered by
the violent movements of the fluid on which it rested.
So a rigid outer shell resting on a more fluid interior of the Earth of greater density.
That sure sounds like a lithospheric plate riding on top of an asthenospheric mantle
and that shell moving around broken and disordered by violent movements of the fluid.
Well that quote comes from our old friend Benjamin Franklin, not only politician, not
only mapper of the Gulf Stream in the 1760s, but also presaging plate tectonics by nearly
200 years in 1782.
Well okay, so in the course of these last two lectures then we've seen that the plate
tectonics cycle is one of constant destruction, renewal, and reconfiguration.
The plates themselves are internally rigid blocks of lithosphere, 10 to 12 major or so,
several minor ones that include both the continents and the ocean floor all together in this thicker
unit of lithosphere.
The continents are just along for the ride.
Ocean basins are continuously being renewed while the continents remain mostly intact,
although they're in constant motion, the interiors of the continents, geologically speaking,
are hundreds of millions or billions of years old.
In fact the continents are the old stuff and the ocean floor is the young stuff, no older
than 190 or 180 million years.
So the familiar ocean basins are constantly recycled and remade while the continents stick
around and earth is at least 20 times older than any of the ocean basins that are on the
earth today.
And yet there have always been ocean basins.
In the next lectures we're going to see how all this process got started and what the
source and the age of the water in the ocean is itself that fills up all of these plate
tectonically created basins.
