So far in recent lectures, we've looked at the ocean basins and we've tried to map out
and understand the container for the global ocean.
Now if you stand on the beach and you look out at the sea, maybe you think, well, where
did that ocean come from?
How long has it been there?
How and when did the Earth get its ocean?
Has it been there for sort of time immemorial, as long as geological time, or is it some
kind of recent feature, or maybe a feature that comes and goes on the planet?
Well, in order to answer these kinds of questions, we need to step all the way back now.
And we're going to review the basics of the origin of the Earth and the solar system,
not because this is a course about astrophysics or solar system development, but because we
need to get to an understanding of how the ocean was born, where it came from on the
planet, and as we're going to see, the ocean really is part and parcel of the development
of the Earth as a planet itself, and it's been a defining feature of our planet since
very, very early in Earth's history.
Let's take a look.
Okay, well, so let's start at the beginning.
And the beginning, of course, as cosmologists tell us, is the Big Bang.
Universe, the universe and time as we know it, has a beginning, which is a strange concept
and one that's kind of beyond the scope of this course, but we know that that happened
about 13.7 billion years ago, a long time, but a finite length of time.
And it's been expanding ever since, like an inflating balloon, plate tectonics not
inflating, but the universe as a whole inflating over all of that time since the Big Bang.
And initially, you know, the Big Bang was this singularity where all of the energy and
potential matter in the universe was concentrated into a singularity.
And as it exploded and expanded, the just unimaginable amount of energy starts out as
simply a wave, electromagnetic radiation propagating, opening up space.
And after about one million years or so, the cosmologists tell us, that energy started
to cool down enough in temperature, or another way of saying is, is the energy was spread
out enough to condense and turn into matter, turn into atoms, the initial building blocks
of matter.
And initially, that was basically all just hydrogen, the simplest possible atom.
So atomic nuclei form protons, neutrons and electrons differentiated, and we have the
beginnings of a matter filled universe.
Hydrogen, just little bits of helium, not much else actually beyond that.
But we let time roll on for just a little while longer, let's say a billion years or
so, not much at the scale of cosmology.
And you know, that matter was not absolutely uniformly distributed.
It was a little bit denser in some areas, a little bit less dense in other areas.
So all those places where the matter was a little bit more densely concentrated, just
infinitesimally so at first, gravity started to act.
We know that gravity is one of the fundamental forces in the universe and it caused any matter
that was in a region to start to clump together.
And so that gravity pulled together the matter and started sweeping things in any particular
region into the first stars.
And in fact those stars in big clusters or big clumps, which we can think of as the first
galaxies as well.
So stars started to form, they're clumps of matter, again, starting with just the absolute
lightest elements like hydrogen and helium.
And as you know, the stars then got enough gravity to collapse, the densification creates
higher and higher temperatures in the interior of those stars and starts the factory that
creates the heavier elements.
So the nuclear fission processes and in fact nuclear fusion processes starting in all these
innumerable stars that formed all the innumerable galaxies across the universe start synthesizing
the heavier elements.
Within the stars, heavier elements that make up the basic building blocks of most of matter,
things like carbon and oxygen and nitrogen are formed in the stars.
Some of those stars were so large and had so much energy in them through these nuclear
fusion processes that they would explode and form supernovae.
And those supernovae would actually build even more heavy elements through nuclear fusion
but also blow them up and spread them throughout this early stage of the universe formation
and move them around and spread a lot of material way above and beyond what had originally been
created by the Big Bang in terms of the weight of the individual elements.
So we get all the elements of the periodic table forming with the most abundant ones
being the relatively light ones and then the heavier ones being more rare through the process
of supernova explosion.
Well as this goes on then we build up galaxies and stars and dust and gas all held together
by gravity rotating because of some of that original captured momentum of the material
flying out from the Big Bang and from all the supernovae driving the rotation of different
galaxies.
The universe has some estimate of many billions of galaxies, perhaps 50 billion galaxies each
one holding something on the order of 50 billion stars.
Our sun is one pretty ordinary star, it's in the outer regions of this Milky Way galaxy
we could say we live in a sort of densely populated suburb, there's a lot of stars around,
it's not empty space.
But even a densely populated part of space is actually pretty sparse, the nearest other
star to ours is only about 42 trillion kilometers away, a pretty long drive and in fact the
reason why the kind of a star trek idea of visiting other stars is pretty likely a difficult
or impossible thing to ever do.
So we have this one ordinary star not much different from lots and lots and lots of other
stars in our galaxy not to mention the others, but this star formed through the condensation
of something we call the solar nebula and the solar nebula is this large scale cloud
of mostly hydrogen about 75% hydrogen about 23% helium so that's almost everything and
then the other 2% is all the other elements that had been made in various stars that had
been born supernovaed over billions of years in the early stages of the galaxy and universe
and we're sort of hanging around, floating around starting to gravitationally interact
with each other.
Probably through the process of supernova formation or supernovaing of nearby stars sending out
shock waves this solar nebula, this cloud of mostly gaseous material got hit by some
shock waves and starts rotating in some way and it's rotating about its gravitational
center and as it rotates the cloud starts to turn into not so much of a sort of just
an amorphous cloud but a disk just in the same way that if you take a ball of dough
and you're a pizza maker and throw it up in the air and spin it once it starts spinning
then in the plane of the spin there's an angular momentum of centrifugal acceleration
that counteracts the gravitational acceleration pulling it together and so it clumps down
in the opposite direction but flattens out like that pizza in the plane of spin and so
we get this rotating disk shaped cloud now of hydrogen, helium and all the other stuff
and this process leads to accretion.
The gravity keeps pulling everything together, all the matter sweeps together, vacuums up
other bits of matter and clumps everything into a proto sun or an early stage of our
sun that's just beginning to get fired up as an actual factory of nuclear fission and
fusion and then the planets that clumped the other matter in the solar system that
didn't actually make it to the sun.
So the sun basically was where most of all of those gases arrived, the vast majority
of the matter in our solar system is actually in the sun itself but outside far enough out
that they were captured by the gravitational attraction of the sun but not actually drawn
all the way into the sun we end up with orbiting material, orbiting matter and this matter differentiated
based on its temperature of melting or maybe more accurately its temperature of solidification
or condensation and so close into the proto sun we have things like the metals that have
the appropriate melting temperature conditions and densities to get close to the sun and
form the metal rich inter planets like Mercury and Venus.
Far out from the proto sun in the outer reaches of the solar system the lowest temperature
compounds condense so we have the gas rich outer planets like Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
water, ammonia and methane dominate these outer planets and we call them the gas giants they're
very large they have large volumes but they're very low density and they're made up of these
various gases.
In between the gas giants and the metal rich inter planets conditions were just right
to get dense large amounts of these sort of intermediate density and intermediate atomic
weight materials like silicon, magnesium and lots and lots of water there was oxygen around
that was made by the sun and other stars there was lots of hydrogen around because that's
the dominant thing in the solar system as a whole and so water is a naturally forming
compound H2O one of the most basic compounds that forms.
Now it can be in the form of a gas it can be in a form of something that's just blown
away as it probably was from the inter planets but we sort of have these Goldilocks conditions
let's call them at the orbital distance from the sun of the earth and Mars to make the
things that we think of as the common rock forming minerals that mostly are you know
silicon, aluminum, magnesium and lots of oxygen and so these are the things that condense
in that region and we end up with a whole bunch of material that's not planets yet but
just little bits and pieces of building blocks that may turn into planets in the region of
earth and Mars.
So we get to this point in the early formation of the solar system and this is about 4.56
billion years ago a whole bunch of orbiting lumps of rock not very large think of them
as asteroid sized pieces and they're called planetesimals and all these planetesimals
are sweeping around the sun orbiting and orbiting and each one is growing and sort of clumping
as its gravity sweeps up the dust particles out in space along its general orbital path
getting bigger and bigger and when two collide if their gravity is strong enough they'll
stick together and so by this period between 4.567 and 4.56 billion years ago a really
precisely dated interval they have swept together into a planet sized mass a proto earth that
had a mass of 80 or 90 percent of the present day earth.
Now how on earth do we even know those dates so accurately I keep quoting these very accurate
sounding dates and it turns out those dates are known with a precision of just a million
years or so even though we're talking about 4,500 in some million years so a precision
of fractions of a tenth of a percent.
The reason we know those dates so well is that there's still lots of chunks of these
planetesimals around meteorites that arrive on earth are little bits of planetesimal that
formed with the solar system but didn't actually get incorporated into a planet and those meteorites
are found all over the planet they're rare but they're not that rare thousands of them
have been dated through radiometric dating means and it turns out that they all date
to virtually the identical age and they date to that identical age with that level of precision
so that we know that the actually the moon because we have moon rocks as well and the
meteorites all formed in a certain period of time meteorites showing us just a slightly
older age close to 4.57 billion years and then as we'll see the moon and the earth probably
finally coalescing a hundred million years or so later so not much change in time although
a hundred million years is maybe nothing to sneeze at in terms of time.
Well all these different lumps arrived on the planet and they brought in their momentum
so they're crashing in the planet's getting bigger stuff's coming in and it's collapsing
under its own weight it's collapsing under its own gravity and momentum of these newly
arriving planetesimals and lumps building up the early planet during all this bombardment
and so the whole thing is gaining a huge amount of energy and this is the early earth and
so what happens then is that the early earth basically went through an entire melt process
the whole thing went from being clumps of little dust and rocks to being a molten body
that's earth-sized and has the right chemical composition to be the earth itself but completely
molten very different from the earth today.
So the young earth at this point about four and a half plus billion years ago goes through
a partial melting process actually goes through a total melting process as partial melting
begins it differentiates again through what we call density stratification and the density
stratification is what gave the earth the most fundamental kind of characteristics it
has today the heavy metals the iron primarily also nickel sunk in towards the center through
melting going on and on and on in the early earth stages and formed the core of the earth
the core of the earth is mostly iron and it's a gigantic ball it's essentially differentiated
today into an inner core which is actually solid due to the pressure conditions there
and then an outer core which is at high enough temperature but a little bit lower pressure
such that it's actually a liquid iron so the outer core is liquid iron the inner core is
like a gigantic ball bearing of iron in the earth the core of the earth is actually about
one third of the planet today and so it seems small relative to the earth but actually the
core of the earth is larger than the entire planet Mars Mars has a lot less gravity in
the earth and a lot less mass. Meanwhile while the core of the earth was forming the lighter
elements were separating from the heavy stuff like the iron and so they were moving towards
the outer part of the earth and two-thirds of the planet is basically the mantle of the
earth and this is made up of the silicon aluminum magnesium all bonded with oxygen in various
ways to form all of the rock compounds that make up the planet. The mantle is made up
of a rock type called olivine which is magnesium silicon and oxygen for the most part. The
crust of the earth is just a very thin outer skin only a percent or so of the diameter
of the planet and it includes a lot of these various rock compounds basically that make
things like the granites and the basalts that include a lot of aluminum and some other
compounds in them. All this early density stratification of the earth took about 100 million years or
so to take place so this is all happening there beyond four and a half billion years
ago and the earth is developing the basic features that it has today. One more key
fundamental feature of the earth of course is not the earth itself but it's the fact
that the earth has this very large satellite relative to the size of the planet called
the moon. Compared to other planets our satellite is quite a large proportion of the size of
our planet and the formation of the moon has been a topic of lots of speculation and research
over a lot of time. The best sort of calculations of those physicists who do the computer simulations
of how the earth got its moon tied to what we know about the composition of the moon
which comes basically from the lunar rocks that were collected during the Apollo missions
suggests that the moon formed through the collision of two of these early planetary bodies the
earth itself and another Mars sized planetary body that came in into the same orbital region
and collided with the earth in just an absolutely cataclysmic collision which probably blew
up and remelted a lot of the earth that had initially formed through that density stratification
and started to re-harden, blew a big chunk of it tore a big chunk of the early earth's
core out, merged partly with the core and ended up separating to orbit the earth as
this independent satellite the moon and leaving the earth behind to then re-solidify once
again. So this was a pretty cataclysmic event in the history of the planet but also happening
very early in that time frame still around more than four and a half billion years ago.
Okay so we've gone through from the Big Bang up to an earth and moon system in just a few
minutes here but the earth then developed an atmosphere. So by 4.56 billion years ago
just 100 million years after this whole earth process had started it looks like the solid
surface had formed and the calculations by people who model this sort of thing suggest
that the earth had largely cooled on the surface. It would have had an original atmosphere that
was made up of just the gases mostly of hydrogen helium stuff left over from the formation
of the solar system but this hydrogen helium is very light, it easily escapes the earth's
gravity and the solar radiation, the solar wind at that time was very strong and would
have blown away this hydrogen helium. So an original atmosphere probably existed or was
beginning to form but never really became the atmosphere of the earth because it was
blown away by the solar wind as it's called. But meanwhile the interior of the earth as
it differentiated and as it had formed and the density stratification had gone on incorporated
a number of materials we call volatile substances. These are the things that make the common
gases we think of. The most abundant ones are carbon dioxide and H2O actually water
in its vapor form, water is a gas. So volatile substances from inside the earth produced
a second atmosphere that was basically made of those two ingredients carbon dioxide and
water vapor and certainly amounts of other materials, methane and ammonia and other stuff
like that. It's possible based on our understanding of how many comets are in the solar system
that they added significant amounts of water as well and in the past couple of decades there's
been a hypothesis put forward that actually comets were a source of the majority of the
water on the planet. It seems that the answer to this question is not completely settled
today but probably most of the water came from the interior of the earth and the comets
just added a proportion but a minor proportion of the water as a whole. At any rate at this
point the earth has an atmosphere that's heavy in water vapor but the surface is still too
hot for liquid water to condense. So we form clouds we form an intense sort of shroud of
clouds around the earth that block out the sunlight down to the surface completely and
a lot of this of course again is known through not pure speculation but simulation of the
physics of the process and how the formation of these clouds would then affect the heat
trapping of the planet. Most likely the weather report was something like this, heavy rain
today tomorrow and in fact for the next 25 million years. The simulation suggests that
that hot surface would evaporate the rain as soon as it fell maintaining this cloud shroud
around the earth and just keep rainfall cycling down to the surface as it condensed when it
was out near the cold part of beyond the atmosphere outer space and then taking heat away from
the surface of the earth by re-evaporating the water forming the clouds. This drives
a phenomenally efficient and active convection system that draws heat out of the earth and
sends it out towards space through the convection of that evaporation and rainfall cycle. 25
million years of rain cooling the surface of the earth cooling down the crust forming
the earth's crust something like it is today. Well this volcanic outgassing that I just
mentioned was basically accomplished by means of volcanic eruptions and we have a good model
for that even in volcanoes today. If you look at a volcano and you think about your image
of a volcano you think about lavas flowing down the flanks of the volcano perhaps and
maybe you think about a big plume of ash coming out of the volcano like the ashes that come
out of the Iceland volcanoes or Mount St. Helens but that's not all that comes out of
volcanoes. Probably the thing that you're not thinking about so much is that a great
deal of just gases coming out of the volcano at the same time. These gases include hydrogen
today they include nitrogen they include oxygen and carbon dioxide all of those things are
coming out of volcanoes with every volcanic eruption. The hydrogen basically escapes to
space the rest of them all become part of the atmosphere and add to the system on the
earth including the water that's in the ocean and on the lands as well as the water vapor
that's in the atmosphere. So volcanic outgassing is a process today and it was almost certainly
a process going back to the earliest stages in earth's history because there's always
been these volatile substances associated with our planet. Actually volcanoes add water
to the ocean today but some water makes it back into the mantle through plate tectonic
processes and the water seems to be balanced pretty closely on the earth. Okay so where
did the ocean come from then? Through gradual cooling of the surface this liquid water began
to accumulate the surface cools down enough that first pools and then bigger pools and
lakes and bodies of water in low spots start to form on the earth. This begins a process
of dissolution of minerals. The water initially would be of course essentially distilled or
fresh water completely but water is an incredibly good solvent as we're going to see in a future
lecture and water will start to dissolve some of the minerals on the surface of the earth.
So this begins the rock weathering cycle and it breaks down the minerals and the water
actually starts to get some salinity it starts to get some dissolved salts and things like
that. Well that ocean just starts to accumulate that water starts to accumulate I should say
and form an ocean and in fact some recent studies suggest that an ocean a liquid water
surface may have completely covered the earth's surface at about four billion years ago and
the reason that this is a possibility is that the sun at that time was probably faint put
out less heat than it does today and so the ocean may have been not only they are covering
the entire solid surface of the earth but in fact also covered with ice to a depth of
several hundred meters at this time very early in earth history. But this didn't last very
long certainly there was liquid water below that at this time and there had to be liquid
water by sometime soon after four billion years ago for reasons that we'll see very soon in
the next lecture. The geological evidence that we have suggests that the earth has had a large
volume and liquid water ocean continuously since very early in its history at least something
like this four billion years and the reason for that the reason that we know that is because
the oldest rocks on the planet that the geologists who go out and look for the oldest datable
rocks that they can find still on earth find rocks that are not rocks that cooled from lava
well there are some that cooled from lava but they find many rocks that show evidence
of having been sedimentary rocks initially in their stage of formation. They've been
through a lot of metamorphic processes and things that have altered them in many ways
but by looking at their textures and looking at their geochemical signatures microscopic
study of the mineral grains in those rocks can identify that they were in fact sedimentary
rocks at one time or that they include grains that had to have been eroded from somewhere
else. So the implication then in having sedimentary rocks on the planet is that there were there
was water around to erode rocks to break them down to form sediments and then re deposit
them in another location and in a future lecture we'll talk a lot about that sedimentation
process but it's pretty clear it starts with the oldest available rocks on earth which
are rocks that are very close to four billion years old about three point eight or so billion
years old are the oldest dated actual mineral grains and rocks that come from earth not
meteorites but that actually come from the earth. So it suggests then that there's been
an ocean over all of that time and after that initial phase that I just talked about around
four billion years the ocean has not frozen solid certainly is not frozen solid even in
that initial time although it may have frozen over nor has it boiled away in that entire
length of time. We see evidence that there's been continuous sedimentary rocks in all the
different eras going out through the first few billion years of earth time and so that
suggests then that there's never been a completely dry surface of the earth again after the initial
formation of the planet. Now there's also evidence from the continents that continental
crustal rock goes back very early in earth history those rocks that are three point eight
or more billion years old and have grains in them that appear to be even older from the
sedimentation process are rocks that show the signature of being parts of the continental
crust. So this suggests then that the crust was already differentiated into continental
crust and ocean crust or ocean basins by some time around four billion years ago that the
idea that that initial early differentiation of the earth and the rapid convection that
was associated with the high heat at that time brought the light materials that formed
the continental crust to the surface and have simply kept them there. If you remember I
mentioned before that the continental crust being the lightest material doesn't easily
go back down a subduction zone so it's not recycled into the earth's mantle in the way
that the oceanic crust is. The continents have been around and the cores of all of the
continents on the planet what are called the continental cratons have ages that go back
to the earliest earth history as far as we can tell.
Okay so we've taken us through 13.7 billion years of time in one lecture here. Well no
that's not quite right. I've taken us through about nine billion years of the history of
the universe and the solar system and I've gotten us up to the earliest part of the earth
but the original earth clearly was present by four and a half billion years ago. It had
an ocean on it for at least about four billion years and that ocean has been liquid and mostly
uncovered by ice but certainly mostly liquid in terms of its volume continuously for at
least all of that time almost all of the earth's lifetime. Plate tectonics also got started
at about the same time and differentiated the surface into these continents and ocean
basins. The ocean basins have been continuously recycled as we've seen and we only see 200
million years of ocean basin history today and yet the continents are four billion years
old. So we see a planet where the continents have moved around but an ocean has been in
place to fill up the low spots and the low spots have been continuously recycled over
and over again probably 20 times over the course of the earth's history.
So we've built the earth now we've put an ocean in it but in the next lecture we're
going to take a look at what's happened to that ocean over all the time since about
four billion years ago. We'll look at the chemistry of the ocean and how it developed
and in particular we'll take a look at the major chemical revolution that took place
two or three billion years ago something we're going to call the oxygen revolution and that's
completely tied up in the question of how life began and evolved on the earth and what
the existence of that life and the existence of the ocean has meant for the planet itself.
