In this lecture, I'd like to take our first foray into society's interaction with the
ocean and get a little bit practical here.
We just spent some time looking at all the different types of sediments that are laid
down on the ocean floor and in the sea.
And of course, those sediments are not simply a kind of a blanket to the sea floor and a
record of the earth's climate and history, but they're also the source of key resources.
The sediments are the source of petroleum and natural gas, for example, as well as some
other resources.
So in this lecture, we're going to take a look at all of the different or several of
the different resources that come from the sea, the physical resources.
We'll save food and other things for later on in the course.
And we'll see that there's been an increasing amount of activity, especially in offshore
drilling for oil and gas.
It's certainly a very expensive, large industrial activity on the planet, and it's not without
risks, as we've seen in recent news.
So we'd like to ask the question, well, why is that done?
And also, maybe more importantly, how is it done?
Why is there offshore oil drilling, and is that the place we need to go in order to get
these resources for society's needs today?
If we look at petroleum and natural gas, they are, without question, the real drivers and
underpinnings of the world's economy, in the sense that we use the energy that comes from
oil and gas, sort of like it or not, to fuel our entire economy.
The global demand for oil and gas is not decreasing, despite concerns about carbon and global warming
and things like that.
In fact, the global demand has been growing recently by about 2% annually, goes up and
down with economic fluctuations, but there's really no sign of any long-term abatement of
that demand going on, and 2% is a pretty rapid growth rate.
The U.S. alone consumes about 25% of the global oil supply.
We're still using up about almost 23 barrels per person per year of petroleum products
in the USA.
Our demand is actually relatively flat, but the global consumption is rising quickly
in other places.
China, for example, is rapidly developing economically.
Their consumption is rising quickly to go along with that, but it's still only about
two or two to three barrels per person per year, so 10% of U.S. per capita consumption
of oil.
Quite reasonably, people in China would like to have a kind of standard of living similar
to the U.S., perhaps.
And so right now, at least, that implies continued consumption, continued growth in consumption
of petroleum and natural gas.
Well, we have to ask the question then, where is that supply coming from?
And we certainly know that for a very long time, something like 150 years, there's been
production of oil and production of gas from on land locations.
Drilling on land is a well-established activity, and drilling on land has involved the discovery
of both crude oil and natural gas for a long time.
That continues to go on.
There's no question.
In fact, there are a lot of new discoveries going on, but right now, about 34% or so of
global crude oil and about 30% of natural gas comes from below the seabed, and that's
a rising proportion.
And that's because, of course, these regions offshore were not explored until later on,
certainly compared to the areas on land, but also because offshore deposits are sediments
that are still relatively porous.
They hold large volumes of oil that's relatively easy to extract if you can get to the regions
below the seabed, and we'll see some of the challenges of doing that in a minute.
This remains something like a $500 billion a year activity on the planet, and again,
that activity level is only growing today in terms of offshore development of resources.
So let's take a look at what the sources really are of petroleum, of hydrocarbons in
the world, all oil and gas deposits.
Both on land and offshore, petroleum resources are virtually all hosted in marine sediments.
And in fact, they're also all sourced in marine sediments, except for a few natural gas resources
that come from basically lakebed sediments, but otherwise similar kinds of settings.
The oil and gas deposits form in specific sedimentary environments that I discussed
in the last lecture.
They basically form in torriginous sediments and in fact in the neuritic sediment environment.
Let's remember what that means.
That means on the continental shelf and slope in areas where the sediment is being deposited
from the land and involves silt and sand and mud that's pouring out of river deltas, especially
the very large deltas like the Mississippi River Delta, for example, into the Gulf of
Mexico that move a lot of material offshore.
That sediment includes a lot of organic matter as we'll see and also buries that organic
matter relatively rapidly in the subsurface below the seafloor in the sedimentary pile
that builds up.
Now we talked about the open ocean sediments a lot in the last lecture as well, the biogenous
material that covers actually the bulk of the seafloor, so the calcareous and salacious
oozes if you recall.
These are not the source of hydrocarbons in any meaningful way at all in the ocean.
In fact, the open ocean floor has a relatively thin accumulation of sediment.
It's not heavily organic rich.
Most of the material is scavenged up at the time of deposition on the seafloor.
And so when we talk about deep water drilling offshore, we're really looking at material
that's torriginous sediment, not the open ocean floor pelagic style of sedimentation.
Well, what does it take then to make an oil deposit?
Let me give you a little recipe to be a home brewer of your very own oil.
Well, the first thing you have to do is start with a quiet offshore region somewhere where
muddy sediments are accumulating, rich in organic matter, usually without a lot of bottom
currents.
So the conditions on the bottom in the ocean are actually what we'll call anaerobic, meaning
oxygen-poor areas and cold, deep, sort of dense water, as we'll see in the next lecture
actually, that doesn't move around too much and becomes poor in oxygen.
So all the plankton and all the pelagic material and also the masses of bacteria that bloom
in shallow water, warm environments in the photic zone die and rain down to the bottom
of the oceans.
You get a lot of organic matter into the sediments.
So you bury that sediment then by piling on top all of this torriginous influx of material
from a river delta.
And if you bury your sediment to under low oxygen conditions to about two kilometers
or so and turn the oven up to about 60 to 120 degrees C or so, not really very hot.
That would be an oven that's no more than about, oh, 250 Fahrenheit or so.
And then slow cook it.
You got to really cook it in to get the juices going.
Slow cook it, in fact, for millions to tens of millions of years.
And voila, you've got yourself a nice broth of some combination of crude oil, the various
hydrocarbons that represent crude oil.
If you want to generate natural gas instead, methane and also ethane and propane and the
other natural gases, then you've got to do essentially all the same things, but you've
got to bury it deeper and turn the oven up a little bit higher.
So cook it to 100 or 200, somewhere between 100 and 200 degrees Celsius, and that will
get you the same original material, the same carrage in as we call it, will turn into natural
gas and will go beyond crude oil and turn into natural gas essentially.
But all of them are generated in the same way and they all require this slow cooking
process after anaerobic digestion of the initial organic matter.
Well, that's enough to generate the oil originally, but the oil generally doesn't stay in those
areas.
We actually call those muddy, organic-rich sedimentary deposits source rocks because there
are sources of the oil in the ocean, in the ocean floor, in the sediments.
Well, oil, though, as you know, is less dense than water, right?
All oils basically will float on top of water, just like the oil in salad dressing, and so
natural gas is even less dense than oil.
So both of them, when they're trapped in tiny sort of droplets in the pore space in the
rock, sedimentary rock is certainly all porous.
It has individual mineral grains with spaces in between them, and the oil and the natural
gas and perhaps a lot of water as well are all trapped in various kind of proportions
in those pore spaces in the rock.
Well, the lighter oil and gas starts to rise up through the pore spaces in the rock.
The water moves down, and the oil and gas move up through a density stratification.
Very similar to the way I described the density stratification of the whole planet.
Remember the core, the mantle, and the crust?
Well, the same thing is going on in a sedimentary basin where oil, gas, and water are separating
in the rock themselves, or in the pore space in the rock themselves.
So they move upwards through the porous sediments.
And actually very often, in many places in the world, they will move upward through the
porous sediments all the way to the seafloor and seep out on the seafloor and become lost.
In fact, not become reservoir accumulations of oil or gas that one could drill a well
into at all.
But sometimes when the geological conditions are right, they will rise up until they meet
some sort of impermeable layer of what's called cap rock for a very reason that it's
a cap.
It's sort of like an umbrella of rock.
The oil and gas rises up and is trapped beneath it, a kind of inverted umbrella situation,
or maybe a better analogy is that it's like the hot air going up into a balloon and being
trapped by the balloon itself.
The oil rises, the gas rises, and you end up with these inverted pools of fluid with
the gas on top right underneath the cap rock, because that's the lightest, and then a layer
essentially of pore space filled with oil, and then a layer below that where that's filled
with water.
Well there are no giant pools, giant open pools of oil in the subsurface.
It's all still occurring in the pore spaces in rock, and so the permeability of what we
call the reservoir rock is a fundamental control on whether an oil field or an oil reservoir
is an economically viable accumulation, meaning that if you drilled a well into it, could
you suck the oil or gas out into the well, and it requires a relatively permeable rock
typically sandstone is the kind of rock that has enough pore space and permeability to
make a reservoir, whereas a shale, some kind of a very sort of dense and fine grain sedimentary
rock is the material that forms the cap.
Well let's turn now to the offshore oil industry.
Certainly marine rocks like that form the onshore oil fields that we see, but again, more and
more of the newly discoverable oil fields are offshore.
Well, we all use the products of this whole industry, but we tend to be pretty unaware
of the vast technology and effort that goes into obtaining offshore oil.
Certainly the Gulf oil spill in 2010 made everybody much more aware of some of the technologies
that were involved, and we all started to hear on the news about things like riser pipes
and ROVs or remote operated submarines, but it's still an industry that's a little bit
mysterious or hidden from view for most of us.
But there are billions and billions of dollars spent every year to explore for and develop
these petroleum resources in offshore regions, certainly not just in the Gulf of Mexico,
but all around the world, offshore of Brazil and Nigeria, Indonesia, and regions all over
the world, Caspian Sea.
A typical deep water exploration well, the kind of well that was being drilled at the
time of the deep water horizon explosion actually, is a phenomenally expensive undertaking.
This can cost something like $100 million to drill an individual well, not when anything
goes wrong, but just the simple ordinary cost of drilling one of those wells, and that's
to put in a whole, literally this big around, down miles into the subsurface, but of course
in deep water that takes a lot of technology.
In fact, the technology that's required in order to do that is literally on the kind
of scale of effort that NASA uses to get into space.
For example, you need large scale, you know, platforms for drilling, we'll look at those
in a second, you need some way to get to the subsurface of the water, even where it's
thousands of meters deep, so that involves robot submarines and things like that, all
sorts of equipment that has had to be invented or developed and optimized, not just for science,
but just simply for ocean engineering, seafloor pipelines, seafloor infrastructure that no
one can dive down to physically, and so all has to be maintained remotely by robotic systems.
Well, where did the offshore oil industry come from?
Basically, it was simply an extension of the onshore oil industry.
This image of Southern California in 1915 shows the sort of density and scale of literally
the first U.S. offshore oil field, Summerland, California.
There was an onshore region that had been drilled and was well known as a nice producing
oil field and it went right up to the coastline, so it was probably a pretty natural extension
to just build some piers and keep drilling offshore.
After all, sea level and the edge of the continent is just an artificial boundary from a geological
point of view.
Same sort of thing happened in the Gulf Coast of Texas and Louisiana, of course, and then
eventually in other parts of the world, is that onshore fields were extended offshore,
first in very shallow water where you could simply build a construction to go off in that
direction.
But in response to the demand for oil, the industry has moved operations into ever deeper
water.
So in the tidewater regions, what's called the transition zone or on the shelf, offshore
platforms stand on the seabed and they can stand on the seabed even into hundreds of
feet of water depth.
There's things called jackup rigs which are floated into place and then legs are jacked
down to the seafloor and stand them up.
There's platforms with very complex foundations, similar to foundations of large buildings
and structures, bridges and things on land.
In deeper water though, once we get more than a few hundred feet deep out into what's
called either the intermediate zone, the deep water or even ultra deep water drilling zone,
which is more than about a thousand meters or so deep water, then the platforms have
to float.
They're floating.
They're often floating on very big, a kind of pontoon system.
Some of them are called semi submersible rigs because a large part of the mass is actually
underwater to keep it stable in the waves.
And then they're tethered down with cable systems so that they stay in place.
But there's a lot of flexibility and the drill pipes that go down to the seabed have to rely
on the depth of the water to be flexible enough to stay in place and drill a hole.
And while the rig is floating and moving in the waves and the tides and things like that.
Drill ships and some rigs are actually even dynamically positioned rather than just simply
tethered down in the deepest water by large thrusters or large propellers that are just
orientable so that you can use GPS to fix a location and then turn the power on to different
propellers to keep the rig fixed to one location.
In fact, modern technology allows those rigs to be fixed to one location out in the ocean,
long distances offshore to an accuracy of plus or minus one meter in any direction.
Within a distance of something like that, they can keep a huge floating rig in place
for months and even years at a time.
Well, because of the cost of building these platforms, a single one of these offshore
platforms actually doesn't drill a single well and then move to a new location and then
drill another and so on or maintain a single well.
They're set up to drill many, many different wells and so the oil industry has developed
what's called directional drilling or horizontal drilling technology.
And maybe you've heard about it, but where a well will be started vertically and starts
down and then special bits are put in place to the drilling pipe that actually have little
small kinks in them and those kinks are even orientable so that even while the bit is turning,
it has a little sort of a little dog leg in it, very, very subtle dog leg that can make
a gradual angle and turn literally horizontally and now many wells are drilled to horizontal
distances that are much greater than the water depth they've been drilled to.
Distances of four and five miles are not unknown in offshore drilling and so one platform
will often drill 10, 15, even 20 different individual wells reaching out in all sorts
of directions to access portions of a given oil reservoir.
As for economic efficiency of putting that expensive platform out in the ocean.
Well, how is all this oil found?
How do they even know where to go with these platforms?
I talked earlier on in the course about the echo sounder principle and mapping the seabed
with sound waves.
Well, there's a much more sophisticated extension of this principle that's called seismic reflection
imaging and sound waves are actually, you know, to a geophysicist seismic waves, hence
seismic reflection, are sent out.
They're more powerful waves, more powerful sound energy than the echo sounders.
They're bounced off undersea sedimentary layers and then recorded on not just a single recorder,
the way an echo sounder might behave, but actually on thousands of hydrophones that are
essentially underwater microphones being towed behind a ship as it moves across the surface.
And so the ship does the same kind of mowing the lawn that we described when we were talking
about swath bathymetric mapping, but now it's mapping not just the seabed, but deep
below the seafloor.
Incredible amounts of computer technology have to be used, massively parallel, high-powered
computer systems in order to convert all those thousands of recordings into very detailed
images of the geologic conditions in the subsurface.
And this is how reservoirs of oil and gas are found today, almost exclusively.
Here's an image example of what one of these seismic reflection profiles can actually look
like.
These are done in three-dimensional imaging now.
This is a cross-section through the subsurface, but you see that we're looking at a place
where the seafloor is relatively deep, several kilometers deep in the water, but we can see
individual folded and actually faulted or broken layers of the geological horizons,
the sand and silt and clay and mud layers in the subsurface that can be then drilled
into and tapped for oil reservoirs when petroleum geologists locate the areas that
are most prospective for drilling based on the return signals in those seismic reflection
profiles.
Well certainly the development of offshore oil has brought the societal need for all
of this energy into conflict with environmental and aesthetic concerns.
Aesthetic certainly because, well, simply being in a region where offshore platforms
exist makes the view from the beach a little bit different.
People in Santa Barbara, California, for example, have often had to think about that offshore
conflict between society's desire for a nice place along the coast and recreation and things
like that, as well as wildlife that lives in the ocean.
This great example of a blue whale swimming by the platforms actually in the offshore
Santa Barbara basin kind of graphically illustrates that.
But also we have the environmental concerns that relate to oil spills themselves, right?
And so in April 2010 we all know that there was a real sort of incredibly societally significant
event, a watershed event happened in the Gulf of Mexico oil field with the deep water horizon.
The state of the art floating dynamically positioned drilling platform of the type I
just described.
One of the world's most sophisticated pieces of engineering technology was drilling a new
well in 1500 meters, about 5,000 feet water depth, 50 miles off the Louisiana coast.
This was a truly cutting edge well that was being drilled at that time.
Well we all know that the rig had an uncontrolled release of the pressure of natural gas from
deep in the reservoir, and that's what's called a blowout.
Oil and natural gas are trapped under high pressure because they're deep below the ground,
the weight of all the overlying sediments and in fact even water above them holds them
under pressure.
When they tap that with an oil well, oil drillers are careful normally to maintain a high sort
of back pressure against that to keep it trapped in the well or to shut it in.
In this case that shut in was miscalculated in some way and the natural gas came up to
the well.
As that natural gas comes up in a well, comes up towards the surface, it depressurizes and
all gases have the property of expanding by hundreds of times their volume when they go
from high pressure to low pressure.
So the natural gas came up the well, its expansion causes that explosive blowout and then ultimately
some spark on the rig itself triggered the actual explosion and fire that caused the
disaster to take place.
So when the firefighters were unable to put out the blaze on the deep water horizon the
rig sank and that severed the pipe connecting the rig to the well on the seafloor 4000 feet
below that was the riser pipe that we're talking about before.
So I think we all know from the news the ensuing flow at the seafloor lasted for 83 days before
it was controlled and it made a total release of about 5 million barrels of oil and large
amounts of methane actually, people maybe are less aware of that but about 20% of what
came out of that well was methane gas in the ocean.
So this was the largest recorded uncontrolled release of methane into the ocean as well
as the largest single source uncontrolled release of oil into the ocean.
It certainly had oceanographic effects that were large and were feared to be utterly catastrophic
to the Gulf ecosystem at the time.
It's unique in the history of oil spills actually at least to date for the fact that
it injected the oil not at the surface where it spilled on the surface and spread out immediately
on the surface of the water like with the Exxon Valdez tanker disaster in 1989 in Alaska
but instead injected into the deep water where the oil some of it rose up to the surface
a lot of it remained in deep water along the way.
Well the 2010 spill was as I said the largest single source spill.
It was comparable in size to the oil release that happened at the end of the first Gulf
War when as the Iraqi army left Kuwait they opened up the well head set the oil fields
on fire and spilled possibly a bit more oil into the Persian Gulf region as an intentional
spill actually.
The size of the deep water horizon spill is somewhat in dispute but it looks like both
scientists and a government and engineers are converging on this number of about 200
million gallons or 5 million barrels were spilled.
Well what happens in an oil spill basically you know the problems are multi-fold one is
the oil spreading along the surface of the water which interferes with the exchange of
gases through the water and also fouls the skin or feathers of marine birds and wildlife
and in addition that water or that oil sorry that's floating on the surface of the water
you know reaches the coastline and in the Exxon Valdez spill in the Gulf of Alaska this was
really by far the most ecologically devastating part of the oil spill the oil fouled the
coastline there was a tremendous effort to clean it up at that time using what was thought
to be the best available method which was essentially to go out to those gravelly rocks
and beaches of Alaska and hose them down try to spray with high pressure jets of hot
water spray the oil off the beaches.
It turns out what probably happened largely was that that drove a lot of the oil down
into crevices in the rock which interfered with the natural degradation and breakdown
of that petroleum and the long term ecological studies suggest that the beaches that were
cleaned in this way may have actually had more long term ecological damaging effects
than the beaches that were not cleaned and actually allowed to just simply let nature
take its course but no matter what in that oil spill for there's absolutely no question
that wildlife was harmed in very large numbers tens of thousands of individuals of many different
species were harmed both marine mammals and seabirds and the fish populations by the introduction
of all this oil into their ecosystem and into their food supply.
If we look at the dispersion then to try to prevent this kind of coastal influx of oil
there's various different methods to try to get rid of and I think we've seen a lot of
this on the news there are oil booms which are basically just large plastic or rubber
barriers that are set up in the water with flotation to keep them on the surface because
the oil floats on the surface so they're just skimmers essentially that collect the oil
hopefully into one region sometimes with two ships like this sometimes lining a coastline
or other sensitive habitat to just protect it from the oil washing in and then sometimes
the oil that's collected by those booms can even be set on fire which adds some particular
pollution to the atmosphere but is seen as a lesser environmental problem than leaving
it in the water to foul the coastline and interfere with marine wildlife.
There's also the possibility and in fact the employment of dispersants.
Dispersants are really not much different than dishwashing liquid.
They are materials, they are soaps that are meant to break the oil up into very small
particles or bubbles and then allow it to be dispersed to be spread out instead of making
a continuous sheen on the surface of the water to break into smaller particles that can more
easily be broken down in fact digested as we'll see in a moment.
And then just simply time, weather and waves will break the oil spill up eventually the
more volatile stuff will actually evaporate and the tar balls or the heavy residues of
the oil will eventually sink to the bottom of the ocean.
What was seen in the Deepwater Horizon spill was that there was certainly an effect on
marine and coastal wildlife in that region and many hundreds and many perhaps even thousands
of coastal water birds were oil coated.
This has the danger of causing hypothermia in those animals and it causes respiration
problems and perhaps interference with reproduction in both marine mammals and marine reptiles
like turtles and dolphins and things like that.
And maybe the worst potential effect is interference with the reproductive cycle of the hydrocarbons
themselves in the larval stages of many fish and shrimp and things like that.
At the time that I'm doing this lecture it's still about relatively early days since that
oil spill has happened about one year later it's turned out that the worst effects have
really not come true from the oil spill and there's an interesting story behind the reason
why that's true.
The long term effects are that harm to wildlife has certainly occurred and ecosystems has
occurred but a couple of different things made it less bad than the worst fears.
And one was simply that the weather was kind relatively calm seas and offshore breezes kept
the oil from largely infiltrating the coastline as much as was seen likely to be.
But the second one is in the marine microbiology.
It turns out that both the oil and the methane gas were consumed by an incredible bloom or
blossoming of bacteria that eat methane or bacteria that eat various hydrocarbons.
Scientists knew that these hydrocarbon eating bacteria were present and in fact present
in the Gulf of Mexico.
There are a lot of naturally occurring oil seeps continuously going on on the sea floor
of the Gulf of Mexico.
In the oil rich region after all oil is a natural geological product.
So these bacteria were known just in the past decade or two that could live on their chemosynthetic
bacteria that could live off of methane and other hydrocarbons.
But the degree to which they would blossom quickly over the course of just weeks and
a month or two after the oil spill and consume virtually all of the methane and a great deal
of the petroleum was a surprise to the biological and chemical oceanographers who have been
out studying the Gulf.
So that's a fortunate occurrence with this great disaster.
The long term effects of the oil and the dispersants that were used largely effectively
it turns out to break up the oil into small enough particles for those bacteria to consume
it remains unclear though there is some room for optimism that this was the lesser of
two evils to use these dispersants.
The big lesson learned certainly though is that the offshore oil industry has to become
better prepared for new environmental challenges because they've moved rapidly into deep water
operations hunting for oil in deeper and deeper settings off the coastline where until this
event in 2010 no large release, no spill had really happened and so plans were not really
in place for how to deal with the engineering challenge of a spill that's so deep at the
bottom of the ocean.
Spill and gas are clearly the 800 pound gorilla in terms of offshore mineral resources but
there are other resources that are either are being exploited or could be from the ocean
and so in the last lecture I talked a little bit about the manganese deposits those are
just beginning to be mined on the seafloor.
Even more prosaically than that we can think about sand and gravel itself as a resource
that's dredged up from offshore regions to replenish beaches and to be used as fill
material and things like that very commonly.
Maybe a more interesting mineral resource from the sea is actually salt, the salt that's
in the water that makes it saline.
We all know about sea salt, most table salt is actually mined from geological deposits
from sedimentary layers of rock but a lot of sea salt, a lot of salt of course is made
by evaporation of salt water in shallow evaporation ponds that's been going on since time immemorial
in many places around the world, evaporate the water off by sunlight and what's left
behind is tasty sea salt.
It also goes on on a much more industrial scale in places in the world, this is a photograph
of the southern end of San Francisco Bay where salt evaporation ponds line the region near
San Jose, the colors in those ponds actually are interesting, the pinks and reds because
those are based on different specific algae that live in each pond that thrive at different
salinities.
Well if the salt is a resource so is the water actually in the ocean and so in the flip side
of evaporating water off to get salt we also have desalination going on around the world.
There are more than 15,000 desalination plants in operation because fresh water is a scarce
resource in many arid regions of the world, Israel is a leader in desalination for example
and these produce something like 8.5 billion gallons of water per day with desalination.
So more and more we have to think of the actual water of the ocean as essentially a mineral
resource.
Methods of desalination include distillation and reverse osmosis to get the fresh water
out and leave the salts behind.
Well I'd like to close with a sort of a final thought that relates back to the petroleum
and natural gas part of this lecture.
We kind of live in modern society in a singular moment in Earth's history at least from a
geologist's perspective and that's because in order to make all of the recoverable oil
on the planet we had to have enough biological activity to make the organic rich deposits
and basically the oil fields of the whole planet are known to come from different geological
eras but it essentially took 500 million years to build them all up.
So 500 million years to make all the recoverable oil on the planet.
We've had oil drilling for about 150 years or so and in that amount of time we've used
up about half of all that oil that was laid down over 500 million years into seafloor
sediments.
About half has been drilled, removed, mostly burned and the carbon put into the atmosphere.
The other half at the rate we're going will be tapped in something like the next 50 to
100 years or so.
So 500 million to make it and only really a couple of centuries to get rid of all that
oil.
We really truly live in a time of geological modification of Earth by humankind on an absolutely
staggering scale.
