The dynamism and energy in nature is perhaps never nowhere more evident than in a breaking
wave.
And when we watch a surfer at the coast or just watch the waves themselves, we wonder,
you know, how do the waves get that wave?
And how does the surfer decide where is the place where there's going to be a good wave
break or what characteristics make a particular wave better than others for a surfer?
In the last lecture, we looked at sort of the static properties of water, still water,
let's say.
So in this lecture, what I'd like to do now is take up some of the first properties of
water in motion, waves in the ocean.
Well, waves are disturbances and so ocean waves, just like all waves of any type, are
simply disturbances of a medium that transmit energy while not actually transferring mass,
at least not transferring it very far.
So if you drop a stone into a pond and you create a ripple, the ripple spreads out ever-widening
circles from where the stone falls in the water.
It creates a little disturbance of the surface of the water and that disturbance is a little
high.
It has a little potential energy because of the change in elevation of the surface of
the water.
That moves outward because the water wants to flatten itself out, which then disturbs
the next bit of water and on and on and on.
And of course, ocean waves are the same thing.
The waves move energy across the sea surface.
But one of the most fundamental and important things to remember about waves is that the
water doesn't travel with the waves across the ocean, the wave is just a propagation
of energy.
For example, if something is floating on the water, as in this image, and the wave is coming
by, then that something goes actually forward and up and backward and back down again and
the wave goes by and it ends up more or less in exactly the same place it started out.
We describe this actually as the orbital motion of waves.
Water waves are just one particular type of what are called surface waves and so they
have a motion that involves both up and down and back and forth motion.
But again, returning the surface to exactly the same place it started out as the wave
passes along.
So in this case, it's that forward, up, backward, and down orbital motion of the surface of
the water.
Now just to kind of remember some basic anatomy of any kind of wave, we can think of a few
common bits of terminology that apply to ocean waves as well as others.
Waves have crests and troughs, right, they have highs and they have lows.
The difference between the high and the low is defined as the wave height.
Sometimes we talk about wave amplitude and it turns out amplitude is half of height because
amplitude is defined from the kind of the zero line to either the crest or the trough.
But in the ocean, we mostly talk about wave height because that's what's easy to observe,
right?
If you're out at sea, you can see the troughs and you can see the crest and you can estimate
the wave height.
We can also talk about the wavelength.
That's the horizontal distance between a point on one wave and the same comparable reference
point on the next wave from one crest to the next crest is a certain distance and so maybe
that wave has a wavelength of 20 meters, let's say.
Related closely to the wavelength then is the same idea but in terms of time instead
of distance, right?
So that's the wave period, the time it takes to successive crests to pass a stationary
point.
If you have a piling for a pier, let's say, standing in the ocean, then as the waves come
along, you can measure the time difference between one crest and the next coming by.
So wavelength and wave period are closely related to each other but they're not the
same thing.
In fact, they're related to each other through the wave speed, the velocity that the wave
is moving laterally, which equals, of course, the wavelength divided by the wave period.
Wave is generally distance divided by time and so wavelength is distance, wave period
is time and so the wave speed is just distance over time.
For oceanography, wave speed is also often referred to with the term celerity.
Celerity is a physics word, it's just kind of jargony, it doesn't really mean for our
purposes anything significantly different from speed but we'll often see the wave speed
are symbolized by a c and that is actually because of the historical use of the word
celerity.
So a wave in the open ocean is what we call a deep water wave and there's a specific reason
we call it a deep water wave and there's actually a specific definition of deep water wave as
well.
A deep water wave is one that is really not interacting with the bottom in any way, so
it's just a wave out in the water and we define it as any wave where the water depth
is greater than half the wave length, okay, so the water depth is greater than the length
over two and the reason for that is that this orbital motion of the wave, the bobbing up
and down that we see at the surface, also impacts the water of course to a certain depth
but it's not an infinite depth, in fact it's not even all that deep in the water.
The orbital motion at the surface has one size and then that size gets smaller and smaller
as in the diagram, sort of exponentially decreasing with depth until basically the water's not
moving back and forth or up and down significantly at all once you get to about half the wavelength.
So to an oceanographer a deep water wave is any wave that kind of meets this criterion
and the orbital motion has decayed away not to absolutely zero but to an insignificant
amount by the time you get to this depth.
We'll take up the shallow water waves in a little while but let's look at deep water
waves first in terms of how they form, okay, well there's two main types, so open water
or let's call them deep water waves and that is capillary waves or wind waves.
So capillary waves are the very small ripples we see, just the tiny sort of centimeter or
even smaller sized ripples that you might see rippling across the surface of the water
that are created by some disturbing force to the surface of the water.
It's usually the wind, right, the wind blows across the water, I guess you could shake
the basin with an earthquake or something but basically the disturbing force is the
wind and it forms these small capillary waves.
Well, wind waves by contrast are the larger scale ones, the ones we see and think of as
ocean waves, they evolve from the capillary waves with more time, continued wind action
blowing across the water for longer and the coalescence of individual capillary waves
building up to a larger size and their wind waves.
Well, if the capillary waves are created by the wind and the wind waves grow with continued
wind action, why don't we just simply call them all wind waves, doesn't seem to make
much sense but the reason is that we classify the waves not just by what creates them but
also by what makes them propagate and travel through the water and it turns out that that's
something called a restoring force, okay, a disturbing force creates the waves initially,
the shear or the drag of the wind over the water pulls the water up in a way we'll see
in a second to be the disturbing force that creates waves but something smooths them back
out again, right, still water is flat, why is it flat, well because water is a liquid
so it'll flow to find its own level and because the surface has a certain amount of surface
tension based on those polar water molecule bonds that have become our old friends by
this point, the water is flat based on the restoring force and that's the distinction
between these kinds of waves.
When waves are small enough to be capillary waves, just tiny ripples, then what flattens
them back out dominantly is not gravity, not the fact that one area is higher and one area
is lower but just simply surface tension that wants to snap everything back into a kind of
a horizontal or level state.
So the restoring force for capillary waves is surface tension but the restoring force
for wind waves for the ones that get larger is gravity because water doesn't want to make
a hill, it wants to find its own level.
So we have this distinction between the restoring forces.
Now the typical wavelengths for capillary waves is very small, the maximum wavelength
is something like less than an inch, about 1.7 or so centimeters in length and that's
just based on the physics of surface tension, how strong that force can be.
Capillary waves form by the wind blowing over the water in a very certain way, the wind
is blowing across the water and it starts to pull on the water's surface just by the
molecular adhesion of the gas actually to the water and that builds up a little hill.
Well on the upside of that hill then the wind separates a little bit from the water and
on the back side, just like the lee of a hill or something like that, a very tiny hill,
there's a little bit of a low pressure zone and in that low pressure zone the wind pressure
dies down and the wind shear separates a little bit from the water.
So it creates this little hill, pressures higher on one side, the upwind side than it
is on the downwind side, so it sets that little hill in motion and that's the motion of the
capillary wave across the water.
So this is a feature that can only have this wavelength of a very small amount, just up
to a few centimeters.
Now wind waves can actually then take up all the wavelengths from sort of the transition
from capillary waves up to the largest wind generated waves in the ocean and that means
these wind waves can have a size or a wavelength that's anywhere from less than a meter, just
centimeters, up to as much as 150 meters or more.
So if we look at calm water and we see the capillary waves sort of dancing across the
surface, often in many different directions, blown by the wind and the surface will develop
some ripples.
Well, if that keeps going then the ripples that the wind is creating will coalesce, as
I said, and maybe the wind gets stronger and starts to build up chalk, right, it builds
up rougher, rougher sea state and the capillary waves kind of move across with little wind
gusts and eddies and the turbulence of the wind, in fact, old time sailors called those
capillary wave gusts that would sort of shoot across the water in different directions, cats
pause because it looked like cats dancing across the water moving very quickly.
But all of it builds up to coalesce into wind waves that are in the areas that we sometimes
refer to as building seas or seas that are building up in their wave dimensions.
Well waves build up where the wind is forcing them, so they start as these capillary waves,
they coalesce, and they build up and get longer and longer wavelengths and start to travel
further as their wave height grows, and in fact there's a very specific relationship between
wave height and wave length based again on the sort of the adhesion of water or the cohesion
of water I should say and how gravity tries to lower it back down.
So wind waves develop up to some maximum wave geometry or steepness based on the forcing
by the wind.
And that steepness is actually a specific ratio of one to seven.
One part high or ratio of the wavelength to the height is a maximum of seven wavelength
to one height.
If a wave gets to that sort of steepness, that gives it a kind of an angle near the
peaks of the waves of about 120 degrees, and that's as steep as water waves can get.
You exceed that, it generates turbulence, it generates white caps, the wind will start
blowing the tops off of the waves, we see foam on the water, and things like that.
So choppy seas get to this sort of maximum ratio or specific ratio of wavelength to height.
While the wave then starts to build up into a sea, that is the maximum height of the waves
based on it turns out the area that the wind is blowing over and the maximum speed of the
wind that generates these waves traveling out.
And the longer it blows for, the longer the wavelength can develop and therefore also
the higher the height based on that seven to one ratio between wavelength and height.
So the region that the sea is picking up all of these waves in sort of weather is actually
called the sea, which is kind of confusing, but it's the region that a wave system is
being formed over.
And so we talk about waves becoming fully developed in that region, and that's a region
that's called the sea.
It's just an area of the ocean over which the wind blows for an uninterrupted distance
over a relatively uninterrupted period of time.
So the factors that control the variety and size of waves then are the speed of the wind,
the duration that the wind blows in a relatively constant manner.
Obviously wind isn't totally constant, but storms develop and wind blows in fairly steady
directions over some duration.
And then the size of the area that I just called the sea, and that is a specific distance
over which the wind is blowing, and that's called the fetch of the wave.
So the wind fetch is the distance over which that sort of wave generating force is happening.
And then it can also depend, of course, on the original state of the sea.
And we talk about a fully developed sea as one which has reached the maximum possible
wave height for the wind speed, duration, and fetch.
And in fact, there's something called the Beaufort scale, which is used by mariners
to describe the sea state, and it depends on the height of the waves from a Beaufort
of zero for waves that are just very tiny chopper, actually almost indetectable, up
through various sizes, depending on the wind speed and the wave height and everything else,
to really gale-sized seas and very large waves up to 12 meters or higher in height
for a Beaufort, you know, nine kind of systems, something like that.
Then once the sea has developed and you get these waves going, then the waves don't stop
when the weather stops or when the wind stops blowing.
In fact, they change into the more regularly swelling patterns of waves, which we in fact
call sea swell.
So the swells are coming out of the region of formation and then propagating across large
areas of the open ocean.
In fact, thousands and even tens of thousands of kilometers away from where waves formed,
the swells can propagate because they move fairly efficiently through the water in terms
of just being the transfer of energy across the ocean surface.
So swell is the wave that ultimately comes out of the region that formed that wave.
And the swell has a particular speed with which it travels over the ocean.
That's a function of the wavelength and the period of the wave.
So the speed, or celerity, of a deep water wave is the wavelength over the period.
But the wavelength and the period are related to each other by this 1-7 ratio.
So it turns out the wavelength is actually the force of gravity, because that's the
restoring force, divided by, it turns out, 2 times pi times the period squared.
So the details of that aren't important necessarily, but it means we can substitute and calculate
the speed just from the period or just from the wavelength because we have two equations
with the same things in them.
So the speed of the wave is either 1.56 times the period of the wave or the speed squared
is 1.56 times the wavelength of the wave, as it turns out.
Well, that's important.
That means a deep water wave travels at a velocity that's dependent on its wavelength.
A longer wavelength wave goes faster and therefore also goes farther.
A longer wavelength wave is also a higher wave.
So these open ocean swells are the ones that have the long wavelengths and travel long
distances at relatively high speed across the ocean.
If we look then at the characteristics of a fully developed sea, as it turns into swells,
then if it has a small fetch, like say, just a 20 kilometer area and a wave height of about
two meters or so, that would give us a wavelength of 35 meters and a period of a few seconds,
say four seconds, and a speed that's pretty slow, 13 miles an hour, 20 kilometers per
hour.
Contrast that with the opposite end of the scale, a really big, very large fetch that
generated a large sea state, 1800 or 2000 kilometers, makes wave heights of 12 meters,
with wavelengths of say 200 meters, a period of 11 seconds, and they go really fast, something
like 40 miles an hour.
And all of that is actually the number examples that I just gave you were for wind speeds of
about 58 miles an hour or so.
Well, where do waves come from?
All over the planet, they don't just come from random places, in fact, they come from
the stormiest parts of the ocean.
And so the big ocean swells, the ones that surfers covered all over the planet, actually
start out in some fairly specific places, basically in the high northern latitudes,
like the North Pacific and Gulf of Alaska, or the North Atlantic Ocean up there near
Greenland and Iceland and all of that region, or the high southern latitudes, basically
the southern ocean down near Antarctica and between South America, Australia, and Antarctica.
If we look at a global satellite map, using the satellite altimetry I've already described
in this course, we can see a measure of averaged out wave heights for the month of October
in a particular year, it doesn't really matter what year, and you see that there are even
averaged over these large areas, typical wave heights of as much as 6 to 8 or more meters
in the far southern ocean, and a little bit less, but still quite large in the North Pacific.
Most of the rest of the world doesn't really generate large waves, but it does see the
swells come in from those regions.
So California surfers tend to see swells that are coming in from the Gulf of Alaska, approaching
from the northwest.
Australian surfers tend to see swells that are approaching from the south, because of
the big waves generated in the southern ocean.
Well, what happens to these waves then, of course, as they get close to the shoreline?
That's what we really want to know about, especially if you're a surfer looking for
a good wave break.
So let's take a look at breaking waves now.
As the wave approaches the shallow water, it starts to interact with the bottom, meaning
that the orbital motion of the deep water waves starts to actually impinge on the bottom
and move the sediments back and forth, perhaps, or drag on the rocks or the reef or things
like that.
And this imparts a viscous drag, because of the viscosity of water, on the wave itself.
It tends to make the waves start to slow down.
So we can actually take our deep water waves, and we can say that they become intermediate
water waves, and then shallow water waves.
The shallow water waves are relatively easy to look at, because they're in a region where,
by definition, the water depth is only one-twentieth or less of the wavelength, so really quite
small compared to the wavelength.
That means the wave motion is really feeling the bottom very strongly.
It's moving back and forth across the bottom, exerting a lot of drag.
And as we'll see, the shallow water waves have a fairly simple velocity relationship.
Moving in between one-twentieth of the wavelength and one-half of the wavelength is a region
that we just call intermediate, because it's a transition zone where the friction and properties
of the water are changing from deep water to shallow.
So we'll take a look at that in just a second.
But first, for shallow water waves, where, again, the water depth is only a twentieth
of the wavelength or less, then the speed becomes very simple, because the speed of
the wave is just a function of the force of gravity, but that doesn't change, and the
water depth.
The speed, in fact, is the square root of gravity times water depth.
Gravity is constant, so we can take it out of the square root, so we can say the speed
is 3.1 or so times the water depth if we measure it in meters.
In other words, the celerity or speed of a shallow water wave is purely a function of
water depth, and the wavelength doesn't matter anymore.
Once it's met the definition of being a shallow water wave.
Now, for the intermediate water waves, the speed gets complicated, everything is a little
bit more complex, and we don't need to try to come up with an expression, because it's
really just a transition zone between the deep water speed definition and the shallow
water speed definition, but the waves are certainly slowing down as a shifting function
of both water depth and wave properties in that zone.
Okay, so what happens as the wave train then approaches the shoreline and starts to break?
Well the wave drags across the bottom, and so it starts to slow down as it becomes a
shallow water wave, from intermediate to shallow water wave.
It becomes more peaked, so the open swell that had a gentle, probably less than that
1 to 7 ratio that I've already discussed before, starts to peak up, and in fact, starts to
reach that, that ratio where the water is no longer stable to hold its shape.
So the waves actually break, where the ratio of the water height to the water depth below
is about 3 to 4 or so.
And because the wave is peaking up, what's happening is that due to the orbital motion
of the wave, the water that's going up is also going forward, as is shown in the diagram,
and the water that's going below is going backward, and what happens is the top of the
wave is still moving faster, based on having just been in a little bit deeper water, while
the bottom of the wave is slowing down.
So the top of the orbit starts to overtake the base of the wave, which is being dragged
by the bottom, the peak falls over, and spills, and the wave, in fact, breaks.
Well, we can really define three types of breaking waves, and these are absolutely important
to our surfer who's looking for a great surf break, right?
And they depend specifically on the characteristics of the bottom, and in fact the slope and shape
of the bottom, where the wave is coming into shallow water.
So when you have a relatively flat bottom with a nice long distance that the wave energy
can dissipate and only gradually slow down as it comes up this just maybe a degree or
a few degrees sloping bottom, you get what are called spilling breakers.
The breakers spill the white cap off the top of the wave, the front wall is a little steeper
than the back, but they continue to spill over long distances.
These are the kind of waves that are fantastic for surfers who are learning how to surf,
because the steepness isn't too high, there's not much chance of the whole wave plunging
over the top of them, and it's a great place to kind of be an apprentice and pick up the
ability to catch that gravity ride on the front of the wave.
If the sea floor is just a little bit steeper, moderately steep bottoms up to 10 or 15 degrees
or so in steepness, especially if there's a little bit of variability in that steepness,
then the wave will start to turn into a plunging wave.
It has a more pronounced and extreme speed up of the top of the wave compared to the
bottom of the wave.
So you have a steep wave front building, a rapid curl over, and the plunge of the wave
front rapidly dissipates energy on this more steep slope.
Obviously that's the sweet spot where surfers want to be.
The plunging wave gives them the most gravitational acceleration for the wave as they get on top
of it, and if they can stay in the part of the wave that's at the front of that, they
ride right down that hill and hopefully stay out of the crash zone of the wave going over
their heads.
Surfers want to be in the tube because right in the tube is where the steepness of the
inner wall is growing most rapidly and they can keep up with it and stay below the crashing
wave.
Finally, when you have a very steep slope, and especially rocky reef bottoms and things
like that at greater than about a 15 degree slope, the waves come in and then they slow
down so forcefully that they simply start to white cap out and don't ever really form
out a peak wave, and so therefore we call those surging breakers.
They don't really even break, but they surge forward, maintaining most of their energy,
spilling some foam off the top, and often reflecting off of seawalls and breakwaters
and things like that.
So in very steep or even cliffy bottom areas, you don't get much of a surf break, not a
very good place to actually go try your surfing luck, but you get a surging breaker instead.
Well, one more property of waves as they approach the shore that we certainly want to take a
look at is that ocean waves, like all waves, refract, meaning they change the direction
that they're propagating as they come into the coastline.
And that's for a very simple reason.
If you think about a particular wave front, let's say of a swell that's coming in, so
one particular crest, it might be coming in from the open ocean to the shoreline looks
like pretty much a straight line.
The wave is a nice straight line and it's coming towards the shore.
Well, if it's coming straight towards the shore, absolutely, with the wave crest parallel
to the shoreline and the bottom is perfectly flat, then the wave might just all break at
once.
But what more typically happens is it's coming in at a little bit of an angle.
It makes some oblique angle to the shoreline.
And what that means is then that one side of the wave that's closer to the shore on
the same crest will be in shallower water than the same crest further out offshore.
And so the part that's in shallow water slows down.
Remember, a shallow water wave has a speed that depends on the water depth.
So the water depth right there is less, wave slows down.
Every portion of that same wave is not slowed down as much.
So what happens is then that wave front starts to bend and it doesn't break, well, sorry,
as a wave it breaks, but the wave front is continuous, but it starts to bend around and
it bends to become more parallel to the shoreline because it's entering this region.
So if we look at waves that are approaching the shore, and this is a great aerial photograph
of waves approaching the shore, we imagine that there's shallower water just offshore.
You can see a regular swell of waves in the deep water part, but as they come into the
shoreline there's this really sharp bending around.
So the waves are breaking almost parallel to the beach, not quite, but almost parallel
to the beach, even though they've approached the coastline very obliquely.
Well, when we have sort of headlands of rock and then bays or beaches behind them, there's
a particular way in which the wave energy kind of refracts around, and what it does
is it focuses that energy in towards the headlands.
So the open water wave comes in, but the rocky point of land usually also has shallower water
offshore, so the waves converge on that headland and focus their crashing energy on the headland
and tend to erode it away more.
On the other hand, they focus their energy away from the nearby bays, and so those bays
are nice calmer water, good places for the children to go play in the surf, and so on.
We can see this great photograph of refraction around a headland in Copacabana Beach in Brazil,
where you have the crashing waves all around the rocky point, but then the nice calm water
of the beach behind where everybody can enjoy relatively safe play in the surf zone.
Similarly, if we look at this image of wave refraction into a small bay, the waves are
literally bent into the same shape as the bay itself, and that's exactly because the depth
of the water offshore mimics the shape of the shoreline and the shape of the land onshore.
So the center of the bay probably has the deepest water, and the points over to either
side have shallower water, and the wave reflects that.
Okay, so we've seen now in this lecture how the waves form out in the open ocean in the
area of the building seas because of fetch and wind velocity and duration.
We've seen how they propagate, how they turn from capillary waves to wind waves, and then
ultimately get set on their course across the ocean, turn into ocean swells that can
traverse an entire ocean basin, and ultimately slow down and crash on the beaches, the reefs,
and the rocks.
We've seen what the characteristics of the shoreline are that will make a wave really
a nice wave for a beginning surfer or an expert surfer or maybe for a toddler playing
at the beach.
All of that has to do with the garden variety, wind waves that we see every day if we go
to the ocean.
In the next lecture, I'm going to take a look at the pathological waves, the scary ones
and the really big ones that are very different from these others.
So we'll look at rogue waves in the ocean and tsunami, and we'll see that many of the same
characteristics govern these very large waves and also tell us about why, in fact, they're
so destructive.
