Well, now that I've painted this picture for you of all the things that are going on in
the water in the ocean, all the movement of the water swirling about everywhere, it's
time to put some inhabitants in it.
Let's take a look at the organisms that live in the ocean.
We're going to turn our attention to all the living things that occupy the habitats
that I sort of defined and discussed earlier on.
But first what we need to do is look at the fundamental sort of components of what life
is all about.
And that means it's about energy and it's about food webs or the interaction of who
makes food and who eats food and who eats who.
So let's start at kind of the most basic question of all, perhaps, and that's what
is life or at least what is the difference between living things and non-living things?
Well this is actually a hard question to answer, but one way of putting it might be life is
capable of organizing energy.
That means capturing energy in some way, storing it up, putting it to use to continue to live
in a particular environment or a particular habitat, and in fact ultimately putting it
to use to reproduce itself, which is another unique sort of fundamental feature of life.
And we can say that the directed use of energy that sort of defines life is partly special
in that it counters entropy, it counters the second law of thermodynamics, which is the
idea that things tend to fall apart, right?
The idea that all energy goes from states of being more ordered or concentrated to less
ordered or concentrated.
Well life is really working against that principle in the sense of concentrating energy and using
it to make a living.
We can look at a few other things that all life has in common, at least on this planet
and it's the only life we know about so far.
First of all, all life we know about is based on carbon, and more than that it actually uses
very specific molecules of carbon, these very complex and delicate molecules, RNA and DNA,
and some of the other ones that are metabolic products of life.
All life requires water, we know that, and we know that life must have evolved in the
ocean, and the fact that it all uses sort of the same fundamental metabolic tools suggests
that life evolved only once on this planet.
Even the most diverse organisms, the Archaeans, the Bacteria, and all the Eukaryotes, all the
animals and plants all use RNA and DNA in some way.
So life seems to have come from a common origin on Earth.
There's probably something on the order of 100 million different species on our planet,
but they all have these common roots, and in a sense we're all marine life.
You may have heard that we carry water in our bodies, our bloodstream is salinity of
seawater as if we have seawater in our bloodstream.
It's actually not true, that's a myth, the salinity of the fluids in our body is much
less saline than seawater, but it certainly is salty, and it is salty because in part
of that marine origin that everything on the planet actually has.
Okay, so I said that life is about the concentration or the use of energy, so let's look at that
in a little bit more detail now.
Well living systems are there to gather energy in some way, and so virtually everything is
dependent on a chain of what we call primary producers and consumers.
So the primary producers are the organisms that can produce something that we can think
of as food, or at least carbohydrates and sugars and things like that, that are carbon
compounds that store in a chemical form some original energy that comes from somewhere
outside life.
And of course most of that energy on the planet is light, so most of the primary producers
use light to generate energy, but some use chemical energy from the earth as we've already
hinted at in terms of what we call chemo synthesis.
All of that energy then flows from let's say the sun into the use by primary producers
as photosynthesizers which fix carbon and turn carbon into something that can be used
as chemical fuel or food.
They're very often then consumed by other organisms who depend on the primary producers
to make the food, and then they consume it.
Some are decomposers, some are direct consumers of living tissues and things like that, but
ultimately all that energy starts as light energy, flows through as chemical energy,
and ends up dissipated as heat.
The activity, the motion and the metabolic processes that all organisms have turns energy
ultimately back into heat where it warms the ocean or the atmosphere, but it radiates
into space in some way.
So that's the flow of energy through living systems in general.
Now primary productivity then is just more defined as the synthesis of organic materials
from inorganic substances, and as I said it's photosynthesis or chemo synthesis.
Chemo synthesis occurs by bacteria and even simpler organisms called archaea, and we're
going to leave that for another lecture when we look at some of the chemo synthetic processes
going on in the ocean.
Most of the primary productivity on the planet happens through photosynthesis.
Well we measure productivity just in general in terms of the amount of carbon that's fixed
or bound into organic material, organic compounds and all the stuff that makes up our bodies
and the bodies of organisms in the ocean.
So in the ocean photosynthesis is done basically by phytoplankton, different kinds of photosynthetic
bacteria and by marine plants and by seaweeds.
So what is primary productivity?
Well we've already actually looked at photosynthesis before, so let me just remind you that photosynthesis
just basically takes the ingredients water and carbon dioxide and uses the energy from
sunlight or captures the energy from sunlight in the form of a directed reaction that turns
those things into more complex carbon-hydrogen-oxygen compounds represented in this sort of simple
photosynthetic equation as glucose, a simple sugar but can also be more complex carbohydrates
in general, plus the release of oxygen.
And that catalyzation process is carried out by the action of these special kinds of compounds
called chlorophylls and or other compounds that plants and animals can use actually and
bacteria can use to use sunlight to fix carbon.
So any organism that does this is called an autotroph.
Autotroph means make your own food basically, troph is feeding and auto means self, so they're
self-feeding organisms, that means they make their own food through primary productivity.
In the next lecture we're actually going to look in detail at a whole bunch of the autotrophs
that live in the ocean and make most of the basic primary productivity in the ocean including
things like diatoms and other plankton and bacteria and all sorts of organisms, so many
of which are pretty unfamiliar to us now.
The major primary producers though include those phytoplankton, cyanobacteria and the
seaweeds and the vascular plants like seagrasses and mangrove trees, we're going to see all
of these in various different lectures but what they all share in common is the ability
to photosynthesize, so different, there's certain different metabolisms that they have,
they all use one form of chlorophyll or another or related compounds but all of them photosynthesize
and they turn sunlight, solar energy as the basic fuel into carbohydrates.
So they're the foundation for the entire marine ecosystem.
Well the producers then fuel or feed the consumers and the consumers are also called heterotrophs
in opposition to autotrophs because they get their food from elsewhere and in fact what
they do is they get their food from consuming the actual primary producers themselves or
the carbohydrates that they're generating and so there's a kind of a yin and yang or
an interaction between the producers and the consumers and this is true in the ocean
but also for all of life where there's a process called respiration which counterbalances
or is the complement to photosynthesis. So if we think about photosynthesis as using
up carbon dioxide and releasing oxygen making food along the way then respiration, we think
of respiration in terms of breathing but respiration in the biological sense is using
up those carbohydrates with oxygen, breaking them down with oxygen and getting the energy
back out of them, the stored chemical energy, they're sort of like a battery and releasing
carbon dioxide back out into the environment as well as releasing a certain amount of water.
So the carbon dioxide that fuels the autotrophs produces the oxygen which fuels respiration
and everybody stays happy. Well let's go back to primary production then
and look at how we quantify it and actually measure primary production. In general I said
that primary production is the fixation of carbon and so we measure it in terms of the
grams of carbon per unit of mass or area of the ocean. We think about in terms of what
the biomass is that's generated by fixing carbon. So we can measure it by weighing biomass
or coming up with the cumulative mass of living tissue over a certain interval of time or
in a certain region or whatever it is. Well if we look at the primary production in the
ocean compared to the land we can see that primary production in the marine setting is
35 to 50 billion metric tons per year. So that's the total biomass generated in a given
year in the ocean environment. On land it's something sort of comparable a little bit
more, 50 to 70 billion metric tons, roughly comparable numbers, the marine setting is
a little bit less than on land. But the total amount of actual biomass that's cumulatively
present in the ocean at any given time is about 1.2 billion metric tons whereas on land
it's 600 to 1000 billion metric tons. So there's much more biomass on land because land organisms
tend to store it up. Animals live a long time, trees live a long time, they build a lot of
biomass. The ocean is really very different. The ocean produces 35 to 50 billion metric
tons per year but the amount of biomass is only 1 to 2 billion metric tons per year.
That's saying that the biomass cycling in the oceanic environment is incredibly rapid.
There's a great deal of turnover so the overall productivity is very, very high. When primary
producers fix carbon it's very quickly consumed, those consumers are often very quickly consumed
themselves, life cycles are very short, the ocean is cranking out biological material
at a just prodigious rate compared to the land which tends to store it up over longer
intervals of time. If we look at the breakdown of that different biomass or our primary productivity
in the ocean we can see that some ocean environments of course are much more productive than others.
Coral reefs and kelp beds, areas around the coastline that we'll look at in a lot more
detail a little later on are highly productive environments. You've probably heard this before.
There are ecosystems that produce a lot of biomass say anywhere from hundreds to thousands
of grams of carbon per square meter of area down through the water column per year.
Areas like the open ocean by contrast are actually sort of relative biological deserts.
They're all biologically productive but only producing anywhere from 1 to 180 or so grams
of carbon in that same kind of area of 1 square meter per year.
Compared to land communities the rainforest and the coral reefs are sort of comparable.
A freshwater swamp is a very productive environment comparable to the ocean. The regions as I
said of the open ocean and even off the shelf regions where it's just plankton growing are
growing everywhere and the ocean is very vast so it's a lot of cumulative biomass but they're
relative deserts. Primary productivity is not that high.
If we look at a satellite image that is actually kind of an incredible image it shows us directly
by measuring the color and the spectrum of colors that are present at the sea surface
all over the world. It's this satellite called MODIS. It's showing us directly the chlorophyll
concentrations in the surface ocean and it shows us that there's a big variation in primary
productivity because the chlorophyll concentration is basically a measure or a substitute measure
for the biomass of primary producers in the ocean and we can see that they're highly concentrated
in areas that are around the coastlines basically and at high latitudes, high northern and southern
latitudes where as we'll see seasonally some of these primary producers have all the right
ingredients to be very productive. So in the rest of this lecture we're going
to look at what some of those ingredients are. What is it that makes it possible to
live in that region and grow in great profusion? If you look at the centers of the ocean basins,
the big open middle of the Pacific Ocean, middle of the Atlantic Ocean, you see relatively
little chlorophyll concentration reflecting that small productivity, that relative desert.
With the exception of regions along the equator and when we look at ocean currents a little
later on we'll understand why that narrow band along the equator is actually a more productive
region than even other areas of the tropics. Well another way of looking at that is that
the primary productivity in the ocean is not distributed evenly in area at all. About half
the productivity is in the coastal ocean and half in the upwelling regions that we're going
to discuss a little later on where deep cold water comes to the surface but only about
1% is in the open ocean. The area of the ocean is mostly 81.5% open ocean and only 18% coastal
regions and the upwelling areas are actually a tiny fraction of the ocean less than a percent.
And so we see that these areas that have cold water upwelling to the surface are areas of
high productivity. It's going to turn out that those are areas where nutrients are available
to organisms that also have a lot of sunlight. So the two ingredients that they need that
are limiting factors are sunlight and access to nutrients and we'll see why that is in
an upcoming portion of the lecture here. Okay well I defined autotrophs and heterotrophs
and so we have this word troph or trophic that is a definition of just basically where
you are in terms of feeding. Where you are if you like on the food chain or as we'll
see food chain is not such a great term so we kind of like to use the term food web instead.
But we can define something called a trophic level and in fact a trophic pyramid and so
as an organism your trophic level is basically how far removed you are from primary production.
So the primary producers the things that photosynthesize are the base of the trophic pyramid and they're
the first trophic level first primary production trophic level and then they get eaten by something
which in turn gets eaten by something else which may in turn get eaten by something else.
And so each of those is one step higher up in terms of its trophic level the consumer
that eats the primary producer is at the first level is a first level consumer and then
there are second level consumers and so on. And the thing is that as you may understand
the amount of biomass it takes to consume keeps sort of building in an exponential kind of
way to get that same amount of biomass at the next trophic level. So for example a high
trophic level organism in the ocean is a tuna it's a big fish it's a predator and it eats
mid-sized fish so to make one kilogram of tuna requires the consumption of something
on the order of ten kilograms of a mid-sized fish that that tuna is eating which may be
eating a smaller fish so it takes ten kilograms of that fish or a hundred of those to get
all the way up to our tuna. That smaller fish is probably eating some first order consumer
like krill or shrimp and it's eating ten times as many of those and then those krill or shrimp
in terms have to eat ten times their own weight in the primary producers. So to go up the
trophic pyramid means to get one tuna or one kilogram of tuna can take as much as ten thousand
kilograms of primary producers for example if it's at the fourth trophic level. Okay so
I've started to talk about then the kind of the relationship among organisms that are
eating each other and we talk about them again in terms of these concepts called food webs
and a food web is simply a diagram that illustrates or shows the feeding relationships and therefore
the flow of energy through various biological communities. We're going to discuss a lot
of biological communities in different habitats and environments within the ocean over the
course of the next few lectures. So if we look at a simplified food web we see that well
it's not really a food chain right because all kinds of organisms that are consumers
are consuming at various different trophic levels simultaneously. So for example if we
take the seal that's near the top of this food chain at a high trophic level it's consuming
at the fourth trophic level perhaps when it's eating some marine bird or some large fish
say a penguin if we're talking about a marine bird but it's also consuming directly some
of the krill or small fish that are down there at the first trophic level for consumers
that are eating directly the primary producers. So the web has arrows showing connections
meaning you know consumption connections from all different kinds of trophic levels along
the way but the arrows always show the direction of energy flow. So one organism can be at
not just one trophic level but depending on what it's feeding on and perhaps even depending
on the season eating at multiple trophic levels within that system. Okay well we talked about
limiting factors for understanding how life is productive in the ocean or how you make
a living in the ocean if you're an organism so let's look at some of the physical and
chemical factors that govern the productivity of life. Basically when we think about the
basic factors we've already talked about some of them. You need access to energy right and
energy comes for our purposes in two forms one is light which can actually be used to
make food the other is temperature because you need a certain amount of energy in the
form of heat just to keep your metabolic processes going if you're an organism. The
other really important one is nutrients so we need a variety of chemical nutrients in
order to be the building blocks of those carbohydrates we want to make as part of our metabolism.
And along the way then the chemical environment is important for actually sort of maintaining
cellular structure and things like that and that includes things like salinity and dissolved
gases we need oxygen or carbon dioxide depending on where we are in the production chain, pH
the acidity or alkalinity affects the chemical processes that can go on and perhaps even
the pressure in the water. Although as it turns out as we saw pressure is not a major
limiting factor on life in the ocean because unlike us life in the ocean largely doesn't
include gas chambers like lungs in their bodies and so they're equilibrated to the pressure
that they're at. Any of these though that I just mentioned can be a limiting factor so
the term limiting factor explicitly in biology is just one whose presence and available amount
governs the amount of productivity the amount of biomass that can be generated and there's
some very important limiting factors in governing oceanic productivity. So let's talk about
light for a second we've already talked about the photic zone and the aphotic zone so the
upper sunlight part of the water and the much larger volume of water that has absolutely
no light below about 600 meters depth in very clear open ocean water and actually much shallower
than that in less clear more turbid water near the coastlines. But let's break the photic
zone down actually now into two parts. We refer to the photic zone as having a euphotic
zone and a dysphotic zone. So euphotic zone is the area where there's lots of light. Light
is very available and it creates lots of potential fertility. It's defined specifically as the
uppermost part of the photic zone where phytoplankton autotrophs can capture more energy than they
use to stay alive. So photosynthesis is viable in this zone for organisms that use that chemical
pathway. It turns out this is less than one percent of the total ocean volume. It's down
to from the surface down to as little as 20 meters maybe down to as much as 60 or 70 meters
or so depending on the penetration of sunlight and the temperature and characteristics of
the water. But the euphotic zone is really just a tiny fraction of the ocean. That's
where most of the primary productivity takes place though. Beneath the euphotic zone then
is the dysphotic zone and as the name kind of implies it has light but there's not really
enough light to support net energy gain through photosynthesis except for some very special
bacteria as I'll tell you in just a minute. The dysphotic zone though is the entire zone
that there's at least perceptible amounts of sunlight so that's from this 20 to 70 meters
or so all the way down to as much as 600 meters. Okay so that's light. How about temperature?
Well temperature in marine water governs the metabolic activity of organisms and it also
governs as we'll see the solubility of gases in water and gases can be a limiting factor
because as we said we need oxygen or carbon dioxide. It also governs the rate of evaporation
of the water. Warm water evaporates more and that affects salinity in turn in the sea surface.
So these are all parts of the sort of oceanic environmental factors that can be limiting
factors for life. And remember that organisms have a specific metabolic rate and that's
how fast energy using reactions can proceed in an organism. So there are temperatures
that facilitate various metabolic processes. The chemical reactions that we need to have
to keep our bodies going or an organism in the ocean needs to have. And so we talk about
for example warm-blooded and cold-blooded organisms. We'll see that there are both in
the ocean although cold-bloodedness or what's called ectothermic organisms are more prevalent
in the ocean by far than endothermic or warm-blooded ones. But that means that organisms have to
be able to manage the temperature within their bodies either by being warm-blooded and actually
changing the temperature within their bodies or by moving to where the temperature is appropriate
for the metabolism that they have. Well the temperature in the ocean water varies a lot.
It varies from near freezing and in fact below zero degrees C as I told you in some cold
polar waters that are salient enough to not freeze at those temperatures all the way up
to as high as something around 100 to 104 Fahrenheit in a shallow tropical lagoon about 40 degrees
C or so. In fact it gets even warmer than that in the ocean. We've already seen the
black smokers. These hydrothermal vents can produce water at up to 400 degrees C. But
it turns out that and we've seen that there's lots of life around those hydrothermal vents.
It turns out that as far as we can tell living microbes can live very close to those hydrothermal
vents and because there's lots of pressure at the bottom of the ocean even at those high
temperatures the water's not necessarily boiling. It looks like the microbes can live right
up to them edging up the gradient of temperature close to the actual 400 degrees C vent but
with an absolute upper limit so far at least of about 121 degrees C and an even sharper
limit that just says that they must have liquid water. It can't be steam or they don't live
anymore. So this 121 degrees C is the upper limit so far to known life on this planet
and those organisms are called hyperthermophiles or organisms that love heat and are so much
so that they're hyperthermophiles. Okay well temperature as I said governs the solubility
of gases in seawater and in some ways that might be surprising a little bit. We think
of warm tropical lagoons as a very fertile kind of place or something like that but at
a given fixed salinity it turns out that key gases that are needed for life oxygen, carbon
dioxide and nitrogen are all more soluble in cold water than they are in warm water.
So if we look for example at a temperature of 10 degrees you know oxygen solubility is
25 or 30 percent higher than it is at 30 degrees C or the warm tropical waters. Carbon dioxide
is similarly significantly more soluble in 10 degree water than in 30 degree water and
it's even more soluble in very cold water like the 0 degrees C water. This is true for
all of them so the gases are more soluble the colder the water is. Cold water has a
lot of these gases that are nutrients warm water is relatively depleted in them because
of that. This is going to become important in terms of understanding where organisms
live in the ocean and how they get access to those gases. Other key nutrients though
are chemical elements, chemical nutrients, compounds that we need to do metabolic processes
and the key ones in the ocean are pretty similar to the key ones that are familiar on land.
Phosphorus in the form of phosphates, nitrogen that's fixed in the form of nitrates and trace
metals like iron for example are all things that organisms need to live and so these are
all present dissolved in various small quantities as I explained before sometimes just trace
quantities in the ocean and they tend to be recycled through biological materials meaning
that organisms that have them extract them from the water they're relatively scarce when
they die then the decomposers decompose their bodies and re-release those same nutrients
that are quickly scavenged up by other organisms to be used again. So the nutrients cycle has
a lot to do with the cycle of growth and death and decomposition of individual organisms.
Well in fact this means that the nutrients have to cycle through the water in different
ways and they have to diffuse through the water and it turns out that these nutrients
that are recycled from decomposition which mostly happens at depth in the ocean have
a real barrier in certain waters to make it back up to the surface and if there's a strong
thermocline, remember the thermocline, the gradient in temperature from warm surface
water to the cold deep and a strong pycnocline, the density gradient that goes along with
it from less dense surface water to denser deep water, if those are strongly developed
then water doesn't easily circulate between the surface water and the deep water, it also
doesn't easily, nutrients don't easily diffuse through the water across this stratified layer
that is represented by the thermocline and pycnocline. What that means is that places
where they're very strong like the tropics or summertime warmed temperate waters actually
become nutrient poor in the near surface. Polar waters often have plenty of nutrients
because they have a very weakly developed thermocline and pycnocline. So what this means
is that for the tropics or the near tropical regions, subtropical regions, ironically the
surface water has lots of sunlight so it's got a great amount of energy but it's depleted
in nutrients and that depletion in nutrients means that organisms are inhibited in growing
and so we see a lot of the tropical waters are actually not all that productive. On the
other hand the polar regions where you don't have that barrier to nutrient cycles, cycling
moving up and down through the water column means that when the sun is shining in the
summertime in polar regions there's plenty of nutrients around and plenty of sunlight
and this promotes the blooming of mass quantities of primary producers, the phytoplankton and
all the things that feed on them as well. So we get big productivity where you might
not expect it in the cold regions but it's very seasonal.
Well one more limiting factor also is the oxygen and carbon dioxide and if we look at
a kind of a graph with depth of those two compounds we see that they also vary a lot
with depth. Oxygen is abundant in the near surface mostly due to the photosynthesis activity
of all those organisms and then it falls off with depth as the heterotrophs that tend
to eat the photosynthetic organisms live sort of just below them waiting for them to die
and rain down and so they eat them, they consume that oxygen through their respiration process
so there's a very pronounced oxygen minimum zone that sort of roughly corresponds to the
base of the photic zone in general. And then oxygen becomes a little bit more abundant
again in cold deep water because of the solubility is higher and because then you're not in
the zone where lots of heterotrophs are active. Also because actually of downwelling of some
polar waters that we'll see later on. Carbon dioxide is essentially the converse story
where carbon dioxide is not very available in the surface waters, again because of all
that photosynthesis those organisms use up the carbon dioxide but it becomes more prevalent
through respiration with depth. One last ingredient to what organisms need is the ability to deal
with salinity and cells have to control their chemical environment. Even fish in the ocean
it turns out does not have an internal cellular salinity that's the same as the seawater
around it and that's because for a lot of metabolic processes it's just advantageous
to be in a more dilute solution if you will inside your cells. If you think of what salinity
is it's dissolved solids in water well cells are the same thing they're basically packets
of water with various kinds of dissolved materials in them and organic compounds within them.
Well any dissolved solid will diffuse from a place of high concentration to a place of
low concentration. If you mix seawater with fresh water then the salt in the seawater
will diffuse through all of the fresh water. If you put a membrane some kind of cellular
membrane in between the salt water and the fresh water then they will tend to diffuse
across those membranes to equal out as well. But there's a process called osmosis which
basically says that the fresh water will move from the areas where there's more of it to
areas where there's less of it or where there's more dissolved salts. So for example a cell
with fresher water in it will tend to lose water by osmosis across its membranes into
the salt water around it. Organisms have to deal with this and so we talk about solutions
in the form of what the medium is around a cell as isotonic or hypertonic or hypotonic.
So isotonic means you have the same salinity as outside your cell. The cells are sort of
happy maintaining their shape there's no osmotic pressure as it's called across the cell to
move water back and forth across that boundary. If they become hypertonic then water wants
to move out of the cells they tend to shrivel up and conversely if they're hypotonic then
the concentration is higher out inside and water tends to come into the cell and blow
them up. Well cells handle this by something called active transport which is a biological
process of expending some energy to force water back and forth across cell membranes
and we'll look at that in the context of some specific organisms later on.
Okay well I think that we've taken a look now at some of the basic ingredients of how
energy and food move through the oceanic ecosystems and we'll certainly look at them
in a great deal more detail now. But one thing I want to leave you with is that oceanic
ecosystems in general are unique compared to their terrestrial equivalents in the very
rapid turnover of that biomass. Most of what grows is very quickly consumed. They're limited
by the sources of energy and nutrients as we've seen as well as by habitat and environmental
conditions like salinity. So I think you can say that well maybe it's not a dog eat dog
world out there in the ocean but it's surely a whale eats krill world in the ocean or a
heterotroph eats autotroph world and we'll keep looking at that in more detail. As we
start exploring in the next couple of lectures what life is like in the open ocean and pelagic
realm.
