In the last lecture, as we looked at the organisms that live in the deep water pelagic zones,
we started to make the transition between the plankton, the free floaters and drifters,
and the necton, or the swimmers in the ocean.
In this lecture and the next, I'd like to take that to the really, truly active swimmers
that are populating the seas and are often at a much higher trophic level and consuming
many of the other different organisms in the ocean.
So we're going to take up all of the animals that actively swim through the water, the
nectonic organisms, and that's going to include invertebrates, we'll revisit the mollusks
like the squid and the nautilus, we'll look at crustaceans, and then we'll talk about
the vertebrate organisms that are in the ocean, fishes and eels, and then in the next lecture
mammals like whales and seals, reptiles and birds that actually swim through the water.
The first question we want to ask then is, in general, what does it take to be a good
swimmer in the ocean?
We know that there are certain characteristics that are shared by most of the marine organisms
that are rapid or powerful swimmers.
Well those basic functions are, or those basic characteristics are, first of all, streamline
and shape, and second, energy efficient and effective propulsion.
So we'll look at both of those over the course of this lecture.
Well, we're all familiar with the idea that there is a certain shape that's aerodynamic.
If you think of cars and airplane design and things like that, or wing design, you know
that a kind of a teardrop shape is the one that is called aerodynamic, and that's for
a very good reason.
It's the shape that, in a wind tunnel, produces the least drag and the least turbulence.
Now teardrop shape meaning kind of rounded at the front, not too sharp an edge, but kind
of an open curve, and then tapering, a long tapering form to a tapered back.
Why is that a good shape from the point of view of avoiding aerodynamic drag?
Well, the rounded front basically separates the flow lines of the air around the particular
shape that's moving through it.
But when that air separates then, if it has a blunt or round back so that it's a flat
body, or a flat object, or a spherical object, then the separation occurs, and just as we
sort of saw with capillary waves on the surface of the water, there's a zone behind it where
the air is a little bit stiller, and in fact where because of the separation of those flow
lines there's a pocket of very low pressure air, and in fact as we'll see, water, in behind
that object.
And so that area is a region that generates turbulence, the fluid medium, the air or water
swirls in behind it, creates vortices, and those vortices basically take some of the
energy out of the flow, direct it back in other directions, and dissipate it as heat
ultimately.
So this phenomenon called vortex shedding, or the creation of vortices behind an object
embedded in a streaming fluid, is a problem.
So it's the fundamental problem of turbulence and drag in flow in any medium.
And what anything wants to do, or what you want to do with anything that you want to
make aerodynamic, is minimize that vortex shedding, and that teardrop shape basically
just conforms the shape of the object to the shape of the air flow that's broken at the
front of the object, and therefore comes back along the taper to the rear of the object.
It inhibits vortex shedding, and that's exactly what inhibits drag in either the organism
or the object.
Well, I talked about being aerodynamic, but of course water is much, much thicker and
more viscous than air, and so the importance of minimizing drag in the water, if you're
a swimmer, or if you're a submarine for that matter moving through the water, is even more
important than it is in the air.
Drag in water is many, many times greater than drag in the air.
So these same shapes that we consider aerodynamic are also hydrodynamic, or shapes that are
effective for minimizing turbulence in drag in the water.
Well, it turns out that studies of, in wind tunnels and in water tanks and things like
that, of what it would take to minimize hydrodynamic drag, show that there's certain body shapes
that work very well, and that do the best job of minimizing that drag.
And we can express them first of all in terms of a shape, that sort of tear drop or torpedo
shape in the ocean, or in the water, but also in terms of a ratio of the length to the width
in terms of the profile or cross section of a given object or body.
That length to width ratio is optimized in terms of minimizing the drag based on different
thicknesses of the profile, when the width to length ratio is about 0.2 to 0.25 or so.
So the width is just a fifth to a quarter of the length of the body that's moving through
the liquid or fluid medium.
Well it turns out then that if we actually look at the body shapes that have been evolved
to by many different marine organisms, they come very close to this theoretical or sort
of mathematical physical calculation of what the optimal body plan is.
And so organisms like swordfish and tuna and dolphins are at somewhere around 0.25 to 0.28
or so in terms of their width to length ratio.
Very good shapes for minimizing drag, and in fact these are the strongest swimmers in
the sea, the ones that move the fastest in order to capture their prey.
And so they have a great sort of evolutionary pressure or evolutionary incentive in some
sense to have gotten to this shape, and so that's in fact the shape they've gotten to.
The most efficient shape of all perhaps is the largest organism, the one that needs to
move through the water to the largest at high speeds and parts the water by the greatest
amount, and that's a blue whale.
Because the blue whale moves through the water, its body shape is at about 0.21 or its body
shape ratio is at about 0.21, optimized for that thickness and size of the whale to swim
most efficiently through the water, use the least energy to overcome drag and move through
the water overall.
Well this is a really, really vivid example of something we call convergent evolution.
And in general, actually the different organisms that swim through the water, especially the
ones that swim actively and vigorously through the water, are a beautiful example of this
process.
Because we have many different organisms that started out as very different types of creatures
with very different types of body plans, and yet evolved to these streamlined shapes that
come very close to optimizing the exact same shape for maximum avoidance of drag and movement
and maximum hydrodynamic benefit.
So the adaptation of this streamlined shape for swimming has emerged multiple times.
If you think of the original organism that all the different large lineages evolved from,
they're basically all an ancient jawless fish.
And ultimately that jawless fish in the ocean evolved into some of the modern fishes, and
a shark for example has a very streamlined shape, very close to that optimum.
It also has fins that have evolved to control it and swim in the water.
But if you think of other organisms that actually moved on to the land and continued
to evolve, then they also obtained the same shapes.
You might think of a land reptile that evolved on land, there was the period of the dinosaurs,
and then in the ocean there was the ichthyosaur, a marine reptile of the Mesozoic period.
The ichthyosaur evolved a similar shape, involved a flipper system that evolved from the legs
of those reptiles on land.
If you think of the mammals that inhabit the ocean, the dolphins and whales as we'll see
are all evolved from land-based organisms that had legs, they're all from various land
mammals and ungulates and things like that, and yet those legs evolved into flippers similarly
with seals and sea lions and such organisms.
Even birds, a penguin, has evolved a flipper that is of course a wing initially, or evolved
from a wing, but is utterly useless for flight at this time, but is fantastic for swimming.
And the shape of a penguin swimming through the water, again, approximates the same kind
of body plan as does the shape of that dolphin, that whale, and even that ichthyosaur.
So these are a fantastic example of things that evolved in different directions to solve
the same problem, and therefore evolved to very similar shapes.
This is the reason, of course, why we don't classify animals based on anatomical shape,
because then we would group them into the same group somehow, but their DNA and their evolutionary
history is utterly different among these different organisms.
Okay, well let's look at some of the different categories of organisms that actively swim
through the water.
An earliest and the most adapted over the longest period of time in the ocean is certainly
the invertebrates, and the larger invertebrates, for the most part, are represented by the
cephalopods, certainly as the most successful group of invertebrates.
Those are mollusks, and they're mollusks that actively swim, so that includes the squid,
octopus, and what's called the nautilus, I'll show you in just a second.
All of them, as I described a little bit in the last lecture, are called cephalopods
because they have this body plan that includes these tentacles, or this sort of foot that
is coming directly off of the head of the organism.
They have a very decentralized nervous system that includes parts of what we might think
of as a brain sort of distributed throughout each of the individual tentacles or feet,
as well as into a nervous system that includes the head.
They have a body, or mantle, that they primarily move around by jetting water out of jets,
so they're basically jet propelled.
They don't swim in the sense that finfishes do, or eels do, but they're jet propelled
in the water, and they feed very efficiently by using, of course, those tentacles to capture
prey and move it into their mouth and move it into their gut.
They have lots of other interesting adaptations, like the ink that are produced by squids and
octopus to confuse prey and predators, and many other adaptations like that that make
them extremely efficient swimmers.
One of the interesting things about the squid are that they actually swim in another example
of convergent evolution in large schools, in many cases, and they swim in a way that
is very streamlined and, in fact, gives them torpedo shapes that are also similar to the
hydrodynamic shapes of larger fishes and things like that.
They were long thought to be sort of relatively slow-moving creatures.
There are a lot of bottom dwellers.
We'll talk about it in another lecture, but the midwater squid in particular are very
rapid swimmers, very active predators, and very successful organisms over a very long
period of time in the history of the ocean.
The chambered nautilus is an interesting one because it's a cephalopod that actually makes
a shell, so it comes out looking something like a snail.
It has a spiraling shell, the famous nautilus shell of both mythology and of the fossil
record.
These were very prevalent organisms back in the Paleozoic period of the ocean before
many of the fishes really took over as the main organisms of the ocean.
There are still nautiluses present today, though, as this one's swimming in the waters
off Palau in the South Pacific Shows, and it shows that jetting or pulsing of water
just like its close relatives, the squid, that just happened to not have that shell.
The most numerous nectonic species in the ocean by far are the fishes, in terms of number
of different species, and overall sort of adaptation success to all niches.
In fact, the fish are the most numerous vertebrates of all on the whole planet, in terms of sheer
numbers and of species.
There's 30,000 species and still counting of fish.
There are more species of fish, in fact, and individuals of fish overall than all other
vertebrates on the planet combined, including all the land vertebrates as well as us.
Well, fish dominate the necton, really, because of the fact that they are adapted to virtually
every niche in the ocean and virtually every habitat that's available in the ocean.
They're in all the zones of the ocean, pelagic and neuritic, surface to deep, benthic everywhere.
There's certainly much more numerous in the areas of very high productivity of the bases
of the food chain, the phytoplankton and the zooplankton that go along with them.
So they're most numerous by far in coastal areas and in surface waters of the ocean.
We're going to take a look at some different features of different species and types of
fish, but of course, what all fish have in common in particular are the existence of
fins or the evolution of fins for locomotion that are very well adapted to the particular
types of locomotion that a particular fish species needs to do, whether it's long-distance
high-speed travel like a tuna or a swordfish, or navigation in the complicated structures
of a reef like a parrotfish or an angelfish or something like that.
And they also have gills for respiration. All fish share the body structure known as gills.
Well, there are three major types of fish. The first is the jawless fishes, the hagfish
and lampraise. We're going to talk about them a little bit in a later lecture on benthic
organisms. And then the other two, the main two types that we'll consider in this lecture
are the cartilaginous fish and the bony fish. The cartilaginous fish called chondrichthes
and the bony fish called osteochthes. You can remember osteochthes because they're bony
and it's like osteoporosis and osteopath and words like that that make you think of bone.
And then you'll just have to remember chondrichthes based on the fact that they're different
from the bony fish and therefore cartilaginous. Well, let's take a look at the cartilaginous
fishes then because these are the oldest group of fishes evolutionarily. They've been
around for basically all of the 450 million years that fish have been on the planet. Evolved
first in the ocean before the bony fishes did. Now the chondrichthes or cartilaginous
fish include the rays, the skates and the sharks. Those are the main categories of them.
And as the name implies, they have no true bone in their skeleton. They only have cartilage
making up all of their actual sort of skeletal material. So it's certainly a fairly rigid
but still pliable and flexible to a much greater extent than mineralized bone. And it's mineralized
bone that's the distinction when we talk about bony fishes or other bony vertebrates such
as ourselves. We're mineralized too. Now, even shark scales are basically cartilaginous.
The scales actually include dentine, a substance similar to what makes your teeth hard and
that's why actually fish or shark skin is so rough and often causes abrasion and can
even be used as sort of a form of sandpaper because it has this relatively hard material
that's still, again, not the same as actual bone. Shark's teeth are very sharp and that's
not because they're bone though, that's still, they're a cartilaginous material but they
include more of that. They're actually modified scales and include some of that dentine as
well. So shark's teeth are fossilized and some of the few parts that actually remain
often of the sharks after they're fossilized but they have that capability that you've
probably heard where they come and rose in the shark and can be regenerated more or less
at will as they get lost. And of course, sharks feed by grabbing on large bites of mostly
larger organisms or bigger fish, marine mammals and things like that and using these serrated
rows of teeth to pull off big hunks of flesh which is probably why they're so frightening
to us, in fact. Most sharks actually bear live young, different from the bony fishes
and similar to the mammals although they're not mammals, of course. Now sharks have some
incredible senses and despite their relatively early adaptation or their early evolution
they've developed some phenomenally acute senses including some senses that are really
pretty unfamiliar to us. First of all, sharks clearly have excellent vision even in very
dim light. They swim and chase prey in the dimly lit waters of the deep euphotic zone
or the dysphotic zone so they have to be able to see things and see movement from very large
distances through the water and they can. They also have a sense of smell and taste that's
really highly developed and actually includes not just their noses or snouts but literally
their entire bodies. They have these organs that are called pit organs which are little
receptor cells, chemical receptors that are distributed over not just their face but their
entire body and they essentially taste or smell the water and can sense various kinds
of chemical signatures, smell traces of prey that they're interested in down to parts per
billion levels, really very tiny levels and can sense the direction of gradients of those
chemicals for example through use of these organs that are distributed over their body
to allow them to swim to and home in on an organism in the water. They have an even more
kind of amazing sense that is completely different from anything familiar to us. They have an
actual sense of electricity in a way. They can sense very weak electrical signals or
electrical currents through a set of organs that are called the ampuli of Lorenzini. What
a wonderful name and this person, Lorenzini, described these first in 1678. You can see
them as actual sort of pores or tiny holes distributed mostly on the snouts of sharks,
sharks and raisin skates and those have small fluid sacs in them that are basically sensitive
to electrical gradients or electrical voltages and so they can detect minute currents that
are perhaps related to even the motion of ocean currents in the earth's magnetic field that
can generate a weak electrical current and perhaps they use them for orientation or the
electrical signal associated with just the body, the metabolism of other organisms perhaps prey.
So these electro receptors are a whole sense that's completely unfamiliar to us here on the
land but are a major part of both shark orientation as well as predation. Well sharks really kind
of get a pretty bad name actually. We're afraid of sharks. There are a few sharks that actually
are known to attack human beings occasionally. They certainly don't make human beings a major
part of their food but great white sharks and mako sharks are ones that can be dangerous to
people perhaps because we thrash around in the water like a very sick swimmer. We're not very
effective, we're not very efficient swimmers so we perhaps look like an organism that's in distress
even when we're swimming well but the vast majority of sharks have no interest in predation on human
beings and in fact shark attacks are very rare. We are much more dangerous to the sharks than they
are to us because unfortunately the world has a taste for shark meat and in Asia shark fin soup
and shark populations are being decimated rapidly by overfishing and overconsumption as well as
in some cases just by killing them as a potential hazard to life. Many of the sharks are completely
docile and maybe one interesting one is the whale shark the largest living fish or the largest fish
that's extant in the ocean approaches the size of many of the whales. They can be as much as 15 meters
in length they weigh several tons and they are entirely filter feeders they don't eat anything
they don't predate on anything large in the ocean they open their large mouths and they just vacuum
up lots and lots of seawater sort of the way a baleen whale does but they filter it through their
gills and they have some structures in their gills that are called gill rakes these protrusions
across the gills that basically catch all the zooplankton phytoplankton that's filtering through
those gills they have to filter these at a rate of at a prodigious rate to get literally many hundreds
of kilograms of food per day they actually filter more than half a million gallons of water per hour
through their gills in order to feed you can swim with the whale sharks they're utterly harmless to
human beings. Well other chondrichthys include the raisin skates there are more than 450 species of
all of these most of them are basically benthic organisms and we'll look at them again when we
when we talk about benthic habitats living near the seafloor in both shallow water and deep water
they're again the largest of them the manta rays the very beautiful rays with their flat body plan
that seem to fly through the water are actually plankton feeders feeding in a similar way to the
to the whale sharks others are carnivorous and do eat small organisms seafloor organisms many of
the invertebrates and things like that some in a defensive way not as an attacking way on predators
have a tail with either a barbed stinger or even can produce electric shock as you know and there
are some skates that if you step on you'll get a you'll get a nasty sting from them but only
because the skate is basically trying to avoid being stepped on. Well okay so the bony fishes are the
most numerous fishes by far they've evolved later than the sharks and the other cartilaginous fishes
but they've radiated throughout the ocean and now represent at least 27,000 different species of
bony fishes probably with many more to be discovered as I said they're exquisitely well adapted for the
wide range of marine habitats they've adapted to a myriad of different forms and all land vertebrates
everything that lives on the land that has a spinal column evolved initially from bony fishes
so we're all we're all the product of evolution from these bony fishes
so there's a wide variety of examples halibut flounder herring seahorses a range of body
plans and that's that result of adaptation as I said so some are adapted in a streamlined torpedo
shape for fast swimming others are flat with a large dorsal area both eyes on top like flounder
and halibut because they're bottom scavengers and basically swim only around the bottom eating
what's in the mud other ones are laterally flat reef fish that are very thin looking but but
height and that's good for maneuverability in and among in and among all the corals of the reef
and things like that other open ocean fish are rounder to maintain buoyancy as they float along
the surface there's just a wide variety of different forms all basically adapted to particular
habitats and environments some of those key adaptations are streamline and shape we've
already talked about we'll talk about propulsion in just a second and also buoyancy or the maintenance
of level because fish need to to be buoyant gas exchange they need oxygen uh osmo regulation
they have to deal with saltiness and then feeding and defense which involves schooling behavior and
also the bioluminescence that I mentioned in the last lecture let's look at a few of these
different adaptations in a little bit more detail well first of all you know fish sink
they're new they're negatively buoyant they have bones they have body parts that are heavier than
water they're denser than seawater so they would sink so they basically have to adapt to that now
cartilaginous fish uh have no specific adaptation to this except that they must remain in motion
you've probably heard that a shark needs to continue swimming at all times and that's exactly
what they do they glide as though they're in flight their fins are shaped like airplane wings to provide
lift and so they must maintain their height in the water by continuously swimming or they would
simply settle to the bottom by contrast most bony fish the tiliosts as they're called which are
most of the osteicthies have swim bladders beneath their spinal column so these are little gas filled
chambers that can be delicately controlled by their metabolism muscles to compress them and
squeeze the gas out organs to release a little bit of gas from their respiratory functions into
these chambers to maintain neutral buoyancy so the fish can maintain a buoyancy level so they
don't have to swim at all and can stay at the same same height some of the very deep living
fishes that live at at high pressures in the abyssal realm have actually developed instead of gas
filled chambers they've developed oil filled buoyancy chambers or fatty tissues that are lighter
than water and so can maintain the level in the same sort of way as the gas bladders that most fish
have a second adaptation is osmoregulation all saltwater fish actually have body tissues that
are less saline than the seawater around them about half the salinity actually the seawater
around them so instead of 35 per mil about 18 per mil well so they need to find ways find strategies
to maintain that internal salinity which is just simply a balance that has evolved as an optimal
salinity for the kind of metabolic processes that their that their cells are carrying out all the
time since fish are hypotonic in this way basically water wants to osmose out to the to to equilibrate
with the surrounding seawater all the time save this problem of constant water loss through their
skin through their through their skin and scale structure so in order to offset that the fish
are constantly excreting salt as well in their bloodstream and through their their their kidney
like organs they excrete very high concentrations of salt so the urine is essentially very high
concentration concentrated brine or saltiness and they also employ active transport meaning
forced osmosis by biological processes pushing salt out through the membranes in their gills and
then excreting salt through the gills as well well fish also need to to breathe right their
consumers and they need to respire so how does a fish breathe they obviously don't breathe the air
like us but they still need oxygen and they need to get rid of carbon dioxide just like we do
well gills of course are the are the organs that that they breathe with and a gill is simply
basically a way to put a very large surface area of a thin cellular membrane where their bloodstream
can flow through these what are called gill membranes inside the gill arches and exchange gases with
dissolved oxygen in the water so the water carries a certain amount of dissolved O2 dissolved oxygen
and the blood flows through the gill are gill membranes one way the water flows past it in the
gills the other direction and exchange oxygen and there's very very large surface areas in this
sort of manifold structure of the gills in fact a mackerel that needs a lot of oxygen swim a lot
has a high metabolism has a gill surface area inside its gills that's 10 times the whole surface
area of the rest of its body actually we're the strange ones because it turns out that being
evolved from marine organisms we have to have a watery coating inside our lungs and we have to
get the oxygen that's in the air actually into solution in that watery system in our lungs and
then exchange it with the internal membranes okay well we talked about body shape and movement and
the primitive fishes like eels swim through the water in a sinuous motion they are sort of a
elongate but they don't have that optimal shape and they sinuously move through the water this
allows them to swim like a snake would would swim or crawl along the ground even but it doesn't
actually it isn't actually a very efficient way to get around and eels are not long distance
swimmers in general most tiliost fish most bony fish by contrast have that torpedo body plan but
also have an inflexible and highly muscular body so they can flat very hard in a hinged tail area
so just so the body basically stays moving straight while the tail moves back and forth you can see
that in the flopping of fish on a ship stack and that's an extremely efficient way to move forward
because it keeps the the the body shape moving through the water in just the right profile
to minimize turbulence while still allowing those powerful muscles to flap the fin back and forth
and and move the fish quickly well the last thing I want to discuss in this lecture is schooling
behavior of fish now fish have a very efficient means of of basically working together to appear
much larger and therefore more intimidating perhaps to predators and that is schooling of
course they school for safety the interesting things about a fish school and we can see in in
this beautiful video of fish schooling behaviors they seem to all turn as one in fact there's no
lead fish unlike many flocking birds but all the fish simply move in a way that seems almost like a
kind of a group mind and in order to actually carry out this schooling behavior they employ a
set of organs that we don't even have also as we watch this video you can see the dolphins
actually exploiting the fish's schooling behavior the fish's natural tendency to school
by herding them into a very tightly packed school that the dolphins will then will then feed on
we'll get to dolphins a little bit in the next lecture but let's take a look at the lateral line
structure that is the key to this schooling behavior in fact to a lot of fish behavior
along the sides of a fish's body there on both sides there's a line of special cells
that are special sort of nerve sensors these are an organ system that we don't share
they're tiny pressure sensors much like the pressure sensors I described at the bottom of
the ocean for tsunami but in the fish they sense minute movements of the water adjacent to the fish
that puts a little bit of pressure on those cells and sends a signal up to their to their
brains through the nerve endings in the lateral line organs and what those do of course is they
sense the movements of every fish around it in such a way that then through the lateral line organ
information they are coordinating their activity with all the fish that surround them on both
sides and so the school seems to move as one because every fish is sensing the motion of every
other fish in that school these tiny tiny motions that we of course would have no way of sensing
ourselves well we've taken a look very briefly and we could go on for a long time we could have
an entire course just about the interesting marine biology of the necton but we've looked at least
at at the most familiar sea creatures these invertebrates like squid and all the different
kinds of fishes from sharks to to tuna to seahorses and we've seen that they're the most numerous
and varied and exquisitely adapted animals on the planet so fish are the most successful
of the necton but of course there's a lot more than fish out there in the sea
so in the next lecture we're going to look at the other active swimmers of the ocean and large
organisms that really use the ocean as their fundamental habitat and lifestyle and that
includes the birds the reptiles and the mammals of the sea
