For the past few lectures now, we've focused on the biota that dwell in the open ocean,
the pelagic zone, but of course many, many marine organisms are tightly connected to
the bottom and even to the coast and the land.
So what we're going to do now is start to examine the benthic or bottom dwelling habitats
and ecosystems over the course of a series of lectures.
But first, what we need to do is understand the physical environment that those organisms
dwell in.
So let's turn to the coastlines, shorelines, estuaries, and the processes that govern the
existence of all these features where the sea really meets the land.
Well have you ever walked along a sandy beach maybe in Cape Cod or the outer banks of North
Carolina or conversely stood on a sea cliff or a promontory in say Oregon or Northern
California and watched the waves crash below and wondered how it all got that way.
Why does one landscape, one coastal landscape, look so dramatically different from another?
What is the kind of governing process that makes it such that we have areas with long
extended sandy beaches versus regions with rocky shorelines and very kind of craggy nature
to them?
Why is the shoreline so dramatically different in all these different locations?
In this lecture, I'm going to examine the processes that govern the range and variety
of these coastal environments.
I'll discuss how the characteristics of coasts are governed by a kind of a dynamic balance
between two fundamental sets of processes and we'll break them down as erosional processes
and depositional processes and in fact we'll define coasts as either erosion dominated
coasts or depositionally dominated coasts.
All of these processes basically result from the interplay of a few different key things.
One is sea level changes, the level of the sea at a given time and its motion up and
down as well as the short-term sea level changes like tidal range and things like that and
then plate tectonics, the movements of the land up and down and sediment transport or
the motion of sand and mud through the coastal environment.
All of these things are going to govern the nature and shape of many of the coastlines
of the world.
Well, if we want to talk about coastal processes, first we have to define some really basic
terms and maybe these are common everyday terms but let's get specific about them.
First of all the shore or the shoreline is the physical place where the ocean meets the
land, the location of interaction of the waves and the tides with the landscape.
On a sort of broader scale the coast or even the coastal zone to a ocean scientist more
typically would refer to the whole region of interaction between the two from some distance
above the high tide line perhaps including salt marshes, sand dunes, sea cliffs and the
region around the sea cliffs off to the immediate offshore region including things like sandbars
and channels just below the low tide line.
The coast is an active place.
It's subject to geological processes of both the land on the one hand and geological and
oceanographic processes of the sea.
It's a battleground between all of these forces and a dynamic balance in fact among all of
them.
First where basically nothing is static, the coast is constantly shifting and moving,
the material and sand is constantly shifting and yet maintains some level of equilibrium
that defines a particular sort of characteristic coastline for a given region.
First of all let's think about sea level and because the coast of course or the shoreline
itself is a kind of an arbitrary point, it's just where the water line happens to meet
the landscape and you might not think of it as very arbitrary, we can certainly think
of it being different when you're out of the water versus when you're in the water but
the position of the shoreline is determined by factors that change through time constantly
in fact.
One is tectonic activity or the lack thereof.
Does the landscape itself, does the crust of the earth move up and down usually over
relatively slow geologic time periods?
That can include motions due to actual tectonics, the movement of faults in the earth.
It can also include changes in the land level due to a process we call glacial rebound.
Areas that had large glaciers on top weighing down the land literally depressed the land
surface and since the glaciers melted off tens of thousands of years ago the land has
been slowly kind of springing back up just like a couch cushion you just sat down on
then got up and it springs back into place slowly.
In addition to sea level or an additional factor then governing sea level is the movement
and trapping of sediments.
So how are sediments moving around, building up piles, dunes and sandbars and things like
that perhaps coral sediments that help build up reefs that change the shoreline position
potentially and then most importantly perhaps or most rapidly changing in some ways is global
sea level and that is what we also call eustatic sea level and that's defined as the variation
in sea level that you can measure all over the world equally.
Now it turns out because of those things like tectonic changes we will also have to consider
local sea level change but for the moment let's just consider how global sea level,
eustatic sea level has changed over time and is changing today in fact.
Well if we look at a reconstruction of what sea level has been over the period throughout
the last few ice ages, the periods where the glaciers have grown and receded and taken
up lots of water into fresh water on the planet and cooled the planet off and then melted
out and the planet warmed up again.
Over the past 250,000 years sea level has ranged from the present day level to as much
as 125 meters lower about 18,000 years ago for example at the height of the last glaciation
to as much as 6 meters higher than the present day when things were melted a little bit more
than they are today in fact and the earth was a little bit warmer.
So sea level has fluctuated up and down on a geologic time frame quite rapidly over this
span of about 130 meters or so.
The recent level is near the highest it ever is actually or it has been during at least
the past 250,000 years so we're in a relatively warm period and the ocean as we'll see not
only gets more water in it from the melting of the ice caps but also expands due to the
extra heat in the ocean, we'll examine that in a later lecture.
So sea level changes over time and that means that the position of the shoreline changes
over time.
I discussed the continental shelves earlier on and this continental shelf is essentially
the region that is where the shoreline passes back and forth as the glaciers come and go.
So if we look at the position of the likely continental shelf 18,000 years ago at the peak
of the last ice age for example the Florida peninsula would have been a much broader region
and the shoreline would have been much further offshore relative to today.
Shoreline has moved over that period since about 10,000 years ago when the glaciers receded
to reach the present day shoreline and they've been rapidly changing over millennia over
periods of thousands of years.
And so shorelines change in response to rising and falling sea level.
In fact if we look even further back in geological time before there were any glaciers on the
planet or even ice caps in the Arctic and Antarctic regions then sea level was actually
much higher.
There would be something like a 60 meter rise of sea level if we melted the entire Arctic
ice caps or polar ice caps off the planet.
Now that's not likely to happen very quickly but it's possible at current rates of few
centuries in the future we would see 60 meters of sea level rise.
That would make the coastlines look very different still.
Large parts of the Florida peninsula would be missing completely with 60 meters of sea
level rise.
Now the long term you static sea level actually gets complicated because not only does the
sea level rise relative to the land but the land doesn't stay in one place and even the
volume of the ocean can change if the mid ocean ridges are more productive that raises
the sea floor for example.
We won't get into that level of complications.
The point is that sea level goes up and down over a variety of different time scales some
quite short.
Well all of these features then govern the erosional and depositional coasts of the planet
and so I'm like to walk through the differences and the forces that shape these two kinds
of coastlines.
So first the erosional coasts.
Erosional coasts are any coasts that are dominated by the breakdown of rock and the creation
of sediment, the sort of active modification of the rocky landscape of the planet.
And so the mechanical force of the surf pounding on the coastal rocks, the hydraulic pressure
driving water into the cracks in those rocks and in fact the abrasion by the sand and gravel
and even boulders that that water carries is the main agent of change for erosional coastlines.
And even beyond that actually biological activity is part of the story too.
The force of trees get down into the cracks in the rocks and break them down and make
them more susceptible to erosion.
Boring organisms, not boring as in dull, but organisms that bore into the rock like clams
and things like that can break down the rock as well.
All of this has an effect on erosional coasts and we see the kind of power of the sea breaking
down the coastline in this photograph that I took myself actually standing on the cliffs
40 or 50 feet above the shoreline, above the surf level near Bandon, Oregon and just
watch these enormous pacific swells coming down from the Gulf of Alaska pounding into
the rocks and you really can literally feel up through your feet the vibrations of the
strength of that hydraulic force of the ocean.
Well so the erosion by the surf then undercuts those sea cliffs, undercuts the rocks and erodes
them back irregularly at first, building these very irregular shorelines, very craggy
and complicated shaped shorelines.
That erosion process typically happens in a specific way, maybe when the waves aren't
quite so enormous as the pounding waves in that last photograph, but the waves come in
and at the sort of mid to high tide level they keep cutting in and eroding notches and
even sea caves at the base of the cliffs.
Those undercut the cliffs, the cliffs keep collapsing into the water and so the erosion
takes place right at the level of the kind of the strongest wave action in that intertidal
zone and cuts back and forth.
And so it typically makes something called a wave cut platform within the tidal range,
a flat region of bare rock that has been chopped out by the waves.
And we can see this wave cut platform or sometimes called marine terrace exposed at the low tide,
especially at very low tides as shown in this image, but then at high tide that's actively
being down cut by the present day sea level.
And since sea level goes up and down, it will make these specific wave cut platforms in
different regions, cutting the cliffs back and adding sediment to the sea, which will
ultimately then move around and form beaches and things like that.
So if we look at a typical erosional coast, we see some basic features of it.
We see the sea cliffs themselves with their active wave cut platform at the base and then
the sediment that's produced on those will start to fill in some of those areas with
what are called exposed beaches or sometimes pocket beaches if they fill in little pocket
areas.
There are headlands of the rock areas that are out beyond the beach where it's just rock
and sea and sometimes those headlands are eroded around and behind and actually left behind
out offshore as what are called sea stacks, these big rocks, rock promontories jutting
out of the ocean, but now no longer connected to the land, at least not at high tide levels.
So this image actually comes from a region near Melbourne, Australia, a region called
the 12 Apostles for the 12 large sea stacks that were there, although now there's apparently
only 11 as one of the large Apostles collapsed just in recent years, a multi-story building
level rock.
Now that's just an indication of the rapidity and the strength of these processes of erosion
going on on erosional coasts.
So if we look at areas around the world of strongly erosional coasts, we see these very
active promontories of headlands of rock with a sort of cuspate pockets that will develop
beaches in between them.
Sometimes when tectonic activity is strong and the land is actively being uplifted by
the motion of faults, we actually see what are called abandoned wave cut platforms.
In this photograph you can see the kind of flat terraced area on top of the sea cliff
region before the mountains.
That is the old wave cut platform from the last time sea level was at a high stand and
the sea receded, it abandoned that platform, the land continued to come out, so when the
sea came back in then it started cutting a new one and that one is left behind as a legacy
of a previous geological era.
Well we talked in another lecture about wave refraction and so let's remember how wave
refraction actually bends the waves in to focus their energy to attack the headlands
and then actually focuses their energy away from the gentle sort of dissipated waves in
the bays and so these cuspate bays are areas where waves are less strong and so sediment
tends to fall out of the water, it deposits sediment in the bays producing the kind of
pocket beaches while it focuses its energy, keeps the sediment in suspension abrading
and breaking down the rocks of the headlands.
And this way we get the pocket beaches forming and then given enough time, coasts that are
craggy and erosional coasts will slowly develop more and more sediment, kind of straighten
out, the headlands will be broken down, the beaches will get bigger and bigger and we
develop towards the long extended beaches we see on more depositional coastlines or more
sort of mature in some sense coastlines.
Well we can also have erosional coasts that are built up a little bit differently and
it's less obvious maybe that this is from erosion but there are coasts that are shaped
by land erosion and what I mean by that is that when the sea level stand was lower so
during the glacial periods and the shoreline was out near the edge of the present day continental
shelf then rivers would cut down through the landscape and cut river valleys.
Well ultimately if sea level rises again so these regions that were produced by terrestrial
or on land erosion get flooded by the influx of the sea again and so we see these flooded
or drowned river valleys that make up many areas especially of the east coast of North
America and other parts of the world.
So like the Chesapeake and Delaware bays or the Hudson River Valley are all examples of
flooded river valleys.
These are really erosion dominated processes on that particular part of the coastline but
it's really the land erosion that we see as the dominant process and then the sea is just
reflutting that.
The most dramatic example perhaps of that kind of erosional process is the development
of fjords places like Norway and Alaska and New Zealand where we see you know dramatic
glacially cut valleys from the large glaciers that were present during the ice ages and
they carve out these deep channeled valleys with the glaciers and then glaciers receded
sea level rose it inundates the valleys often putting deep water sea water into these very
steeply sided essentially land erosion dominated valleys.
The land is actually moving vertically upward even as the sea flows in because of that postglacial
rebound that I described a few minutes ago.
And so we see coastlines that are incredibly convoluted and craggy like the southern part
of the South Island of New Zealand where famous place called Milford Sound is that many people
have seen perhaps on tourist trips but where many many tens of miles inland you can see
these large ocean fjords going into the into the coastline carving it up.
Well from our erosional coast then let's turn to depositional coasts and these are regions
where the net accumulation and movement of the sediment shapes the fundamental sort of
morphology of the coastal area.
So this is really about the transport of sand and mud and the coastal environment is defined
by and dominated by the distribution of those kinds of sediments.
So we have the deposition of beaches and barrier islands and all of the different sandbars
and spits and things like that that are associated with sand transport along a depositional coast.
So in the absence of ongoing tectonic activity or big scale glacial rebound major sea level
changes erosional coasts will tend to evolve into depositional coasts and that's essentially
what we've seen with large parts of the coastal the eastern coast of North America.
The long sandy beaches are the process fundamentally of deposition of sand.
Well so let's take a look at the beach the beach itself you go out to the beach and you
look around and maybe you just lie on the sand and stare at the waves and don't want
to think about too much.
And next time you go to the beach let's look for some of the fundamental features of what
the beach morphology actually is.
Basically we break the beach down into a series of regions that are dependent on the general
sea level and where the wave action occurs and then where the high tide and low tide
lines mark it.
So we have the the the near shore region which is offshore where the breakers are where the
waves are actively breaking on the beach further out we'll just call the offshore beyond
essentially the the low tide where the water depth gets significantly greater than the
low tide level.
Go through the near shore region and the waves break on the beach the part of the beach
that is actively washed back and forth by waves in any typical kinds of of weather and
tides is called the foreshore region.
So the foreshore and then the foreshore is is then backed by what we call the back shore
region.
And the boundary between the foreshore and the back shore is the upper limit of basically
the sort of the highest high tide wave action perhaps associated with the strongest winter
storms that are still common that will produce an area called the beach berm.
In fact there can be several beach berms sometimes there's a higher beach berm that is the break
and slope between the sort of the steeply sloping foreshore where the waves are washing back
and forth and the more gently sloping back shore the highest beach berm might be produced
by the largest recent major winter storm or something like that and then there can be
a second beach berm which might be just the sort of the the one associated with the most
recent few tidal cycles or wave action that's been going on in recent days on a given beach.
So we break the beach down then into these different regions and then in the back shore
region basically instead of wave dominated or water dominated processes sediment transport
is taken over by wind dominated and land dominated processes.
So the sand may reach the the beach berm it dries out it's not getting wetted anymore
because it's at the high winter berm or the high storm berm and then it'll get blown off
of there and of course form sand dunes and things like that.
But we often see a very prominent break in the kind of the slope of the beach that defines
that beach berm.
Equally offshore we see a region where sand is being actively transported back and forth
and sometimes mud as well so finer grained material.
So the waves are washing back and forth and they have a turbulent action right on the
on the foreshore region and as they the water swashes back down into the near shore it'll
often build there's a little bit of a foreshore terrace sort of a flat spot and you often find
this if you walk out into the water right it's flat and then it drops off into a long shore
trough and that's just a trough that runs along the length of the shoreline where the
turbulent action of the water flowing back to the ocean digs out the sand a little bit
and piles it up into a longshore bar so you'll walk out in the water it gets deeper and all
of a sudden you find yourself standing in only ankle deep water on top of that longshore
bar.
Not every beach has every one of these elements but this is sort of the you know the composite
of typical sandy beaches in various regions really around the world and that region where
we see the the the longshore troughs and bars really is from sort of mean sea level down
to the low tide region.
So if you walk on the beach look for the beach berm or look for the beach berm see if you
can see a sort of a higher winter berm and a lower summer berm notice that slope difference
between the foreshore and the back shore look at how the dunes are dominated by wind processes
and perhaps have started to have some vegetation growing on them.
If you look at examples from aerial photography of various beaches around where you see beautiful
examples of this from from all over the place barrier islands on the east coast of the U.S.
or perhaps this beach in Kenya where you can see the berm line in the middle of the sand
just as an absolutely extremely well-defined line defining the difference between the foreshore
where the waves are swashing and then the back shore and the berm line can actually be the
highest point on the beach with the beach actually dropping off behind it.
The dune field here is well developed and also begun to be stabilized by vegetation growing
on that dune field as well.
Even behind the dunes then we'll often see a lagoonal area a lower area where the sand
now is not piled up anymore lower elevation and perhaps if the ocean is is breaking through
in different channels that are cutting across the entire beach region they'll fill water
in behind the beach into a lagoon.
Well sand moves up and down the beaches in very specific directions and there's a very
important process that is actually continuously transporting sand and sediment along a beach.
So the sand on a given beach in one year is not the same sand literally as it was in the
past year or as it will be in the next year even if the beach looks virtually the same.
There's a dynamic balance of sand moving through that system and that's due to a process called
long shore drift.
Basically the process is very simple waves generally don't approach the beach head on
they usually approach from some angle and in most parts of the world there's sort of
a prevailing wind and wave direction.
In North America both East Coast and West Coast we see waves approaching sort of from
northerly directions so in the Northeast they come the waves come from the Northeast
from the North Atlantic.
So what they do then is the waves approach from this oblique direction.
When they wash sand up the beach the sand goes along with the waves right up the beach
at a sort of diagonally angle.
The water that rushes down the beach doesn't rush down the same direction it came up of
course it rushes down the beach because of gravity so gravity pulls it straight down
the beach face and so the backwash the swash in is diagonally up the beach the backwash
is directly sort of downslope and so you get a kind of a zigzag pattern that gradually
transports sand along the beach from North to South in North America really on both coast
typically.
There's also a current offshore we call the longshore current that is from somewhat the
same thing the oblique approach of waves and the way they break along the beach produces
water moving in the near shore offshore region laterally along the beach in the same direction
as the longshore drift and carving out in part that longshore trough and moving sediment
laterally along the beach and so when you feel those strong sort of currents when you're
playing in the waves that are pulling you along the beach you're feeling the longshore
current and in fact the longshore drift.
Well sediment transport by this longshore drift and the presence of storms especially
that move a lot of sediment produce some very distinctive features that we see along the
coastlines of the world.
As the sediment transport comes along and beaches perhaps have a little bit of you know
embayments and headlands and things like that we will see the longshore drift moving
sediment along.
In some cases that longshore bar the sand that is moved offshore being deposited just
outside the region where wave bases or where waves are breaking builds up so high that
it becomes what we would call subareally exposed meaning exposed as new land or as a sand bar
that's above at least low tide if not all tidal levels so that those sand bars can gradually
turn into actual barrier islands you know the long extended islands that lie just off
the sort of main coastline that dominate many regions of depositional coasts.
Even less well developed perhaps than barrier islands but very important is that the sand
that's drifting along the coast with the longshore drift if it reaches an embayment or something
like that a bay or a river mouth then it reaches a point where the water gets a little deeper
the wave action is a little less strong and so a lot of that sediment will be dropped
out of suspension and deposited as things like sand spits and sand bars that partially
cover those or even completely cover those river mouths and harbor areas.
So we can see some examples we can see lots of examples if you look around in satellite
photography here's one from Wilmington North Carolina where you see the river entering
the ocean and the sand hook or sand spit extending from the north part of the way across the
river mouth and often these have to actually be dredged out you can even see the sediments
from the river being pushed out into the open ocean.
So the sand spits are very well developed feature due to that deposition at the mouth
of the river.
Barrier islands are incredibly well developed around the east and gulf coasts of the U.S.
Galveston Island Texas is a classic example of a barrier island system with a well developed
sandy island the island has no rocky underpinnings whatsoever it's simply a sand bar with a slack
water lagoon in behind it and some inlet channels that allow this the high tide and storm waters
to flow back and forth.
As we'll see later with hurricanes in extreme storms this becomes you know a real problem
when the whole barrier island can be potentially overwashed by the sea.
One more example North Carolina barrier islands the outer banks region and all of the regions
actually from you know the the eastern shores of Maryland Virginia on down are just dominated
by these extensive barrier island systems that are all offshore bars that are created
by the longshore drift.
The fact that they're created by the longshore drift means that they're not static in place
at all the sand first of all is moving into them on a literally annual basis and out of
them on an annual basis and they're moving back and forth with changes in sea level so
over geological time since the last or over say the last 10,000 years as sea level has
come up since the last ice age the barrier islands have been moving steadily towards
the shoreline in a later lecture we'll look at the present day effects of some of those
changes and we'll look at the present day effects of human interactions in the form
of trying to stabilize these these barrier islands that really want to be in motion.
Well some of the features of barrier islands then are are really clear if you look at them
from the air but also clear if you're looking at them on the ground so if we look at any
of the typical east coast barrier islands of the U.S. we see the beach the dune fields
and then behind them we usually see a broad and extremely low elevation marsh salt marsh
and tidal flat region often these extend over you know many square miles of region eventually
grading out into an actual saltwater lagoon or perhaps even brackish water lagoon before
you reach the mainland itself.
One interesting feature of beaches in general if you go to many places around the world
especially beaches with coarse sediments on them so very large sand grains maybe small
pebbles and rocks as opposed to sort of fine light sand you see that the beach tends to
have a steeper slope to the ocean on those coarse sandy beaches the water can infiltrate
the beach and drain right into the beach more easily on these beaches so the swash brings
sediment up but instead of running back down the beach it tends to just percolate into
this coarse sand and so the beach develops a steeper face.
On many of those steep face beaches we see a very regular pattern of what are called
beach cusps these cuspate almost rhythmic looking in terms of how regularly spaced they
are patterns on the beach of small very small just a foot high or inches high promontories
and depressions it turns out that the formation of these beach cusps and the regular spacing
is kind of enigmatic there are a number of theories about how they might have formed
but it's not clear that any of them really answer the question once they get formed you
can see how they continue to develop because the cusps themselves actually divide the waves
through the kind of wave refraction process but the initiation of these beach cusps is
a mystery to science even today on the other hand they're there and so we have to find
some way to account for them.
Well US coastal areas then are fundamentally controlled by large scale processes and so
we can really place this erosional and depositional coastline into a framework of tectonics.
So the pacific coast of the continental US and in fact of Alaska is dominated by the fact
that it's an active tectonic margin it's a region where plates are converging or moving
past each other so the effects of that recent tectonic activity render it erosion dominated.
By contrast the Atlantic coast is a passive continental margin remember that the plate
boundary is way out the mid-atlantic ridge and there's no boundary between the ocean
plate and the land plate and so it's depositional dominated except for those flooded valleys
which are sort of a special case.
The Gulf Coast similarly is a region that is smaller wave sizes it's an enclosed basin
it's a passive continental margin and so it's also a depositional dominated coastline.
Well to sum up then erosional depositional and sediment transport processes work together
to produce all of the characteristic coastlines of the world.
Now there's a few types of coastlines that we haven't really examined yet including ones
that are dominated by biology in some way coral reefs, mangrove forests and things like that.
We're going to take a look at those a little later on.
In the next lecture what we're going to do is really take this one step further and we've
come all the way to the coastline we've seen how the sea interacts with the land right
at the beach and right at the cliffs but we'll examine the locations where actually the fresh
water the water from the rivers comes in and meets the sea.
So the next lecture is really where the rivers meet the sea.
