Now we're ready to enter a whole new chapter in the course, the ocean in motion.
We've dealt with the ocean basins and the life that inhabits them, but we've treated
the water statically.
Water, of course, is a fluid medium, and it's constantly in motion, and even more
than that, it's in motion in very different ways than just the waves and tides tsunami
that we've already seen, the wave-like motions that transport energy around the planet, but
don't move very much water, because they don't cause the large-scale global transport of
the water that mixes the ocean over long time scales.
But ocean currents do exactly that, so we're going to take up the great surface and eventually
deep water currents that stir up the sea.
But in order to do that, we have to actually step even further out above the skin of the
ocean and talk about the atmosphere for one lecture.
And the reason we have to do this is that the atmosphere and oceans are intimately linked
in how they move.
The ocean wouldn't be in motion, it turns out, if it weren't for atmospheric motions
and the wind blowing across the sea, just as the wind moves the waves, we will see that
the wind drives the surface currents of the ocean.
So just as we had to look at the kind of underpinnings of the ocean basin and step back and look
at the earth and the geological cycles and plate tectonics, now we also have to look
at this outer skin of the planet as a whole.
It's a water planet, but that's partly because it has an atmosphere and an atmosphere that
moves around and transports heat on the surface.
So the atmosphere and ocean are linked in a couple of specific ways.
And one is the uneven distribution of heat on the planet, as we'll see, and then how
that is modified by this mysterious thing that I've mentioned a couple of times now
called the Coriolis effect, because that affects all movements on the earth as it rotates on
its axis.
So let's take a look at atmospheric flow.
Well first of all, what is the atmosphere?
It's air, right?
What is air?
Well, air is a gas and it's made up of actually a fairly simple composition of a few gases.
If we take dry air and leave the water vapor out, we'll put that back in in a second, then
air is basically 78% nitrogen.
It's mostly nitrogen, 21% oxygen, about 1% argon, and the rest is just in vanishingly
small amounts.
There's not much carbon dioxide, it's just a small fraction of 1%.
And then various other elements of the gases.
So basically it's nitrogen and oxygen.
Air can also hold water vapor though, and up to actually 4% by volume.
So a significant component, the largest component after the nitrogen and oxygen, is water vapor.
And this is from evaporation off the surface, both land, but actually dominantly off the
surface of the sea, since the ocean is most of the surface of the planet.
Well, air density varies, and so we have to take that into account because what moves
the atmosphere around are basically differences in density that then are set in motion by
gravity and by differences in pressure.
So density of the atmosphere decreases with altitude.
The higher you go up in the atmosphere, as we'll see, the gases are less compressed
and therefore less dense.
Warm air is less dense than cold air, so density varies with temperature.
Think of a hot air balloon, we heat up the air and it expands, but it also rises specifically
because it's less dense, so therefore it's buoyant through the colder air around it.
Maybe counter-intuitively, humid air, air with water vapor in it, air with more water
vapor in it, is actually less dense than dry air.
We think of a humid day as a heavy air kind of day, but that's just the feeling it gives
us from feeling overheated.
Air with more water vapor in it is less dense because H2O, the molecule, is a lighter molecule
than the nitrogen or just oxygen O2 gas that makes up the rest of the air.
So a particular volume of air at a particular pressure has a certain number of molecules
of gas in it, and water vapor is a lighter gas than those other ones.
So the more humidity air has, actually, the less dense it is, and the more it will rise
through the other air.
And also, interestingly, warm air can hold more water vapor than cold air can.
So warm air is already less dense, and then if it's more humid or holding more water vapor,
it becomes even more pronounced in its difference in density with colder, drier air that's around
it.
Well we've talked about density, but we usually think about air in terms of pressure, and
so we have to understand the pressure in the atmosphere.
First of all, you know that the pressure is apparently 15 pounds per square inch down
here at sea level, or what we just call one atmosphere or one bar, or sometimes a thousand
millibars if we're meteorologists.
So that pressure is due to the weight of the entire column of air from sea level up to
the top of the atmosphere.
It's about one kilogram per square centimeter.
That's the same as the 15 pounds per square inch.
But that air column, of course, you know, is lighter and lighter as you go higher up
in the atmosphere.
So the pressure decreases as we go up.
Well the gas, the air that's present, then when pressure is reduced, if you look at a
gas higher and higher up in the atmosphere, it expands because the pressure becomes lower.
And if it expands, that actually causes it to cool off.
We have that reduction in temperature from the expanded gas.
The molecules aren't as close together.
The heat energy is spread out over a larger area.
That means a lower temperature.
Conversely, it contracts and also warms when pressure is increased.
So the higher the pressure, the warmer the air gets.
Well because of the ability of warm air to hold more water vapor than cool air then also
when warm humid air forms at the surface, say just above the sea in the tropical regions,
then it starts to rise because of its lower density.
It rises up to the upper atmosphere, it expands, it cools off, it then is able to hold less
water vapor in gaseous form and it tends to form droplets so we get clouds and ultimately
rainfall out of rising warm air that expands in the upper parts of the atmosphere.
So that's sort of the fundamentals in a nutshell of the atmospheric part of the hydrological cycle.
Well heat distribution on the Earth then you can probably see is going to be important
in terms of understanding what happens to air masses or what happens to the air in the
atmosphere and then ultimately how that impacts the ocean and the flow in the ocean and the
movement of water around on the surface of the planet.
So let's take a look at the heating of the surface of the planet.
Now the Earth has geothermal energy and heat comes out of the interior of the Earth but
that's quite minor, that's a tiny fraction of the amount of energy at the surface of
the Earth relative to the amount that's coming from solar heating.
The sun shines on the Earth, that's what heats things up.
We don't think of our climate as being driven by the heat from the ground, it's driven
by the heat from the sun.
That heating is uneven.
Uneven heating from the sun basically warms up the equatorial regions much more than it
warms up the polar regions.
Maybe that's fairly obvious, we think of the tropics as warm and the poles as cool but
that drives a circulation of the air in the atmosphere.
So equal amounts of sunlight might shine on all different parts of the Earth but they
shine more directly on the equatorial and tropical regions shining straight at the
Earth and shine more obliquely as we approach the poles because the surface of the Earth
is curved and the sun is often in some direction relative to being essentially perpendicular
to the pole of rotation of the Earth.
So you get a sort of oblique sunlight which is more easily reflected away in the polar
regions, there's also more ice near the poles, that reflects more of the solar energy that
reaches the surface there.
So if you think about it you wonder maybe why is the equatorial region hotter than the
polar region but that's because of the direct heating of the sun versus the very oblique
heating of the sun in the polar regions or in the far latitudes north and south.
So the effect is a net heat gain and a surplus of heat in the tropics and a net heat deficit
in the polar areas.
The uneven heating of the Earth, the imbalance of that heating on the surface of the planet
then creates this surplus of heat, lack of heat in the polar regions and the air starts
to move in order to redistribute that heat.
There's a net transfer of heat poleward from the equatorial regions that kind of evens
out this very uneven insulation or sun shining and heating of the Earth at the start.
If there wasn't any movement in the atmosphere the poles would be much much much colder and
the equatorial regions would be much much much hotter than they are actually on our
planet today.
Well there's one more little bit of complication to that story which is of course that the
Earth's axis isn't just perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic and to the direction
of the sun, it's tilted by 23 degrees.
And so we have summer and winter, we have periods of the year where the northern hemisphere
is tilted towards the sun and periods of the year where the southern hemisphere is tilted
towards the sun.
That changes that obliquity angle and so there are of course some times of the year where
the polar region in the north doesn't get any direct sunshine at all and conversely
six months later the southern hemisphere Antarctica doesn't get any direct sunshine at all, we
have periods of darkness.
So that's an uneven heating seasonally that warms the northern hemisphere and southern
hemisphere at different times of the year.
That's the cause of the seasons, remember seasons aren't because we get closer to the
sun and further away, they're because of the angle that the Earth makes with the direction
to the sun.
Well so we can think of a sort of a hypothetical atmospheric circulation on Earth due to this
uneven solar heating only.
You would have rising warm presumably humid air from evaporation at the tropical regions
that would rise up to the upper atmosphere, it would spread towards the polar regions
and then it would get colder as it goes to the upper atmosphere and moves towards the
poles and then descend back again because the cold air at the poles would become denser
and warmer so you'd have descending air near the poles and then flowing back perhaps along
somewhere down near the ground surface from the polar regions back towards the tropical
regions back towards the equatorial regions.
So this would form a kind of a giant convection cell in each hemisphere much like convection
in a pot of boiling water or maybe more precisely or more aptly, imagine a room that has nothing
in it except a radiator on one side of the room and a cold window on the other side of
the room, warm air rises off the radiator, would spread over the top, the ceiling of
the room until it got near the cold window which would cool it back down and that would
cause that cold air to fall and sink and so you'd get a convection current or a convection
cell forming inside that room.
Well it turns out that these giant hypothetical convection cells on earth really don't exist
and they don't exist because there's one more really important complicating factor and that
is the Coriolis effect.
First described by Gustav de Coriolis in 1835, we have the fact that the earth is rotating
modifying any flow of anything, in fact any freely moving object on the earth doesn't
flow in a kind of nice simple direction the way we would maybe like it to, especially
if we're in a freshman physics course or something like that.
So everything on earth that's in motion is fundamentally affected by the fact that the
earth is rotating and it's rotating in a specific direction, it's rotating always eastward.
So the Coriolis effect deflects objects, let's take a look at how that works.
First of all let's imagine a kind of analogy to the planet, something simpler like a merry-go-round
on a children's playground with some kids sitting on it and they're trying to throw
a ball back and forth to each other.
So the merry-go-round starts to spin so they're in a spinning reference frame, a rotating
reference frame.
If one throws the ball then the ball already has the angular momentum, the speed of the
merry-go-round so it will fly across to the other side but of course during the time that
it flies across to the other side then the merry-go-round continues to move.
So to an observer that's outside looking down from the top or something like that you can
see that the ball flies in a straight line path but to the kids who are on the merry-go-round
when the ball is thrown it looks like it veers off to one side, it veers off in one direction
and flies in a sort of strange unexpected path, it makes it hard to actually catch the
ball right, it's not going where you expect it to.
So that rotational effect on the path of a moving object is exactly what's happening
on the earth.
The earth is spinning on its axis and the earth is fat in the middle, the largest diameters
at the equator and then if you think about the way it's rotating then if you imagine
a sort of imaginary disk at a constant line of latitude through the earth any particular
place of different lines of latitude the further north or the further south you go from the
equator is spinning around a smaller distance, go all the way to the north pole and things
are literally just turning around you know a very tiny little circle perhaps just inches
away from the north pole it's just inches long but it takes 24 hours to go all the way
around one full turn no matter where you are on earth.
So the upshot of that is then that a place that's far to the north let's say Madison
Wisconsin is rotating through a much smaller circle and with a smaller velocity than a
place on the equator somewhere.
So we're moving at different speeds depending on where we are north or south on the planet.
What that means is that a moving object is deflected in particular direction because apparently
deflected to people on the surface of the earth much like the merry-go-round because
of those different velocities.
So if I'm standing there in Madison Wisconsin and I happen to have an intercontinental ballistic
missile at my disposal and I get angry at one of my colleagues in South America somewhere
on the equator then I launch my ICBM.
If I launch it directly due south at a place that's due south of where I'm located well
it won't land there because during the time it's in motion the equatorial region will
move further eastward than I will at my sort of high northern latitude spot 43 degrees north
or so.
So it will apparently look like it's veering off to the right as it moves southward.
So in that case it would be veering off to the west.
If instead the ICBM was launched the other direction it would also look like it veered
off to the right because that missile would have that angular momentum move further eastward
than the part to the north of it.
And so you have materials that in the northern hemisphere always look like they're veering
to the right due to the Coriolis effect on these moving objects.
In the southern hemisphere the effect is the same but opposite so everything looks like
it deflects to the left.
So if you're moving from south to north in the northern hemisphere it goes eastward
but of course if you're moving from north to south it's still to the right and that
means it deflects westward.
Now interestingly the Coriolis effect is zero at the equator.
If you're absolutely perfectly on the equator and move in a direction that's right along
the equator there is no Coriolis effect and in general the Coriolis effect is relatively
weak when you're near the equatorial regions.
This is going to be really important for understanding the flow of air and water.
It's strongest near the poles due to the rapid change in the amount of that rotational velocity.
Well the air in motion then in the atmosphere is affected by the Coriolis effect as well.
So as the air rises let's say in the tropical and equatorial regions from the rising phenomenon
that I've already described it moves forward but it's deflected to the right in the northern
hemisphere and to the left in the southern.
And so it doesn't make it all the way to the poles, it makes it up a certain distance
and it gets cold enough and then the air starts to sink again.
North of that then there's actually another system like that that gets set up from cool
air sinking and warm air rising.
And so the atmosphere is broken down into or is sort of develops a number of different
circulation cells.
They're driven by convection it's just they're not as simple as without the Coriolis effect.
And so we basically can break down circulation on the planet into some very large well-developed
cells that have actually been given specific names because they're persistent on the surface
of the planet.
From the equator to about 30 degrees north latitude and 30 degrees south latitude are
the kind of symmetrical Hadley cells.
From 30 degrees to 60 degrees north they're the ferrule cells and then above 60 all the
way to 90 degrees north or 90 degrees south are the polar cells.
So 30 degree divisions, three parts in each hemisphere, six sets of cells overall kind
of govern the generalized airflow pattern in the planet.
We call these atmospheric circulation cells, the Hadley cells, the ferrule cells and the
polar cells.
Well, the cells themselves then are airflow and so part of the cells that are at low altitude,
the parts of the cells that are along the surface of the earth are the prevailing winds.
They're given the names of specific kinds of winds because they're typical winds that
flow to move the air to fulfill the circulation, the convection circulation in these cells
and then there's also upper atmospheric flow that goes along with it to keep the cells moving.
So the subtropical trade winds, the temperate westerlies and the polar easterlies are all
the low altitude arms of these major atmospheric cells.
Well, what is wind?
I just started talking about wind.
Now wind, well we know what it feels like when the wind blows, what's making the wind
blow?
Well, it's blowing because of pressure differences.
Simple as that, air simply flows from zones of high pressure to zones of low pressure.
So when you see the weather report, you see them talking about a high pressure cell or
a low pressure cell, if you know that there's a high pressure region nearby, especially
coming into your area, then you're likely in for a windy day because that air is going
to flow out of that high pressure region to any lower pressure region.
The rising warm and humid air creates a low pressure.
The sinking cold and dry air creates a high pressure.
So that drives, for example, the sinking cold air that's moved eastward is now coming back
towards the rising warm tropical air that's moving westward and so we have the trade winds.
We have the air circulation in the subtropical regions that moves from the east, from the
northeast towards the southwest.
So where air is ascending and descending between the cells, then we have a different
condition because we actually have regions where calm air prevails, where winds aren't
strong.
These prevailing strong trade winds or westerlies that are associated with the interiors of
the Hadley and Ferrell cells, we instead have regions that we call the intertropical convergence
zone, ITCZ, or maybe more poetically the equatorial doldrums.
When we're in the doldrums, we're in regions of calm air where nothing much is happening.
These are the places where the warm humid air is ascending.
Most of the airflow is relatively slow but it's mostly vertical and so instead of feeling
strong prevailing winds, we just feel sort of calm air.
There are also regions that have heavy rainfall because that warm humid air is dropping a lot
of water vapor as it gets aloft, as it gets high.
Similarly, then the boundary between the Hadley and Ferrell cells around 30 and 35 degrees
north, right in that region around that 30 degree north band, lies something that are
called the horse latitudes, you've probably heard of them, a place where the cool dry
air descends.
On land this produces very persistent high pressure zones that tend to be very dry.
The big deserts of the world virtually all lie in this 30 to 35 degree north or south
belt, the Sahara or the Gobi Desert in Asia, some of the driest places on earth.
In the ocean it produces areas where the winds are calm and the salinity can be high because
there's very little rainfall.
The name horse latitudes actually is a Mariner's term and at least lore, it's not completely
clear whether it's true or not, lore suggests that they're called the horse latitudes because
during big ocean crossings in the days of sailing there would be areas both in the northern
and southern hemisphere where ships would become be calmed for long periods of time.
If they were transporting horses then they needed to keep the horses watered, water was
a scarce commodity on a ship in those days and so sometimes they couldn't afford to keep
the horses and would literally toss them overboard in an effort to basically be humane
to the horses that were going to die of thirst out at sea because they needed to save the
water for the people to move across the ocean.
Also we have the zones of intertropical convergence and the horse latitudes as zones where the
wind doesn't blow very strongly, the winds in between are the important governing winds
that move ocean currents around and also have moved Mariners around the sea for a very long
time.
So just jumping back to those for a second, we call the trade winds Easterlies, remember
because winds are named by the direction that they come from as opposed to the direction
that they blow, that seems confusing to a lot of people.
Trade winds come from the east, they actually sort of come from northeast to southwest,
they're called Easterlies.
Surface winds are the Hadley cells and they're centered around 15 degrees north and south
latitude.
The westerlies by contrast are the surface winds of the Ferrell cells, they're centered
around 45 degrees north and south latitude.
And then in the polar regions up at 70 or more north we have the polar Easterlies, north
and south of course, polar Easterlies as well.
So it's becoming very simple geometry, right, the boundaries are at 30, 60, 90 and then
the strong winds are centered at 15, 45, sort of 75.
Well, wind in general blows due to pressure differences in the air, so it's actually variable
all the time.
Wind isn't constant, even in the ocean, even in the trade winds regions, it's not constant.
It blows in different ways on different days of the year and the wind pattern is a constantly
changing modifying thing on the planet because atmospheric flow is complicated and it has
turbulence in it, there are pressure differences all over the place and so the wind blows due
to those pressure differences.
But nevertheless, these wind patterns are persistent on average year after year and so that's how
the trade winds and the westerlies have gotten the name prevailing winds.
The winds that prevail most of the time that you can count on to be present sort of more
often than not in various parts of the world.
Well, in the days of sailing ships of course mariners depended very specifically on knowledge
of these wind bands and the calm regions not only to get around but also as sort of part
of their navigational strategy essentially for understanding where they were north and
south and moving across the oceans when they were dependent on winds at all times.
We've talked about and heard about ships being be calmed in different locations.
So now we have actually a piece of information, the tool to understand why it is that Columbus,
the discoverer of America, actually never set foot in North America.
As you know, he landed on the island of Hispaniola, he was in the Caribbean, he never came to
the mainland of North America in his entire lifetime.
Well he left Portugal of course and they knew that they had to sail across the Atlantic
Ocean.
So the first thing they did was head south along the African coast until they reached
the latitude of about 15 degrees or so where they got into the trade wind belt and then
they rode the trade winds westward across the Atlantic Ocean in order to just go west.
They basically tried to get on a line of latitude.
They used their navigational tools like their like their sextants or astronomical observations
to stay on that belt, stay in the trade winds and move right across the ocean.
Well when they got to the far side of course at that latitude what they hit was not Florida
and not the coast of the mainland east coast of the United States but the coast of the
island of Hispaniola and other islands in the Caribbean.
Once Columbus's group left and wanted to go back then to Europe they needed to get away
from the trade winds because that would of course be a hard thing to sail against the
winds.
So instead they first moved northward and basically tracked up north far enough to move out of
the trade winds and begin to pick up the westerlies that would give them prevailing winds
that would bring them back to Europe.
Columbus didn't go very far north and actually had some trouble on the way back from being
in some of the more be calmed seas.
Eventually the pattern of trade flow as we saw in Ben Franklin's map way back in the
early part of the course was such that yes the sailing ships would travel to the south
and move across as far south as they could get away with and then catch the Gulf Stream
and then ultimately the prevailing westerlies to make it back to Europe or to move to Europe
going in that direction.
So these these prevailing winds have been an important part of course of navigation over
very long periods of time.
Well we've taken a look now at the fundamentals of atmospheric circulation on the planet but
we're going to see very soon that this is the underpinning we need in order to understand
all kinds of things about the circulation that actually happens in the ocean.
We're going to take a look in the next lecture at major ocean storm events things like hurricanes
and tropical storms typhoons and we'll see that those are governed by actually the interaction
of the trade winds with the heat in the ocean.
We'll also take a look at big events like El Nino and the Southern Oscillation as it's
called and see how that's a linkage between the atmosphere and the both the currents and
the heat flow in the ocean itself.
We'll ultimately find that the great currents of the oceans are driven as I said in a similar
way to to the waves by the winds that blow at the surface of the earth.
Ultimately all of it atmospheric circulation and oceanic circulation is governed by the
transport of heat on the surface of the planet and that transport of heat is going to concern
us for several lectures because we'll look at how the ocean is the major player not just
a major player but the major player in the global climate system that keeps the climate
on earth as it is and makes it a temperate place to live for life both in the sea and
life on land and ultimately how that climate system in the ocean is changing with changes
in the amount of heat input and retained to the global atmospheric system.
So all of it is linked in an intimate way in terms of understanding the water planet
as a whole.
