In the last lecture, I painted the sort of general picture of atmospheric circulation
and flow, the prevailing winds, and the stable atmospheric cells of convective circulation.
So now, let's take a look at what happens when that becomes pathological, when it interacts
with the ocean surface to produce all sorts of stormy weather.
We're going to see that the differences in pressure between the air masses themselves
or sort of packages of air that get some stable characteristics and differences in heat energy
between the ocean and the atmosphere are the things that really drive the major atmospheric
storms from large scale pressure cells that create gales to various kinds of extra tropical
cyclones and ultimately even hurricanes and typhoons.
Well before we get into the storms, let's look at a little bit gentler weather patterns
because we need to understand some things about the differential heating of both land
and ocean.
And we can see weather cycles that range from the basic coastal daily breezes that we see
at the seashore, the onshore and offshore breezes, to sit things as large as the tropical
monsoon seasons of the southeast Asian region, all as functions basically of differential
heating of the land and the ocean.
So first of all, the sea breezes and land breezes that we experience at the coast, sometimes
the thing that makes it so pleasant to be at the beach when just a few miles inland,
the temperature can be hot and very humid or very uncomfortable.
There's a differential amount of temperature change of the land and the ocean during the
day when they're both being heated by the sun equally because of the different thermal
capacity and thermal inertia of water versus the soil and the landscape and the vegetation
on the land.
Remember that we said that water had a tremendous heat capacity and also a tremendous amount
of thermal inertia.
So when the sun shines during the daytime, it heats the land up more than it heats the
water up.
And as the land heats up from the sun shining on it, it heats the air just above the land,
the immediate atmosphere above the land.
So that warming air becomes less dense and it starts to rise.
It rises up to the higher parts of the atmosphere.
And if there's an adjacent coastline, the ocean is remaining more cool.
It's getting heated by the sun too, but it doesn't rise in temperature nearly so quickly.
So as that happens then, the water or the air above the ocean comes streaming in to
replace the air that's rising over the land.
So we pull in air from the ocean.
We get a breeze that comes in onto the land.
Sometimes that cool and perhaps a little bit humid air that's coming in off of the ocean
as it meets the land produces the dense sea fogs that we see that San Francisco, for example,
was so famous for, even during summery weather, this cool and humid and foggy air that's coming
in off the sea.
Now at night, the whole process reverses itself.
The sea is warm.
The land cools down quickly because it doesn't have very good thermal inertia, very good
thermal capacity.
And so the air sinks, the cool air sinks off of the land, flows down off the land and moves
back out to sea and flows out over the ocean.
So that warm, relatively drier, sorry, that cool relatively drier that's come from the
land interacts with warm air from over the ocean, which then is rising offshore and putting
the water vapor in the atmosphere that ultimately turns back into fog for the next day.
So all this process is driven on a more or less diurnal kind of basis, day to night shifts.
Well if we look at a much larger scale, seasonal instead of daily, we can see something very
similar going on, driving the enormous monsoon seasons of the Himalayas and India and the
entire South Asian region.
So we've all seen images of flooding in India coming during these very seasonal torrential
rains of the monsoon, up to 425 inches of rain can fall perhaps over areas of India specifically
from April to October, so essentially during the summer months.
What's going on with the monsoons?
Well they develop for similar reasons as those daily sea breezes, in fact.
The Himalayan mountains are a region of both high altitude and also large land area, so
during the summer months we see regions where the sun is warming up the land and it's causing
air to flow up over the land of India, up over the mountains of the Himalayas and rise
high into the atmosphere.
That rising warm air from the land is drawing in air from offshore.
Now the ocean offshore in this sort of subtropical region is relatively warm and certainly very
moist.
It carries a lot of water vapor.
So it's being pulled in and then rising up the mountain front where it's expanding because
of the decrease in pressure as you go to higher elevation and dumping those torrential rain
falls.
It's the change in pressure over the land, sucking air in and all the water that goes
with it off of the ocean.
Conversely in the wintertime then the pattern reverses.
The landscape becomes much cooler.
The ocean is still retaining warmth so the rising air over the ocean is what's carrying
things out and the air flow reverses essentially and so dry winters happen as dry air sinks
off the Himalayan mountains and the Tibetan Plateau.
The homonsoon season then just varies back and forth by essentially the exact same process
of differential thermal inertia between the water and the landscape.
Well storms are disturbances in all of these large scale flow patterns so let's turn our
attention to what happens when the atmospheric circulation kind of goes awry.
We develop pressure differences in the atmosphere and those pressure differences take on some
fairly specific forms that we want to take a look at in a certain amount of detail.
Virtually all storms, all of the really major storms that we want to consider, both winter
and summertime storms that we see in our parts of the world, are cyclones.
They're rotating masses of low pressure air, hurricanes, nor'easters, wintertime gales,
all of these different storm systems basically have the same characteristic and when we look
at the radar maps whether it's during summer thunderstorm season or whether it's during
the winter and big storm seasons we often see these cyclonic or rotating, cycling masses
of air and bands of clouds that produce rainfall or snowfall or things like that.
Cyclones can form both between two different air masses and we'll see what the air masses
are in a moment or they can form at the boundaries within different air masses that have very
different characteristics.
What is an air mass?
We think of air as just a fluid and so it's continuously, smoothly varies everywhere but
actually there are bodies of air obviously with somewhat fuzzy boundaries but bodies
of air nonetheless that have relatively uniform properties and by properties I primarily mean
density because that's what, as we've seen, drives pressure and therefore drives wind
and drives air flow.
The density is a function of the temperature of the air and the humidity in the air, the
amount of water vapor in the air, right?
So air masses get either relatively low density or relatively high density and form areas
of relatively high pressure or relatively low pressure.
Air masses, once they've acquired those properties, can maintain them actually for longer than
you might think, a number of days or even weeks at times when air is not moving all
that much because the atmosphere is just so vast certain regions will acquire characteristics
like a cold mass of dry air or a warm humid mass of air.
The boundaries between the air masses are what meteorologists call fronts so just simply
areas of large gradient in density and therefore large gradient or change in pressure and of
course when we say a front comes through we think of it as the wind blows very strongly
because we're rapidly changing in air pressure from low to high or high to low in a particular
region.
These boundaries can actually be pretty sharply defined and then we've seen them all on radar
maps and things like that and that's because the air masses do retain their characteristics
and only mix relatively slowly at the scale of kind of weather development.
So these cyclones then, we'll talk about two different kinds, we'll talk about tropical
cyclones, the thing that the name maybe applies more commonly in our minds to which as the
name implies occur in tropical regions, start in tropical regions and when they get strong
enough as we'll see they get the names Hurricanes or Typhoons or even Willy Willys and other
strange names like that that are all really just different names for the same thing.
We'll take those up in a second.
First we're going to talk about extra tropical cyclones, a term we don't maybe hear about
so often but at least here in North America we do hear a lot about the famous winter storms
called Nor'easters and we'll take a look at how these extra tropical cyclones form actually
at the boundaries between two different of the major atmospheric circulation cells that
I defined in the last lecture.
Well the extra tropical cyclones are great cyclonic or rotating storms but they really
form in a fundamentally different way than the Hurricanes and the tropical storms.
These can be of course very damaging, very noticeable storms and they involve both the
land and the ocean for their formation.
An example of extra tropical cyclone is the record setting weather that happened in April
of 2007 and affected the whole New England region as well as Canada and regions actually
all the way out extending over to Europe as this large extra tropical cyclone Nor'easter
spun up and blew huge amounts of snowfall and rainfall and ice storms across the New
England region knocked out power to huge areas and millions of customers but also brought
with it a very large storm surge and wave damage all along the coastline and we'll take a look
at that in just a second.
Another example of a kind of a famous Nor'easter or extra tropical cyclone is the one that
became kind of documented by the book The Perfect Storm, the book and the movie Perfect
Storm which was a 1990 storm that was a convergence of more than one extra tropical style cyclone
in the northern Atlantic Ocean.
Well so how do these things form?
Remember that we have the ferrule cell where the predominant wind patterns are westerly
so coming across let's say the North American continent and moving towards the east and
then the colder air of the polar cell which is moving predominantly from east to west
it's an easterly current of air flow so there's a strong front that commonly develops between
the two regions the westerlies and the easterlies at what's called the polar front and especially
wintertime that can be a well-developed front with very cold air masses further to the north.
Well that front is not of course a perfect line of latitude and it tends to have undulations
in it and it'll tend to also have variability in terms of slight differences in pressure
low and high.
Well as those pressure differences happen and as the front meanders a little bit what
can happen is a low region can start to develop and in a low region of air pressure then winds
will tend to converge on that low so the westerlies will converge towards the low from the south
the easterlies will converge towards the low from the north and they will start a rotating
or start twisting up the polar front itself into kind of a shape that quickly starts to
attain this sort of counterclockwise first shark fin like shape of the fronts and then
ultimately a kind of spiraling twist.
What happens then is that the cold air masses are dense and they sort of sink in or wedge
in below along fronts beneath the warm air mass that's coming from the ferrule cell westerlies
that rises up aloft from that and they'll pick up warm humid air from those westerlies
they'll quickly rise aloft as the cold air wedges in beneath them pushing them up causing
them to decrease in pressure and drop their drop their moisture their their humidity in
the form of rainfall so the rainfall can begin the extra tropical cyclones typically start
in either sort of the general Gulf Gulf Coast region or further to the north but still west
across North America at least for the case of the northeasters and then they spin up
and begin to pick up energy as they move across the continent.
If they happen to make it out into the north Atlantic then the relatively warm Gulf stream
waters will fuel some additional humidity into the system but it's still dominated by
this cold air swirling that's coming in that's basically moving downward and encroaching from
the polar cells and so the combination of that humid air with all of this cold air and
moving humid air aloft produces the phenomenal amount of rainfall and then the low pressure
that generates the winds that drive the whole extra tropical cyclone and spin it up as it
as it twists the polar front into into the cyclonic storm itself.
Well so the cyclone storms can dump a lot of water and that's certainly damaging the
form of rainfall or heavy snowfall in the region but oceanically speaking or oceanographically
speaking one of the biggest effects is the development of a storm surge as the winds
blow we know that winds move water in the form of generating waves and things like that.
When the winds develop a very strong pattern in the flow of a cyclonic storm then the winds
push the water ahead of the storm system itself the wind basically blowing across the water
moves water and if it's moving in one direction long enough and strong enough it will create
a kind of a pile or a hill of water in front of the storm.
In that storm surge as it's called reaches the coastline then it can surge up and there's
often high waves generated as well so you have a both a general rise in the water level
over an area of hundreds or thousands of sort of square miles of ocean surface and then
waves on top of that and they broke in in the case of the 2007 storms and did lots of
damage to coastal properties and overtop seawalls all over the New England region along say
the main coast and Massachusetts coast for example.
If they come right on top of a high tide as well that just exacerbates the problem and
in 2007 that's exactly what happened.
Well tropical cyclones by contrast are really kind of different animals because they form
within one air mass not at the boundary between two and they are really fueled by the tremendous
amount of evaporation that's possible in a warm tropical ocean.
In fact tropical cyclones we can see are essentially giant heat engines they're using the ocean
as a battery that's fueling heat into them and we'll see that that's because of the storage
and release of the oceanic latent heat by evaporation and then recondensation when the
heat gets up into the atmosphere in the form of generating water droplets and rainfall.
So let's take a closer look at these tropical cyclones then.
They are individual masses of humid warm rotating air as we know they rotate.
They form initially as tropical depressions or low pressure zones in the trade winds and
so they form within one air mass over the ocean between 10 degrees and 25 degrees latitude
either north or south of the equator.
In order to become full blown tropical cyclones they have to move over water that's greater
in temperature than about 26 degrees C 79 Fahrenheit so quite warm water in the ocean
and that's because then that water facilitates the rapid evaporation of lots of water at
the surface which creates warm very humid very low density air that rises aloft quickly
and lowers the pressure at the center of the storm so you get a low pressure developing.
Let's take a look at what one of these tropical depressions actually looks like.
Well in the satellite image of the trade wind belt moving across a sort of central parts
of Africa we can actually see that the trade winds are blowing and as they pick up humidity
in different places they first just develop areas where maybe you see a little bit of
cloud formation and things like that but small eddies and waves small variations again in
pressure from low to high in those tropical depressions in a way that's a little bit obscure
starts forming concentrated zones within that belt of low pressure and so we call those
actually they're in the waves of the easterly winds and the low pressure and high pressure
form what we call the easterly waves in the trade winds or the easterly winds.
As those tropical depressions form then they form a little bit of low pressure.
Once the low pressure forms then they can turn into tropical storms and ultimately cyclones
and we can see actually a nice satellite image of those storms forming up and spinning up
going from tropical depression which is really just a low pressure sort of meteorological
phenomenon into an actual full blown cyclonic storm this image happens to come from the
Atlantic in 2008 as hurricanes Ike and Josephine were forming up.
So these tropical cyclones form up over this low pressure area and they become just by
definition tropical storms if the wind speeds are less than about 120 kilometers an hour
but they become hurricanes if the wind speed exceeds 120 kilometers an hour.
Now a hurricane is what we call it in the Atlantic Ocean a typhoon in the Pacific Ocean
is exactly the same thing it's just a different name for the same phenomenon and globally
speaking we're simply called them tropical cyclones all these terms are equivalent the
Australian Southern Hemisphere equivalent is the willy-willy but it all amounts to the
same storm phenomenon everywhere.
Well the hurricanes have a low pressure core and the wind comes in from all directions
to try to fill in that low pressure core and so the hurricanes build an intensity over
the warm ocean water because as long as they're over that warm ocean water greater than 26
degrees evaporation will keep the pressure at the center low and we see very low pressures
at the centers of all tropical cyclones and the larger the tropical cyclone the lower the
pressure tends to be at the center.
If they move over cooler water or land then they will tend to dissipate because they lose
that heat fuel they lose that heat engine at the base of them and they'll they move
over all in predictable ways because those directions are governed by the winds at the
time and the pressure differences and also the temperature differences at the ocean surface.
So let's take a look at where tropical cyclones form we have a general idea that yes they
form in the sort of tropical Atlantic Ocean out in the middle of the ocean somewhere between
Africa and the Caribbean region and again that's in these disturbances in the easterly
wind areas.
They also do the same thing in the tropical Pacific Ocean both in the eastern Pacific
near Baja California let's say in the Mexican mainland and also in the western Pacific near
the Philippines and Indonesia and so on.
They're formed in the southern hemisphere as well although not to the same profusion
as in the northern hemisphere just for reasons of sort of meteorological differences with
less land in the southern hemisphere but they're certainly present in the South Pacific
and enter the Australian region or even in the Indian Ocean affecting the eastern coast
of Africa.
Now all of them once they form are masses of air that are swirling like this in the
northern hemisphere in a counterclockwise way sorry in a clockwise way and as they move
with the trade winds they move in a western direction.
But unless they're moving absolutely perfectly west if they're veering at all in latitude
then they will start to turn to the right just as everything does with the Coriolis
forces.
So when we look at the track lines of many different hurricanes over time or many different
tropical storms they always track westward and in the northern hemisphere turn northward
and bend around and they'll either come in the let's say the Gulf of Mexico and Texas
region but bend northwards across the mid-continent or sometimes come up along Florida and right
back out to the Atlantic Ocean affecting the east coast either more or less depending
on how rapidly they're moving and therefore how rapidly they're turning to the right
as they go.
So they have very specific storm tracks.
The typhoons in the western Pacific do exactly the same thing.
They're spawned in the western Pacific region and they have very constant tracks that carry
them up past the Philippines, Taiwan and into the Japanese islands region very typically
and many typhoons per season are generated in that region just as a number of hurricanes
per season tend to be generated in the Atlantic region.
They're specifically formed though in the areas where the water can be warm enough to
generate them.
They're also not spawned within a few degrees of the equator north or south because the Coriolis
forces are too weak in those regions to actually get the storm rotating and generate that ultra
low pressure zone at the center of the storm.
So that raises the question then why do they rotate in the directions that they do?
Northern Hemisphere tropical cyclones rotate counterclockwise.
It seems like this is the wrong direction of rotation if we say that things always sort
of bend to the right that looks like a kind of a backwards rotation.
Well the Coriolis force actually controls it as well but it's in a way that might not
be immediately obvious.
If you have a low pressure zone at the center of the storm then what's happening to air
masses around it is that the air is all trying to rush in to fill that low pressure.
As the air rushes towards the low pressure though it always bends to the right with the
Coriolis and so that air coming in will veer essentially away from the center of the storm
as it gets close.
If it's coming from the south it will veer eastward, if it's coming from the north it
will veer westward and so it starts that rotation that's going counterclockwise in the Northern
Hemisphere.
It's clockwise of course in the Southern Hemisphere because of the opposite Coriolis
forcing in that region.
So what's the internal anatomy of a hurricane actually look like?
Well the center of the hurricane is the region where this ultra low pressure develops, water
is being evaporated off the surface of the ocean very quickly because it's so hot and
the winds are blowing as they try to move in to rush to fill that area so wind that
has relatively low humidity is coming in being, it's quite warm and it's being heated
up even more, it's picking up moisture from the ocean as it picks up that moisture it
then spirals up out of the spiraling air mass and exits at the top dropping massive amounts
of water vapor as it reaches the higher altitude levels of the atmosphere.
So the rain bands that form are the water vapor that was generated close to the center
and then are dropped as rain and form these large convecting cells that spiral around
that central region.
Now the absolute center of the hurricane as we all know is the eye of the hurricane where
the weather can actually be calm and clear and so as these winds are spiraling around
that center there's a point obviously that has to be right at the center where the wind
is essentially not blowing at all and so we have calm gentle winds, the only flow may
be vertical, in fact there may even be some down flow within that region of air from a
loft that drops into the center and is more air that actually fuels that cell overall.
But largely the hurricane's eye is a very confined feature of just maybe a few miles
or a few tens of miles across compared to the hundreds or even thousand mile scale dimension
of a really large hurricane.
Well in fact they can have this kind of structure of up to a thousand kilometer diameter, fifteen
kilometers tall.
The rain bands are these rapidly spiraling clouds, copious rain of up to several inches
an hour of course and they're moving with the trade winds east to west.
They're losing that energy if they move over land but as long as they're over warm water
they're still fueled.
The battery is still running the engine of the hurricane itself.
If we look at Hurricane Katrina as an example 2005 was the world record hurricane season
for the Atlantic Ocean, many named storms, they actually ran out of names at Z and had
to start over again with the Alpha and the Zeta at the end of the season.
But the Hurricane Katrina was the biggest one and certainly the most famous one that
moved in from the Atlantic Ocean into the Caribbean region.
It formed up into a category one hurricane by the time it was east of the Florida Keys.
It moved northward far enough to move just a little bit over, Florida made its way out
into the Gulf of Mexico and then it rapidly intensified in strength.
It moved up to a category three, four and five hurricane as it moved over to the Gulf
of Mexico.
Reason for that was the heat generated by the incredibly strong high temperature zone
that was present in the Gulf of Mexico just by bad luck at that particular time of the
year in that particular year.
In the Gulf in fact there is a current that's called the Gulf Loop Current, we'll take a
look at that later on, but it has a very high surface temperature and had an especially
high surface temperature in the summer of 2005.
So the satellite mapping of this temperature of the surface of the water in that Gulf Loop
Current kind of shows you exactly where Hurricane Katrina picked up its excess strength and
grew into a really monster storm where near record sea surface temperatures were present
at that time.
It also that was warm surface temperatures directed it and sort of veered it off towards
the north where it went directly at essentially New Orleans or just to the east of New Orleans
as opposed to heading off into Texas like some later hurricanes did, Rita for example.
Well I've just talked about the categories of different storms and hurricane intensity
of course is categorized, the Saffir-Simpson scale is the name of the scale that we use
this one through five, the details are maybe not important to us right now but just recognize
that the scale is directly based on a measurement of the wind strength of the hurricane.
So a category five has to have more than 155 mile an hour winds, 135 knot winds at sea,
a cat three is 111 to 130.
All of this is dependent though on the degree to which the center is low pressure and how
low the pressure gets at the center of the hurricane compared to the surrounding air
masses will determine the wind speed that's swirling up within that cyclonic storm.
The destructive power of hurricanes then is in the force of the wind and the intensity
of the rainfall but more than anything else as we've seen the destructive power of hurricanes
is in the storm surge that raises the local sea level right there in front of the storm
just as it is with the coastal effects at least of the northeasters.
So when Katrina came in and veered to the north and seemed to be heading directly for
New Orleans there was the worry about a direct hit on the city of the center of the hurricane
itself with the full fury of the rainfall.
It veered a little bit north and eastward as it made landfall and initially there was
actually a little bit of a sigh of relief if you remember that this hurricane hadn't
quite hit the city but it veered just a little bit to the east of the city.
However that initial sigh of relief just within a few hours was replaced by dismay as the
full effects of the storm surge were seen.
So if we look at the sea surface mapping of the height of the sea surface at the time
of the storm we can see from satellite imagery again that there was up to an 8 meter storm
surge pushed by the winds on the leading edge of the hurricane.
Now if the hurricane is rotating in this counterclockwise fashion that means compared
to the eye the right side is pushing water in front of it to the north the left side
was pushing water out to sea to the south so that water can sort of circle around the
hurricane out in the open ocean but as it moved in towards the land that water that
was being pushed by the right hand or eastern side of the hurricane piled up against the
coastline.
It produced this very large storm surge that then sloshed westward into Lake Pontchartrain
and so the city was inundated by flooding as the levees failed not from the rainfall
directly of the hurricane but from the oceanic storm surge that pushed that water in and
overwhelmed the city's levee defenses.
Rainfall was really a secondary feature.
That storm surge was actually even stronger further to the east past Christian Mississippi
it reached a height of something like 11.3 meters a 37 foot storm surge.
Remember we talked about tsunami and the height of tsunamis well an 11 meter tsunami would
be quite a high one and only the largest and most destructive like the Indonesian tsunami
or the the Japan tsunami produce run-ups that are even higher than that we saw as much
as 30 to 38 meters of run-up at the coastline in that Japan tsunami in 2011 and so this
is larger than the storm surges from even the largest hurricanes.
On the other hand they affect fairly comparable areas with their with their worst damage probably
the biggest tsunami are more destructive and bigger features than the largest of hurricanes
but of course hurricanes are somewhat more frequent.
Well if we look at storm surges then from other recent events we've seen that the barrier
islands that are marked the Gulf Coast so strongly that are so well developed along
the Gulf Coast are also have been affected by storm surges from many many hurricanes
time and time again and that applies of course to the Florida Keys and other regions as well.
The barrier islands that I showed you in in the previous lecture along the region around
Galveston and what's called the ball of our peninsula just north of Galveston had tremendous
damage from storm surges especially in Hurricane Ike in 2008 and we've probably seen these
images from the news that show that the storm surge literally just washed right over the
very low elevations of those barrier islands.
It roaded away the coastal area if we take a look at these before and after images of
that region around Gilchrist Texas you can see not only that the the waves washed over
the land because of the storm surge and the highways associated with it and washed away
a lot of houses but also moved a lot of sand up into areas that were formerly not beach.
This would be the kind of event that drives barrier island migration over time and in
fact barrier islands in general as sea level rises and things happen don't necessarily
migrate absolutely steadily the big sediment transport happens in the biggest storm events
like the hurricanes and typhoons.
Well the region just to the south of that area that we just looked at is Galveston Texas.
Now Galveston had a hurricane in 1900 didn't have a name hurricanes weren't named at that
time and there was little or no warning of hurricanes at that time because we didn't
have the meteorology we have today.
So people were trapped in the city and many thousands of citizens were killed.
It was actually the worst natural disaster in U.S. history in terms of loss of life even
exceeding what happened in Hurricane Katrina.
So after that time there was a seawall built a very high seawall constructed over the ten
years or so after the 1900 hurricane in order to keep the storm surge out from Galveston
Island.
Now we've talked about some of the problems with seawalls and those problems are certainly
still true but in terms of protecting against the storm surge for a very large hurricane
the Galveston seawall one of the largest civil engineering projects that had ever been undertaken
at the time it was built pretty much worked as designed during Hurricane Ike a full century
later.
Many of the houses or all the houses that were behind the seawall were essentially okay
some waves came over the top but the real storm surge didn't erode away the island over
the top of the seawall in Galveston.
Well okay by combining our understanding of the atmosphere the surface waters and how
the heat energy is channeled in them we've gained insight into the major weather patterns
and storms on the planet.
So now we have all these tools to see how heat drives flow in the atmosphere in the
ocean we're going to take a look next at how all these forces drive the oceanic scale
currents out in the open sea.
