Well, let's continue our examination now of the really big scale movements of water
in the oceans, the things that mix the ocean efficiently and set all the water traveling
around the entire globe.
We've already explored the surface currents that move water horizontally around the planet
in these great oceanic gyres, and we've seen that they're driven by prevailing winds, by
the trade winds and westerlies and winds like that.
Well, it turns out that vertical movement of near-surface waters, and in fact even
of waters significantly deeper than that, can also be driven by the wind and can be
driven by oceanic currents, the surface currents themselves.
These vertical movements are things that are going to be important in oceanic biological
productivity and play a key role in the global climate phenomenon that we know as El Nino.
So let's take a look at vertical movements of water driven by horizontal flows.
Well, the vertical circulation of water that's induced by this horizontal flow, both in currents
and in wind, as I said, is known as upwelling and downwelling, and these are fundamental
processes going on mixing the water and the ocean.
Upwelling brings deep water up to the surface, or water that's currently not at the surface
from depth.
It takes two forms.
There's basically equatorial upwelling and coastal upwelling, and we'll look at both of
those in a few minutes.
And then it's kind of converse is downwelling, not surprisingly, downwelling causes surface
waters to sink, and downwelling can have important coastal effects, and also as we'll see in
the next lecture is important for the formation of the deep water that fills up most of the
ocean basins, what we call the high latitude cold water formation.
Well, first let's consider equatorial upwelling.
Now this is a phenomenon that goes on in both the Atlantic basin and the Pacific basin,
and it has to do with the position of the equatorial currents and also the trade winds.
Remember that I said that the northern and southern equatorial currents are a pair of
sort of congruent currents in the northern and southern hemispheres in the ocean, and
they straddle the equator, but they don't straddle the geographical equator.
I should say they're not on either side of the geographical equator.
For reasons of meteorology and the difference in land and ocean balance in the two hemispheres,
the south equatorial current is actually more or less right on the equator, and the north
equatorial current is significantly further north in the northern tropical belt.
So this south equatorial current moves water from east to west across both ocean basins,
both major ocean basins, and it flows essentially right along or slightly diagonally across
the actual geographical equator.
Meanwhile, the trade winds in the northern hemisphere and the southern hemisphere also
blow east to west because they're driving that current along the equator.
Well remember the Coriolis effect.
At the equator, absolutely at the equator, the Coriolis effect is zero, but as soon as
we move off the equator, either north or south, it's non-zero.
I said it's weak in the equatorial regions, but it's certainly present.
And so the water that's moving along the equatorial region, along the equator itself,
driven by that south equatorial current, if it's just a bit to the north of the equator,
even a degree or less to the north of the equator, it's going to turn to the right,
right?
We're in the northern hemisphere, so it'll turn away from the equator and towards more
northerly waters.
On the other hand, the water that's just a bit to the south of the equator is going
to turn to the left because it's in the southern hemisphere.
The net effect then is that the water at the surface is parting, and we call that process
divergence.
The south equatorial current parts the water literally like Moses parting the Red Sea.
Now, the water, of course, unlike in Moses's case, can't just create a hole.
It moves away from the equator itself, and so deeper water wells up to fill in the gap.
So this parting of the surface waters sort of pulls up colder water that's actually
maybe more dense because it's colder, but has to fill up the space that's left behind
by the motion of the surface waters away, by the pressure drop of the surface waters
moving away.
So the Coriolis effect causes the water to turn in opposite directions across the equator
and therefore cause equatorial divergence, and that equatorial divergence in turn is
the cause of equatorial upwelling.
Well we can actually see this divergence in satellite imagery of the Earth.
So if we look at a satellite image of the sea surface temperature mapped from space,
then cold water sort of finger, very narrow, running right along the equator, mandering
a little, but essentially running right along the equator in a narrow band, extends across
the Pacific Ocean Basin.
You can see it in the image as the cooler colors, because that's the way the map is
colored by temperatures, so the yellows and greens are that cold, upwell equatorial water.
It's cold because the water comes from several hundred meters deep.
It's actually associated with something called the equatorial undercurrent or equatorial countercurrent
that I mentioned before.
And that colder, deeper water is welling up to the surface and showing up as a sea surface
temperature anomaly in satellite imagery year in and year out.
Well recall that most of the tropical regions of the euphotic zone are relatively barren
of primary productivity.
When we looked at our maps of global productivity at the sea surface of phytoplankton, the photosynthesizers
that are responsible for all the primary productivity, for the most part the tropical regions of the
open Pacific Ocean and the open Atlantic Ocean were actually kind of barren.
There's not much going on.
The reason there's not much going on is that those warm surface waters, the waters that
are very well warmed by the sun, they are depleted in the key nutrients for photosynthetic
activity.
And that's due to the fact that there's that very strongly developed thermocline that we
described earlier in the tropical regions.
Warm surface water, cold deep water, and a strong gradient between the two.
Remember that the thermocline is also a picnocline or a density gradient, right though.
Warm surface waters are low density, the deep waters are high density, so they don't mix
very well with each other.
Well surface waters are depleted in carbon dioxide because the photosynthesizers use
that up.
They're also depleted in other important nutrients that photosynthesizers need to fix nitrogen
and to use carbon to build carbohydrates and carbon compounds, the phosphorus and the iron
and other things that they need.
So in the deeper water remember we have the detritol food web and so the stuff that dies
in the surface water falls down there, other organisms scoop it up, all the zooplankton
and all the other consumers, and they basically break down all that organic matter and re-release
those nutrients and also re-release a lot of carbon dioxide.
They respire carbon dioxide, but the carbon dioxide is trapped at depth when there's
a strongly developed picnocline and thermocline.
So when upwelling takes place then the waters part, deeper water wells up, it brings carbon
dioxide rich, you know, dissolved CO2 rich water to the surface and it also brings those
other nutrients to the surface and that facilitates great masses of phytoplankton blooming along
the equatorial region.
The equator has lots of sunshine so it's great for photosynthesis and these organisms are
essentially nutrient limited, as soon as they get enough nutrients they become very
productive.
Well we can actually see those phytoplankton blooms as well from space.
In a different satellite image from a NASA satellite called Sea Whiffs, measures the
surface color of the ocean water.
It's just a measurement of color, but in the open ocean, because the water is very clear,
the only thing that really changes the color of the water is the presence of the color
of the photosynthetic plankton, basically the presence of the chlorophyll in their bodies
makes the water a little bit greener.
And so the Sea Whiffs satellite measures ocean color and that's directly converted to a measure
of the presence of what's called chlorophyll A, the most common type of chlorophyll for
these phytoplankton.
So we're looking at a global scale map actually of the Sea Whiff measurement, averaging out
six years of data, winter, summer, spring and fall, both hemispheres.
And again, you can see that narrow finger, almost a pencil it looks like, across the
equatorial region, especially well developed in the Pacific, but certainly also present
in the Atlantic, that represents the productivity, the actual phytoplankton productivity of chlorophyll
along this particular, you know, along this zone of equatorial upwelling.
The phytoplankton in turn then feed a localized food web along the tropical region.
Most of the tropics are relatively barren, you see the large areas of sort of deep blue
that's very low chlorophyll concentration, but the equatorial waters have the phytoplankton,
they have fish and zooplankton that feed on them, and ultimately they have large fish
like the tuna fisheries of the tropical regions that are basically living in this dense, highly
productive zone.
Well, those measurements in turn, the combination of the sea surface temperature measurements
and then the chlorophyll measurements can be used with some calculations of the rate
at which the water has to be replaced to maintain a certain temperature profile and a certain
color profile based on the productivity of phytoplankton, it can be converted into a
map of global wind induced upwelling.
So how much of the upwelling is there?
I should say it's wind induced because the trade winds drive the equatorial currents,
it's really truly induced by the combination of the equatorial current and the trade winds
themselves.
But that wind induced upwelling measured in centimeters per day shows this very highly
productive zone again, right along the equator or sorry, zone of high upwelling.
The upwelling in this image goes up to as much as 50 or 60 centimeters per day.
The water is coming up much, much slower than the currents are flowing.
Remember, some of the currents flow at several knots, meaning several miles per hour and
this upwelling is proceeding at rates of tens of centimeters, a couple of feet per day of
vertical movement of the water.
But nonetheless, that's enough to bring this cold, nutrient-rich water up to the surface
and fertilize the equatorial region and cause these phytoplankton blooms.
Well, so that's equatorial upwelling.
As I said, there's another process also very important for biological productivity, maybe
even more important for biological productivity, and that's called coastal upwelling.
So we have a coastal region, you have ocean water on one side and land on the other.
And we very often have currents that flow parallel to the shore.
For example, along the west coast of the United States, there's the California current.
It's the eastern boundary current bringing water from northern latitudes up in the Gulf
of Alaska and off Canada down along the U.S., California, and then eventually merging with
the equatorial region.
Well, as that water moves from north to south and also prevailing winds tend to move from
north to south for the same reasons, basically higher pressure zone in the north to the south.
So prevailing winds move in the same direction.
That combination of wind blowing and water flowing along the coastline causes Ekman transport
to take place.
Remember Ekman transport, whatever direction the wind is going and the water is going,
the water beneath it is moving at a direction off to the right, at least in the northern
hemisphere to that water.
And Ekman transport actually means that as the wind blows along the coast, the water
moves perpendicular to the coast and offshore.
So the surface water moves off to the right of the wind direction.
And normally that might mean that it would just pull water in behind it, but if there's
a barrier there in the form of a coastline, then that water moves away.
There's no surface water to replace it, so it draws deep water up once again, just like
we did with the equatorial water.
So now adjacent to the coastline, deep water is welling up and replacing that surface water.
In places like California and Peru, which has the equivalent situation for the southern
hemisphere, this coastal upwelling is a really important process, moving a great deal of
water from deep to shallow.
And it's also kind of magnified by the fact that if you recall, the continental shelf is
very narrow in California, and in fact, things drop off the continental slope.
If you're standing in coastal central California, to go offshore, you'd be in very deep water
very quickly.
There's very little continental shelf, unlike the east coast.
So it means that deep water can efficiently well up offshore of the continental slope and
fill in that area.
Well, this deep water is drawn up from even thousands of meters deep in the water.
It replaces the surface water.
And once again, just like with the equatorial system, it produces a very voluminous amount
of nutrient-rich water arriving at the surface and fueling major phytoplankton blooms.
So if we look now at sea surface temperature and chlorophyll, the two images that we are
familiar with from the equatorial region at this point, for the region offshore central
California from San Francisco Bay to Monterey Bay and down on towards Santa Barbara, you
can see in the sea surface temperature the signal of this phenomenal amount of coastal
upwelling, very cold water at the surface right at the coast.
If you've ever been to the beach in any of those regions, you know that you're in for
a shock if you expect water temperatures similar to the same latitudes along the east coast.
Because even in the middle of summer in central California, the water is freezing.
I used to live in Santa Cruz where I did my PhD and wore a wetsuit even in the middle
of summer just to go swimming in the ocean.
But what's bad for swimmers is great for productivity of the biology in the water.
So the color image on the side is again a chlorophyll image and it shows that there's
this massive concentrations of chlorophyll where that upwelling fuels biological productivity.
And that's phytoplankton productivity once again.
That phytoplankton is the basis of a very highly productive food chain and the famous
fisheries of California and also of Peru and the areas in South America like this of
anchovy and sardine as well as fisheries in rich Antarctic waters that have the same
kinds of coastal upwelling are all fueled by that upwelling productivity.
So again, we've referred once or twice to Canary Row and the Steinbeck era and those
canaries of Monterey and the canaries of San Francisco Bay were all based on these productive
fisheries of sardines and other fish that were fueled by phytoplankton productivity due
to coastal upwelling.
The most productive fishery in the world, sort of per square meter is the anchovy fishery
of coastal Peru regions and so that's the same kind of story in the southern hemisphere.
There's other regions of the world as well that have significant amounts of upwelling
productivity and one notable area are parts of the Mediterranean where you have a lot
of coastline, you have this enclosed ocean basin and so prevailing winds drive very strong
upwelling in sort of localized areas around the Mediterranean producing again high productivity.
Okay, well so the converse to upwelling is downwelling and downwelling essentially is
the process that works in the same way due to Coriolis effect and Ekman transport but
if the wind is blowing the opposite direction along the coastline.
So if we use our example of the northern hemisphere once again, if the coast is on the east side
and the open ocean is on the west side, the wind is blowing from south to north then it
pushes the water to the right, that means as the wind blows the surface waters pile
up against the coastline but of course they don't actually pile up, what they do is those
surface waters are forced to sink even though they're low density, they are forced to sink
because there's nowhere for them to go.
So they depress the thermocline, they push it down, they push the picnocline down and
this can suppress primary productivity because now you have all these warm nutrient depleted
surface waters that are making it to great depth so that's not good obviously for the
potential fisheries and things like that and some areas of the world's oceans are relatively
unproductive because of strongly developed downwelling.
Well downwelling has some positive benefits too because ultimately the same problem in
terms of mixing goes the other direction.
The surface waters are rich in oxygen because phytoplankton make oxygen but the deep waters
are depleted in oxygen and so downwelling mixes that oxygen rich surface water, oxygenated
surface water into the deep water and that is an important nutrient for all the organisms
that are in the deep pelagic and even benthic zones of the ocean.
If it weren't for downwelling going on over the world quickly the stratification of the
ocean would become very extreme and all the deep waters would be oxygen depleted, they
would become anoxic zones and much of the zooplankton and larger organisms that live
down there wouldn't be able to live because they wouldn't have enough oxygen to fuel respiration.
Okay well so all of this upwelling and downwelling then is something that's going on all the
time and plays a major role in productivity in general but it also has to continue a theme
we've already developed some pathological effects at times.
And so let's take a look at the phenomenon called El Niño or as we also call it sometimes
oceanographically the southern oscillation and I'll explain why so sometimes it's even
abbreviated ENSO, El Niño Southern Oscillation ENSO.
What is El Niño?
Actually where's the name come from even?
In the 1890s Peruvian fisherman, the fisherman who were exploiting that big anchovy fishery
off the shore noticed that in certain years there was the arrival of an unusually warm
current on the coastline, the water got warmer than it normally was and it happened to come
typically around Christmas time.
So they started to call it the Corriente del Niño, meaning the current of the Christ
child, El Niño is the Christ child in Spanish, it just means the boy in fact literally.
But so this Christmas current Corriente del Niño would show up in certain years and in
those years their fisheries failed.
They would see that they would go out fishing and they just weren't catching anything nearly
as productive as in a normal year.
In fact it was worse than just the fisheries because there were so few anchovies and so
few fish that the seagulls had not much to eat and the other birds that were there and
that particular region has for a long time had a very large bird guano mining industry.
Why do you need guano?
Well it's fertilizer of course.
So the bird guano industry was really strongly affected during the El Niño years.
So the fisheries were no good, the guano was no good and the local economy would crash
and in fact this caused especially in earlier times that the whole region would go into
a state of potential famine even because of the lack of food.
It's not much of a Christmas present is it?
Well let's take a look at what happens and why the Peruvian fisheries actually fail.
First off we'll start with the pattern in a normal or non El Niño year.
If we think about the equatorial currents, the trade winds and the whole Pacific basin,
in a normal year what goes on is the surface winds are strong, they create the equatorial
upwelling and they also blow the equatorial currents strongly over towards the western
Pacific.
The Coriolis turning is not strong as we said before at the equatorial region so the water
makes it all the way across the Pacific till it's in the region of Indonesia and New Guinea,
Philippines over there and all this warm surface water that's been warmed by being in the tropics
piles up.
It actually has a higher elevation than the water on the other side.
It depresses the thermocline in that region so you get a warm water pool, meanwhile back
off the Peruvian coast there's been strong upwelling because that water is pulling away
from the edge of the continent, the Peru current is coming along from the south, so great upwelling
is going on, the fishermen are happy and the guano miners are happy too.
It drives a lot of rainfall in those years and so you get a lot of evaporation in the
western Pacific, the west side of the Pacific, away from Peru.
Rainfall takes place and the water keeps moving and the equatorial upwelling zone is strong
and everything is pretty comfortable.
In a year like this actually if we look at a profile of the temperature of the water
with depth, this false color image is a profile down through the water column to several hundred
feet and you can see this warm water pool in the western edge of the Pacific Ocean,
obviously greatly vertically exaggerated on the planet, but the cool water over on the
Peruvian side of the equatorial region of the ocean.
Well, so what happens in an El Nino year?
Why do the fisheries fail?
Well, there's a diminishment for reasons that are somewhat unclear in the trade winds in
the equatorial Pacific Ocean and it starts with a atmospheric phenomenon that is a persistent
high pressure zone in the tropical western Pacific.
So again, in that region over by the Philippines, to Indonesia, New Guinea area, high pressure
develops and stays around in the atmosphere, not in the ocean, but in the atmosphere.
And that change to a high pressure system is called the Southern Oscillation, so that's
the so part of Enso.
Well, when that happens then you get high pressure over there and what happens then
is that the trade winds don't blow towards it because winds blow away from high pressure
towards low pressure, so the trade winds weaken and die out.
That means the equatorial surface current kind of dies out or weakens and instead all that
warm water pool that is dynamically maintained by the wind blowing over to that region starts
to basically slosh back across the Pacific.
It flows eastward from the western Pacific and it suppresses that upwelling.
So if we look at the El Nino year then, we see that the thermocline is starts to rise
up in the west Pacific where it's drought conditions and high pressure air.
The water moves back, a ton of water moves back across the Pacific and suppresses the
upwelling on the Peruvian side, in fact it even generates downwelling going the other
direction on the Peruvian side.
So this is Pacific wide, remember that's a third of the circumference of the earth is
participating in this whole phenomenon.
And the water is warmer only by, you know, a degree or two but that's a significant amount
in oceanographic circulation.
So the trade winds die out, the equatorial currents die out and the water moves around.
Again a cross section through the water column shows us that that warm water of the thermocline
has progressed far to the east.
Well the strongest, the strongest El Ninos actually have been in recent times have been
in 1982, 83 and 1997, 98.
But one of the best recorded ones was a more recent one in 2009 and 2010 when lots of satellite
data measured all sorts of things about the progress of this El Nino.
So we'll take a look now at this animation or this time lapse series of all the satellite
data.
It's actually a measure in color coding of sea surface height.
And so what we see is that as it progresses we start off with sort of normal equatorial
conditions.
We have sea surface is low, it's colored blue, that's a direct proxy for temperature, a
directly analogous to temperature.
And then in the fall of 2009 as El Nino gets going you see this red pool of warm water
that started out over there in the western Pacific starts spreading back across to the
eastern Pacific and hit the Peruvian coastline and suppress that upwelling.
Due to the fisheries real damage.
As the process continues then and we move into 2010 we eventually see the re-establishment
and redevelopment of equatorial upwelling going on.
And that's the process that we call La Niña.
So the currents eventually re-establish themselves once that high pressure is dissipated and
the warm water pool has spread out over the ocean.
And now we see a tongue of blue water, blue color coded water meaning cold surface temperatures
again re-establish itself, the Peruvian fishing industry is happy once again.
So if we just look at a kind of a, you know, take two time snapshots out of that we see
again this very strong warm water equatorial situation totally opposite to the normal in
say the late fall and December of 2009 contrasting directly with the water situation along the
equator in the La Niña case later on in six months later or so, seven months later.
Well what are some of the effects of El Niño in the southern oscillation?
First of all because of that sloshing of the water the sea level actually rises in the
eastern Pacific by as much as 20 centimeters or so.
Normally the western Pacific is a little higher than the eastern Pacific actually by as much
as a meter.
And so they kind of level out.
And remember that's over, you know, 10,000 kilometers span we're seeing these differences
of a meter or two.
These are small, small values but water is a fluid medium and so it moves around.
More importantly than that in the eastern Pacific the water temperature rises by up to seven
degrees causes more evaporation, low pressure over the eastern Pacific intensifies and there's
often heavy precipitation in coastal South America.
Torential rains, landslides in 1997 and 1998 El Niño, 250,000 people were left homeless
and every port in the country was closed by torrential rain and bad weather and landslides
for over a month actually.
It was a tremendously devastating event locally in that region.
The climate effects are actually felt all around the world, especially in the trade
wind belt but also to a lesser extent in other areas including North America actually.
So all around the world in the trade wind belts we see major modifications due to Enso
of the amount of rainfall, it's caused major droughts in Africa and in India at times while
causing torrential rain in other parts of the world, all disrupting local climate and
local economic activity in many cases.
As I said, 1982, 83 and 97, 98 were some of the worst ones and the events in California
in 1997, 98 were pretty bad as well.
We saw even in the northern hemisphere record snowfall in the mountains, torrential rains
and landslides hitting the coast there and that was because of modification of the whole
global sort of pattern of air flow and high and low pressure systems in both hemispheres.
If we take a look at some of the global effects, basically during an El Nino year the Pacific
jet stream is suppressed down to a relatively southern area by persistent low pressure in
the Gulf of Alaska and so that brings warm, wet air, the so-called pineapple express across
California and the southern part of the U.S. and has caused major storm events actually
all the way across to the eastern U.S.
It doesn't affect the northern parts of the country and Canada as much but it allows a
certain amount of warm air to settle in over the northern United States and southern Canada
because it moves the polar jet streams further to the north.
Well, I referred to La Nina just a second ago so let me define that.
Basically La Nina is the absence of an El Nino or the opposite effect of an El Nino when
there's an especially wet and warm time in the far western Pacific and the Peruvian currents
are especially well developed.
So in a sense La Nina, which just means the girl of course, is just the counterbalance
to El Nino and the world oscillates back and forth between the two conditions with relatively
few years that are neither at least a weak La Nina or a weak El Nino and then every once
in a while there's a really strong one.
But in a La Nina year, to contrast it with that El Nino year that I just talked about,
we see that the jet stream, the Pacific jet stream goes farther to the north, it can even
merge with the polar jet stream, we get persistent high pressure up in the Canadian Arctic that
brings very cold air across the central part of the United States and we have very dry,
sometimes very drought-like conditions across the southwest and California.
More effects going on all over the world in fact.
Well if we look at the ratio of El Nino to La Nina years, we can really see this oscillatory
nature of it and NOAA, the National Oceanographic Atmospheric Administration, keeps something
called the Oceanic Nino Index which is sea surface temperatures measured in a particular
place in the central Pacific Ocean and you see that it basically just bounces back and
forth between stronger weak El Nino which is above the line and La Nina which is below
the line in the curve 1950 to 2009.
Not a lot of change necessarily, they come and go and there are periodically very strong
ones, you can see the 82 and the 97 spikes there in El Nino and then often the strong
ones are followed by strong La Nina conditions but the magnitudes oscillate up and down for
reasons that are really not clear today in climatology.
Well we've seen then that vertical motions, upwelling and downwelling of the surface waters
can be driven by both winds and the surface currents and they pull deep water up to the
surface in the case of upwelling, controlling the location of especially productive zones
of the world's oceans from the point of view of biology.
There are cyclical disturbances to those patterns in the form of El Nino La Nina cycles that
cause major disruptions in the fisheries, in the global circulation of water in fact
and of the air and even cause natural disasters.
So in the next lecture we're going to follow the upwelling and downwelling down deep, deeper
into the ocean to see how the water moves right beneath the thermocline and the density
barrier that we call the picnocline.
