In recent lectures, we've taken a close look at circulation of both the atmosphere and
the ocean, and we've seen how intimately the two are linked, one driving the other
and one affecting the other.
Well, one of the most important ways in which they're linked to each other is the earth's
natural climate system.
The natural state of the earth's climate is a balance among solar radiation as the heat
input or the energy input, the redistribution of that heat, as we've seen by the ocean
and the atmosphere, and the envelope of the atmosphere itself, which contains the gases
that trap that heat on the surface of the earth, the naturally occurring greenhouse
gases that make up the chemical composition of the atmosphere.
The ocean plays an absolutely central role in the maintenance of the overall thermostat
and climate control of the planet due to its tremendous heat capacity.
So let's explore that in this lecture.
Well, most of the heat in the climate system is in the ocean.
In fact, the vast majority of the thermal energy in the overall climate, the atmosphere,
ocean-land climate system, is in the water, and of course that's because the heat capacity
of ocean water is a thousand times that of the atmosphere.
Gases can't hold much heat.
Water cannon has that great thermal capacity that we've been talking about.
So the oceans contain the vast majority of the overall heat in the ocean-atmosphere system.
They're the great heat sink for the planet.
The currents in the ocean that we've seen in the last couple of lectures redistribute
that heat, making both the tropics and the high latitude polar regions relatively hospitable
for life and the reason why things have been able to adapt to life and we have open water
oceans and reasonable air temperatures all over this planet.
Well, let's take a look at the earth's heat budget in a little bit more detail then.
Fundamentally, the heat budget is very simple.
The sun shines down on the planet.
It warms things up, but an equal amount of heat is radiated back out to space.
The planet's surface overall is in a balance.
It has a heat budget and the budget is balanced, in fact.
Remember we said that geothermal energy was not contributing significant amounts of heat
to our surface climate.
It's all about the sun and the solar radiation shining on the planet.
So as that happens then, the heat that's radiated out to space has to exactly equal the heat
that's coming in or else the planet would slowly warm up or maybe rapidly warm up or
it would slowly cool down or rapidly cool down.
But over millions and millions of years, it's maintained an equilibrium.
Now it goes up and down over a small range, but that small range is within the comfort
zone for life as we've been talking about.
The oceans have never boiled away.
The oceans have never frozen solid and generally things have stayed within this narrow range
and we've already explored some of the reasons why that is.
Of the incoming solar energy, if we take 100% of the incoming solar radiation shining on
the planet, it's partitioned then into different things.
31% of it reflects back right off of the atmosphere.
Basically, clouds are reflective and the light just bounces back into space, doesn't really
warm the planet up at all.
That reflectivity, by the way, is given a name scientifically and it's called albedo.
Albedo is just how reflective the surface is.
It ranges from zero to one.
High albedo, one, means perfectly reflective.
A mirror has an albedo like that.
Zero means something that's black and just absorbs all the light that's coming in and
converts it to heat.
So albedo is an important concept.
Clouds have reasonably high albedo, ice has reasonably high albedo because it's white,
it's bright, it reflects the sun back out.
Open water, by contrast, if we're talking about the oceans, has relatively low albedo.
The sun shines on the water, it penetrates into the water.
From space, the water looks dark and that's because it's absorbing that light, that solar
energy, and converting it into heat.
Okay, so 31% reflects off the atmosphere, 47.5% of that incoming solar energy is absorbed
at the surface of the earth.
The vast majority of that absorbed in the ocean because the ocean is good at absorbing
heat.
The land also warms up, obviously, from the sun shining on it.
About 47.5% that is absorbed at the surface ultimately gets re-radiated back as heat
instead of light.
So it warms things up and it radiates into the atmosphere.
17.5%, so the balance is absorbed within the atmosphere directly.
So the sun shines in and the molecules of gas in the atmosphere are warmed directly by
the sun shining on the gas itself, the air itself.
And so all of these things ultimately are either reflected out to space or converted
into heat, which is then eventually just radiated back out into space by the earth's heat loss
at the top of the atmosphere.
It's all in balance overall.
So we have something then that is the natural greenhouse effect.
And that is the fact that certain gases in the atmosphere are well known through long
time known chemistry and physics to be able to absorb heat and basically maintain that
heat so it doesn't radiate through those gases, it heats them up instead.
Water vapor is actually the primary greenhouse gas on the planet.
The gases that go into the atmosphere include water as a gas, water vapor, and that water
vapor absorbs heat very efficiently.
And there's a fair amount of water vapor.
We said the atmosphere can take up to 4% water, remember, to get to high humidity.
Second greenhouse gas that's important is carbon dioxide.
It's a naturally occurring gas.
It's part of the atmosphere.
It only occurs in very small amounts, much, much less than a percent.
In fact, we measure it in parts per million, a few hundred parts per million, but it absorbs
heat very efficiently.
The other important one is methane, which is naturally emitted by the planet due to biological
processes, decomposition, and things, and that's another important greenhouse gas as
well.
So these are the three that are kind of creating the natural greenhouse effect.
Well, right now, the Earth's surface average temperature is between 15 and 16 degrees C,
59 or 60 degrees Fahrenheit, reasonably comfortable average for life, and that's not a surprise.
We've evolved to live under this condition, so naturally that's what we like.
If there were no water vapor in the atmosphere, or CO2, or methane, if there was no ocean
on the planet, no giant heat trap, people have calculated that the actual surface temperature
of the Earth on average would be about minus 18 degrees C, or just below zero, I should
say Fahrenheit.
So the surface temperature of the Earth overall would be enough to freeze everything pretty
much solid.
You certainly see that this effect of having these heat trapping gases on the planet is
important for life on the planet as a whole.
They, you know, they trap that heat energy before it's re-rated in space.
It's a temporary trapping, again, or it's not warming up quickly or cooling down quickly,
but it traps enough heat to maintain that particular set of temperatures that 15 or 16 degrees
C as the dominant condition on the surface of the planet.
Well, most of that heat, as I said, is stored in the ocean, and so that buffers the atmospheric
changes.
Remember, the atmosphere can change a lot.
The comparison to Mars was that the day and night range can be a 150 degrees difference
from day to night on a planet with no ocean.
On our planet, the day to night range is really just a few tens of degrees, and in fact the
year to year range, or the annual range from winter to summer, even in the high latitudes,
is measured in tens of degrees and not, not hundreds.
So that's a good thing.
We like that because it means that this whole natural process exists, life depends on the
greenhouse effect in the sense that if it weren't happening, the world would be frozen
over.
We wouldn't be able to live here.
There wouldn't be any free water present.
The link between these gases, carbon dioxide, methane, and water vapor, because they are
so fundamentally important to the nature of the climate system on the planet, through
their heat trapping properties, has been recognized for a really long time, over 150 years, and
it's because of that role that it plays.
So in 1824, the French famous mathematician and physicist Joseph Fourier recognized the
fundamental heat trapping nature of the Earth's atmosphere, that the atmosphere itself kept
things warmer on the planet than in the absence of an atmosphere.
In 1857, John Tyndall, an Englishman, demonstrated the atmospheric greenhouse effect quantitatively
through experiments and identified the specific gases, carbon dioxide, and water vapor as the
key ones that played the role in generating this greenhouse effect.
By 1896, actually, chemists, Fanta Orranius, proposed that the burning of fossil fuels,
in particular coal, in his day, would actually increase the amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere, trap heat, and, as he was thinking about, prevent the next ice age.
So this was actually the first clear statement of not just greenhouse gases as sort of a
fundamental process on Earth and a natural process, but that things that human beings
were doing might modify the amount of those greenhouse gases, the first clear statement
of what we would call today anthropogenic global warming, all the way back in 1896.
In fact, in 1906, Orranius calculated the warming effect of a doubling of CO2 as 1.6
or more degrees C. Now, he thought that this would take 3,000 years, but actually we're
getting pretty close to the doubling level already, and it won't be that many more decades
before we're there, at least at current rates of increase of CO2 in the atmosphere that
are being measured today.
Well, Earth's climate varies. It's not just a constant. I said it's in an equilibrium,
but I also said that that equilibrium changes over time within a narrow band. And we certainly
know that over geological time, climate has varied. We know that there's been an alternation
of ice ages and warm periods over time scales of sort of tens of thousands of years to millions
of years. There's even megacycles of periods where there were no ice ages for millions
of years, and other periods like the recent past, geologically speaking, where the ice
came and went on a time scale of tens or hundreds of thousands of years. So we know that climate
is highly variable. We also know actually that it varies over much shorter time scales,
even decadal scales, because of events that have taken place within recorded history.
Well, history and then beyond history, ice and ocean sediment cores that are those kinds
of records, as I discussed with the ocean sediments way back when we were talking about sediments,
give us a kind of a tape recorder or a tree ring system, so to speak, of past climate.
And they show us how some of that changes occurred over time, both the very gradual
and long geological process change, and increasingly people are recognizing from detailed analysis
of year-by-year layers in the ice cores and in the sediment cores that sometimes it's
been rapid natural climate change even in the distant geological past.
So as we said, climate certainly changes, and I talked about the long scales like the
ice ages, but there are also these short-term scales, the medieval warm period, a period
in the Middle Ages when Europe enjoyed especially sort of climate weather. On the other hand,
there was a period a little later on in the 1700s of the little ice age when climate was
especially cold and harsh weather in Europe and even in North America at that time. These
were long thought to be basically gradual changes would occur, but there's a recognition
that all of these even short-term changes are driven by geological factors of different
kinds, and sometimes the rapid changes are pretty clear and it's pretty clear what causes
them. For example, big-scale volcanic eruptions like Mount Pinatubo in the 1990s, which was
a big volcano that erupted in Indonesia, put massive amounts of dust and sulfur dioxide
and all kinds of stuff, the ash that comes out of the volcano, into the stratosphere.
A big enough volcanic eruption can spread enough of those particles in the stratosphere
that they actually cause and Pinatubo caused a noticeable dimming of the amount of sunlight
reaching the surface of the Earth and reaching the lower parts of the atmosphere. That reduced
warming over a period of time and the global climate and global temperatures took a noticeable
dip due to that volcanic input of material. In the more geological past, there have been
times when very large-scale volcanic eruptions have taken place, like the supervolcano explosion
of Yellowstone, for example. Those kinds of things, or the Crater Lake explosion that
took place several thousand years ago, those kinds of events have also probably had even
greater effects over short periods of time, say decades, on climate. That kind of thing
is linked to periods like potentially the Little Ice Age and Medieval periods, so these variations
over sort of centuries and decades. How do we know about the longer-term climate
change? The changes between the Ice Ages and over the past several hundred thousand
to even one or more million years. Well, the fundamental record for that is ice cores,
and ice cores particularly from Antarctica and Greenland, where drillers have gone out
and sampled ice, going right down through the ice sheets and found that they could find
literally down to annual-scale cycles of snowfall and then compaction. It's not snow anymore
by the time it compacts for an ice core that's thousands of feet deep. It becomes bands that
are very dense and very narrow, but individual cycles can be found. They provide data over
six hundred thousand years on temperature and also actually the content of the atmosphere,
because the ice traps tiny bubbles, microscopic bubbles of ancient air, and those can be analyzed
with a mass spectrometer, and you can get the carbon dioxide content, the methane content,
and even the isotopic ratios of some of those carbon and oxygen and other compounds that
tell you about the chemistry of the air at any given time in history or I mean in prehistory,
and also even proxies for what the temperature of the air or the ocean water itself was.
So if we look at the record that comes from ice cores, we see that there's been a cyclicity
of changing apparent surface temperature of the atmosphere, which partitions the oxygen
isotopes and therefore causes a signal in the ratio of different isotopes of oxygen going
up and down, and that pairs with the time period such that you can see basically the
rise and fall of temperature in a sort of a sawtooth pattern where we see a gradual growth
of the glaciers and ice sheets and a cooling of the atmosphere, and then a sudden drop
off as we come out of each glacial period. And it turns out that we can map those directly
to the kinds of sea level curves that we see and that we've already looked at, coming
from mostly ocean sediment cores that tell us where eustatic sea level was at any given
time over the past several hundred thousand years. And remember we said we're at a high
now, it was not that, in the not that distant past between ten and eighteen thousand years
ago down a hundred and twenty or more meters below its current level, and then gradually
sea level was higher and higher. And so that's the same sawtooth pattern that we actually
see in the ice cores and it shows us that sea level went up and down in lockstep with
the changes in oxygen isotopes that tell us about the temperature and the changes in carbon
dioxide over all of that time through the waxing and waning of the different glacial
periods. So remember we're in an interglacial now and there have been major glacial periods.
And the CO2 in the atmosphere and the temperature in the atmosphere and the ocean, apparent ocean
sea level have gone up and down together. So we see this linkage of all of these systems.
Well the sediment cores actually from the ocean also provide us a record that goes back
much much further in geological time, back before there were any glaciers on the planet
for example, into a period that was much warmer than today, several tens of millions
of years ago, between forty and sixty million years ago, in the early part of the senozoic
era or after the dinosaurs were gone. And again, oxygen isotope and other proxies are
showing us what the temperature conditions of the ocean were at those different times
and show there were periods that were much warmer than today and they were associated
with different chemistry of both the ocean and apparently the atmosphere, high carbon,
high carbon dioxide, and then periods that were much cooler during the glacial stages.
So we see a much longer term record in the ocean floor sediment cores than we can actually
get from the ice cores. Well what causes all these ice age changes? What caused all
this natural climate variability over time? These were caused by an external process to
the earth or at least an external process to the climate system that has to do with
the earth in orbit around the sun. Now remember that the earth goes around the sun once per
year and its orbit is tilted. We have an axis that's tilted. Sorry, so its rotation axis
is tilted. Well that tilt actually changes a little bit over time and it's like a spinning
top on a table. It wobbles just a little bit and that's called the precession of the
earth's axial tilt and then the tilt changes, it precesses and at the same time the earth
doesn't go around the sun in a perfect circle, it goes around in an ellipse and that ellipse
gets sort of more squashed and then more circular on a rhythmic cycle that just has to do with
gravity in the solar system and that's called the eccentricity. So there's three different
things that change on different time scales that are very long scales about the earth and
the sun. Well astronomers are able to calculate these very precisely and so the precession,
the so called obliquity which is the tilt and the eccentricity all cycle back and forth
on different sort of periodic signals. Some of them cause more solar energy to reach the
surface of the earth and others cause less and you have to put them together and so they
kind of create constructive and destructive interference that creates changes in solar
forcing and a calculation of all those Milankovitch cycles when compared to the stages of the
glaciation show that they're linked. When there's more solar forcing, more sun energy
on the earth, we come out of the glacial stages, when there's less we go into a glacial stage
and that's driven by the external process. It's accompanied by the big changes in atmospheric
carbon content among other things.
Okay, so this is all the process of the natural climate system on the planet and now if we
take a look at what's going on in the present day climate system on the planet, we have
to look at the warming that's evident that we see and we have to try to understand how
it fits into this natural set of cycles of the planet as a whole. So I can show you some
data in just a second that suggests that the ocean is warming up, we hear about the atmospheric
warming, we don't hear about the ocean warming as much but that's quite well known now, the
measurements are robust and showing it from very many different kinds of data both surface
and depth profile measurements as well as satellites. In fact, ocean heating is actually
taking up most of the change in heat again on the planet as we'll see. And so the climate
system is going through a modification that is different than what was happening prior
to the late 1800s in fact with a signal that started to really strongly emerge in the early
part of the 20th century. So if we look at the heat content of the ocean as measured
by averaging out temperature measurements all throughout the ocean all over the planet,
then we have a signal that we can see and use and sort of look at the average trends
in that heat content of the ocean. Now we don't talk about the average temperature of
the ocean because temperature is so variable between surface waters and deep and different
latitudes across the planet that that's a difficult number to find very meaningful.
The heat content is a more direct map of the kind of integrated temperature, well really
heat energy that's being stored in the ocean at any given time. So if we look at the actual
data for the heat content of the ocean based on field measurements and then also satellite
measurements all of them integrated together from 1955 to about 2009, we see that there
has been fluctuations up and down there's lots of variability in the measurements but
in general there's a rising trend and in fact there's an accelerating rising trend after
about 1970 or so in this length of the time series. We don't have the direct measures
of the heat content going back any further than that. The global ocean heat content
and this calculation is made for or summary is made for 0 to 700 meters depth that's where
most of the changing heat that's where virtually all of the changing heat is stored and it's
showing that the heat content of the ocean is rising and is rising rapidly. In any given
set of years it goes up and down a little bit short term changes are due to major fluctuations
in ocean currents things like El Nino in the southern oscillation cause rises and falls
in given periods for example it fell around period around 2007 and 8 as a strong El Nino
system developed but overall there's a very strong trend of growing heat content of the
ocean and it's unequivocal at this point. Well that heat content in the ocean is directly
a reflection with sort of the virtually the same trends and the same ups and downs as
the global surface temperatures measured from space by satellites of the recent global
surface temperature of the land and the entire planet integrated everywhere. So the heat content
of the ocean is a reflection of the excess temperature in the atmosphere on the land
surface and at the ocean surface. Well we also know from measurements that were made
directly starting in the 1950s that the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has been
rising over time and in fact we can look at the carbon dioxide variations again from those
ice core records and we can see that they have that sawtooth pattern that's so characteristic
for the ice cores. We were at the high point of those sawtooths at the beginning essentially
of the industrial revolution and certainly by the time the strong data started to be
put together in the middle part of the 20th century and then the CO2 concentration has
gone to much higher levels since then and people are familiar with this kind of diagram
that shows that the CO2 concentrations are rising and rising relatively rapidly today
and in recent decades and at no time it turns out from the geological record in the last
10 million years has the concentration been as high as the present day. So we have a warming
gas in the atmosphere at a level that hasn't been present throughout the entire glacial
interglacial period and in fact going back to that much warmer era much earlier in the
Cenozoic. Looking at that in detail then we also see that the changes in the carbon dioxide
greenhouse gas actually shows the same sort of acceleration after about the 1960s or so
that we saw in some of the world temperature records. So the temperature and the carbon
dioxide are changing in lockstep on the planet. That's one of the fundamental observations
that causes people to draw the conclusion that the global warming is related, that the
change in temperature that we observe on the planet is related to the change in the amount
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere that's being put there by the burning of fossil fuels
as noted by Arrhenius way back in the 1800s. Further kind of corroborating evidence that
goes along with that is that global climate simulations, so the computer models that are
run over time, we'll look at this a little bit later on, show that if you leave out the
extra CO2 in the atmosphere and run those global simulations you can't get the kinds
of warming trends with reasonable assumptions about the planet's climate. These are models
that are somewhat like weather models that we use for the weather forecasting but run
over much larger area scales and much larger time scales, they're not meant to predict
sort of day to day or year to year variations but long term trends. But you have to have
the excess warming generated by the blanket of the extra CO2 and in fact methane in the
atmosphere to get the models to run even for the past century, not talking about the
future but just running for the past century to get the level of warming we've already
seen. Well I want to give you a little quotation that's from a report of a blue ribbon commission
to the president and it says this, it says, through his worldwide industrial civilization
man is unwittingly conducting a vast geophysical experiment, within a few generations he's
burning the fossil fuels that slowly accumulated in the earth over the past 500 million years.
By the year 2000, a clue that my quote is a little bit old, the increase in atmospheric
CO2 will be close to 25% and this may be sufficient to produce measurable and perhaps market changes
in climate. Well that report was actually written all the way back in 1965 and it was
a report of the scientific community to president Johnson where they recognized that global warming
was going on, it was going to change the climate and in fact the change in atmospheric CO2
by the year 2000 was actually somewhat greater than 25%, more like 29% or more based on the
pre-industrial baseline because we're putting more of it in the atmosphere faster than they
recognized in 1965. So the atmospheric level of carbon is changing, we see CO2 having gone
from a pre-industrial level of 280 parts per million to a 2010 level of 390 parts per
million and a rate of increase that's increasing in the past decade or so, past two decades
over the rate it was going before and that's just very simple, we are burning it, we're
taking it out of the ground, we're burning it and it goes in the atmosphere, there's
no magic to that. Methane is another greenhouse gas that is going into the atmosphere at greater
rates primarily due to agriculture and the fact there's a lot of cows that emit methane
on the planet and so that's increasing at a fast rate too and that's another important
greenhouse gas. But besides the greenhouse heat retaining effect, carbon dioxide plays
a huge role in the ocean system for another reason. CO2 is the very rapidly exchanged gas
between the atmosphere and the ocean. Actually that's good because most of the CO2 we're putting
in the atmosphere is being dissolved into the ocean water and so therefore it's not
trapping heat in the atmosphere at as rapid an increased rate as it would be otherwise.
On the other hand that's bad because the more CO2 that gets dissolved in the ocean as we'll
see a little later on, it has an effect on the chemical balance of the ocean and this is
bad news for a lot of the life that's present in the sea today. Well, I want to draw a little
bit of a comparison maybe to the ozone layer because we hear a lot about global warming
and greenhouse gases and it may seem that, you know, it's very hard to see how we can
do anything about it. Now the ozone layer story is kind of salutary though because it shows
that there can be successes in global scale modification of what we call the ozone layer
in global scale modification of what we do chemically to the atmosphere.
You remember the ozone layer now. The ozone layer, the ozone hole, the depletion of the
ozone layer due to the release of chlorofluorocarbons going back through the industrial
era and right up until the 1970s into the 1980s is not the same thing as the greenhouse effect.
In fact they're not linked at all. The ozone hole has no particular effect on
global warming. People often confuse the two. The ozone layer story is that the natural
ozone in the stratosphere absorbs the ultraviolet coming in. That protects us and all other
life on the planet from DNA damage. It actually has an oceanic effect in the reduction of
productivity of plankton when too much ultraviolet gets to the surface and along with the effects
like skin cancer and eye damage that we feel. Well the chlorofluorocarbons, the CFCs that
we produced, react with that and break it down. So there's a small depletion over the U.S.
about 3% but over the polar regions it was depleted, the ozone layer itself was depleted
by 50% or more. In 1990 there was this international agreement to ban the CFCs and it seems to be
working. The concentration of chlorofluorocarbons in the atmosphere is declining rapidly and
the ozone depletion has flattened out from a very rapid change and may reverse soon.
So if we look at a graph going up to the most updated numbers we have available now,
ozone depletion was rapidly increasing and then it kind of flattened out. It hasn't
really started to go down yet but the computer simulations suggest that it will start to go
down in the coming years and decades and so we'll probably avert the worst effects of that.
Well maybe this is a model for global scale cooperation on carbon emissions and the change
in the natural state of the climate system that is represented by additional extra heat
trapping gases going into the atmosphere today. It's a thornier problem than the ozone hole
because chlorofluorocarbons could be replaced by other industrial chemicals. It's less easy
to see how we replace the fossil fuels and the carbon dioxide that we emit unless we come up
with ways to generate significant, and I really mean truly significant amounts of our energy from
non-fossil fuel burning sources. That's proved to be a thorny problem. On the other hand,
you know, one possibility that's being examined today is the possibility of actually finding ways
to chemically remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. So some of what's already been
emitted take it back out of the atmosphere, a process called carbon sequestration.
And there are pilot projects on now in terms of pumping CO2 into the ground on land and there's
some very interesting proposals to look at pumping carbon dioxide into the deep ocean where it might
sink to the bottom and stay there or drilling holes and pumping it back into the deep sea
in the same regions where petroleum carbon is being taken out of the ground in the ocean.
Well, so we've looked at the natural climate system and we've looked at how it's starting to change
in the present day, post-industrial era. So in the next lecture, we're going to take a look at the effect
of those climate changes on sea level and the ocean itself and the ice volume and we'll look at the effect
that all of these things have and are going to have perhaps on life in the sea.
