In the last lecture, we saw that the total heat budget of the planet is changing and
has been changing in recent decades.
We're going to take a look in this lecture now at the part of the planet that really
is going to see that effect first and strongest and that of course is the ocean.
It turns out that the largest effects of the modified heat-trapping nature of the atmosphere
from the increased carbon dioxide content are already being seen in the ocean
and are going to continue probably to be seen in the ocean.
The heat content as we already saw is rising in the ocean at an accelerating pace
and that's going to have an effect on all sorts of aspects of the ocean as a whole
from sea level to the movement of ocean currents over time.
The last few decades have been a period of that change beginning
and the future decades are likely to see that change accelerating in nature and in intensity.
Well, the first most important change that we're seeing on the planet is that sea level is clearly rising.
We already looked at sea level rise when we were talking about beach erosion and things like that,
so let's return to that for a while.
Overall, when we look at global scale sea level, so the eustatic average,
not the local fluctuations in a given place, we have records from tide gauges in various parts of the planet
that go back actually hundreds of years, but in terms of being able to build up a global average,
we have decent records that give us something back to about 1900 as a reasonable time frame.
If we look at the data that goes back from 1900 all the way up to about 2001 or so,
so when we had all these tide gauge records, we see that not much changed from 1900 to about 1930.
Sea level was globally averaged out pretty much fairly steady, maybe rising very slightly.
From 1930 on, the slope of that line on the curve changes, and we see an average rate from 1930
all the way up to the turn of the century or so, the turn of the 21st century,
of about 1.8 millimeters per year, something a little less than 2 millimeters per year.
Notice that these tide gauge records to have error bars on them, and they're larger error bars.
There was more uncertainty back in the early part of the 20th century,
and they get smaller as the records get more numerous and better quality as we go to the end of the 20th century.
But once there was satellite data that could actually measure the sea surface height anomalies directly,
and remember we've used that satellite data time and again to look at very detailed precise measurements
of sea level all over the planet, then it became possible to calculate sea level change with even greater precision.
And so for the period from 1993 to the end of 2008, beginning of 2009,
we can see sea level changes with even greater precision, and we see some variability.
We see the curve fluctuating up and down a little bit of mean annual sea level over that window of time.
But basically the slope of that curve gives us about 3, 3.1 millimeters per year of sea level change.
So it's a much steeper slope, significantly steeper slope, about half again as much as the slope that we take if we take the whole 20th century.
So something is accelerating in pace in sea level rise, and sea level goes up and down.
There are years where sea level actually looks like overall global average is lower than other years.
But overall, certainly averaged out over this kind of decadal scale, it's going up and going up more or less continuously.
That decadal fluctuation is actually a reflection of large scale oceanic circulation.
So for example, the dip you see around 2008 is related to that strong development of a La Niño, El Niño oscillation,
and the ENSO system that we've talked about in a previous lecture.
Okay, well, sea level rise closely tracks the overall global average temperature rise over time.
So we see, as we saw in the last lecture, temperatures rising at the surface of the earth, and sea level is rising as well.
And they rise with similar changes in their gradient.
If anything, sea level is actually starting to accelerate its rise at a faster pace than the temperature is in the last several decades.
So why do they track each other? Is there an obvious reason why they should?
Well, maybe it is obvious, but sea level rise is actually due to a combination of two things.
One that may be extremely obvious to you, and the other that may not be so obvious.
So the first is that when the global temperature increases, land ice starts to melt.
We've probably all heard that the glaciers are in retreat on the planet, and that's true.
Glaciers are receding up their valleys on average all over the planet.
A few glaciers are growing, but most are receding in recent decades.
Even more importantly, the Greenland ice sheet, the major ice caps of the planet, Greenland and Antarctica, are losing volume.
They're losing land ice, and it's turning into water.
That water is being introduced into the ocean as new mass, and so there's an increase in the volume of water in the ocean.
That makes sense. That's part of sea level rise.
The second part, though, is that the water itself is getting warmer.
Now, what's the difference between warm water and cold water?
Well, one key difference we've already said is a difference in density.
Warm water is less dense than cold water, and a difference in density implies actually a volume expansion.
It means the same mass of water occupies a little bit more space.
And so the sea level rise is also partly due to the thermal expansion of the water.
As the water heats up, the water gets a little bit bigger,
and so it fills the basin a little bit higher than it did before.
Even if there was no introduction of any new melt water whatsoever, sea level would be rising anyway because the water is expanding over time.
Now, that expansion is very small. Water doesn't expand a lot.
It's a 10,000th or two of a percent or something like that, or fractionally a 10,000th or two of the volume of the water changes with a degree change in temperature.
And we haven't even seen a degree change in temperature.
Actually, the oceanic temperature changes in the surface waters are probably down more in the 10th of a degree kind of range.
But the ocean basin is big. It's a lot of water.
And even just down to 700 meters, if we take 700 meters of water over the whole planet and we warm it up just a little,
we get millimeters and then centimeters of sea level rise out of it.
So these two things both contribute.
And it turns out they contribute in sort of roughly equal amounts, the additional melt water and the thermal expansion.
And depending on the given year, the thermal expansion comes and goes because we have more heat added to the ocean or less heat added to the ocean.
Again, based on those decade scale oscillations of oceanographic currents and atmospheric redistribution of heat.
So that one comes and goes a little bit.
The melt water input seems to be more steady and also increasing over time.
So the best available data that we have now in 2010 or up through 2007 actually was published in 2010,
suggests that the overall amount of sea level change is something like from 1993 to 2007,
the rate of growth is 3.3 millimeters per year.
It actually slowed down if you just take the window 2003 to 2007 to 2.5 millimeters per year,
but that's because of those small term fluctuations.
And then the overall change over that total longer window is at least 3.1 millimeters per year.
Now of that about two thirds is land ice melting and about one third is the thermal expansion.
And then again in that short window of time when it went down a little thermal expansion was even less.
So the thermal expansion fluctuates a little.
The input of melted water, fresh water that comes from land ice melting is pretty steady and in fact probably growing over time.
So about 50 to 80% of the additional sea level rise signal comes from added mass from melting
and 20 to 50% comes from that thermal expansion.
Okay well we already looked at the heat content of the ocean in the last lecture
and we said that about 80% of the extra heat, the extra added heat to the atmosphere is actually stored in the ocean.
So the ocean is that great heat sink.
80% of the heat that comes from the actual contribution of anthropogenic or carbon dioxide
that's added to the atmosphere through human activity makes it into the ocean.
This has a number of effects on processes going on in the ocean.
Probably the most significant effect, the one that we're seeing the most rapidly is the warming of the Arctic region
and in particular the annual melting of sea ice in the Arctic is rapidly increasing.
It turns out that we expect the warming signal to show up the greatest at the polar regions
because those are the regions that cool the most seasonally winter to summer relative to the tropics
and so the effect of extra added thermal mass can make the polar regions see a larger effect from greenhouse warming in general.
Certainly what's been going on since the late 1970s is a rapid decrease in the total amount of ice in the Arctic
that makes it from one season to the next.
So if we look at a graph of just the monthly average amount of ice in September for each given year
and we use September because that's the end of the summer so the ice that's around in September
is the ice that made it through one summer and will probably make it on to continuously be ice in the next year,
those September numbers show a pretty rapid decline.
Even again, as inter-annual, year to year there's a sort of a short term cycle.
Sometimes there's more ice, sometimes there's less, sometimes there's a couple of years in a row with more
but overall there's a huge trend since 1979 to 2010 of decreasing amounts of Arctic sea ice overall that time.
Well, this is going to have a significant effect on the Arctic system in a number of different ways.
First of all, just the reduction of sea ice is a problem for a lot of the organisms that live in the Arctic that depend on the sea ice.
There are a number of Arctic marine ecosystems that are dependent on sea ice being present on top to provide habitat
to limit the amount of water mixing, wave action and things like that.
Some of the benthic fauna, for example, would be affected by open water instead of sea ice.
We've all heard about the polar bears and the idea that their habitat is critically dependent on being able to hunt for fish
by using the sea ice and actually roaming all over what is an ocean after all, not land, the Arctic ice pack in general.
Remember that the Arctic is an ocean basin, the sea ice that I'm talking about is floating ice sitting on top of the water.
Well, at the current rate of change by 2030 or so, so not that long from now, a few decades in the future,
the sea ice is projected to be less than one-third of its average level for the 1979 to 1990 time period.
And so at least seasonally in the summertime, it will have shrunk down this sea ice to a level that is maintained year after year after year.
And well, it'll open up navigable passages actually through the Arctic.
For hundreds of years now, people have wanted to find the famous Northwest Passage,
a shipping route that goes from Europe or Eastern North America to the Pacific without having to go all the way down around the tip of South America
or through the Panama Canal. That is already beginning to happen.
In fact, in 2007, for the first time ever, navigable waters for ships that were not icebreaker class ships opened up through the Arctic Ocean.
This is likely to continue to happen not necessarily every year, but more and more frequently and persistently by about 2030.
That has a secondary effect, of course, of also opening up areas for new oil and gas exploration and development as well as mining.
There's certainly a land rush on on the northern margin of Canada and Alaska and around Siberia to find areas that might be to explore areas that might be prospective for either land side or ocean side deposits of petroleum.
Well, we can ask the question then, does sea ice melting contribute to sea level rise? You melt all the ice, so you have new fresh water and it rises sea level, right?
Well, no. Actually, that's not true, or at least it's not true in the way that you might think.
Think about a glass of ice water filled up with water and ice cubes so that the water is right up to the brim or an iceberg floating in the ocean.
When that ice melts, does the water overflow the glass? No, of course it doesn't because the ice is floating in buoyant equilibrium.
It's Archimedes principle. It displaces its own weight in water.
So when the Arctic sea ice melts, the ice will all melt, the fresh water will return to the ocean, but it won't change sea level directly at all.
On the other hand, it does actually have some effects on the ocean and there are some indirect ways in which it does create actual sea level rise.
For one thing, if there's that much warming and it's warmer water, then it might create additional thermal expansion.
More importantly is actually that the melting of sea ice contributes to a positive feedback, as we call it, in the ocean climate system.
And that is the albedo change. Remember what albedo is? It's the reflectivity of the sunlight, so on any surface the sun shines on it and the energy is either absorbed and turned into heat or reflected back to space.
Sea ice is pretty reflective. It's white and it reflects a good proportion of that incoming solar energy back to space.
It has an albedo ratio of sort of 0.3 to 0.4, 30 to 40 percent or so.
Open water, by contrast, absorbs more of the light and converts it into heat.
The sun penetrates into the upper waters, the upper few meters of water and turns into heat there.
So it actually has a lower albedo overall and so the open water actually, its albedo ranges depending on a lot of things, how wavy it is, what the solar angle is, how far north you are,
but several times smaller than or a large percentage smaller than the albedo of the ice.
So when you melt ice and turn it into open water, then more energy is absorbed from the sun and that warms the water up more, which can feed back into melting more ice.
And so there's this positive feedback where melting the ice warms the Arctic Ocean, which causes more ice to melt and so on and so on and so on.
It's pretty clear that this whole process is underway in the Arctic already. This is not speculation about the future.
This is what's been going on for the last at least couple of decades in the Arctic Ocean to cause the rapid change in sea ice melting.
Well, what about the land ice? Yeah, land ice really can contribute, of course, to sea level rise because it adds water that was on land to the ocean.
Well, the land ice change is dominated by Greenland and Antarctica and actually until as recently as 2007, it was thought by most of the scientists who worked on this,
that Antarctica might be gaining ice to changes in the climate producing increased snowfall there and so actually adding more mass,
even though it's overall a global warming system that would increase snowfall in Antarctica.
But better satellite data in recent years and multiple independent lines of analysis of that satellite data have shown quite recently that Antarctica is losing ice mass
and so therefore that's turning into water that's ending up in the ocean. And so most of that, you know, 50 to 80% of the total sea level rise that's coming from ice melting
is coming from Antarctica and Greenland together, Antarctica in particular.
Well, what does all this mean for sea level? We've looked at the sea level curves in a lot of detail already and we'll come back to this eustatic sea level curve one more time
to remind us that, you know, the present day sea level is near the highest it's been over all the glacial and interglacial cycles.
And so there's only been one point in the last 250,000 years where sea level was higher than the present day and that was at the period of the last interglacial period
and it was about six meters higher than it is at present at a time that was, you know, 125,000 years ago or so.
Well, so the last time that the polar regions were as warm as present or actually a little bit warmer than present,
the direction that we think that they're headed with the increased trapping of heat on the planet, then sea level was between four and six meters higher than it is right now.
So, melting of the land ice and partial, not complete, but just partial melting of some of the polar ice caps could induce an ultimate rise in sea level of four to six meters
or even more if the polar cap melting goes, the land ice melting goes even further than that.
Remember I said if we melt all the ice caps off of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets, we would see a sea level rise much greater, something on the order of 60 meters.
Now, even if that were to happen, that is at least centuries in the future because it's a very slow process to melt all that ice.
Four to six meters is actually also probably well beyond a century in the future as we'll see in terms of the best available models for how much sea level is going to rise.
So the kind of, you know, apocalyptic scenarios of sea level suddenly going up by tens of feet or many meters and flooding coastal cities rapidly is not going to happen.
The sea level's rise is going to potentially accelerate but be much more slow than that kind of, that kind of doomsday pace.
Well, besides sea level, the salinity in the ocean is also starting to be modified by this whole process.
And the reason for that is linked back up to the North Atlantic deep water formation.
We have the Arctic Ocean covered with sea ice.
We're melting that sea ice at an increasing pace.
As that happens, it's melting out and adding fresh water back into the sea.
Remember I said that the process of North Atlantic deep water formation was making cold water that was extra salty because it had had ice extracted from it,
and that's what sinks down to form most of the deep water in the ocean.
Well, the converse is true then also.
If you melt the ice and put it back as fresh water, it's going to cause the surface waters in the Arctic region and off Greenland,
and the region that North Atlantic deep water forms to become fresher.
And there's at least some evidence that since the 1950s when oceanographic salinity measurements start to become available up to near the present day,
that that salinity has decreased in the far northern regions of the Atlantic.
And that suggests that deep water formation could begin to slow down and could begin to go into a new state where it's not being generated as robustly as it is today.
Well, in fact, that's led to one scenario that had been proposed and was popular actually in the 1990s,
that perhaps this influx of fresh water out of the Arctic might shut down that deep water formation pool in the surface
and actually even shut down potentially the surface currents like the Gulf Stream.
A movie that came out a number of years ago the day after tomorrow was based on a kind of a doomsday scenario like that.
One piece perhaps of good news from the climate modelers is that current models suggest really that the likelihood that that effect could be so strong
as to actually significantly impact the Gulf Stream and let's say change the climate in Europe and paradoxically throw it into a new ice age
looks very unlikely. It seems very unlikely that that can happen on any kind of short term and by short term I mean centuries kind of time scale.
So at least that's one thing that we probably don't have to worry about as much as a scenario in the global warming world.
On the other hand, there are a lot of changes that really are going on and we want to look at what the now the projections of Earth's future climate are.
So far I've talked almost entirely about things that have already happened the temperature change and heat content change and sea level rise that we've already measured in the ocean.
In order to project those into the future we have to start to speculate more and the way that scientists speculate is to run numerical models global scale computer simulations of the climate.
They use the best available physics and understanding of how the ocean and atmosphere flow and interact and respond to heat input and all of those things.
They use the biggest computers in the world to run these things that are called general circulation models or GCMs.
They require the input of not one scientist working on a grant but many dozens or hundreds even of scientists collaborating to write those computer models and to write the code that they actually run on these massively parallel computers.
The kind of super super high high end computing that where they're always testing the limits of whatever the latest computer that comes out is.
Those scientists are running those simulations in order to project climate into the future but how can you tell that your simulation is actually working and that it does what it's supposed to do.
It's after all just making a series of mathematical calculations.
Well one of the ways that they test a climate model I actually alluded to in the last lecture where they look at testing predicting not the future but predicting the past.
Well that sounds strange but what I mean is you can take as input our best available understanding of the chemistry of the ocean and the atmosphere and the heat content and its flow systems.
At some point in the past like 1900 or 1950 or whatever year you choose and then run your computer model based on that input into the future but of course the future starting from let's say 1950.
And so you run it out to the 21st century and you see how well your model predicts what actually already happened so you don't give it as input the data from that period up to the present day.
You use that as a test and so that's how they calibrate and test these kind of global climate models global circulation model systems.
Well when these models are run for the future then you also have to try a lot of different scenarios because no one knows how much additional carbon dioxide and methane are going to be put into the atmosphere in the future.
There are various scenarios the planet as a whole the collective activity could kind of do business as usual and keep increasing amounts of fossil fuels going into the atmosphere each year.
That's what we're seeing so far we could actually all start to agree to reduce the amount of fossil fuels that are used we could gradually wean ourselves off if the economy the economics of different other kinds of energy change.
We could have a global economic collapse that would reduce the amount of fossil fuels used even in the recessions we see the amount of fossil fuels goes down and actually CO2 emissions even go down.
So lots of different scenarios are tried and they run these simulations to come up with the heat content of the atmosphere and the ocean into the future.
Well when we look at those results then we see a warming world if we project it out 50 years if we project it out 100 years into the future.
All the simulations suggest even based on the idea that what if we stopped emitting carbon dioxide today not possible but what if you just said it goes to zero.
What's already in the atmosphere and what's already in the ocean in terms of the heat is going to continue to warm up the planet raise sea level and have other effects over the span of the next century.
And the additional CO2 we put in the atmosphere is simply an additional factor in that in that future rise.
Well some of the basic conclusions from global circulation models today suggest that the global average surface temperature will increase some more.
It's already increased at some significant fraction of one degree C since the middle of the 20th century.
And it will probably increase between 1.1 and 6.4 C by the end of the 21st century 2099 and more in the Arctic and also actually over land areas as opposed to over the ocean.
The ocean is a heat sink it soaks up a lot of heat without changing in temperature very much so the areas above the water and also the maritime regions of the coastlines won't see as much change as interiors of the continents or the Arctic regions.
That doesn't sound like a very large number but remember the difference between an ice age and today is just a few degrees C so 6 would be exceeding the total amount of change since the last ice age to the present day.
That would be into a world that was in a very different condition at that high a change of average global temperatures.
We also see from GCMs that the rate of warming is likely to be unprecedented. It already is going very rapidly and it's unprecedented since the end of the last glacial age 10,000 years ago.
So we're entering a new period that over the span of human history we haven't seen before.
For sea level rise the conclusions are evolving actually a little bit quickly.
In 2007 the conclusion of the IPCC the sort of consensus of climate scientists and oceanographers was that sea level rise by the end of the 21st century would be between 0.18 and 0.59 meters.
Something maybe up to two thirds of a meter at the extreme case and probably less than half a meter by 2099.
But since 2007 there's been additional much better simulations of what's going on with the dynamics of those ice sheets in Antarctica and Greenland and a better understanding overall of what's happening to sea level rise.
And so now the consensus is emerging that this is likely to be actually quite a bit more 0.85 to 0.12 meters or about some large fraction of a meter of sea level rise by 2099.
Because the rate of warming and of sea level rise are both already going faster than the last IPCC you know median values or sort of the middle road values of all those computer simulations.
Well so the effects already underway include sea level rise and the loss of sea ice but what effect does that have on people on the planet?
Well one of the biggest effects of course is that low elevation regions are at risk of losing populated area.
We talked about that already for coastal regions in a big area like the United States where people may have to retreat from the coast as the sea continues to encroach or build very expensive sea walls
and ultimately sort of dyke the country up the way the Netherlands are today.
But maybe more dramatic are countries in the world that actually have no place to go, no higher ground to go to.
And that includes the Pacific and Indian Ocean Island nations and Bangladesh.
For example, Kiribati and the Maldives which have populations of hundreds of thousands of people are Pacific Atolls.
They're Atoll islands, they lie at an average elevation, those two countries, the entire country in both cases has an average elevation of 1.5 to 2 meters above sea level.
1.5 to 2 meters.
Rising sea level displaces fresh water in the aquifers and it erodes and floods the island.
So even if the island doesn't actually sink under the waves literally, or even before that happens, they would be rendered uninhabitable.
And this is already underway in both of those places.
And it's looking like in a matter of decades, not centuries, these countries may be literally uninhabitable.
In fact, in 2008, the President of Kiribati in the Pacific announced a plan to manage the complete sort of repopulation of his country.
Everyone moving to Australia, New Zealand, other places in the Pacific Ocean.
And the country would literally cease to exist if they have to carry this plan out.
It's not so far-fetched.
Tuvalu, another Pacific Atoll, the highest elevation in the entire country is only 4.5 meters above sea level.
A 20 or 30 centimeter sea level rise, something that we might see within the next 50 years, would be enough to make the whole country uninhabitable.
Now that's a very small country. There are only about 10,000 people there.
But the idea that a country would literally go out of business because of sea level rise is not so far in the future.
In fact, in the Maldives, the President of the country, in order to really underscore this whole point,
in 2009, held an underwater cabinet meeting to sign papers protesting against the lack of response at the Copenhagen Accords to the urgency of the problem.
If you live there, you really feel it.
And in fact, if you live in Bangladesh, you really feel it as well.
Because a 1.5 meter sea level rise, something that we could see in a couple of centuries, maybe even in the next century,
would place 16 percent of Bangladesh under the tidal range, displace 17 million people.
17 million people.
And of course, the impact is wider because, first of all, saltwater encroachment into aquifers spreads the impact farther.
But also, 17 million displaced people have to go bother other people, essentially, or they have to be displaced to somewhere.
And so the impacts will be felt all over, especially the less well-developed regions of the world that are in low-lying coastal areas.
Well, some additional ocean-related observations of climate change include the change in snow cover and ice extent on land already decreased about 10 percent since the 1960s.
That's adding the net water to the ocean.
El Nino periods have already become more frequent since the 1970s, according to the ocean climatologists.
And there's some evidence that the cyclonic storms, the hurricanes and typhoons, are becoming more severe.
And possibly even the extra-tropical cyclones, although that's a little less certain.
And the reason they're becoming more severe, of course, in the case of tropical storms, is they're fueled by heat.
And if there's more heat in the surface waters of the ocean, that's more energy for them to pick up as they move along.
Computer simulations, by the way, don't show more frequent hurricanes.
So far, the general consensus is they just show more severe ones when they do form.
That's an area of rapidly changing research, so we'll see what happens in the future with that.
Ocean temperature is going to continue to rise and accelerate.
The heat content will grow.
The Arctic sea ice will contract in the 21st century.
These are virtually certain.
The summer ice may disappear entirely over the span of a number of decades.
And the Greenland and Arctic ice sheets will continue to lose ice at an increasing rate.
So sea level is going to keep rising.
And increased risk from the storm surges, the hurricanes themselves, because under higher sea level you have less buffer zone,
and saltwater intrusion are a big secondary but very important effect of sea level rise overall.
Well, in the future, again, according to the simulations, we're likely to see an ocean that is both more active in some ways and less active in others.
We may see stronger surface heat in the surface water, stronger surface currents, and also, as I said, stronger storms being fueled by that heat.
But if the deep water circulation starts to become slackened or decreased by the lack of that Arctic deep water formation,
and perhaps similar thing going on the Antarctic, then maybe over time that very slow circulation of all the deep water in the ocean will be modified.
And we don't know how those effects will play out over a long period of time.
So we've looked at these effects of global change, but in the next lecture we're going to take a look at different scale of human impacts on the ocean.
That's going to include all sorts of pollution problems and things that we put in the sea.
It's also going to include, though, a whole different effect of carbon dioxide, as we'll see, in terms of the change in chemistry of the ocean
and its effect is essentially a toxin to much of the life in oceanic ecosystems.
