In several of the previous lectures, we've examined a number of different major human
impacts on the world's ocean ecosystems.
We've looked at fishing and whaling and other extraction of resources.
We've even seen that human impacts have been going on for a very long time.
For example, remember the story of the discovery and then extinction of the stellar seacow
in only 20-some years because of hunting and the demise of that organism.
We've looked at sea level rise and changing temperature in the ocean, and we've talked
about things that are introduced into the sea as well, in particular oil spills, such
as the Gulf oil disaster.
So what I'd like to do in this lecture now is take up the topic of what we put into the
sea in a lot more detail, and we're going to look at toxins and pollution in the ocean.
Well, marine pollution would be defined just as the introduction into the ocean by humans
of any kind of substances or even energy that changes the quality of the water or affects
the physical and biological environment, and pollutants by definition interfere in some
way with reproductive, metabolic, or other biochemical processes of life in the sea.
Some of what's introduced into the ocean is done essentially quite intentionally.
For example, we have outfall.
We have sewage treated in many cases, not treated in other cases, that's dumped directly
into the sea quite intentionally, or solid waste that's dumped at sea, which still goes
on to a great extent, both from on land sources and also from marine dumping, from ships that
are traveling at sea.
Other things are introduced less intentionally, but still as the result of sort of ordinary
business as usual practices, like the runoff of agricultural waste down the rivers and
into the ocean, or other kinds of industrial waste that have made it into the terrestrial
ecosystem and get into the sea, or come in through the air in the form of particulates
from say burning of coal that land on the surface of the ocean.
These are major inputs of material into the sea.
There are also as much more actually minor inputs, just maybe 10 or so percent of all
inputs, are things like oil spills at sea, direct spills that are accidental introduction
of pollutants into the environment.
So let's take a look at a number of these one at a time.
I'm going to examine different environmental impacts on the ocean's ecosystems from stuff
we're putting into the sea, and some are familiar forms of pollution, and others are not actually.
Some are effects that worsened until they were recognized as threats to the health of
animals or people, and then have been mitigated for, so things are getting better.
Others are just now worsening, or maybe even only just being discovered in say the past
decade or so.
The first one I want to look at is actually one that you might not think of as a pollutant
at all, might seem a little bit of a novel concept to you, but the effect of the introduction
of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and the ocean, and its effect as a toxic compound.
Well, I mentioned, I talked about the coral reefs already, and I talked about some of
the stresses on the coral reefs, and one of the fundamental stresses is from something
we could think of as a form of energy pollution, and that is the warming of the water can be
heat pollution that causes higher water temperatures.
Why is that pollution?
Well, because it has a toxic effect directly on many of the different organisms in the
sea, and the coral reefs are the most specific example.
Remember coral bleaching.
What happens to corals is that when the sea surface temperatures exceed normal summer
high temperatures by only about one degree or so, the corals respond by expelling those
symbiotic algae that live within the coral polyps, the zoazanthellae.
That's called coral bleaching.
They can recover if it's a brief episode, and the water temperature returns normal.
They repopulate with the zoazanthellae, but if it goes over a month or so, remember the
corals essentially die off, and it doesn't recover.
New reef building corals can build new structures, but they won't re-inhabit the same coral skeleton.
Well, this temperature change in the water can be sort of a semi-naturally occurring
event.
In 1998, the El Niño-La Niña combination caused changes in water temperature in tropical
regions around the world, and it's estimated to have killed 16% of corals worldwide.
That's a natural event, but the corals were right at the edge of their temperature range
in part because the ocean is getting warmer, and the warmer it gets, the closer they'll
be and the more vulnerable to kind of meteorological events like that affecting them.
Direct introduction of warmer water at coastlines is also causing coral bleaching in many different
places, and the worldwide coral population or the number of coral reefs that are healthy
today is only about 50% of what it was, say, 50 years ago or so.
But a different form of pollution comes from carbon dioxide introduction into the environment,
and that is something called ocean acidification, and that is potentially an even greater effect
on the coral reefs overall.
We've said that when there's more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere than there was in the pre-industrial
era, and most of that carbon dioxide that has been introduced into the atmosphere has
actually been exchanged with the ocean and become dissolved CO2 in the water of the ocean.
Well dissolved CO2 makes water more acidic because it reacts with the water to form something
called carbonic acid.
So the ocean's normal pH level is about eight.
The ocean's a little bit alkaline.
Remember, seven is neutral on the pH scale between alkalinity and acidity.
Just a small change in that alkalinity and that pH of eight down towards the direction
of more acid interferes with the coral's ability to make their shells.
They make their coral skeleton, the reef itself, from calcium carbonate, also known as limestone,
and if there's more carbonic acid in the water, it dissolves the limestone or more directly
interferes with their ability to secrete the limestone and make the hard reef structure.
So actually specifically the pH of the ocean today in the tropical regions is about 8.1
and its pre-industrial level was about 8.2, known from old water samples.
If it gets to 7.9, not a big change but remember pH scale is kind of a logarithmic scale, 7.9
which is projected at present rates to happen in the next 40 years or so, it's possible
that the corals will literally cease to be able to make their skeletons, that is build
the reef at all.
And a near extinction of many or even nearly all reef building corals is considered a real
possibility by marine biologists.
This was only recognized over the course of the past less than 10 years really and it's
a very new area of study, it's a very new area of major concern among marine biologists
that the reef building corals as we know them could cease to exist within the next, within
coming decades.
Other organisms are actually at risk too from acidification because remember there's lots
of things that make their shells or their skeletons out of calcium carbonate, phytoplankton,
the coccolith of forids, remember the great white cliffs of Dover and the zillions of dead
animals that are dead phytoplankton that make it up, that's all calcium carbonate, limestone
that was secreted by those organisms, if they can't make that calcium carbonate anymore
then they won't bloom in the ocean in the profusion that they have today.
Foraminifera and terrapods are other organisms that make carbonate shells, the effect of acidification
on all these organisms are really unknown at this time in our major area of current research.
More generally it's simply not known how the larval stages of many organisms are going
to respond to a changing pH balance of the water in which they live, this could interfere
with a number of metabolic processes and so changing the fundamental acid chemistry of
the ocean is a big effect and it's a big effect that's just beginning and we don't
know where it's going but we do know that it's certainly going to happen because CO2
is getting into the water and that's some of the most basic chemistry of all, that just
simply makes it more acidic than it is today.
Well that brings us into sort of the whole concept of toxic marine pollution and the
introduction of toxic materials, toxic to life in one way or another into the sea and
so we have all kinds of examples including point sources of sewage outfall.
For a long time raw sewage all over the USA and certainly the rest of the world as well
was simply dumped into the ocean, the ocean was the ultimate drain and sewer and you put
it there and you assume that the solution to pollution is dilution as was often said,
the sea is big so put it out there and everything's fine.
It turns out everything's not fine because a lot of the material that goes out in that
sewage outfall ends up deposited in the sediments near the outfall source, near where the pipes
go into the ocean or even buried in the sediments around that area.
So that's a real significant problem.
Solid waste in the ocean is another problem.
Let's talk about the key characteristics of any pollutant in the marine environment.
There's sort of three, first of all the concentration of that pollutant, the amount that's present,
a trace amount of some pollutants is really not toxic to anything around if the toxicity
is relatively low so for some things we really genuinely don't have to worry about them.
The toxicity, the actual degree to which that particular pollutant is damaging, the
amount of it say ingested by an organism required to cause damage is of course a major factor.
And then finally the persistence, meaning the length of time that pollutant lasts in
the environment.
Many pollutants are broken down by organic processes or by ultraviolet sunlight relatively
quickly so they make it into the water but then they break down and so they have low
persistence.
They have short persistence times.
They make some less of a problem than ones that have very long persistence in the ocean.
Well runoff from land and direct introduction of sewage outfall and sometimes of actual
solid waste dumping all introduce a number of really, fairly toxic materials into the
ocean.
And that includes heavy metals like mercury and lead, PCBs, you know, various kinds of
organic compounds that are used in industrial practices or used in dry cleaning industry
and are basically interfere with various kinds of biological metabolic processes.
These are significant problems when they go into the ocean and enter the food chain,
the food web that we see in the sea and we'll see examples of that in a few minutes.
Those are delivered primarily from urban runoff and sewers and urban activities including
industrial manufacturing, driving of cars, all of that sort of thing.
Some other examples are pesticides.
Pesticides are delivered primarily from rivers and streams because they're put onto agricultural
fields, end up in the hydrologic system and flow down to the ocean.
Pesticides basically when they get into the ocean do exactly what they're meant to do
which is kill organisms or hurt organisms but they're doing it in the wrong place instead
of doing it to keep down pests on the agricultural fields.
They're now doing it in the ocean where we don't want them to.
Agricultural fields are also treated with fertilizers all the time and so those agricultural
fertilizers are nutrients and when they go into the ocean you might think well nutrients
are good, right?
We want nutrients so that there would be blooms.
Sometimes there's too much of a good thing as we'll see.
Well first of all the really toxic compounds, the heavy metals, let's talk about them for
a second.
Very small concentrations of these heavy metals can cause toxic damage to organisms and you
know important among others are lead, mercury and copper.
Some of the sources of heavy metal pollution include in particular coal combustion because
coal contains significant amounts of these heavy metals and they don't burn up the way
the carbon does, they go out the smokestacks so they end up in the ocean through particulate
outfall onto the ocean.
Power generation steel and iron manufacturing from fuel oils, all of these things included
and one major area is actually the incineration of urban trash because when we burn garbage
we put things that are in the garbage that we don't want to bury in the ground into the
atmosphere instead and a lot of that comes back down on the land or on the sea.
Well chemical pollution by toxic heavy metals and organic compounds like PCBs have affected
virtually all the urbanized coastal areas of North America and in fact all around the
world.
Shellfish for example are basically have too much of the toxic compounds to even consume
and fisheries are banned for them in many estuaries that were formerly highly productive,
San Francisco Bay, the region around New York City, the region around Galveston and Houston,
Texas, Southern California.
These are all areas where basically things have too much of toxic compounds for humans
to consume and those are also of course then in the marine food chain.
Organic compounds as well and all over the world the problem is essentially the same.
Some places they're banned, some places they're not and some places shellfish fisheries are
going on even though there's known to be high toxicity in the material that's fueling the
shellfish.
Well why does that become a problem?
What happens in the marine ecosystem that causes this to become an issue both for the
marine life and for human beings?
You've certainly probably heard that children and pregnant women are advised to limit their
intake of tuna fish.
Why is that?
Well it's mercury and mercury is concentrated in the flesh of the tuna fish.
So take a look at that concentration in just a second but the mercury comes as I said
from the burning of coal and it's what we call a teratogen meaning it's something that
actually causes genetic damage and that's the specific reason why people who are pregnant
or might become pregnant are advised not to eat too much tuna because of the kind of examples
of the really acute mercury toxicity that unfortunately have been seen in the world.
One of those examples is a famous story of Minamata Japan, an area that between the 1950s
and 1960s was a town, there was an industrial source of really heavy loads of mercury going
into a shallow bay, an estuarine environment in the town and the people who lived there
consumed huge amounts of shellfish that were coming out of that same bay.
It caused the most acute probably mass scale mercury toxicity and many many children were
born with genetic defects, it's a very sad story, it went on for a very long time before
the specific toxicity of mercury was recognized and steps were taken to mitigate against it.
So this has actually been given the name Minamata disease which is essentially just acute mercury
poisoning.
It's not just tuna, the FDA recommends children and women of childbearing age avoid swordfish,
sharks, king mackerel, all together and many other fish to limit their intake.
Why is that?
Well all of them share, what they all share is they're the big fish that consume other
fish, they're living at a high trophic level as consumers in the ocean.
The shellfish are concentrating it more or less directly, they're filter feeding right
out of the water where the mercury or the other compounds were put directly into the
water.
These other large fish are way out in the middle of the sea, we talk about tuna, they're swimming
around in the ocean but they're living at a high trophic level.
And because of that then they're susceptible to what's called biomagnification and this
was made famous by Rachel Carson, Silent Spring, way back in the early 1960s, late 1950s.
So the example that was, the one that really made biomagnification clear was DDT and in
the early 1960s, late 1950s it was being used of course very heavily applied to control
mosquitoes, to control all sorts of pests, it's a very good pesticide in fact, insecticide.
But the problem is the DDT gets into the water at very low concentrations, something like
three parts per trillion in this sort of classic study from Long Island Sound.
But the DDT is consumed by the plankton, it's taken up from the water by the plankton, it's
consumed by the small zooplankton and concentrated there, they're eaten by the small fish, remember
the amount of food you need to eat at each trophic level is a factor of ten at least
magnification and so you go up through the small fish where now it's at half a part per
million instead of measured in parts per trillion, all the way up to the larger fish and ultimately
the birds that were consuming those fish at the fourth trophic level up or the fifth trophic
level up and in pelicans and cormorants and things it was at 25 parts per million, a ten
million fold increase in concentration of that toxin up the food chain and so of course
that's toxic to the animals that are consuming it and it's toxic to human beings if we consume
those animals like the high trophic level tuna and swordfish.
Biomagnification applies to lots of pollutants, not just DDT, fortunately DDT is mostly out
of our environment and those levels have actually declined greatly since it was banned in North
America but biomagnification applies to mercury which is exactly the reason for the FDA recommendation,
it applies to PCBs and other chlorinated hydrocarbons and in fact dolphins off the US coast have
been found to have levels of PCBs, chlorinated hydrocarbons that are many many times what
we consider a safe level on land, dolphins with flesh that has 6900 parts per million
PCBs, the human safe limit set by the FDA is 5 parts per million, 6900 so that dolphin
is essentially a toxic substance all by itself and that's because of PCB dumping into the
ocean and lead is another one of course that becomes concentrated through biomagnification.
Well there is some good news on these kinds of toxic substances because the recognition
of their toxicity and accumulation in ocean water, sediments and organisms has actually
led to real action. We know DDT use was banned in the US in the 1970s, leaded gas was phased
out from 1975 or so and it turns out that the near shore environment shows rapidly declining
or showed rapidly declining amounts of these really really bad substances till you know
by the 1990s heavy metal disposal was greatly tightened up at least here and accumulations
have fallen to tiny fractions of the peak levels of the 60s and 70s and 80s. In other
parts of the world they may not be controlled as well and certainly in a lot of developing
countries what goes into the ocean is virtually unknown and uncontrolled. On the other hand
the news is not all good because the accumulation of these substances in organisms and in sediments
means that many of those compounds are still hanging around, they got taken up by organisms
and buried in the sediments. The estuarine shellfish in particular still have large toxicity
associated with you know the runoff from several decades ago and that's why virtually all
the urbanized areas, their estuarine environments are still off limits to shellfish fishing.
Well another form of pollution as I said can be too much of a good thing which means nutrient
runoff into the ocean and I mentioned this once before the process called eutrophication.
The result of putting excess nutrients in the water can be a bad thing because it causes
too much to grow in the water. Nutrients go into the water from either sewage outfall
or agricultural runoff of fertilizers. Both are major sources depending on where you are
in the coastal regions of the ocean they're both potentially big problems and the reason
is because the same nitrogen and phosphorus that helps plants grow in agricultural fields
once it gets into the water offshore or the extra organic matter that comes from sewage
outfall can cause it fuels organisms. They're happy they have lots of nutrients in the shallow
water offshore so it causes massive blooms of algal plankton or the thing called red tide
and even causes some of these other odd things you sometimes see like yellow foams. Now normal
seafoam you see at the coast is often not the product of any kind of human introduction
material it's just part of the marine process and the organic matter but sometimes when
it gets really extreme it's because of excess eutrophication. We already talked about red
tide a little bit remember what that is. It's the massive bloom of those dinoflagellates
particular kinds of phytoplankton that are photosynthesizers and once they get all those
nutrients they can bloom in great perfusion but many of the dinoflagellates as a defense
mechanism have toxic compounds in their bodies so that they're not good to eat and in high
concentration in the water then they become very toxic to marine life, can kill a lot
of marine life and can sicken or even kill human beings who consume that marine life
and in some cases of allergies even people who live nearby and the wind just blows from
say the dinoflagellates the red tide that's all washed up onto the beach. Red tide can
get so bad that it can even be seen from space as in satellite images of the Florida peninsula
for example where the red tides form around the coastline. Another one the so called black
tide is a different story because black tide as we see in this image from near the coast
and beautiful otherwise pristine waters in New Zealand is a massive bloom of algae in
the water again fed by nutrients from runoff and eutrophication that's not directly toxic
itself but what it does is it uses up the available oxygen. Now algae and other photosynthesizers
make oxygen right but what they do is during the day they make oxygen at night they respire
and burn the fuel and they use up some oxygen and then all the zooplankton bloom and the
larger fish bloom use up the oxygen that those algae are making eventually cause the water
to become hypoxic or too low in oxygen. The effect of hypoxia is that the big fish and
shrimp and things like that that can leave that can move will leave the area they go
to where there's more oxygen they need oxygen to to respire. Other organisms that can't
get out of the area that don't move as fast like crabs and things like that will just
suffocate shellfish as well. So in the Gulf of Mexico there's something called the dead
zone maybe you've heard about it. From February through late summer every year a huge hypoxic
low oxygen zone appears in the Gulf of Mexico off the mouth of the Mississippi River. It's
produced by the agricultural runoff that's coming down the Mississippi and causing eutrophication
of the shallow near shore waters there. Nothing is living on the bottom or in the water column
above the bottom in this vast plume of nutrients that we call the dead zone. It varies in size
from year to year depending on oceanographic conditions and storms and waves and things
but up to 8,500 square miles of area can be can participate in the dead zone and it's
basically getting worse as the years and decades go by. The Gulf of Mexico dead zone is also
only one of many around the world anywhere where there's sort of large runoff into the
sea from big rivers that drain out agricultural areas and especially when they go into very
shallow water basins. One of the maybe positive aspects of the dead zone and the eutrophication
problem at least is that it's pretty reversible. It's because of the direct influx seasonally
of this essentially toxic nutrient load into the water. For example there was a very bad
dead zone forming in the Black Sea off of the coast of the former Soviet Union and during
that period when the former Soviet Union existed fertilizer runoff ran into the Black Sea and
just the way we're talking about the Gulf of Mexico dead zone. After the collapse of
the USSR then the government's support of fertilizers and the government's support of
agriculture dropped precipitously in that area. Fertilizer usage dropped and the dead zone
actually recovered so that region of the Black Sea has become much healthier since the end
of the Soviet Union than it was before. Well another form of direct dumping into the water
is solid waste. The sea is a dump for trash and garbage all over the world to this day.
Fortunately it's not as much so from the USA as it was in the past but it isn't over here
and it's certainly not over in much of the rest of the world. Starting from 1890 basically all
of New York City's trash for example went into the New York Bight, the water just off the mouth
of the Hudson River. Garbage of every type all the urban trash went into the sea. Floating
garbage ended up on beaches all over New Jersey and all over the Long Island region and really
caused a certain public outcry so eventually from the 1930s on floating garbage at least was
banned or restricted. It wasn't until 1986 that they actually stopped that dumping and moved to
a different dump site called the 106 mile site because it was 106 miles offshore where they
dumped sewage sludge and other solid waste. Only between 1986 and 1992 actually was that used and
then finally ocean dumping from the city at least was restricted but in that time that short period
of time 42 million tons of sewage sludge were dumped out there and actually became a study
site for growth of benthic organisms because it was in very deep water based on the introduction
of extra organic matter stuff to eat. Restrictions are growing on this kind of dumping but it's
still a big problem. One kind of problem from that actually is that military dumping of solid
waste has been going on for a very long time and is restricted now but there's a legacy of it out
there in the ocean that's phenomenal. One of the expeditions that I went out on to go out offshore
the Pacific Northwest we were intending to go down and take core samples of the sea bottom
and the area that we were coring in was a zone that was restricted because according to the
information we had gotten at the end of World War II the Navy had dumped large stores, whole
barrels, many barrels of mustard gas that had been stockpiled during the war and never used
and so they just went out there and dumped it in the deep water. There are huge dumps like that
in the Atlantic, in the Pacific, and all over the world's ocean of pretty toxic compounds so we
were afraid we might core through an actual you know old rusting oil drum of mustard gas and get
one of our cores back. We had to get clearance on the exact location but of course this was done
in the 1940s. Records weren't kept particularly well they just went out to sea and dumped the
stuff so there wasn't a record of the exact location and we had to do a camera survey of
the sea bottom first to make sure the area was actually clear. And then finally I want to talk
about plastics in the ocean. Plastic garbage and particles in the sea have become pervasive and
they've become pervasive pretty recently as society has just greatly increased its use of
plastics. They come from both land sources in terms of dumping and from marine dumping from
ships in fact. There's an estimate that every year 135,000 tons of plastic are dumped by ships at sea
including fishing gear that cripples or kills marine mammals we've all seen photos of seals and
dolphins wrapped up in plastic or birds caught in the six-packed rings and these are all very
real problems and very growing problems. They're kind of exemplified by something that's been in
the news lately the recently discovered Great Pacific Garbage Patch which highlights the problem.
The Pacific Garbage Patch is a region of the North Pacific Ocean within the big gyre. Remember
the oceanic gyre is the currents and the center of the gyre is areas of water that's relatively calm.
It's in the doldrums, the winds don't blow a whole lot, the water doesn't move around a lot
and the currents have swept bits of plastic that are entering the marine world into
concentrated a couple of different concentrated zones within the Pacific gyre. It's not the whole
Pacific gyre which covers an enormous region the Pacific Ocean but a couple of specific spots one
near sort of the North Atlantic side of the gyre, one near Japan and also what's called a convergent
zone in the north side of the gyre where the waters are downwelling somewhat in the sea north of Hawaii.
There's an estimate of something like one million pieces of plastic per square kilometer over an
area that in aggregate it might be as big as the continental U.S. But it's not exactly what maybe
the news has pictured it as being because most of that plastic is in the form of very very small
suspended pieces in the water. If you look at the water you wouldn't even even see them. If you
sample the water you find that there's microscopic bits of plastic everywhere concentrated in this
great Pacific garbage patch. One sampling study of the water showed that the actual plastic
particles outweighed the zooplankton in that region by a factor of six. Now that doesn't mean they
do for the whole ocean fortunately. This is a concentrated plastic zone and zooplankton are
actually pretty rare. It's a relative biological desert. It's possible though that toxins like
PCB and dioxin accumulate on the surface of these plastic and are consumed by various organisms
and it's really unknown to what extent the plastic mimics the plankton and is therefore consumed by
all forms of marine fish and mammals and other organisms with unknown effect. One effect we do
know is that plastic ingestion by birds by pelagic birds is a major problem for those birds.
The pelagic birds are the ones that fly all over the ocean and live basically at sea albatrosses
and related birds called fulmars fly around at sea and they feed and of course when they see a bit
of plastic not at not a microscopic bit anymore but an actual chunk of plastic of some sort
of discarded bottle cap for example they see it floating in the water they're going to consume
it they think it's it's something good to eat. Those organisms albatrosses and fulmars are found
in recent years to have up to 20 or more pieces of indigestible plastic in their stomachs interfering
with their digestive systems in the Pacific in the Atlantic and now even recently discovered for
fulmars living in the Arctic Ocean region. Now the study of diet in these birds back in the 1970s
where lots of them were dissected to see what was in their digestive tract reported no plastic
particles so no plastic pieces so from the 1970s to today this has become an enormous problem and
it may be interfering with these birds lifestyle very much. The last thing I want to mention
briefly is sound pollution in the ocean you know the industrialized ocean is a very noisy place we
may not think of sound as pollution but it is in the sea and that it interferes with organisms
ships use sonar the seismic reflection exploration below the seafloor uses these air guns that emit
loud booms into the water but probably most of all just everyday shipping is a constant source of
noise from propellers and things like that so the potential impacts are large for animals that use
echolocation and sound to communicate like whales and dolphins. We don't really know what the the
effect is on them of all of these sounds for the strongest sounds mostly emitted by sort of
almost classified or new navy sonar that's very high-powered it's possible there's direct damage
to the internal organs of some of these echolocating mammals some have claimed they've actually
caused death or beaching of whales but that's not exactly clear to this day it may be true
research is ongoing on that but certainly just the noisy marine environment may be interfering
with the large long-distance communication of say the humpback whales and other organisms
which may be affecting their entire lifestyle and certainly has to at least be annoying them
well on many different fronts than the marine environment is challenged as never before there
are some success stories with respect to point sources but less so with the broad-based runoff
and plastics things that are entering from everywhere and they're a rapidly growing problem
awareness of these problems presumably though is the first step to finding solutions to them
