So, in 1964, Arthur C. Dotto, an American philosopher, walked into the stable gallery
in New York City and saw something that took him about 20 years to process.
But once he had, he declared that what he saw that day was the end of art.
He saw that art had reached its conclusion.
He spent the following years developing this idea in articles and books, and since then,
it's become a very influential theory in the history of art.
To explain it, we're going to have to go deep into the history of art, discuss Plato,
we'll dip into Hegel for a bit, and hopefully by the end of it, you may even find a way
to enjoy contemporary art, even though, according to Dotto, art finished more than a half century
ago.
And if this sounds like it's your kind of thing, you may want to subscribe or visit
my Patreon page, I put out a new video every month, let's just jump right into Dotto's
theory of the end of art.
So let's start with a couple basic ideas from art history, some stories that art tells
about itself.
It's often said that Giorgio Vasari's The Lives of Artists is the first work of intentional
art history.
It provides biographies of painters and generally follows a narrative that each successive painter
is building on the innovations of previous artists.
Giotto builds on Chimabui, Francesca builds on Giotto, and so on.
The implication here is that art is always progressing towards something.
In Vasari's work, it feels like art is progressing towards Michelangelo, but more broadly, it's
progressing towards what Dotto called perceptual equivalency.
The goal of art is to have the images look as realistic as possible.
So that's the first point that I want to establish before we move on.
Early art history had a particular story about itself, that if it moved forward, it moved
towards more accurate representations of reality.
The second concept that I want to establish at the start of this video is that art is
connected to a time and place.
The art historian Michael Baxendahl began his classic book Art and Experience in 15th
Century Italy with a line, a 15th century painting is the deposit of a social relationship.
In other words, it's the product of a system of exchange, patron, artist, audience, and
through that exchange the painting comes to represent the values of its time period.
It's a record of those relationships.
More broadly, what is considered a work of art in a given time and place is the result
of a consensus between members of what Dotto calls the art world.
So in the 15th century, to keep that example going, the art world consists of painters
and sculptors, sure, but also the patrons who commissioned the work, the craftsmen who
work in the studios of the artists, the religious scholars who might comment on the work, the
politicians who might censor the work, and the general community that will engage with
the work when it's produced.
So for example, Botticelli's The Birth of Venus takes a pagan goddess as its subject,
unthinkable just a few years before it was painted, but the Medici patrons and artists
and the intellectuals of the time period kind of agreed that a painting like this could
be art, and therefore it's art.
A hundred years later, Baroque art would be fashionable as part of the counter-reformation.
The standard and quality of art would be judged not by the same standards of the high renaissance,
but with the standards of the Baroque.
So a pagan goddess might be seen as heresy rather than art, and so artists like Michelangelo,
who had no problem creating works of pagan deities in the 15th century, might stop doing
that in the 16th century.
Societies have changing values, and those values are reflected in the art world.
So art is connected to history.
If you study art history, then you study those connections.
Oftentimes, it's done in a way that I just did.
You name a place and a time, Italy in the 15th century, you name the artistic movement,
the high renaissance, and you analyze the work based on that cultural context and using
the standards of that particular movement.
Judging high renaissance art by the standards of say, impressionism would make little sense.
So when we say Botticelli was a painter of the high renaissance, that gives us a way
to understand his paintings.
It gives us a general understanding of his artistic project, and with that understanding,
we're provided the tools to analyze his work.
Okay, so those two points established.
Art has a sense of its own progression through time, and that art history connects art to
time and place of production.
Now let's dig into Danto's argument.
He's a philosopher, so we'll have to begin with philosophy.
Famously, the philosopher Plato adhered to the memetic theory of art.
He believed that a work of art should have perceptual equivalency, that good art looks
like a mirror of the world.
This was influential for Vasari's understanding of art's progress, for example.
But Plato also thought that art is kind of useless, and this is an important starting
place for Danto.
It's the start of what he calls the philosophic disenfranchisement of art.
So according to Plato, the world that we see every day is just a reflection of the higher
realm of ideal forms.
It's like every chair that we see is just a reflection of an ideal chair that lives
in our mind, and this allows us to identify a chair in the physical world.
Like we have an idea of a chair in our heads, and then we see one, and we know what it is
because we have a bucket to put it into in our heads.
It doesn't matter what it's made of, or what color it is, it reflects our understanding
of what a chair should be.
Similarly, every right triangle that we encounter in the physical world is only a reflection
of the ideal right triangle that can be studied with reason and geometry.
By studying that ideal right triangle, using our capacity for deductive reasoning, we can
understand any right triangle in the physical world.
So if we want to understand our physical existence, we should study the truth, we should pursue
the study of ideal forms and mathematics and so on, focusing on our reason rather than
our perception.
Furthermore, in Book 10 of his Republic, Plato has Socrates define artists as an imitator
of that which others make.
So if reality is just a reflection and art is an imitation of that reflection, then artists
are just producing reflections of reflections, and that, for Plato and Socrates, is moving
in the wrong direction.
It takes us further from the truth, not closer.
It's the opposite of truth, it's a lie.
So we can safely ignore art, it's useless.
And we can make the argument that this started a long tradition of philosophers belittling
art, even when they discuss it positively, and like, I get it, what does art actually
do?
Kant, for example, once said that art is purposive without purpose, that its purpose
is only its intention to be made.
It doesn't do anything other than exist as a creation.
Like take Picasso's masterpiece, Guernica, considered by many to be one of the greatest
works of art in the 20th century.
The painting illustrates the terror bombing of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War.
Did this painting stop any bombs?
Did Franco's troops see this painting and have a crisis of conscious and lay down their
guns?
I think that you know the answer to that.
Arthardanto says now that the purpose of Guernica is to be a handsome backdrop for pickups at
the Museum of Modern Art, or a place to meet a date like the clock at the Biltmore Hotel,
to ornament the kitchen cupboard in the sophisticated apartments that I saw written up.
So for the philosopher of art, Arthardanto, Guernica, perhaps the most powerful work of
art of the last century, these days serves no greater purpose than an identifiable pickup
spot or decoration.
That's what art ultimately does.
And philosophers aren't the only ones to think art is useless either.
I made a video recently about W.H. Auden's view that poetry makes nothing happen.
The argument here is that art can reflect things that exist but can't actually do anything
about them.
Dotto asks, did jazz in any sense cause or only emblemize the moral transformations of
the jazz age?
Did the Beatles cause or only prefigure the political perturbations of the 60s?
Art is a product of its time, not an influence on its time.
It doesn't actually do anything.
Okay, so art is weak.
It has no power to affect any kind of real change or do anything at all.
Everyone seems to agree, from philosophers to poets.
Fine, I get it.
But then, what's all this censorship about?
Why did Botticelli feel like he needed to throw some of his pagan inspired paintings
into a fire in 1497?
Why do politicians ban books?
Why did Plato and Socrates ban poets from their perfect utopian republic?
If the arts are so impotent, why are they also perceived as being so dangerous?
Well, Dotto's thesis in the philosophic disenfranchisement of art is that it does not come from historical
knowledge but rather from a philosophical belief.
Representing art as something that in its nature can make nothing happen is not so much
a view opposed to the view that art is dangerous.
It is a way of responding to the sensed danger of art by treating it metaphysically as though
there were nothing to be afraid of.
So in other words, the sense that art might be dangerous caused the philosophical position
that art is not dangerous.
Philosophers feared the power of art and so they belittled it and created narratives and
frameworks to keep it at a distance.
If you tell artists that they were useless enough times, maybe they'll even believe
it.
I'm looking at you, Winston Hewauden.
Philosophy disenfranchised art by constructing a narrative of art's uselessness and it worked.
So when philosophy excluded the arts from the realm of reason and utility, the arts
responded by taking up shop in the realm of expression and emotion.
Art could use its memetic properties to imbue people or events with emotionally expressive
resonance.
It can tell you how you should feel about something.
This king, for example, is really cool and strong.
This battle was really important and people acted heroically.
This bombing was really terrible and caused people a lot of pain.
If we accept that this is the purpose that art has been relegated to, then we need to
understand how that changed the idea of progress in the arts.
So let's return to that philosophy of art's progress that I articulated earlier and follow
Danto's argument all the way to the end of art.
So Vasari's account, and many others in the European tradition of art history, tells
the story of increasingly lifelike depictions of reality.
Again, what Danto called perceptual equivalence.
Techniques like geometric perspective or foreshortening are advancements in this progress.
They help art move towards that goal, towards its end.
So Giotto is more realistic than Shimabui.
Botticelli bests them both.
Michelangelo is better at capturing movement and tension.
Caravaggio isn't afraid to paint the dust on feet or use people outside his door as
models and the story goes on, ever closer to perceptual equivalence.
But then, of course, the camera was invented.
Shortly after that, the moving picture was invented, and no one is going to be able to
paint movement better than a moving picture can capture it.
Painting can no longer compete in that game of perceptual equivalence.
So it had to lean even harder into that expressive and emotional realm.
Art became intensely emotional after this.
Expressionism becomes more than just a purpose, it becomes part of the formal qualities of
the painting.
Art becomes intensely emotional after the invention of the camera.
Expression becomes more than just a purpose of art, it becomes part of the formal qualities
of the painting.
Like following Danto's lead, let's take this painting from 1906 by Matisse.
A hundred years earlier, this painting would not be considered worthy of a gallery.
If we hold it to the strictly memetic standards of art, this doesn't look anything like the
reflection of a real person.
So the art world of 1906 must have been holding it to a very different standard.
The formal goal of art must have shifted fully, from representing to expressing.
And according to the standards of expression, this can be categorized as art by the art
world.
There's no problem there.
As Danto says, the green stripe tries to get us to see how Matisse felt about the subject
shown, his own wife, calling for a complex act of interpretation on the part of the viewer.
And in this way, art can still progress.
It can still move forward and continually improve toward a goal or standard.
Painting can become more expressive, it can more accurately communicate or provoke emotions.
From this perspective, Impressionism and the various art forms that Expressionism took
illustrates that progress.
So establishing that the art world can still make progress towards a goal, Danto makes
an interesting move here by looking at the idea of progress in the art world through
the philosophy of an Enlightenment-era thinker named GWF Hegel.
So we're going to need to dip into some Hegel now.
So Hegel had a very particular philosophy of history.
He viewed it as a dialectic, so let's define that term first.
Plato's dialogues are a good example of a dialectic.
In those works, Socrates will pose a question and one of his friends will propose an answer.
They will propose a thesis.
Socrates will then refute that thesis.
He will provide us with an antithesis, an antithesis.
And in the resulting discussion of back and forth, eventually a middle ground will be
reached and he calls that a synthesis.
Hegel viewed history as like a giant dialectic.
He saw that the culture and ideology of a given time and place proposed a system of
values, an aesthetic, a set of trends across diverse fields that includes everything from
political systems to the games that children play.
Those values and trends are then criticized or negated in some way by successive or contemporary
cultures.
There are reactions to the norms of any given system.
That conversation between a cultural system and the reactions to that cultural system
are a dialectic.
At some point a compromise is found between the two and that compromise becomes a new
thesis and the process begins again.
So for a quick example, Catholicism in the 15th century said that there is no salvation
outside of the church.
Then Martin Luther comes along and presents that an antithesis, saying that salvation
can be achieved by individuals through faith alone.
And as a result of this dialectic between thesis and antithesis, Europe eventually finds
a peace in the Treaty of Westphalia, which neuters the question altogether by subordinating
the question of salvation to the judgment of secular governments.
Loyalty to the nation-state replaces loyalty to the church hierarchically and that becomes
the new thesis.
So Hegel's dialectics is a framework for understanding non-linear progress.
But Hegel thought of it as much more than a framework.
For him, this dialectic is a path towards self-discovery.
This path will lead humanity to an understanding of itself.
Like this giant conversation between cultures could theoretically have an ending.
All the disagreements could be reconciled in this ongoing conversation, and history could
have an ending just as Plato's dialogues find conclusions.
Danto uses this framework to view the development of art.
He sees that within this progress of history towards self-knowledge is the story of art.
One artistic movement proposes certain values, like those of the High Renaissance and Botticelli.
Then a counter-argument is proposed by somebody like Savonarola or Martin Luther, and we get
a third proposition in the Baroque.
This becomes the new thesis, and the cycle continues.
So if this is the way that the art world works, if that's like the way that progress actually
works and not in that linear way that Vasari thought, then art can actually have an ending.
That conversation could have a conclusion.
And Danto thought that he witnessed it in 1964.
So what exactly happened in the Stable Gallery in 1964?
Well, he saw Andy Warhol's Brillo Boxes.
These boxes were made to look exactly like the boxes delivered to stores that sold Brillo
Pads.
Andy Warhol believed that he could have an aesthetic experience in a warehouse and tried
to recreate that experience in an art gallery.
The boxes asked us to consider that experience worthy of our attention, as full of potential
meaning, and to consider that experience as part of the ongoing discussion about what
art is and what it can be and what it means to be categorized as such.
About a half century before these Brillo Boxes inspired Danto, Marcel Duchamp used his position
as an artist to ask similar questions.
In this work, provocatively entitled In the Advance of a Broken Arm, a snow shovel hangs
from the ceiling.
That's what it is, a snow shovel that he probably picked up at the hardware store and
hung it from a ceiling in an art gallery.
He called this type of art ready-made art.
The shovel had artistic value because he decided that it had artistic value.
And this forces the question of why some objects are considered art and other objects that
look similar or literally exactly the same are not considered art.
When do we decide that something should be considered meaningful?
Like this image of the Mona Lisa on my screen right now is not art, but the Mona Lisa that
hangs in the Louvre is.
A Michael Jordan Chicago Bulls jersey is commonplace, but the jersey that Michael Jordan wore when
he won his first championship?
That thing has value.
We invest it with meaning.
So why and how do we do that?
This type of question can be extended into other parts of the human experience.
Why and how do I remember some experiences but forget others nearly identical?
Duchamp's ready-mades ask philosophic questions.
Danto tries to place Duchamp's ready-made art within that greater dialectic of art
and history.
He says, there is a deep question of what internal evolution in the history of art made
Duchamp's question object historically possible, if not historically necessary.
My view is that it could only come at a time when it no longer could be clear to anyone
what art was while perfectly clear that none of the old answers would serve.
The old answers, that art is working towards the goal of perceptual equivalence, or that
it communicates emotion, were no longer sufficient.
That centuries-old dialectic of art trying to find itself ends with Andy Warhol's Brillo
Boxes as the fulfillment of Duchamp's project, because at that point we see that the end
of art is the philosophy of art, a philosophy of meaning-making.
Or in Danto's words, Hegel's stupendous philosophic vision of history gets, or almost
yet, an astounding confirmation in Duchamp's work, which raises the question of the philosophical
nature of art from within art, implying that art already is philosophy in a vivid form,
and has now discharged its spiritual mission by revealing the philosophical essence at
its heart.
So what art finally will have achieved as its fulfillment and fruition is the philosophy
of art.
So art becomes self-actualized like the hero of a coming-of-age story.
Early art recognized its role in ritual and meaning-making, and then philosophy issued
its challenge.
Philosophy worked to construct an identity of art's impotence, and the history of art
since then has been a story of its self-rediscovery.
Despite philosophy's attempts to belittle it, to disenfranchise it, art reveals itself
to have been an investigation into the nature of reality the whole time.
It's a way to ask big questions about knowledge, the search for meaning, the process of becoming,
the foundation of ethics, and so on.
I hope you get the point.
Art is, and always has been, a potent form of philosophy.
It just becomes aware of that in the 1960s.
So now that this conversation is over, now that art ended, what now?
Duchamp said that one of his goals was to stop making retinol art.
He didn't want to make art interesting to look at, but instead interesting to think
about.
A lot of contemporary art is like this.
It's aware that it's philosophy.
When I read art theory books, it usually takes me a longer time than usual because the author
will mention a painting or a sculpture or whatever, and then I need to go look that
thing up before I return to the article.
Not when referencing a work of contemporary art.
Typically a simple description is enough, like, I don't need you to show me a picture
of Duchamp's artwork, The Fountain.
I can just tell you that it's a urinal Duchamp signed and put into a gallery, and that he
didn't even sign his own name.
The description of the work should be enough, I'm not even going to put it on the screen
right now.
It's just a urinal turned on its side with a signature.
And a couple months ago, I published a video about the work of Anika Yi.
Much of her artwork is perishable, like it won't last beyond a few months.
The work is not so much about the enduring physical object, but, as I argue in that video,
it's wrestling with the same questions that philosophers of eco-feminism wrestle with.
It's giving a physical form to those ideas and providing a public point of contact for
those ideas outside of academic journals.
And Anika Yi is a major contemporary artist who recently had a months-long commission
inside the Tate Modern Turbine Hall.
This is a prestigious commission given to only the most exciting contemporary artists.
The previous artist to hold that same commission in that same space was Kara Walker.
These two artists do not share many visual similarities, and yet, they're two of the
most important living artists today.
That's what's going on in the 2020s art world, a lot of differences.
And if we compare that to like a visit to the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, there you're
going to see a lot of Renaissance art and you will also see all the similarities between
those artists.
As we go to a gallery like the MoMA, we can categorize a bunch of the paintings as Cubist
or Impressionist or Geometric Abstraction, but what exactly is Anika Yi?
What exact movement is Kara Walker working within?
We don't have a good answer for that.
So what does art look like after the end of art?
Well, one answer is that it looks like philosophy.
Another answer is that it looks like pluralism.
We can analyze an Impressionist painting using the standards of Impressionist movements,
but we don't have those same rubrics for contemporary art.
This might be why so many people struggle with it, but I for one think that it's pretty
cool.
It's liberating, the gate keeping that artistic movements and manifestos created by artists
have been eliminated.
Artists can look like themselves rather than looking like a good expression of whatever
artistic movement is fashionable at the time.
Like, it's pretty cool that Anika Yi can have robots float around in the same exact
space that Kara Walker just a few months earlier made the invisible narratives of public monuments
visible in a really powerful way.
Those two works of art aren't easily categorized.
They're doing something original, they're doing something different, they're doing
something that's important to them.
Okay, so like, an obvious criticism of Danto's philosophy is that the story he tells about
art is Eurocentric, but the conclusion of that story that he tells allow us for the
world to consider a lot of different approaches often outside of European traditions.
The closing paragraph of his essay, The End of Art, includes the following lines.
The age of pluralism is upon us.
It does not matter anymore what you do, which is what pluralism means.
When one direction is as good as another direction, there is no concept of direction any longer
to apply.
Decoration, self-expression, entertainment are of course abiding human needs.
There will always be a service for art to perform if artists are content with that.
Time ends in its own fulfillment.
Now there are many reasons to question Danto's account of art.
It's Eurocentric, it claims to be about all art, but really it seems to just be about
painting and possibly sculpture sometimes.
And anytime that you invoke Hegel, you're invoking big macro narratives of history that
kind of fall apart once you dig into the internal arguments within the cultures that you've
used a broad brush to explain.
Historians of the early modern period do not view the art of the high renaissance as broadly
homogenous as Danto's narrative would imply.
There are many more criticisms to discuss, but this video has already gone on too long.
That said, I still find Danto's account useful to think about contemporary art.
I find it useful to think about contemporary art as asking philosophical questions or possibly
offering answers to the ongoing referendums of philosophy, like the nature of reality
or the ways that we construct meaning or understanding in the world.
And this account actually helps me appreciate contemporary art even more, and I think that
that's where I'll end this one.
So if you stayed for the whole thing, thank you for watching, I'll see you next month.
