Okay, dear, so in this lecture we are going to talk about an argumentative essay.
Fine.
The title of the essay there is Does Social Media Make Us Anti-Social?
Does Social Media Make Us Anti-Social?
So look at the favorite topic.
From the beginning of the topic, you come to know whether I shall go for the topic
or I shall go against the topic.
Look at the favorite topic and every argumentative topic you will have two sides, either to go
for the topic or to go against the topic, fine?
So argumentative topics are easy to understand because those are not expository topics, okay?
Expository topics, the things are not in a question type but in the argumentative essay,
the topic will almost like be a question type, whether to go for the topic or to go against
the topic and most of the time it will be in a form of a question.
So now look at it like, Does Social Media Make Us Anti-Social?
No, it's your choice whether to say yes, Social Media Make Us Anti-Social or whether to say
no, Social Media Does Not Make Us Anti-Social, that is your choice now, okay?
Okay, it's an argumentative essay based on reasoning, facts and point of views, okay?
Expository essays are based on only facts but argumentative essays are based on reasoning,
facts and point of views.
You will have to go for logical reasoning, you will have to put the facts and you will
have to your own point of view while writing the essay, the argumentative essay, fine?
The important note for an argumentative essay, that is one can go for or against the topic
in an argumentative essay, okay?
One can go for or against the topic in an argumentative essay, you are not bound to
whether to go for the topic or go against the topic, that is your choice, which side
you can defend, you have to go for that, okay?
It depends on your defense, which side you can defend, fine?
You have to go for that, whether you can defend the topic or you can go against the topic,
that is your wish, okay?
Or you can go for both the topic as well as against the topic, okay?
Whether you go for or against the topic or you can discuss both of the sides, like you
can go for the topic, you can also go against the topic at a time, fine?
You cannot, like you can have your own point of view, fine?
Outline on the essay, that is introduction, okay?
The first sentence of the introduction, look at it.
Social media make us antisocial because it affects our familial relations, okay?
Why social media make us antisocial because it affects our familial relation?
How it affects our familial relation?
Because living in one family, the family members have less time for each other, they are just
using social media.
The son will have no time to meet his parents, his mother in the next room or his sister
to sit with them, okay?
He will have only time for, or she will have only time for social media.
He or she will be busy in social media, like the Instagram, the Snapchat, the Facebook,
the social media messenger and the WhatsApp and all these things.
And he will have no time to sit with the family.
So it affects the familial relation, fine?
The next point is, it makes people socially neglected.
Yes, it makes people socially neglected.
How it makes people, how it makes people socially neglected?
Because people will have no time to come out to the society and meet their neighbors and
the members of the society.
So they are socially neglected.
People don't think that they are a part of the society because they are not seen outside
in the society and only, they are not seen in the gathering, the public gathering and
the social gathering of the society.
They have their own world inside their home, inside their room and even inside their bed.
Like they will have no contact with his, with his or her siblings, like sleeping or sitting
around him in one room.
Like he will have no time for, even for them to talk to him, he will be so much, or she
will be so much busy in the social media, fine?
Social media is devoid of face to face contact.
It is devoid of face to face contact, like we will have no face to face contact with
the people.
Like you will be just chatting with them, you will be just reading the repost, you will
be just commenting over, there is a tie up, like it is not even, it is no, no, no room
for face to face contact in the social media.
Like people will just read your post, or you will read the post, or you will have only
comment on that, like on that, okay?
Or you will have to share the post, or you will have to, to read to the story, like these
are the things, fine?
Or you will read the, you will read someone's status and you will comment on that, okay?
It's such thing, it is no face to face contact.
The next point is it increases vanity and self-adulation, it increases vanity and self-adulation.
People are like, they go for that, like they have no room even to escape all these things,
fine?
It is a world of isolation which demands complete isolation from rest of the world, okay?
Social media is a world of isolation, okay?
Which demands complete isolation from rest of the world.
It's a separate world, it's a separate world of segregation.
People are segregated, people are isolated, like they are isolated in the midst of the
heavy and crowded societies, like one person will be, one person will have a lot of social,
a lot of family members, or he will have a lot of friends, and he will have many things,
but he will, he won't be able to meet them and to come out of his home, like he will
be isolated in his room, in his home, okay?
That is a different world, okay?
People are isolated on social media, yes, they will have a lot of friends from around
the world, but they won't be able to meet them or talk to them, that is just an isolation,
that is, you know, a company doesn't mean only messaging and only texting, a company
means being sitting together, talking together, like drinking together, and walking together,
it doesn't mean that only texting is enough, so it's a separate world, isolated, people
are isolated from the rest of the world, they have their own world, fine?
The next point is, it creates uncertainty and unpredictability, people are like, it creates
uncertainty and unpredictability, it creates unpredictability, things become unpredictable,
you cannot predict anything, like you will be predicting something, you will say it will
have something, yes, many of the boys, like they will have friends, they will have a friend
request or friends, like the account will be the name of a girl or something like that,
but in reality that will be something else, okay, that is unpredictable, you cannot predict
that this person is a girl or this person is a boy, okay, that is unpredictable and
uncertain, because many of the boys are using girls' accounts these days and girls also
use boys' accounts for some purposes, so it is unpredictable, like, okay, and some people
like the anti-stat actors, like the violators, they also use certain type of IDs, you cannot
predict that he's a traitor or he's a patriot, fine, and that he's working for the country
or against it, you cannot predict anyone, so there is no predictability, there is no,
like, no, no, no, no certainty, things are not certain and things are not predictable
on social media, you cannot say something about anything on the social media, okay, it
is like that, social media has psychological implications, social media has psychological
implication, people are, the social media users, they are psychologically, like, they
have psychologically been converted and been, like, attracted to the social media, they
have psychological implication, they will not be feeling physically and mentally good
when they are using social media a lot, okay, because they forget the real world and then
they start living in the world of social media, they have no clue of the real world, then
they think in these social media, they didn't drink and they eat and all the things, when
they do these, they think about the social media, also have a psychological implication
as well, because the real world is an active world, this is not the world of commenting
and liking and messaging and texting, it's a real world, fine, so it has psychological
implications, it has shaken the foundation of the nature of its old tradition and norms,
fine, it has shaken the foundation of the centuries old traditions and norms, how?
Long ago, like, previously people used to visit one another, to visit the homes and talk and
have gossips and all these things, but these people don't visit each other, okay, there is
a traditional norm, people don't visit each other, when it would be eat, previously people would go
and they would impress each other and they would wish to eat, greet each other, but these
are not the case, only texts are only commented on a post, happy eat to everybody and friends
would come and they, friends will come and they will comment on the post, happy eat to you,
and that is, that is not, you know that is the thing these days, people don't visit physically
each other, like to, for wishing they happy eat, only commenting and only texting, that is enough,
and because, because that has challenged the old tradition and norms of the society, fine,
people used to, people used to, like, to, to visit the, the, the, the, the, the, the I'lling person,
to visit the L person, the sick person, but these days they will only comment, get well soon,
get well soon, that is, they don't visit, I had seen your status, you are, El and I commented on
that, okay fine, not, see this is not the thing, fine, someone will get married these days and he
will post on the social media and people will come, congratulations, congratulations and
and congratulation no one will go to his or her home for for wishing him or her the engagement
ceremony or the wedding ceremony so that is that is the thing these are the things fine
it creates vulnerabilities yes it creates vulnerabilities you know people are
the the the the the information and the secrecy are vulnerable these things can be easily traced
okay the the the uh ids and the secrecy these are not safe okay the information these things are
not safe on social media these can be be traced by some hackers and all the people and they can
be used for illegal purposes you know vulnerabilities mean the things when things are vulnerable it
mean the things are easily to be reached to fine and affected by so this is all about the
social media social media is a kind of addiction yes it's a kind of addiction people are addicted
to social media social means like the word save the snap the instagram the messenger the phall but
when they don't use this that they feel a kind of like they feel a kind of pain they feel a kind of
like restlessness restlessness they feel restless when they don't use the social media
suppose you might have seen an addicted person everywhere he will go he will must open the
facebook app and to check whether someone has texted me someone has posted and like that
he will check or she will check the word save also the messenger the insta the snap check in
order to see i don't think he will be thinking or she will be thinking in his or her mind that
someone might have texted me so that is a kind of addiction okay people are addicted to social
media like they cannot live without the social media they must use the social media they will
have no money for the the rest of the thing but they will have the money for going to to have
activated an internet package in order to see whether someone has texted me or like that fine
so it is a time of you know it is an addiction social media is an addiction conclusion so
in the conclusion we would say that social media it make us an anti-social like it
it do all these things with us but in order to skip the addiction one should not be too much
too much the too much related or too much attracted toward the social media because
it has some positive and negative implications both thank you for watching us and hope you might
have understood the argumentative essay stay with us
