Hello, welcome back to the eighth lecture in our series on how to think like an economist.
For the last couple of lectures, we've been thinking like economists about questions of
rational decision making when we have less than perfect information.
We concerned ourselves with issues of uncertainty.
We concerned ourselves with issues of risk.
But today I want to take this consideration of rational ignorance into a different area
because we are rationally ignorant and that opens the door for other people to use information
strategically.
And after all, most of the information we get, we get from other people.
You remember the old caution that I'm sure your mother shared with you at some time?
Remember the source.
What's in it for him?
What incentives does she have to use the information in her control to further her own ends?
I want to begin today by just talking in general terms about strategic use of information and
the consequences that has for individuals and for social outcomes.
And then finally, I want to take the last part of the lecture and an extended look at
an example, the so-called great crash of 08, and look at it as a failure of information
above all else.
Back in lecture six when we started talking about information, I suggested that metaphorically
we think about information as if it was a giant pile of sand.
We could go and pick it up, but it was heavy and awkward to carry, so we'd get it in bits
and pieces, a bucket full of the time.
We could go back for more again and again, but as we acquired additional information,
the marginal value of another little bit would decline.
We'd hit diminishing returns.
And at some point, another trip wasn't worth the cost.
And that's what determined for us our level of rational ignorance.
But you and I know that information is not just lying on the ground waiting to be picked
up.
Mostly, somebody else already has it.
And so when we take that metaphorical trip to the information stand, what we're going
to find is that some of the owners may decide to hide some of it from us, others may offer
to carry it home for us for free, or some may simply disguise it, distort it to change
its true character.
They have incentives to use the information under their control to try and influence our
decisions.
And in fact, it would be irrational of them not to do that.
And it would be unwise of us not to recognize that incentive for them.
So it's time for us to think about our informants.
Any time you have a decision to make that's going to affect somebody else, and that person
has information relevant to your decision, he or she has this incentive to filter, to
distort, to obfuscate, to subsidize, to hide the information.
You know, and they know, that rationality dictates that I'm going to make my decision
with partial and imperfect information.
If they alter the composition and the quality of the information I have, they can probably
influence the choice I make.
I ran into this more than once when I was young and single, and in a book I wrote about
this many years ago, I called this the blind date principle, because I'd learned the hard
way you can't always trust your friend's account of how good a blind date is going
to be.
So let's just suppose that my friend's sister-in-law comes to town and she does not want to have
to spend the evening with her, so she's trying to get me to take the sister out for an evening
spun in excitement.
Now she'll tell me, truthfully, her sister-in-law has a great sense of humor.
She might even show me a flattering and unretouched picture of her, as she looked 25 years ago.
She might forget to mention that her sister's coming to town to compete in the national
championship as America's loudest hog-caller.
Sometimes the information was free, some of it was distorted, some was withheld.
But a conclusion I probably would not have reached if I had all the information was the
decision that I reached in that case.
And even though my carefree bachelor days are long over, you and I both face figurative
blind dates every day of our lives.
Commercial advertising is a blind date.
Job interviews are blind dates on both sides, both the job applicant and the employer.
You remember Anthony Down's analysis of voters' rational ignorance?
Let me tell you, politics is a blind date.
You recall his conclusion that if you examine the benefits of becoming an informed voter
and you compare that to the costs of becoming an informed voter, it's irrational for most
of us to gather much political information.
But the candidates, they have lots of information about themselves, they have a very significant
interest in how we cast our ballots, and the result, of course, is that political campaigns
are nothing but blind date proposals in the extreme.
The candidates spend extraordinary amounts of money trying to change the stock of information
we have that's favorable to themselves and with negative ads to increase the amount of
information that's unfavorable to their opponents.
It's clear to anyone with a television set that the most effective form of blind date
persuasion in that kind of a situation is to present the information in a way that's
hard to avoid.
If you take that 30-second political ad and you put it just before the climatic scene
in a popular TV drama, no one will dare change the channel.
If you stick it in during a timeout in the final moments of the big game, no one's going
to dare leave the room.
I often think, at the end of an election, the greatest social benefit is not that policy
has been determined, not that our votes have been counted, but what I find is the greatest
advantage of the end of a campaign is those repetitive, non-informative, often insulting
and deceptive ads are finally off the air.
George Akerlof shared the 2001 Nobel Prize in economics in part for taking a more formal
approach to what I was calling the blind date principle.
Akerlof spent a lot of time focusing on the social consequences of situations like that.
I was, of course, thinking about the individual consequences for myself in a blind date.
Unlike me, he didn't call this a blind date problem, and that maybe he had a less traumatic
adolescence than I did.
Anyway, he decided to use a more formal term, and he called this information asymmetry.
A situation where one party, to a potential interaction, has a lot more relevant information
than another party.
The title of his analysis was The Market for Lemons, and in short, here's how it goes.
Says who knows how dependable a used car is going to be, and the answer is the current
owner.
They have months, years of possible experience with it.
And so the presumption is that they're going to be much more likely to get rid of an undependable
car.
They'll want to dump a lemon and hold on to a gem.
So the result is, according to Akerlof, that problem cars will probably be overrepresented
in the used car market.
Now, buyers, of course, don't have any way of knowing how effective an individual car
is going to be.
There's information asymmetry.
They don't know that something is a lemon, because they don't have the current owner's
long-term experience.
So if they assume sellers are rational, potential buyers are going to assume that most of the
cars in the market are lemons.
And then, of course, they're going to use the expected value analysis we did last time.
And buyers should be unwilling to pay a price that's appropriate for a gem, because if it
was a gem, why would the owner be trying to sell it?
And, of course, actual owners of gems won't be willing to sell at a lemon price.
So the average quality of cars in the market fulfills the expectations that they're all
going to be lemons.
The seller has information the buyer needs, but can't be trusted to reveal it.
Eventually, advantageous trades will go unmade.
The market breaks down.
Everybody behaves rationally, but everybody loses.
Buyers disproportionately end up with lemons.
Sellers of gems can't get the price they deserve.
The result of this information asymmetry is something that economists call adverse selection.
The gems are selected out of the market, and the adverse condition is only the lemons remain.
If it's time for a hostage, in medieval times, when a rival to a sitting king felt he had
to signal his own trustworthiness, he might leave his son in the king's castle to be held
as a hostage.
Then, if the rival broke the promise, invaded the king's realm, the king would at least have
an opportunity for vengeance, if not for direct resistance.
Willingness to hold your son as a hostage made the promise credible.
The rival had changed the payoffs, his own payoffs, from an invasion.
This assumes that there's a strong amount of parental affection.
If you look at the history of royal families, it's possible that if you offered up an overly
ambitious son as a hostage and then invaded the king's realm, you might actually be solving
two problems at once in a clever way.
Their warranties are really just hostages.
They follow the same reasoning, they fill the same purpose.
You have a gem.
You have the information that shows your car as a gem.
If you bind yourself to paying 50% of any necessary repairs over the first 90 days, that's a credible
statement that your assertion that your car is not a lemon is true.
It distinguishes your car, it signals its own quality.
An unwillingness to offer a warranty is credible information that the car is in fact some kind
of a lemon, so that that creates an incentive for the owners of disproportionate asymmetric
information to reveal it accurately through the use of a hostage like a warranty.
For the past two and a half lectures, we've been thinking like economists about this ubiquitous
problem of limited information, and now we've added the idea of strategic resources to uncertainty
and risk.
Those are important concerns, and they're insights that matter when as individuals we
go shopping for used cars.
But they're also so fundamental that when those concepts are misunderstood, when these
problems arise, entire economic systems, the world over can be shaken to the brink by the
kind of situation we've been talking about.
So what I want to do for the rest of the time we have today is to use our analysis of the
economics of information and use it as a key to try and understand of an important event
what we call the great financial crash of 08 in the serious recession that followed it.
As you'll recall in the very first decade of the 21st century, there was an economic
and financial crisis of proportions that hadn't been felt since the 1930s.
Households and nations both fell into serious difficulty, and it all reached ahead sort
of a crisis in a financial panic, a worldwide credit market freeze in the fall of 2008.
The financial system, for a few days at least, simply stopped.
Now editorials and pundits all over the world pointed their finger at greed, at irresponsibility,
at incompetence, and at criminal fraud.
And there was some of all of those in there.
But I think it's also true that there was a tremendous amount of uncertainty, rational
ignorance, a reaction to risk, social cascades, and information asymmetry, all coming together
in what was a perfect storm of financial crisis.
I want to explore that now.
There's consensus among economists that the crisis really began had its roots in housing
markets, especially in the United States.
Now I want to take a few minutes and talk about housing and housing markets, and talk
about finance, and then I'm going to try and draw this together.
You know that housing is special.
It's not like buying a new coat.
You're buying a long-lived physical asset that provides shelter, it provides status,
it provides location, it allows you access to public benefits, and it lasts years and
years into the future.
You buy all that in one lump sum up front, and it's expensive.
There's sort of a rule of thumb that says you can afford up to two and a half to three
times your annual income for housing, but very few of us have enough savings to do that.
So the first step in this crisis is to buy a home almost all of us have to borrow.
And at that point, this physical asset sitting on a lot somewhere becomes entwined with the
ethereal world of finance, where values are floating in air and hard to see.
Without borrowing, very few of us could buy, and if you can buy, remember there's two sides
to every transaction, if you can buy, few can sell, and the whole market freezes up.
So let's begin our analysis of information in the crash of 08 by looking at the fundamental
characteristics of any loan.
Remember our foundation principles?
Each transaction has at least two sides.
Every dollar that's borrowed is also a dollar length.
In any voluntary transaction, economists believe both participants think they're going to be
better off.
And so a mortgage creates opportunities for gain for both, the borrower and the lender.
But it also creates extraordinary amounts of risk.
So people don't like risk, are there ways to control it?
Well, for the lender, the risk clearly is that the borrower will be unable or unwilling to
pay back that loan in fuller and part.
Repayment is an uncertain future event.
Ah, we talked about that last time.
And the expected value of that event depends on the probability of being fully repaid.
But what is that probability?
How do you find out that probability?
It's not something objective like heads, where you can count there's one side heads
and one side tails.
There's no clear source of objective information on risks about people's behavior in the future.
So the lender's going to be, at the end of this process, rationally and necessarily ignorance
about the buyer's future.
Of course, the buyer's kind of uncertain about his or her own future too, who isn't.
But there's a serious information asymmetry in this, because even though both of them
are uncertain, the borrower knows far more about his own long-term financial prospects,
about any impending large expenses, about job and marital security, about their own future
health prospects, any potential inheritance, legal liabilities, you know, rational borrowers
may try to set up the lender on, you guessed it, a blind date.
And lenders, of course, don't like blind dates, so the lender's going to try and do everything
he or she can to protect themselves against that.
Historically, in mortgage markets, there were requirements of absolute complete disclosure
and documentation.
A borrower had to prove their financial history.
They had to prove their employment status.
They had to provide checkable credit references.
And the lender would really pay good money to acquire that information.
They'd buy and they'd trust the credit histories and the credit scores from the three credit
bureaus.
Well, how do the lenders know the credit bureau's information is accurate?
Again, thinking like economists, they think about the credit bureau's incentives.
The credit bureaus make money only if their data is accurate, and if they start providing
inaccurate information, they're going to lose the full value of their database.
But even with that, full documentation, full evidence, the reports of credit bureaus, there's
still some risk that remains.
So what's the final defense?
The final defense is, as we said before, the final defense is a hostage, a mortgage
lien, because if the borrower fails to pay, you can foreclose on the house, you can sell
the house and recapture your funds lent.
So the risks were controlled for decades, with full documentation required information
plus a hostage of a mortgage lien.
That reduced the risk of loss to lenders.
It increased the expected value of the loan, and for most of the 20th century, the information
demands and mortgage and housing markets kept the number of really bad, blind dates
fairly low.
Changes in the 1990s and the early 2000s, however, created a whole new set of incentives.
It provided for much less information in markets, and created a worldwide crisis.
Now, I want to be really honest with you here for just a second.
I want you to bear with me for a few moments, because my intent is to see if I can thoroughly
confuse you.
I want you to find out that you don't have any idea of what I'm talking about, and if
you'll trust me, the more confused I can make you now, the better you're going to understand
my final point in a few moments.
So the question we need to ask is, who needs the information about the mortgage, when do
they need it, who has it, how can I get it?
Most loans really originate on a local basis.
A local bank or a savings loan gives cash to a buyer, they buy the house, and it's
purchased in their own locality.
And if the bank keeps it, the originator is the one who gets harmed if there's a future
loss.
And in knowing that, it's got a pretty strong incentive to want that information we talked
about to accurately assess the value of the house.
But increasingly, there are these expansive secondary markets for mortgages.
And what originators do is they'll take the mortgage and they'll sell it to a pension
fund, to an insurance company, or some other financial institution.
So the original bank gets its money back in a matter of days or weeks.
It makes some money and proceeds from the fees in creating the mortgage instrument,
but when it sells it, all the risk goes to the buyer of the mortgage.
So for the bank, it's the saleability rather than the long-term performance of the loan
that matters.
The bank gets paid when the loan is made, not when it's repaid.
Well, if saleability depends on having this full documentation, on having an accurate
assessment of the market value, then having the secondary market adds some complexity,
but it doesn't really change the fundamental principle.
If the mortgage looks bad, it's going to be harder to sell.
It's going to be undesirable.
It's going to be subprime.
And for a long time, both loan originators and secondary buyers avoided those loans because
there was too much risk, too little information, and too much danger.
Starting in the 1990s, because of changes in public policy and some fancy financial
wizardry on Wall Street, everything changed.
A number of lenders started exempting borrowers from even the most minimal information demands
inside the industry.
They called these liar loans or nine-a-loans, nine-a-four, no income, no assets.
If you tell me you have enough money to pay the mortgage, I'll believe you.
But why now?
Why would any rational lender accept a blind date with a nine-a-loan?
That's just crazy.
I can see why the originator of the loan doesn't care about the probability of performance
because it's selling the loan.
And once it's sold the loan, the question is, why would any of the buyers accept that
heightened risk?
I think they're persuaded via blind dates and a massive cascade that there really wasn't
heightened risk despite eliminating most of the protections.
That would have been modern-day alchemy if it had been true, but sadly it was not.
Who is responsible for the changes?
Well, we have two players, Congress on the one hand and Wall Street on the other.
First, the federal government became midwife to this large national secondary mortgage
market by creating institutions like the Federal National Mortgage Administration that all her
friends call Fannie Mae.
Fannie Mae borrows money from the general public and then uses that to buy mortgages
on the secondary market, ultimately financing mortgages all over the country.
But the original lender over here has no information at all about the strength of the
mortgage and the far end of that whole chain of events.
They always relied on Fannie Mae to assess those.
They always thought their risk was that Fannie Mae wouldn't be able to pay back, that Fannie
Mae would default on the bonds.
And surely Fannie Mae will do its own due diligence.
Fannie Mae will take care that the mortgages are sound.
And besides that, there's probably the full faith and credit of the United States behind
it.
In the 1990s, Congress started pushing Fannie Mae for policy change.
It asked Fannie Mae to lower its underwriting standards.
It asked that they push more funds toward low and very moderate income people who before
had been priced out of mortgage markets.
Who knew they were doing this?
Certainly not all the people over here who were lending money to Fannie Mae.
They'd been taken on a blind date that they didn't even know they were on.
On the other hand, there was the Wall Street financial engineering.
And remember I said, I was going to confuse you?
Just bear with me.
I'm going to see if I can't just make you crazy confused in the next couple of minutes.
As soon as you got home from your blind date with Fannie Mae, Wall Street was standing there
with several other suitors waiting.
Wall Street figured out that it could make a profit if it would buy up whole packages,
whole bundles of these subprime mortgages, and use that whole portfolio as backing for
something called a mortgage-backed security.
And then it could get investors to buy mortgage-backed securities, which meant they were buying a
share of the revenue from the portfolio of the subprime mortgages.
These people were able to invest in high-yield subprime mortgages, and they didn't have to
put all the eggs in one basket, sounded good.
They didn't need so much information on the individual loans because they were buying
the sum total of them.
Now Wall Street's profit, of course, was determined by how many of these securities
they could sell.
So there was this hunger on Wall Street, more and more subprime loans to feed this new market.
But the story goes on.
We could then package mortgage-backed securities and use that package as collateral, the hostages
behind collateralized debt obligations.
And then, in case there was any risk that the collateralized debt obligations wouldn't
pay off, other companies like AIG started selling insurance, just follow me with for
a minute, this is going to be confusing, started selling insurance in the form of credit default
swaps to pay off the collateralized debt obligations if the underlying mortgage-backed securities
based on portfolios of individual subprime mortgages failed to perform.
And on and on, you've just been asked to go on a date with your cousin's best friend's
brother's office mate's pen pals teacher.
How could anything possibly go wrong?
By the time we had done all that, it was virtually impossible for the ultimate investors at the
end of that chain to have any idea, any idea, who actually and ultimately owed what to whom.
You didn't know who you owed money to.
You certainly couldn't assess accurately the likelihood of people repaying their loans.
This whole structure created massive, massive uncertainty about risk.
But it really didn't matter, of course, because there was that final hostage that would guarantee
replacement, repayment, if this whole thing started to collapse.
And what was that?
It was the value of the real estate itself.
After all, housing prices always rise, at least a little, don't they?
Yes, they do, until, like tulip bulbs, they don't.
The underlying loans at the bottom of this whole obfuscated chain started to go bad.
For closures rose, housing prices fell.
More and more people found that they owed more in their mortgage than their house was
currently worth, their mortgages had turned upside down.
That creates an incentive to walk away.
Once the hostage has died, its value as a deterrent is gone.
And at that moment, in that panic phase, suddenly, everyone again became aware of their own level
of ignorance.
There was no reliable information to gauge the creditworthiness of anyone else.
No one knew how much their own assets were worth, let alone the assets held by others.
No collateral could really serve as a hostage.
No one dared lend to anyone.
Credit markets froze.
Businesses dared not buy.
Businesses dared not invest.
The worst economic downturn in decades beset the world's economy.
If you look at that, if you see that through an economist's eyes, you can see that this
whole crisis, the rise and the fall, the bubble and the burst, are really reflections of information
asymmetry, rational ignorance, and risk.
Far too many of us accepted a financial blind date, forgetting how easily trust can be misplaced.
Not because everybody we deal with is inherently dishonest, but because, just like us, everyone
we deal with faces inevitable uncertainty, ignorance, and risk.
When we forget that, that's when we collectively get into some real trouble.
So what do we take from all of this?
First and foremost, we need to remember that our own inevitable uncertainty makes information
itself strategic.
Most of what we need to know, we have to get from other people.
Know when information asymmetry is going to make you vulnerable to a bad blind date.
We face this time and again in handling our personal and national finances.
And there this protection is a healthy dose of skepticism.
Does your advisor's compensation create incentives that conflict with your objectives?
If you're promised high, steady gains year after year with no significant risk, I think
you should view an entreaty like that the way you do when you receive an email from
that unknown Nigerian prince who keeps emailing me.
You know, the one who keeps offering me a 10% commission if I'll just let him launder
several million dollars through my bank account.
I suppose it could be true, but I think it would be dangerous to stake too much on it.
In the next lecture, we're going to add to this the consideration of the famous fourth
dimension in Einstein's characterization of the universe.
We're going to start talking about time and economists are going to have a lot to say
about that.
