Welcome to lecture 22, the Particle Zoo.
We got ourselves into quantum physics by looking at experiments that were done largely
around the turn of the 20th century to try to determine the ultimate structure of matter.
We started with democratists in 400 BC who argued there were indivisible atoms, but by
the time we reached the year about 1900, we recognized that there were atoms, but they
weren't indivisible.
And by the time we had Rutherford's solar system model, we at least knew of two kinds
of subatomic entities, electrons, which had been discovered by Thompson in the late 1800s,
and comprised the outermost part of the atom, the electrons being at orbit, then around
the very massive positively charged nucleus.
So we had nuclei and we had electrons.
We also had the subatomic particles, alpha particles, particles called beta particles,
which turned out mostly to be electrons, and other particles that were emitted by radioactive
atoms.
So they're already at the turn of the 20th century where a host of subatomic particles
that physicists were discovering.
Now at that point in this course, we stopped and we looked at the evolution of the theory,
quantum physics, that describes the behavior of matter at the subatomic scales, and we
found some very strange and bizarre happenings.
But now we're done with that for now, and we're going to resume our descent into the
heart of matter.
We're going to resume a search for the ultimate constituents of everyday matter, bizarre,
exotic matter, all the matter that makes up the universe.
Throughout the 20th century, particle physicists did increasingly sophisticated and increasingly
powerful experiments that were essentially like Rutherford's experiment that discovered
the atomic nucleus.
Namely, they bombarded matter with high energy subatomic particles.
And again, as I said before, the drive for ever higher energies to probe ever deeper
into the heart of matter is what gave rise to the building of ever larger particle accelerators
to the point where today we have accelerators that are many miles long or miles in diameter
and cost many billions of dollars.
And don't get built all that often for that reason, but we need to go to higher and higher
energies to probe ever deeper into the heart of matter.
Well, by the middle of the 20th century, it was evident that there were hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of different kinds of supposedly elementary particles that had been
created in these particle accelerator experiments.
You smash one high energy particle into matter, and all kinds of other particles come out.
You can characterize them by things like their mass, and their charge, and their spin like
we talked about for electrons, and a few other fundamental properties that matter seems
to have at the subatomic scale.
But why should there be hundreds and hundreds of particles?
Why should nature be so complex?
I thought physics was about nature being simple.
And so physicists in particularly the second half of the 20th century tried to piece together
some kind of overriding structure that would explain the plethora of particles that were
found, hopefully would explain them in terms of a few smaller, more fundamental entities.
And that result has been largely successful.
And by the 1990s, a complete picture was in place.
It's called the Standard Model of Particles and Forces that seems to explain all the particles
we have observed and is basically a complete theory, although it too requires some explanations
that aren't contained within that theory.
And rather than give you the history and all the hundreds and hundreds of particles in
my talk here on the particle zoo, I'm simply going to tell you what we now know in the
21st century about particle physics and about what the essential particles are that make
up matter.
So let's take a look at the structure of matter.
Let's probe into ordinary matter with a microscope that can go ever more deeply into the heart
of matter.
Let's see what we find.
We'll start with a macroscopic object, something the size of a person or a tennis ball or a
typical size object we deal with.
In this case, it's a cat.
Looks a lot like Schrodinger's cat, doesn't it?
So we're going to take this cat.
We're going to look inside it at an ever smaller scale and see what we find.
Now we're not biologists here, so we'll skip the fact that we'll come to organs and then
cells and then organelles within the cells and so on.
We'll get right to the chemistry of this cat.
And the first thing we see at the level of chemistry are molecules.
Molecules are the basic essential particles making up the chemical substances.
Molecules can be simple.
As the molecule I've shown here, which is a water molecule, H2O, two hydrogen atoms
and one oxygen atom, or they can be complex like the DNA molecules that carry the heredity
of this cat.
So we've looked with our microscope and come across a water molecule.
That's the fundamental piece you can have of water.
Anything smaller than that, it's not water anymore.
Water is a chemical substance.
It's not a fundamental element like hydrogen or oxygen.
It's a chemical compound made up of those things.
And so here's a molecule of water.
What happens if we look with our powerful microscope at the molecule of water?
What do we see?
Well, we see that it's made of atoms.
And I show here a typical atom.
It happens to be a helium atom because it's got two electrons.
It's not one of the atoms of water, but it's an atom.
Like the atoms, the oxygen atom that makes up water and the hydrogen atoms that make up
water.
In fact, here's a picture of an oxygen atom.
So here we have an atom.
And this is the point we were at with Rutherford's solar system model of the atom in the early
1900s.
This atom consists of a nucleus, as far as we know, or as far as Rutherford knew, a tiny
dense object carrying virtually all the mass of the atom, but occupying only about in diameter
one-tenthousandths to one-hundredthousandths of the overall diameter of the atom.
So again, these atom pictures are very much symbolic.
They're very much not to scale.
So here's our atom.
Now, what's the atom made of if we apply our microscope to the different parts of the
atom?
What do we see?
Well, one thing we see are the electrons.
The electrons comprise the outermost part of the atom.
They're in orbit around the nucleus in the Rutherford picture.
In the Bohr picture, we know things get a little more complicated.
And because of quantum mechanics, we know we really can't think of them as little balls
whizzing around their kind of fuzzy statistical objects.
But nevertheless, we're going to picture them in this crude way as a little tiny point-like
particle.
There's the electron.
What if we probe into the electron?
Well, all attempts to probe into electrons have never found any structure inside the
electron.
Electron appears to be a truly structure-less point-like entity when we try to probe it.
When we ask questions of the electron, what kind of particle are you trying to make it
act like a particle?
It does not have any structure.
It's a structure-less point particle.
We believe the electron is truly one of the elementary entities that make up the universe.
There's no way to take an electron apart.
There's no way to find anything inside an electron.
Electron appears to be truly elementary.
So we've now analyzed the outer part of the atom, which consists of electrons, and we
find these truly elementary-looking point-like particles that have a few simple properties.
They have a certain amount of mass.
It's about a 2,000th the mass of the other particles that make up the atom.
It's rather small.
Electrons comprise only a small fraction of the mass of an atom.
They carry a negative electric charge of one unit of charge, and they have a few other
properties, spin, and so on.
We understand electrons very well.
They're also stable particles.
If we have an electron, it seems to last forever.
It never disappears.
It has nothing else it can decay into.
Well that's the electrons in the atom.
What if we now probe at that nucleus, which, to Rutherford, was simply a small, massive
object carrying positive charge?
Well again, these probings are done with a sequence of experiments in which you bombard
the nucleus with ever more high-energy particles, and you see whether the nucleus flies apart.
You see what particles come out, and so on, and you begin to understand the composition
of the nucleus.
What happens if we look in the nucleus?
Well here's the nucleus enlarged in detail, and we find the nucleus has a lumpy structure.
It has a real size.
Nuclei are approximately but not exactly spherical.
They have a measurable size.
They're not point-like particles like the electron.
They're definitely not elementary.
They seem to be composed of other particles.
The particles that compose the nucleus are called collectively nucleons, and they come
in two kinds.
There are protons, which are positively charged particles, and neutrons, which are negatively
charged particles.
And when protons and neutrons were discovered, they were assumed to be probably fundamental
particles like the electron, elementary particles with no further structure.
So the nucleus is comprised of protons and neutrons.
The protons carry plus one electric charge.
There's many of them as there are electrons in the atom, and the atom is therefore electrically
neutral.
The neutrons are neutral.
They carry no electric charge.
They're very similar to protons, otherwise they have the same mass, or almost the same
mass in particular.
What if we try to look in more detail at these two constituents of the nucleus, the protons
and the neutrons?
Well, if we probe protons and neutrons by bombarding them with high-energy particles,
we find in Rutherford-type experiments that occasionally we get particles scattering off
what looks like a tiny point-like massive object inside the proton and the neutron.
So protons and neutrons themselves appear not to be elementary.
They appear to be made up of more fundamental entities.
We can actually measure a size for the proton and a size for the neutron.
It's about 10 to the minus 15 meters if you want to know what it is.
Numerically, it's a tiny, tiny size, but it's a measurable size, and these things appear
to have internal constituents.
What are the internal constituents?
Well, earlier in the 20th century, not early, but early in the second half of the 20th century,
as physicists were trying to make sense of these hundreds and hundreds of particles,
all physicists came up independently with the notion that maybe we could describe a
lot of these particles if we postulated the existence of some fundamental entities called
quarks, which were even smaller and which would combine in threes to make protons and
neutrons and a lot of the other particles in twos or threes.
Well, for a while, that was just kind of a bookkeeping device for keeping track of all
the different kinds of particles, but when experiments probing the structure of protons
got to high enough energy, we found indeed there seemed to be particles within the proton,
and those particles are the quarks, and those particles are in the neutrons.
So the proton and neutron are themselves made of smaller particles called quarks.
The quarks are kind of unusual.
They carry fractional electric charges.
When Millican did his famous experiment in the early 1900s and found that electric charge
was quantized in units of the electron charge, he was slightly wrong.
Electric charge is in fact quantized in units of a third of an electron charge, and some
of these quarks carry a third of an electron charge, and some carry two-thirds of an electron
charge.
In particular, the proton is composed of up quarks and down quarks, two up quarks and
one down quark.
The quarks have these very whimsical names.
As you'll see, I'm going to introduce you soon to more quarks, and they all have slightly
whimsical names.
They really have no bearing to their meanings in ordinary reality.
There's nothing up about an up quark, there's nothing down about a down quark.
Those are just names.
The proton is composed of two up quarks, each one of those has two-thirds of an electron
or proton's worth of electric charge, positive two-thirds, that adds up to positive four-thirds,
and the down quark has negative a third, and so that subtracts to make the proton's charge
of plus one.
The neutron is made up instead of two down quarks, minus a third charge, minus a third
charge, that's minus two-thirds, and plus two-thirds in one up quark, and that makes
the neutron neutral.
So the proton and neutron are very similar.
They're each made of three quarks, the proton two up quarks and a down quark, net positive
electric charge of plus one unit, and the neutron two down quarks in one up quark, net
electric charge of zero, making the neutron neutral.
So again, if we probe deep inside one of these nucleons, a proton or a neutron, we find
up quarks and down quarks in this case, quarks.
We believe that the quarks are structuralist, although some people have proposed theories
where maybe they're not, but it looks right now like the quarks are truly structuralist
point particles like the electrons, like the quarks are fundamental constituents of matter,
and so in this picture anyway of the ordinary matter that the cat is made up of, we've gotten
down to what we believe at this point is the fundamental level.
We believe that three kinds of particles, two broad classes, quarks and electrons, comprise
all ordinary matter and make up all their ordinary matter.
It just takes three kinds of particles to do it, electrons, up quarks and down quarks,
and those are the truly elementary particles of nature.
If you'd taken physics a few decades ago, we probably would have been saying, well, the
elementary particles are electrons, protons and neutrons.
Nope, the elementary particles are electrons and the two kinds of quarks that appear in
protons and neutrons, but things are going to get more complicated than that.
Before they do though, let me mention that the combination up, up, down or up, down,
down, those aren't the only combinations you could put together of quarks.
In fact, you can put together many combinations of three different quarks, and all those combinations
make up possible, quote, elementary particles, particles that were once thought to be elementary,
but are now known to be composed of quarks and aren't really elementary.
All the others except the proton and neutron are highly radioactive and unstable and decay
in a relatively short time, so we don't see them around.
The neutron itself is unstable if you take it out of the atom, a neutron decays in about
an average of, half of them we've gone in an average of about 20 minutes.
The neutron is an unstable particle also.
The protons appear to be stable over very long terms, although there are some theories
that predict they ought to decay in times on the order of a one with 33 zeros after
it numbers of years, and experiments looking for proton decays in large numbers of protons,
huge tanks of water, tens of thousands of gallons have not yet discovered that the protons
decay.
So protons seem to be stable particles, neutrons are not, and all the other particles that
you can make from three quarks are not stable.
Those other particles including, and the neutron and proton as well are called hadrons, it
means heavy particles because they're made up of quarks, and they're pretty heavy.
The quarks are massive and they combine to make fairly massive particles.
The proton and neutron are each about 2,000 times as massive as the electron.
Quarks can also combine in twos, a quark and its anti-quark, remember the electron had
an anti-particle, the positron, every quark has an anti-quark, and if quarks combine
and pairs a quark and an anti-quark, they make a whole other class of particles called
mesons.
So there's quite a bit of possibility here with these quarks.
So what is it that holds all these things together?
What sticks the quarks together to make protons and neutrons?
What sticks the protons and neutrons together to make nuclei?
What holds the nuclei and electrons together to make atoms?
What holds the atoms together in molecules, and why doesn't the cat simply fall apart
into a blob of molecules and ultimately quarks and electrons?
Well the answer is the same in all those cases.
The answer is some kind of force interacting between the particles to hold them together.
And we've had a lot to say about force earlier in this course.
For example, there was the force of the push as I shove on this table.
There was the force of gravity pulling on a ball and dropping it to the floor or pulling
on the moon to keep it in its orbit.
There was the force when I stretched that bungee cord to show you how E equals MC squared
applied even to that kind of motion, all kinds of forces you can think of.
There's the force of friction we worried about in Galileo's early studies of motion.
How many kinds of forces are there?
Well actually physicists today believe there are at most three fundamental forces, and
most physicists believe there's probably only one, but we haven't yet discovered how
the three are related into one.
More on that in lecture 24.
So we believe there are only three fundamental forces, and together they account for all
the forces, friction, everything else that happens, all the forces, all the interactions
in the universe we believe can be explained in terms of these three fundamental forces.
If I had been giving this lecture series a few decades ago, I would have said four fundamental
forces.
If I had been giving it a few centuries ago, I would have listed many more, but we've achieved
a lot of unification of previously separate entities.
And now we're down to three fundamental interactions, and I want to describe them briefly.
What are they?
What are the fundamental forces?
Well the first is probably the most familiar, but probably also the least understood, and
it's by far the weakest of the forces, and that's the force of gravity.
What is gravity?
When we know that from our study of general relativity, gravity is ultimately the geometrical
structure of space-time, and it has the interesting property that it acts on all matter, no matter
is exempt from the gravitational force.
Gravity acts between every piece of matter in the universe.
Protons act on neutrons, neutrons act on neutrons, electrons act on protons, electrons attract
electrons, it's just they repel much more with a different force.
Gravity is a force that acts between all particles in the universe.
It's a very, very weak force, and so the only time we see it being significant is when there
are enormous accumulations of matter.
That's why the gravity of the Earth or the Sun seems significant to us.
Enough matter gets together to warp space-time enough to make significant changes in the
motion of particles.
So gravity is a very weak force, it doesn't seem that way to us simply because we live
very near a very large accumulation of matter, namely the Earth, which warps space-time in
its vicinity.
So gravity, a weak force, it's really in a way the least understood of the forces, even
though we have the general theory of relativity.
Then there's a force called the electroweak force.
This used to be two separate forces, but now it's one.
What's the electroweak force?
Well it comprises what I've talked about before, the electromagnetic force as described by
Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism, and the electromagnetic force itself is composed
of two forces that were once thought to be separate, but as we saw in the lecture where
we looked at electromagnetism, electricity and magnetism really aspects of the same thing.
So the electric force and the magnetic force, once thought to be distinct, are in fact aspects
of the electromagnetic force.
Then there's another force, somewhat obscure, called the weak force, the weak nuclear force,
and it's responsible for a certain limited class of nuclear interactions that occur.
We see them in nuclear experiments, they occur on the Sun, and are partly responsible for
the generation of solar energy again that keeps us alive, called the weak nuclear force
as opposed to a different nuclear force, the strong force.
And the weak nuclear force and the electromagnetic force are now understood to be aspects of
the same underlying force, called the electroweak force.
That understanding came about theoretically in the 1970s and was confirmed experimentally
in the 1980s, so that's a fairly recent addition.
Before that time, I would have told you about the electroweak force and separately, independently,
the weak force.
Now we know they're combined into something called the electroweak force.
And finally there's a force that is sometimes called the strong force, although probably
better named for it is the color force.
This is the force that acts between quarks.
This is the strongest of the forces we know about, and it's responsible for holding quarks
together to make protons and neutrons and the other hadrons and the mesons.
And the color force has an unusual property.
Remember how the gravitational force falls off with distance.
That's why we could have a finite escape speed to get objects infinitely far from Earth.
The electric force also falls off and the magnetic force with distance.
As I move electric charges farther apart, the force gets weaker.
The weak force does the same thing.
The color force, the force that acts between quarks remarkably does not fall off with distance.
If you try to separate quarks, you're pulling always against a constant force.
And therefore it would take infinite energy to get two quarks separated.
And that can't happen.
In fact, if you try to separate two quarks, when you get so much energy built up, you
may have enough energy to create a pair of particles by that pair creation process we
described.
And instead of getting the quarks apart, you simply start creating more particles.
You cannot separate quarks because of that feature of the color force, the force that
binds quarks together.
It doesn't decrease with distance, and therefore we've never been able to isolate a quark.
And most physicists believe we will never find an isolated quark because to isolate quarks
is impossible.
Yet by probing the structure of nucleons, protons and neutrons, we know that quarks
exist, and we know that they can combine with each other in different ways, but we
can never have a separate isolated quark.
So one will never see an isolated quark.
By the way, if you've ever studied nuclear physics at all, you were probably told there's
a strong nuclear force that binds neutrons and protons together to make an atomic nucleus.
That's true, but the nuclear force isn't a separate force.
It's simply a manifestation, a kind of residual manifestation of the color force between the
quarks that is acting even more tightly to bind the quarks into the nucleons.
That color force is felt a little small distance beyond the nucleon itself, beyond a proton
or neutron, and it's that small residual effect that is nevertheless the very strong nuclear
force that binds the protons and neutrons together to make an atomic nucleus and is
responsible for nuclear energy conversions, nuclear weapons, nuclear power, nuclear reactions
of all kinds.
And if we go up in our hierarchy back to the cat, then the force has become more familiar
again.
What binds the nucleus to the electrons?
Well, that's the familiar electric force.
What binds the atoms together to make molecules?
Well, that's a residual of the leftover electric force that is felt between neutral atoms because
different parts of the atom with different electric charge may be in different places,
and so there's a residual electrical effect, just like the nuclear force is a residual
of that color force, and then the molecules are held together ultimately by electrical
interactions to make the cat.
If they weren't held together, gravity would pull the cat to the floor and just a blob
of stuff.
So there's how the forces work to hold things together.
We put together these forces with the known particles and we get what's called the standard
model of particles and forces, and this is the model that governs our best understanding
of the way the universe works today.
We know it's not complete, but it does a pretty good job of explaining all the observed particles
and their interactions.
The particles in the standard model come in two general classes.
There are quarks, we've talked about quarks before, I've talked about the up quark and
the down quark, but there are actually several other quarks which I'll introduce in a moment.
So there's quarks, and then there are particles called leptons.
This means light particles, particles that have very little mass, and you've met one
lepton already, it's the electron, you've actually met another lepton back in lecture
number nine, more on that, and the leptons come in two varieties, there are particles
like the electron, the electron and some close cousins of it, and then there are very elusive
ghostly particles called neutrinos, which hardly interact with matter at all.
They can barrel right through the earth with very little likelihood of anything happening
to them.
They're generated in copious amounts in the sun, they're very hard to detect.
They were thought until very close to the end of the twentieth century to have zero mass,
like photons, and therefore to travel at the speed of light, but in experiments that were
done at the end of the twentieth century, it was determined that neutrinos almost certainly
have a very, very small amount of mass.
We're still studying that today, that's an active area of research.
So what do these particles look like in the standard model?
Well remarkably they come grouped in families, and here's how it works.
The particles in the standard model, the first family consists of the up quark and the down
quark.
Each quark has a pair of, each family has a pair of quarks.
The up quark and the down quark are the quarks, and the first family of particles in the standard
model.
Then there's the electron and the electron neutrino, which is this ghostly elusive particle
associated with the electron.
That's it, that's the first family.
And the first family of particles, two quarks, an electron and an electron neutrino, to a
first approximation are all that's necessary to make all the ordinary everyday matter of
which were composed.
I say to a first approximation because very recent research is showing that although a
proton is indeed composed of two up quarks and a down quark and a neutron of two down
quarks and an up quark, there are in fact coming into existence and going out of existence
quickly and ephemeraly pairs of quark, anti-quarks of heavier varieties and that those ephemeral
so-called virtual particles that come into existence and disappear play a significant
role in establishing properties of the proton and neutron like their mass and that spin
that elementary particles have.
So you may hear it said that all ordinary matter is described by this first family of
particles.
That's approximately, but not entirely true.
It looks like particles from the other families are also playing some role.
What are the other families?
Well the second family includes a quark called the charmed quark and another quark called
the strange quark, a particle called the muon, which is like a heavy electron and which
is unstable.
The muon is the particle we studied in lecture number nine when we had these muons created
in cosmic rays and we saw time dilation occurring with the muons and then with the muon there's
a neutrino associated with it.
As we go from one family to another, we go to particles that are more and more massive
and consequently they require higher energies to create and so it takes higher energies,
bigger particle accelerators to study the more massive particles.
The third family includes so-called top quark, the bottom quark, a very heavy electron like
particle called the tau and a particle called the tau neutrino.
The top quark was only discovered in the mid-1990s and that's what completed this picture.
So we now know that all these particles exist, we've detected them all.
By the way there's a relationship between these families and this is found out in the
experiments that study the masses of neutrinos.
It appears that electron neutrinos can change and the muon neutrinos can change into tau
neutrinos.
Neutrinos can oscillate back and forth from one form to another.
So you may say okay this looks good but I'm sure next year's edition of this course is
going to have a fourth family as we discover them.
Well no, there are experiments you can do that tell you what the number of families of
particles that can exist should be and these experiments seem to confirm very precisely
that it's no more and no less than three.
So we believe these are all the families of particles there are.
Why?
Who knows?
We don't know why there should be three families of particles but that's the way nature appears
to have made things.
And again I want to emphasize only the first family appears regularly and routinely and
continuously in ordinary matter.
Particles in the second and third families are all unstable and they quickly decay to
other particles.
So protons, neutrons, ordinary matter were made of electrons and up quarks and down quarks
although as I just described the other ones do play a modest role in the existence of
protons and neutrons and maybe a role that's not so modest but they aren't there all the
time they're coming into existence and going out of existence.
They did play a major role in the early universe when things were so hot there was enough equals
mc squared energy around to create even these heavier particles and they do play a role
in some astrophysical processes and they play a role in our particle accelerators.
Now there are other particles we aren't quite done.
There are other particles and the reason there are other particles is because in quantum physics
the description of a force is not somebody pulling or pushing nor is it necessarily that
field picture although it's a kind of modified field picture.
In quantum physics the description of a force between particles is that particles interact
by exchanging yet another particle and that particle is called a force carrier and I'm
going to give you an example of how that works for a familiar force the electromagnetic force.
The two particles that are interacting in this case I'll show you a proton and an electron
they're interacting it's a attractive force in this case the electric force that's attracted
between those two what happens is one of them emits a photon that's the force carrier
for the electromagnetic force the familiar photon the particle that is also the particle
invisible light or electromagnetic waves of any kind what happens is the electron emits
the photon the proton absorbs it and in that process they've developed that attraction
that goes on between them then a proton emits a photon goes back and forth photons go back
and forth.
This is called a virtual photon because it comes into existence that the electron travels
to the proton goes out of existence of the proton we never see it so it's called virtual
but that process the exchange of a virtual photon is quantum physics description of
how forces actually act.
So there are other particles there's the photon the particle that carries the force the electromagnetic
force and there are other force carrying particles what are they well for each of the forces
there's an associated force carrying particle for the electromagnetic force that particle
is the photon electromagnetism is mediated if you will by the exchange of photons between
charged particles.
For the weak force there are two force carrying particles called W and Z bosons and it was
their discovery that confirmed the electro weak unification that made the weak force
understandable as being related to the electromagnetic force.
For the color force the force that binds quarks there's a particle called the gluon because
it glues the quarks together and two quarks interact by exchanging gluons.
Gluons are fascinating because they themselves interact and they can make particles called
glue balls which are big clunks of gluons and these are again areas of very active research.
Finally for gravity which doesn't fit into the standard model we don't know how to incorporate
gravity with these other forces that's going to be the subject of my last lecture attempts
to do that.
If gravity could be described in terms of a quantum theory and we don't yet know how
to do that then there would be a particle called the graviton which would mediate the
gravitational force.
So in addition to the quarks and the leptons the quarks and the electrons and the neutrinos
and the muons and the muon neutrinos and so on there are these additional force carrying
particles the photon the W and Z bosons the gluon maybe the graviton.
Finally there's one more particle you'll probably hear about it's a particle called
the Higgs boson nobody's ever seen a Higgs boson because we haven't got particle accelerators
that reach the energies we think are going to be needed to create it and the Higgs boson
is some kind of sort of a master particle whose existence is believed in the standard
model to be responsible for determining the masses of all the other particles.
There's a particle accelerator going online in the first decade of the 21st century it's
not there yet it's going to be in Switzerland that's on the French-Swiss border and it's
called the Large Hadron Collider and it probably will reach energies that are capable of producing
the Higgs particle.
It takes a lot of energy because E equals mc squared if that happens we will by that
time have completed the standard model of particles and forces.
What good does this do us well I'm going to show you in the next lecture how our understanding
of the particles and forces leads us part way to an understanding of the evolution
of the entire universe.
