Welcome to lecture 2, Heaven and Earth, Place and Motion.
I advertise this as a course about modern physics, but in the first lecture I also talked
at some length about classical physics as a way of contrasting the physics before the
year 1900 with the modern physics that this course is primarily about.
In this lecture I've got to take you back even further to what I'll call ancient physics,
pre-classical physics, physics before the time of Isaac Newton, because we want to understand
how ideas evolved from that physics into classical physics and then set the stage for the several
quandaries I mentioned that then led to the introduction of modern physics.
I'm going to concentrate in this lecture and in subsequent lectures for a while on the
question of motion.
Now this sounds like kind of a dull, dry topic and many students going through introductory
physics courses unfortunately come away thinking, gee, motion, why do I really care
about that?
Well, if you think for a minute about motion, you'll realize it's the key to everything
that happens.
If there were no motion, everything would stop.
There would be no change, there would be no time, you wouldn't get from one place to
another, electrons wouldn't jump across the synapses in your nerves and your brain and
you wouldn't think there'd be nothing happening.
Motion is what makes everything happen.
Why are we going to concentrate on motion?
One reason physicists concentrate on motion is because they'd like to predict how things
are going to move.
If I launch this rocket with this velocity, will I get it into orbit around Venus?
For example is a question.
If I slam on the brakes with this much force, will my motion stop in time to avoid hitting
the car in front of me?
How does the electron move in this complicated new molecule I've synthesized that may be
a drug that cures cancer or whatever?
These are questions about motion.
We need to understand motion to understand how the world works, but that's not the reason
in this course for our being interested in motion.
The reason we're interested in motion here is because what does it mean to move?
It means to move from place to place, that is through space and it takes time to move.
There's no such thing, we don't think, as instantaneous motion being here and then instantaneously
being here.
So motion is inextricably tied with the key ideas of space and time.
And space and time, if you think about them, are the fabric of physical reality, the underlying
stage in which all physical events take place.
So if we understand motion, we have a clue to the nature of space and time and it's
no secret, as you understand from the first lecture with the time traveling twins, it's
no secret that relativity does strange things to our common sense notions of space and time.
So we've got to understand how those common sense notions were developed and then we've
got to understand what a true understanding of motion tells us about the real nature of
space and time.
So we're going to be emphasizing questions of motion.
And we're going to ask a useful question, and I ask you to keep this question in mind
throughout at least the first two thirds of the course because it's going to pop up again
and again and again.
And the question is this, is there a natural state of motion?
Is there some way things sort of left to their own devices like to move or maybe not move?
Is there a natural state of motion?
If there is a natural state of motion, what is it?
If there isn't a natural state of motion, does everything just want to stop?
You might have thought that was the natural state, but think again, things don't just
stop.
Electrons are whizzing around, cars are moving, the air is moving, the planets are going around
the sun.
Maybe being at rest is not such a natural state.
We'll come to understand that.
To answer the question, is there a natural state of motion?
As we now understand the answer, we've got to go back though and look at what the answers
were in ancient times and then in classical physics times, and so that's what I intend
to do.
And in this lecture, I want to look particularly at the ancients answer, and the ancients answer
is interesting because it's a blend of science and philosophy and theology.
In ancient times, the universe was divided into two realms.
There was the earthly realm, that was the realm of the base, the imperfect, the crude,
the solid, the material stuff like us and rocks and water and oceans, the earth.
And there was one set of rules that governed how things happened on earth.
And then there were the heavens, hence my title, heaven and earth, place and motion.
There were two places, the heavens and the earth, and they had different laws of physics
if you want to think about these ancient ideas as laws of physics.
And the answer to the question, what's the natural state of motion?
And a different answer on earth and a different answer in the heavens.
And the answer given for earth was very simple.
Natural state of motion for earthly entities is to be as close as possible to the center
of the earth, which was the center of the universe.
And the earth was the realm again of the material and the base and the solid and so on.
And so that explains a lot of things.
It explains the fact that if I take this ball for example and drop it, after a while it ends
up at rest as close as it can possibly get to the center of the earth, which happens
to be the floor in this instance.
So the philosophical sense that things on earth tended toward the center of the earth
and to come to a state of rest as close to the center of the earth as possible, seems
to be borne out by experiments, again dropping a ball is a physics experiment, I'm challenging
physical reality to tell me how it behaves and I'm learning something about it.
That experiment seems to verify the ancient notion that motion on earth ultimately has
a natural state which is to be at rest as close as possible to the center of the earth.
Notice that that is also in a sense a philosophical explanation for the phenomenon that we now
call gravity because it sort of gives a teleological, a purposeful, a philosophical explanation for
why that tennis ball ended up on the floor.
It wants to be as close as possible to the center of the earth and to be at rest and
it got into that state.
The answer, what's the natural state of motion to the ancients for objects on earth was they
want to be as close as possible to the center of the earth and they want to be at rest and
that's easy and done with and explains a lot of physical phenomena that we observe.
In the heavenly realm on the other hand things were very different, the heavens are the realm
of the ethereal, the spiritual, the stars, the planets, people didn't really know what
they were, they were things up there in the heavens and there's a very different natural
state of motion, the natural state of motion in the heavens according to the ancients is
circular motion, move in a perfect circle.
A circle is about the most perfect geometrical form you can think of, it has no corners,
it has no beginning or end, it's everywhere the same, it's a beautiful perfect thing and
the idea was motion in the heavens was circular motion and objects in the heavens simply continued
in circular motion, that was the natural thing for them to do.
There were various theories about why that happened, there were also various theories
to explain funny phenomena of earthly motion, for example if I throw a ball it keeps moving
for a while before it ends up in that natural state, well there were theories about air
rushing from the front to behind to keep it moving and things like that, but the basic
idea was it wanted to end up in that state at rest whereas objects in the heavens wanted
to be moving in those perfect circles just continually.
I want to emphasize one other aspect of this, why do things move, that's another question
we can ask, well we've just given a kind of philosophical explanation, things on earth
move toward the center of the earth because they'd like to be at rest as close as possible
to the center of the earth, if they're not in that state according to the ancients it
takes some kind of push to get them going or to keep them going, if you see an object
that's moving, for example an ox cart is moving down the road, the ox is pulling it, that's
what makes it move, if the ox stops it stops moving, if you take your foot off the gas
pedal of your car the car comes to a stop, albeit not instantaneously but sooner or later
it ends up in a stopped state, so the idea was you need to have some kind of push, in
that case the push of the tires against the road ultimately driven by the engine of the
car, you need to have some kind of push to keep something moving, absent that push the
thing stops moving, so a fundamental idea of the ancient view of motion is that it takes
a push to keep something moving at least in the terrestrial realm, in the heavenly realm
you have this different situation with the perfect circles and they just continue.
Let's look for a minute more at the heavenly realm, out of that idea came a sort of cosmology,
the picture of what the universe looked like, and let's take a look at the first visual
here, this is a picture of the universe as the philosopher Aristotle envisioned it, Aristotle
is working in the 300s BC, and he has a vision of a universe in which the earth is sitting
at the center, the earth is surrounded by concentric rings that hold the different planets
that are thought to go around the earth, and that also hold the sun which is also thought
to go around the earth, and farthest out are the so-called fixed stars that stay in the
same relative position in the sky, and they're thought to move as one giant sphere around
the earth.
By the way, for those of you who are watching this course on audio, I do have a number of
visuals and I've selected the most important ones and put them in the booklet, so I urge
you to refer to those, if you're driving your car you might want to wait until you come
to a stoplight or something, but this course is definitely aimed at you audio people as
well, and when I describe a visual that isn't in the book, and this is an example, I'll
just tell you what we're looking at.
So we're looking at this picture of the earth at the center of the universe surrounded by
concentric rings holding planets and in one case the sun.
Well, there's a problem with this picture.
One thing we'd really like our laws of physics and our cosmologies and descriptions of the
physical universe to do is correspond to reality, and unfortunately the picture Aristotle
described of objects going around the earth doesn't quite make it, and the reason is if
you look at the motion of the planets in the sky, they do not seem to describe perfect
circles around the earth, the sun essentially does, the distant stars essentially do, but
the planets don't, they do strange things.
If you watch a planet, Mars say, or Jupiter, night after night you'll see it changing its
position in the sky relative to the fixed stars, for a while looking it's like it's
going in a nice circular path around earth, but then it will pause and it will go backwards
for a while, in a little loop, and then it will pick up and go forward again.
It isn't describing perfect circular motion around the earth, but Aristotle and the other
ancients were hung up on the notion that celestial motion must be perfect circles.
So it was up to Ptolemy in about 140 AD to come along and modify the Aristotelian picture,
and here's what Ptolemy did.
He simply took the planets, and instead of having the planets moving in perfect circles
around the earth, they moved in little tiny circles, they were called epicycles, around
other perfect circles that themselves went around the earth.
So Ptolemy made a cosmology, a picture of the universe, that fit physical reality better.
If you study how this system works, in which planets are going around the earth, but then
they're also moving a little circles around your path, you'll find that they do in that
situation pretty much what they appear to do in the sky, that is they exhibit this occasional
backwards or retrograde motion, and so on, and this could be embellished with additional
circles upon circles to make it more accurate and so on, but the point here is we're emphasizing
the notion of perfect circles in the celestial realm.
So the universe, according to Ptolemy, is basically like that according to Aristotle,
but the circular motions consist not of a single circle around the earth, but circles
upon circles.
We don't need that for the sun, which appears still to describe a perfect circle.
So that's the picture, according to Ptolemy, and that picture range for thousands, a couple
thousand years basically, until Copernicus in 1543 published the heretical idea that
no, the earth is not the center of the universe, instead thought Copernicus, the sun is the
center of the universe, and this is the great Copernican revolution, and it's the first
step in what is ultimately going to lead us to Einstein's general theory of relativity.
It's the first step in saying earth is not a special place, and earth's motion is not
a special state of motion.
Copernicus emphasized the business of place.
I'm going to emphasize also the business of motion, because that's what's tied up with
relativity.
So what does the universe, according to Copernicus, look like?
Well Copernicus was loath to give up the perfect circles upon circles, so his cosmology also
had a sun at the center.
It was surrounded by orbits of planets and a circular orbit of the earth, and the planetary
orbits needed to have circles upon circles, because they didn't seem to be describing
even quite perfect circles around the sun, and Copernicus was really insistent on maintaining
this view that the celestial motions are perfect, so he came up with a cosmology, again circles
upon circles, but here the sun is at the center.
Well, the next bold step was taken by Kepler, who was working in 1610 roughly, and he was
working with data that had been collected painstakingly by the astronomer Tycho Bry,
and Tycho had amassed years and years and years of data on the positions of the planets,
and on the basis of that data, Kepler concluded something quite different.
He concluded that motion in the heavens, the motion of the planets around the sun at
least, were not perfect circles, but they were ellipses, and I'm showing here a picture
of an ellipse, for you audio people, it's simply an egg-shaped curve with the sun, not
at the center, but off at a place called the focus, which is at one side.
This is a highly exaggerated picture.
The orbits of the planets are not very elliptical at all.
They are almost perfectly circular.
The earth, for instance, differs from perfect circularity by about 3%.
If I were to draw it, you'd have a hard time distinguishing it from a perfect circle.
So this is highly exaggerated.
Orbits of comets do look exaggerated like this, so do orbits of the satellites that
are used to provide television service to Siberia, for example.
They describe great looping orbits that take them hanging for a long time over the northern
hemispheres, the extremes of the northern hemisphere, and then they whiz down around
in these elliptical orbits.
Elliptical orbits do happen, but they aren't the orbits that the planets follow.
The orbits the planets follow are circular almost, but they are measurably different,
and Kepler said they are circles, and not only did he say that, he made up laws that
described how fast the planets were moving at different parts of the ellipse in relation
to the period, the time it takes to go around, and the size of the elliptical orbit.
So he described mathematically what these orbits looked like and how the planets moved
in the orbits, but he gave us no physical explanation.
He didn't say, why do they move in these orbits?
He just said, I think they do.
So where have we moved?
We've moved away from the notion of an earth-centered universe.
That was Copernicus' big step.
We now have a sun-centered universe, but in Copernicus' idea, still with perfect circles.
Now we've moved away from that further to a universe in which the orbits of the planets
appear to be ellipses, not circles, and Kepler is telling us how to describe mathematically
what those elliptical orbits are.
But we have no explanation for why the ellipses are there, and we still have this dichotomy
between motion on earth and motion in the heavens.
And now we move to someone who's probably one of the most important figures in all of
science, and that's Galileo Galilei.
Galileo, who lived from 1564 to 1642, was a real experimentalist.
People like Kepler were looking at observational data.
Galileo also got his hands on real things.
He purportedly dropped objects off the Leaning Tower of Pisa, whether that's true or not.
He certainly did experiment with terrestrial motion on earth and tried to come up with
an explanation and an understanding of how that motion behaved.
He tried to answer the question and succeeded in answering the question, what's the natural
state of motion on earth?
And Galileo did several things.
We'll talk a little more later about his experiments with earthly motion, but he also did some
observational astronomy, and he developed the first astronomical telescope.
He was alive at the era when the whole idea of lenses for eyeglasses on vision correction
had just been invented.
He made a telescope and he pointed at heavenward, and he saw some things that had never been
seen before.
I just want to describe for you three things Galileo saw, because they shook the foundations
of this philosophical idea that the heavens up there were somehow perfect and different
from the base and course and crude earth down here.
The first thing Galileo saw, not necessarily the first thing, temporarily, but one thing
he saw, we looked at Jupiter, and you can do this observation with a pair of binoculars.
If you look at Jupiter, you'll see what Galileo saw.
He saw four little dots lined up in a line on either side of Jupiter.
You look in different nights, they're in different places, sometimes you can't see one or two
of them because they're behind or in front of Jupiter, but if you watch Jupiter when
it's up in the sky at night, in different nights, you'll see these little dots that
are in a line right across Jupiter's equator on either side of Jupiter.
Those are the so-called Galilean satellites of Jupiter.
They are clearly and were clearly to Galileo a kind of miniature solar system.
They represented moons of Jupiter going around Jupiter in the same way the Earth's moon goes
around the Earth.
And so Galileo had for the first time an example of another solar system-like thing, another
miniature cosmology, and it clearly had Jupiter at the center and the moons going around
it.
And that helped confirm the notion that there was nothing so special or unusual about the
Earth being sort of like a moon of the sun going around the sun along with all the other
planets.
Discovering another miniature solar system, if you will, Galileo had confirmed the Copernican
idea that the sun was a solar system with the sun at the center and the planets going
around it.
It's a little bit-Galileo's discovery of Jupiter's moons, I think, is a little bit
like what will happen when eventually, perhaps, we discover a life somewhere else in the universe.
We'll have a second example.
All of a sudden what happened here on Earth that many scientists don't think is unique
will be proved not to be unique.
Similarly, Galileo discovered the moons going around Jupiter, and for the first time the
solar system idea was not unique.
It was a common place, or not the common place, but at least it was a physical occurrence
that had occurred more than once.
So that was an important observation.
The second observation Galileo made was of the phases of Venus.
You're all aware of the phases of the moon.
Sometimes it's full, sometimes it's new moon and you can't see it, sometimes it's a crescent,
sometimes it's a half moon, sometimes it's gibbous, not quite full, and so on.
Why does the moon have phases?
Because the moon goes around the Earth, and at different times in its orbit, it's in
a different place in relation to the sun.
For instance, when it's a full moon, you'll notice the full moon rises at sunset.
Why?
Because the sun is on one side of the Earth, the moon is on the other side, and it's getting
full sunlight.
That's why the full moon always rises at sunset and always sets at sunrise, for example.
At other phases, the moon is being hit, only part of it is being illuminated.
Only part of it, you can see from Earth, is being illuminated, and we get the phases.
In the moon's case, although the moon goes through different phases, the phases are always
the same size.
Galileo observed the phases of Venus.
Venus goes through full and crescent and so on, but there's something else that happens
with the phases of Venus.
When Venus is full, it's a very small circle.
When Venus is a crescent, it's much larger.
Why would that be?
Well, there's an easy explanation for that in terms of the Copernican picture.
In the Copernican picture, Venus is full when it's on the opposite side of the sun from
the Earth, and therefore it's farthest away, and therefore it looks smaller.
It's a crescent when it's relatively near the same side of the sun as the Earth is,
and the Earth is only seeing a small sliver of the lit up part of Venus, and therefore
we see a crescent, and it looks much bigger because Venus is much closer.
It would be very difficult to explain that observation in terms of the Aristotelian Ptolemaic
idea that the Earth is the center of the universe, because there Venus is going around the Earth,
and except for that little circle on a circle, there's very little change in its distance
from Earth.
The observation of the phases of Venus was a very important one in helping to verify
the Copernican notion again that the Earth is not special, the Earth is not the center
of everything.
We're moving away from Earth-centeredness with that observation.
The final observation that Galileo made, he looked at the sun and he observed sunspots.
Timing here, by the way, is remarkably lucky because the sun, very soon after Galileo's
time, went into a phase called the Maunder Minimum that we solar physicists, and I happen
to be a solar physicist in my research field.
We don't understand why that occurred, but the sun went through a period when it had
almost no sunspots for a long time.
What are sunspots?
Well, to Galileo, they were dark blemishes on the surface of the sun.
He hadn't actually discovered sunspots.
The ancient Chinese had discovered them much earlier and called them crows and didn't know
what they were, and Galileo didn't know either, but the important philosophical point was
they were blemishes on the surface of the sun.
Here's the celestial body, and it's no longer perfect.
By the way, you look at the moon, you see it has craters and mountains.
It's not perfect either.
Here's a break in the notion that the celestial realm is somehow perfect and somehow distinct
from the terrestrial realm.
All of a sudden, there are mountains and craters and there are spots on the sun, and it's not
perfect up there either.
So why should it obey some kind of different perfect laws?
Galileo didn't get any further than that, but he established the imperfection of the
heavens, if you will, and that was a break in this notion of a separate terrestrial and
celestial realm.
Then Galileo turned to motion on Earth, and he did several important experiments.
The experiment we're most famous with, the experiment in which he supposedly dropped
objects off the leaning tower of Pisa, that was an experiment which, if it occurred, verified
the notion that all objects fall toward the Earth with the same, not speed, but acceleration.
They gain speed at exactly the same rate.
It's a difficult experiment to do accurately.
No resistance gets in the way, but Galileo, if he did it from the tower of Pisa, was able
by dropping objects of different weight to confirm that they didn't fall at grossly different
rates.
That was an important understanding of gravity.
Then Galileo carried out an important thought experiment, which I will describe here and
show you in a visual.
What Galileo did was to imagine a ball rolling in some kind of trough.
Ball starts at some height in the trough, it rolls down to the bottom of the trough,
and then it rolls up to the other side, and how far up would it get, Galileo asked.
Well, he reasoned that if there were no friction and no air resistance and so on, everything
were perfect, the ball would roll to the same height it started out at.
And absent any friction or air resistance, it would simply roll back and forth in that
trough continuously, back and forth, always rising to the same height.
Of course, it doesn't, it eventually slows down because of friction and stops at the
bottom.
But that was Galileo's thought.
Roll the ball from one side of the trough, it will rise to the same height on the other
side.
What if we make the other side of the trough somewhat longer?
What if we take this trough, which is now symmetrical, and we stretch out one side of
it?
Well, the ball will still rise to the same height, reasons Galileo, in this so-called
thought experiment.
He didn't actually do this, but he said, what will happen if we did this?
It will rise to the same height vertically, but it has to roll further horizontally to
get there.
Because the trough that was initially symmetric is now longer on one side of the side it's
going to rise up to after it rolls down.
And then said, Galileo, what if we go one step further?
What if we take that trough and lower it completely, make it horizontal at the bottom?
So the ball rolls down the trough and then it rolls continually horizontally along the
bottom of the track.
What happens?
Galileo said, absent friction and air resistance, it never stops.
Now, the historians of science will tell me I'm being a little bit simplistic here and
I am.
Galileo was worried about the curvature of the earth and other things like that.
But in principle, this is the essence of his idea.
Galileo said, if this trough never goes back up again, the ball will just continue rolling
horizontally without its speed changing.
And he reasoned that from this idea of taking the trough and gradually lowering the one
side the ball rolls farther and farther horizontally while rising to the same height.
Finally, if it can't ever rise to the same height it started at, it will just continue
to go horizontally forever.
And Galileo therefore concluded something very, very different about terrestrial motion.
He reasoned this way.
He said, look, if an object is moving at a constant speed in a straight line, what's
it going to do?
It's going to keep doing that.
It's going to move forever in a straight line at constant speed.
It's never going to stop.
That idea is crucial to classical physics and to modern physics as well.
That idea is one of the key ideas in understanding motion.
What Galileo is saying is the natural state of motion is not to be at rest on the surface
of the earth.
That's the state of motion you get to because of things like friction and air resistance
and things that you bump into like the floor when the ball falls.
The natural state of motion is to move in a straight line at constant speed.
It doesn't take a push to have something be moving.
This is a crucial point.
This is one we teachers of introductory physics spend a lot of time trying to get our students
really to believe.
It's really true, folks.
It doesn't take any push to make something move.
If you see something moving, the question is not, why does it keep moving?
The question might be, how did it get moving in the first place?
Or if you see something that stopped, how did it get stopped if it was earlier moving?
The question is not, what keeps it moving?
Because it takes no push, no pull, what physicists call a force.
It takes no force to keep something moving.
That's what Galileo says, and that's what appears to be a correct description of the
way motion works.
The natural state of motion is to be moving uniformly in a straight line.
There's a name for that statement.
It's a name attributed to both Galileo and Newton.
It's called the law of inertia.
It says that an object has an inertia, a natural tendency to keep moving.
If I take this big ball over here, and I set it into motion, it keeps moving.
I'm going to fall on the floor and crush itself if I didn't stop it.
That's because of its inertia.
It takes a push to get it started moving, and it takes a push or a pull to stop it.
What it naturally wants to do is move in a straight line at constant speed.
That's the natural state of motion.
That's the law of inertia.
By virtue of having mass, by being heavy, by having, if you will, weight, although those
terms are not quite synonymous, this object once moving will keep moving.
It takes a push to get it moving.
It takes a push to stop it moving.
It also takes a push to change the direction of its motion.
The motion that's natural, according to Galileo, is uniform motion.
That means motion in a straight line at constant speed.
If you see any deviation from that, if you see an object speed up or slow down, or, and
this is the point our introductory physics students sometimes have trouble with, or change
its direction, in all those cases, you can assume that a force, a push or pull, has acted
on it.
But if you see it moving in a straight line at constant speed, there's no way, no reason
to explain that.
That's what it naturally wants to do.
Nobody's pushing it or pulling it.
Why is that such a hard idea for us to grasp?
Because in most of our world, the experience, push this tennis ball, you see it slowing
down, eventually it stops.
Take your foot off the gas of the car again.
You ought to just keep rolling forever if what I've just said is true.
Well, it is true, except there are pushes and pulls working on the car.
There's the push of the air against it.
There's the friction pushing against the tires.
In the case of the ball, there's friction with the table, and again, there's the air
pushing back on it.
We don't see those forces.
They don't manifest themselves the way my hand does as a forcible push or pull, but
they're there, and they cause the motion to change.
If we could abstract those forces away, and that's what Galileo's thoughts on motion
thought experiment did, or if we could go to a physical situation like, say, an ice
hockey rink, look at the hockey puck, it whizzes across the ice.
There's almost no friction.
It goes a lot, it would go much further than the size of the ice rink before it slowed
down appreciably.
Look at the skaters themselves, unless they dig their skates into the ice to try to force
themselves to turn or to start or stop, they simply coast at essentially constant speed.
The forces of friction and air resistance in that case are small, the pushes and pulls,
and the natural state of motion reveals itself.
But the reason we have trouble teaching this to introductory physics students and getting
them to believe it, it actually makes the world much simpler, and the reason we have
such trouble accepting it in our everyday lives is we're all sort of closet Aristotelians
in a sense.
I use that term with my students.
I tell them they're closet Aristotelians.
They sort of believe really in their gut that Aristotle was right, that it takes a push
or a pull to make motion, that the natural state of motion is to be at rest on the surface
of the earth.
It's not true.
The natural state of motion is to move in a straight line at constant speed.
Perhaps the very best example of this I can give you is the Pioneer and Voyager spacecraft,
which are now beyond the outermost reaches of the solar system, and they've been going
for something close now to 30 years, 20 to 30 years, and they are just moving in almost
straight lines.
There are slight pushes and pulls from the gravity of the sun and the planets, but they're
essentially moving in straight lines at constant speed.
They have no rocket motors going.
There's no fuel involved.
They're still broadcasting back to us with their radio transmitters, though, and they're
way out there, and they're just going to move forever until something pushes or pulls
on them, like the pull of a distant star or an alien hand reaching out and grabbing them
and trying to figure out where they came from.
Otherwise, straight line, constant speed, it's the natural state of motion.
It takes no effort.
It takes no force.
It takes no push or pull.
This is the essential change that Galileo has made.
He's developed the law of inertia.
He said the natural state of motion is straight line motion at constant speed.
Pushes and pulls are required only for changes in motion.
We're going to make a great deal of those two points.
If you see a change in motion, you know a push or pull has occurred.
If there's no change in motion, that's perfectly natural.
There's no push or pull involved.
The law of inertia holds.
An object moves in a straight line at constant speed unless a push or a pull acts on it,
and out of that is going to come a whole host of classical physics, and that's ultimately
going to lead us to the questions that will bring us to relativity.
