Welcome to Lecture 3, The Clockwork Universe.
Why that title?
Because partway through this lecture I hope to convince you that if you believe the Newtonian
paradigm of physics, the essence of classical physics, you'll believe that the universe
is completely deterministic, that whatever conditions were established at the start,
the universe then would evolve like a giant clockwork with every move of every particle
completely and exorably determined, the clockwork universe.
Before we get into the mechanism of the clockwork universe, though, let's look a little bit
about the individual whose name is most associated with this idea, and that's Sir Isaac Newton.
I advertised that I would get in the personal touch occasionally, and I'll do that a little
bit in Newton's case.
Newton was born in 1642, which coincidentally is the year Galileo died, but he very much
carried on where Galileo left off and extended Galileo's ideas, and the physics of Newton
is really the physics of Newton and Galileo in many ways.
Newton had some interesting history.
In his early 20s, he had to leave Cambridge University because of the plague, and he actually
moved back to his family at a place in Woolsthorpe, England, and he spent several years there,
which were among the most productive years of his life.
So the plague drove him away from Cambridge, and he was very productive.
He returned to Cambridge, and the chair that he held is now held by Professor Stephen Hawking,
whom many of you know about, and you may have read his book, The Brief History of Time.
So Hawking holds Newton's chair at Cambridge University.
What Newton is most famous for are his laws of motion and his law of gravity, and I want
to spend most of this lecture looking at those laws, but then at the end, getting us to a
sense of how they're going to lead us on to Einstein's relativity.
Newton's three laws of motion are something everybody studies who deals with introductory
physics.
There are three laws that describe how objects move in response to forces, that is, to pushes
and pulls.
Together, if you know the pushes and pulls and you know Newton's laws of motion, then
you can determine exactly what an object is going to do, hence the clockwork universe
idea.
So what are Newton's three laws of motion?
Well, the first is something we've already seen.
The first law of motion is essentially the law of inertia that I described in the last
lecture and attributed to Galileo, and it says basically in somewhat formal terms that
an object moves uniformly, and again, remember what uniform motion means.
It's a straight line path and it's at constant speed.
Any deviation in direction or speed is not uniform motion.
An object moves uniformly, that is, in a straight line at constant speed, unless it's
acted on by a force, that is, by a push or pull.
And we call this the law of inertia, and it's the statement basically that straight line
motion at constant speed, uniform motion, is the natural state of motion.
So here Newton is simply recapitulating what Galileo said, that objects have inertia and
that inertia keeps them moving, makes uniform motion in natural state of motion, and that
you have to do something to change that state of motion.
You have to exert a force, a push or a pull, to start an object moving, to stop an object
moving, to change its speed, or to change its direction.
That's the first law of motion.
The second law is the really meaty one.
The second law describes quantitatively how forces, that is, pushes and pulls, cause changes
in motion.
The first law is really a subset of the second law, because the first law says, unless there's
a force, there won't be a change in motion.
Motion will continue in the absence of a force.
Newton's second law quantifies that with the famous formula F equals MA, and I'm not big
on math here, but I do want to describe for you what that formula means.
F is the force, the push or the pull.
A is the acceleration, the rate at which the object's motion is changing.
That's what acceleration means.
When you step on the accelerator of your car, what that does is change your speed.
When you turn the steering wheel, this is less obvious, but the steering wheel is also
an accelerator.
When you turn the steering wheel, you're changing the direction of your motion, and therefore
you're accelerating your car.
You may not be going faster or slower, but you are accelerating because your motion is
changing.
A is the acceleration, the change in motion, and M is the mass, if you will, the weight
of the object.
And so what the second law says is simply this.
Well, first of all, let me tell you what it says in the context of the first law.
It says if F is zero, if there's no force, then A will be zero, there will be no change
in motion.
And we get back the first law that says, absent a force, an object will continue in straight
line motion, there will be no change in the motion.
But Newton's second law goes beyond that.
It tells us, for example, that if M is big, if an object is very massive, it would take
a big force to give it an acceleration.
If an object is not very massive, it doesn't take as much force to give it the same acceleration.
As an example, over here I have two objects of different mass.
I've got a tennis ball and a bowling and a basketball.
The basketball is not only bigger, it's also more massive.
That's the important thing here.
And I'm going to give them each the same push, the same acceleration.
Here goes the basketball.
I'm going to give it a little push.
I'm not going to keep pushing it.
I don't need to keep pushing it.
I'm going to give it a push to change its state of motion.
Right now it's at rest with respect to this table.
I'm going to change its state of motion.
I'm going to make it move with respect to the table.
Here I go.
I put it into motion, and it then moved in essentially constant motion until another
force acted on it, namely me grabbing it at the other end.
So that was the basketball.
Massive, I gave it a force.
I didn't change its motion that much, that is, it didn't get moving that fast.
I'm going to give the same size tap to the tennis ball, much less mass, same F. Newton's
equation says I'm going to get a bigger A.
It got up to a much greater speed.
Force, mass, and acceleration are related.
The bigger the mass, the bigger the force it takes to change an object's motion.
And that's true whether you're changing the object's motion as I did here by changing
its speed, by speeding it up, by getting it moving, or changing its motion by stopping
it.
It takes a bigger force to stop the basketball than it does to stop a rolling tennis ball.
It takes a bigger force to stop a truck than it does to stop a car.
The acceleration and the force and the mass are all related, and that's what Newton's
second law says.
And if we know how an object is accelerating, if we know how its motion is changing, and
we know how it was initially moving, we can predict everything it's going to do.
So in principle, if you know the force that's acting on an object, the pusher pole that's
acting on an object, and you know it exactly, and you know what the object is doing at some
point, then in principle you can predict what it will be doing at every other point
in the future, provided you continue to know the force.
That's the essence of the clockwork universe idea.
The clockwork universe says if we know Newton's laws of motion, which we do, and we know the
forces, the pushes and pulls that are acting on objects, and we knew the positions of all
the objects that make up the universe, every planet, every electron, every proton, every
atom, and we knew their motion.
In principle, even though we don't have any computer powerful enough to do the calculation,
in principle that calculation is doable, and in principle everything that happens from
then on is predictable, the universe is completely deterministic.
It's kind of a bleak picture in a sense, philosophically, because it leaves no room for our free will,
unless you want to postulate that our brains operate outside the laws of physics.
But that was the picture that emerged from classical physics, a clockwork universe, a
universe that once God, or some initial random event, or whatever it is, puts it into motion,
the rest of it is completely determined, and it simply runs on its own like a clockwork
obeying Newton's laws of motion.
Well, that's two of the laws of motion.
The third law of motion you've also heard of, I'm going to phrase it in slightly different
terms than you may have heard, forces come in pairs is what the third law of motion says.
It says if I push on something, for example, I'm going to push on this table now, the table
pushes back on me.
In fact, it pushes back on me with a force that is equal to the force I used in pushing
on it.
If I push on this lectern, it pushes back on me, and I can feel that push in my hands.
When I hit that basketball to get it rolling, I felt that I was hitting it with my hand.
That's because the basketball was pushing back on me.
That's also an essential part of the set of laws of motion.
For those of you who have studied any physics, the third law of motion is very closely tied
with the idea of conservation of momentum.
But we don't need to worry about that.
The point is these three laws provide a coherent whole that describe everything there is to
know about motion according to Newton, according to classical physics.
So we have three laws of motion, but we don't yet understand much about the forces, the
pushes and pulls that might act to cause objects' motions to change.
Well, there Newton made another great step forward.
Newton studied one of the most important forces known.
There's a famous myth about Newton, and we're going to take a look at a picture that describes
that myth.
Here's a picture of Newton sitting under an apple tree, and the myth goes, Apple falls
on Newton, hits him on the head, and he discovers gravity.
Well, I think that myth stated that way has to be nonsense.
It didn't take Newton to discover gravity.
It took some cave person sitting under a cliff outside their cave, and rocks come falling
down or something, or a wild animal jumps over the cliff or something.
They realize there's gravity.
When our ancestors swung from trees, they know inherently about gravity.
You don't discover gravity by having an apple hit you on the head.
The story of Newton, if it's true, is much more subtle and much more sophisticated and
much more profound in its implications.
Here's Newton sitting under the apple tree, and if this story were true, the moon is also
up in the sky at the same time, and Newton sees the moon.
The realization that's associated with the apple tree myth or story, if it's true, is
that Newton recognized that the motion of the apple and the motion of the moon are one
in the same motion.
That's the essence of Newton's genius.
He said, the moon, what's it doing?
It's moving around the earth.
The apple, what's it doing?
It's falling toward earth.
What do both those motions have in common?
What they have in common is that in both cases, the objects are being accelerated, deviated
from straight line constant speed motion in a direction toward the earth.
It's as though in both cases, there's a pull toward the earth acting on both those objects.
In the case of the apple, the pull is causing the apple to move actually physically toward
the earth.
In the case of the moon, the motion is not actually making the moon come any closer to
the earth, but it is pulling it away from its straight line path.
It would follow according to the first law of motion if there were no force acting on
it.
That's the key point to realize.
It's that simple also.
Physics is simpler than most people realize.
This is a case in point.
You ask, what keeps the moon in orbit?
What keeps an artificial satellite?
Why don't they fall down?
They are falling.
They're falling toward earth in the sense that their motion is deviating from a straight
line because the earth is pulling on them.
It just happens to be the case with the moon that that pull and the motion of the moon
are such that the pull keeps the moon in a circular path.
I have another example of that here.
I've got just a tennis ball attached to a string.
I'm going to whirl around over my head here, and we're going to just ask a couple of questions
about this.
So here goes the tennis ball.
Is it moving in a straight line at constant speed?
No way.
It's not moving in a straight line.
It may be moving at constant speed, but it's still accelerating.
Its motion is still changing.
It's not going in a straight line at constant speed.
It's not undergoing the, quote, natural state of motion.
Why isn't it?
Because the string is pulling on it through me at the center of the string here pulling.
I'm exerting a force which is communicated through the string to the ball, and the ball
is going on a path that deviates always from the straight line it would go on if I were
to let it go flying off, which I won't do.
But if the string were cut or something or I let go, it would go flying off in a straight
line at constant speed.
It's falling, if you will, toward my hand.
It's being pulled always toward my hand out of the straight line path it would otherwise
follow.
It's that simple.
Objects move in a straight line at constant speed unless they're acted on by a pull.
In this case the pull has just the right strength to keep the object moving in a circular path.
And so it does.
It deviates from the straight line path that it would otherwise follow.
And the moon in its orbit around the earth is doing exactly the same thing.
And that's exactly what Newton recognized if in fact it's true that the apple hit him
on the head and he discovered gravity.
And he didn't only recognize that qualitatively, he recognized it quantitatively as well.
He formulated on the basis of that observation the so-called law of universal gravitation.
Newton said, I believe that every object in the universe attracts every other object with
a force, a pull that depends on how massive the two objects are and also on how far apart
they are.
The further apart they are, the weaker the force.
And it falls off very rapidly.
It goes as 1 divided by the square of the distance, if you've heard the inverse square
law.
We don't need to get into that.
But the point is it falls off with distance.
That means the acceleration that the earth gives to the moon, the great big massive moon
very far away, is much less than the acceleration it gives to the apple.
Why?
Because the apple is closer to the earth.
Well is that true?
Newton went and calculated.
He said what kind of rate of change of motion would it take to cause the moon, roughly 250,000
miles away, to go around the earth once every roughly 27 days, which is roughly the period
of the moon's orbital motion.
And he found that the force was roughly 1,300 of the force that acts on the apple.
He calculated the moon was about 60 times as far from the center of the earth as the
apple is, and that all works with the mathematics of universal gravitation.
So Newton came up with a law of universal gravitation and demonstrated that it indeed
seemed to be true with regard to the apple and the moon.
The apple is close to the earth and falls with a large acceleration.
The moon is much further away and, quote, falls again in the sense that it's falling
out of the straight line path it would otherwise take in describing a circle with an acceleration
that is weaker in just the exact relation that Newton's law predicts, given how far
away it is.
By the way, universal gravitation really has been verified in the laboratory with very
delicate apparatus.
We can now do experiments where objects like this tennis ball and this basketball, we typically
use them lead objects or steel objects or something because they'd be more dense and
more massive, over scales like this we can measure the strength of the gravitational
attraction.
In fact, that was first done in the 1700s by Cavendish.
So this is an experiment we can actually do.
We can measure the universal gravitation between two ordinary sized objects.
It's very, very small and very difficult to measure.
When we accumulate a lot of matter in one place, as we do with a planet or a star, then gravity
becomes a big, significant force.
It's actually rather weak.
But it's one of the fundamental forces that make the universe work, one of the fundamental
pushes and pulls.
Newton realized something else with his universal gravitation.
He realized the possibility that we could have objects in orbit.
And Newton had a thought experiment.
He imagined the Earth with a giant mountain on it.
Again, one of these thought experiments where you think about what would happen if you could
do something which maybe it's not so easy to do.
So we have a picture here of the Earth with a giant mountain on it.
We're going to throw a ball horizontally off that mountain and it's going to fall to Earth.
Very familiar with that.
If I threw that tennis ball, it would fall to the ground pretty soon.
If I threw it horizontally, it would describe a curved path.
Well, this ball we throw off this high mountain also describes a curved path.
The only difference is the Earth is curving away beneath it, so it perhaps goes in a slightly
different route and lands up somewhere else than it would if the Earth had been completely
flat.
But it goes around and eventually hits the Earth.
If we throw it faster, it goes farther before it hits the ground.
Just like if I threw a tennis ball horizontally in this studio, it would go further before
it hit the ground.
If I throw it fast enough, and here's what Newton's genius again realized, it could be
falling toward the Earth at exactly the same rate that the Earth is, if you will, falling
away underneath it because the Earth is curved, and it would go in a circular path and come
right back to its starting point.
An absent air resistance or other factors that would tend to slow it down, that ball
that we threw would continue in a circular orbit around the Earth forever.
It would never stop.
In fact, that was Newton's realization that we could perhaps put artificial satellites
in orbit, and today, of course, we do that all the time, and we rely on those satellites
for weather prediction, and communication, and television, and navigation, global positioning
system receivers in our car these days.
All these are examples of satellite technologies, and it was Newton's genius to realize that
such satellites were possible.
He didn't have the technology to put them up, and it was not until the middle of the
20th century that we were able to do that, but we routinely put satellites up, and we
not only put them in circular orbits, we also put them in elliptical orbits, and Newton
also anticipated that.
Newton took his newly discovered universal law of gravitation, and he said to himself,
what kind of paths will objects follow?
What kind of paths, particularly, will a planet follow as it moves in the vicinity of the
Sun, subject to this force, which gets stronger as it gets closer to the Sun, and weaker as
it gets further away?
Newton said, how do I figure that out?
Well, he discovered he didn't know how to figure that out, so he had to invent the branch
of mathematics that it takes to figure that out, and that branch of mathematics is called
calculus.
So Newton had a real incentive to invent calculus, which was also independently invented by Leibniz.
But Newton invented calculus because he wanted to understand how his universal gravitation
would describe the motions of planets, and lo and behold, out of that mathematics came
the prediction that the motions of planets should be elliptical orbits, the Sun should
be at one focus of the ellipse, and the laws that Kepler had described about how fast the
planets move around the Sun, how much area they sweep out, and the period in relation
to the radius of the orbit, the size of the elliptical orbit, all those laws that Kepler
had described with no physical basis fell out of Newton's universal gravitation when
he applied the calculus and asked the question, how will a planet move in the vicinity of
the Sun?
So Newton had brilliantly verified Kepler's observations that the planets moved in elliptical
orbits.
He had explained it.
He had said the law of universal gravitation, that all objects attract with this force,
that depends on distance, explains that.
So Newton had made a brilliant explanation.
Well Newton had done more than that.
He'd made a philosophical leap because in recognizing that the motion of the moon and
the motion of the apple are the same thing, Newton had forever unified terrestrial and
celestial motion.
That distinction that I emphasized with the ancients, that distinction is gone.
No longer do we have a separate law of physics for the crude base Earth and a different law
for the perfect ethereal heavens up here.
They're all described by the same law.
It happens to be Newton's universal law of gravitation coupled with his three laws of
motion.
They describe the motion of the apple on Earth, they describe the motion of a ball I throw
here in this room, they describe the motion of the moon around the Earth, the Earth around
the Sun, the Sun around the center of the galaxy, and an artificial satellite around
the Earth.
They describe motion in the heavens and they describe motion on Earth and those realms
are no longer distinct.
Before we go on, let's just take a moment and review the evolution to this point because
now we're quite advanced beyond the stage of Aristotle.
We now have a universal physics.
We have laws that seem to govern the behavior of motion everywhere in the universe, something
very different from what Aristotle posited.
And those laws are thought out mathematically, they're written in rigorous mathematical language
so we can make predictions and those predictions agree with reality as in the case of Newton
comparing the acceleration of the moon and the acceleration of the apple or Newton predicting
the motion of a planet and discovering it was exactly what Kepler had described with
no basis for understanding why that description was true, Newton has now explained it.
So we have a very powerful statement about how the world works and it seems to apply everywhere
in the universe.
So let's take a look at the history that got us there.
We had a natural state of motion in the case of Aristotle in around 350 BC that was rest
on Earth.
Terrestrial motion, the natural state was being at rest on Earth.
In the celestial motion, the natural state of motion was circular and Earth was at the
center.
Ptolemy embellished that a little bit with the circles on circles but it was the same
basic idea.
Natural state of motion, terrestrial is at rest, natural state of motion circular is
the Earth at the center.
We next went to Copernicus in around 1540, didn't change the ideas of motion on Earth
but told us that the natural state of motion in the heavens was still circular but the
sun was at the center.
So a step away from the Earth being special but a conservatism also in maintaining the
notion of circular motion.
Galileo comes along working around the year 1600 and made a radical change in the natural
state of motion on Earth.
For Galileo for the first time the natural state of motion was uniform motion in a straight
line.
Galileo stated the law of inertia which became Newton's first law of motion which was then
embellished in Newton's second law to give it a quantitative substance and talk about
how forces, how pushes and pulls change one state of motion.
Galileo also in the celestial realm set the groundwork for Newton by saying the celestial
realm is imperfect.
I see a miniature planetary system in Jupiter and its moons.
I see blemishes on the sun, I see sunspots, I see venus' phases and I see the size of
the venus changing with phase and I interpret that to be evidence that in fact the Copernican
system with the sun at the center seems to be correct.
Then along comes Newton working around the year 1700 a little earlier, a little later.
He says terrestrial and celestial motion for the first time obey the same physical laws.
Same laws.
One universal physics that applies everywhere in the universe and so Newton has done the
first of the several great syntheses we're going to talk about in this course taking
seemingly disparate regions, disparate areas, disparate fields in this case astronomy and
terrestrial physics and uniting them.
They're one.
They're one because they obey the same laws.
They can be understood as aspects of the same thing.
What venus is doing in its motion around the sun can be understood as the same thing as
what the apple is doing when it falls on Newton's head or what the tennis ball is doing when
you hit it on your game of tennis on the cruise ship.
After a philosophical shift, one universal set of laws of physics and there's something
very special about those laws, the Newtonian laws of motion, the Newtonian Galilean scheme
and I want to take the last few minutes of this lecture and emphasize that very important
special point.
Let's ask the question, for whom do these laws of motion work?
For whom are Newton's laws true?
Just for Newton?
No.
They're true for anyone.
Are they true just on earth?
No.
Look at the creature on Jupiter if there is one who sees these moons going around.
That creature, if a Jovian fruit falls on their head, if there's such a thing as a Jovian,
they're going to make the same conclusion.
The same laws work on Jupiter as they work on earth.
The same laws work on venus.
We already know this.
We were doing this tennis thing on venus, bouncing a tennis ball back and forth.
We understand that the laws of physics that work on earth work elsewhere and equally importantly
they work regardless of your state of motion.
That's the important point.
Not so much your place, but your state of motion.
And I now want to get a little bit more specific about that and be a little bit more careful
when I make that statement.
The statement I want to make is this.
The statement is that the laws of motion are the same for everyone.
At this point I have to qualify that statement somewhat further and until the year 1914 we're
going to keep that qualification on.
That qualification applies to Newtonian physics and it also applies to Einstein's special
relativity.
It's important qualification.
And it says this.
The laws of physics are the same for everybody in uniform motion.
Everybody who's in uniform motion.
If you're moving in straight line motion at constant speed and you do experiments to determine
what are the laws that govern physics, you'll get the same or govern motion anyway.
You'll get the same answers that I do if I'm sitting at rest on earth or if I'm in a spaceship
in interstellar space without my engine going so I'm not accelerating so my motion isn't
changing.
Or I'm on that planet in that distant galaxy moving away from earth at 80% of the speed
of light.
As long as we're moving uniformly, we'll get the same results for the laws of motion.
We'll all agree that Newton's laws work, that universal gravitation works, and that they
have exactly the same form.
We can read the same textbooks and do the same physics and we'll get it all right.
You may be wondering to yourself, wait a minute, earth isn't in uniform motion.
It's spinning and it's going around the sun.
And you're right.
Earth isn't exactly in uniform motion, but the spinning of the earth is slow enough and
the motion around the sun, well that's a little more subtle in the context of Newton's theory.
I'm going to say that's also slow enough that earth is approximately in uniform motion.
It's not in a perfect state of uniform motion.
And later in the course in lecture 11, no, lecture 13 rather, we're going to be very
very concerned about how we find a perfect state of uniform motion.
And I'll give you an answer to that at that time.
But for now, except that earth and the other planets and the sun, which is going in a very
big slow orbit every 250 million years around the center of the galaxy, these are essentially
in uniform motion, close enough, Newton's laws hold almost perfectly.
Going or rotating merry-go-round or in a car, rounding a corner at high speed or something,
or in a car that's accelerating on a jet plane when it's heading down the runway, and Newton's
laws distinctly don't apply in those environments because those are not situations where you're
in uniform motion.
But here at the surface of the earth, we're close enough.
Not perfect, but close enough.
And so we have this principle that the laws of motion are the same for anyone in uniform
motion, and I spent a good part at the end of the first lecture convincing you that you
in your gut know that, and it makes a lot of good sense to you.
It would be a ridiculous universe in which we had these nice simple laws of motion that
worked only here on earth, and if you go to Venus, there's something more complicated,
and if you go to that distant planet on that distant galaxy, it's even more complicated.
No way.
It makes good physical sense.
The laws of motion, and I'm going to emphasize motion, I'm going to use the word motion instead
of physics for the next few lectures, because at the time of Newton, motion was the only
branch of physics really known to any great extent.
We knew a little bit about optics, a little bit about heat, but not a whole lot.
Motion, it's the laws of motion that are the same for anyone in uniform motion.
And that statement has a name.
It's called the principle of Galilean relativity, sometimes called Newtonian relativity, because
it flows out of the ideas of Newton and Galileo.
This is the first time we've seen the word relativity in a real physics context.
I've talked about relativity before, how this is going to be a course largely about
Einstein's relativity.
Here's that word relativity cropping up.
Einstein's relativity is actually not such a new idea.
It's actually a very old idea, recycled and embellished a little bit, and we're going
to come to understand that in a few lectures.
The original relativity principle was Galileo's and Newton's.
It's the principle of Galilean relativity, and it states what I just said.
It says the laws of motion are the same for anyone provided they're in uniform motion.
Now, that's the kind of formal way of saying it.
There are lots of other ways of saying it, of which I'll just give you a few examples.
You can play tennis on a cruise ship, or on Venus, or on this distant planet orbiting
a star in a galaxy that's so far away that it's moving away from us at 80% of the speed
of light.
These all make good gut sense, as long as the motion is uniform.
If that cruise ship gets hit by a tidal wave, things get real different.
If Venus crashes into another planet and breaks in pieces or something, or if you're in an
airplane and it encounters turbulence, then it doesn't apply, because those aren't uniform
motion.
But you can play tennis on a cruise ship, or on Venus, or on that distant planet.
It's all the same, because the laws of motion work for you just as well there, and in that
state of motion, as they do here on Earth.
Other ways to say it, only relative motion matters.
If you say to me, if you're driving down the road at constant speed in a straight line,
and I'm standing by the roadside, I'm prone to say, you're moving, but you have every
right to say, no, I'm just sitting here in my car, you're moving the other way.
We tend to be very prejudiced to thinking the Earth is this special place, and so whoa,
it's really the person who knows Earth that is at rest, and the other person's moving.
But what Galilean relativity, not anything fancy in Einsteinian, just old-fashioned Galilean
and Newtonian motion theory tells us is that you really can't distinguish.
We can't say one person is moving and one is not.
Anyone in uniform motion has equal access to the laws of physics.
They're equally good for anyone in uniform motion, and so no one can say absolutely,
I am moving and you're at rest, or I'm at rest and you're moving.
Those statements make no sense.
What we can say is I'm moving down the highway at 50 miles an hour relative to the ground,
or you're moving, you standing at rest relative to the Earth are moving past me at 50 miles
an hour the other way.
We can talk about relative motion.
That's why it's a relativity principle, because it says relative motion is a meaningful concept,
but absolute motion is not.
Only relative motion matters.
That's what that statement means.
You can eat dinner on an airplane, because you don't worry about, in fact, your food
is moving at 600 miles an hour.
As long as the plane is moving uniformly, no problem, you put your fork in the food
just like you would at home and you eat the food.
Now, you hit turbulence and the food goes flying all over the place.
That's different.
You're no longer in uniform motion and the laws don't apply there.
I am moving is a meaningless statement.
You can say I'm moving relative to you, but you can't say I am moving.
That's a meaningless statement.
And to put it more succinctly in the final terms, and we're going to come back to the
statement again and again in the next few lectures, there is simply no experiment you
can do involving the laws of motion that will answer the question, am I moving?
Put you in that airplane, pull down all the shade so you can't see the earth going by,
and there is no way you can tell for sure whether the airplane is moving or not.
There's no experiment you can do with tennis balls and billiard balls and throwing things
around and measuring forces and pushes and pulls that will give you any sense of physics
other than Newton's laws of motion.
There is no experiment you can do that will answer the question, am I moving?
And that's where we sit at Newton's classical physics with a law of relativity, a principle
of relativity that says uniform motion is the natural state and motion doesn't matter
as long as you're in uniform motion, we all see the same laws of physics.
