Lecture 16, Into the Heart of Matter
Here we're going to leave relativity aside, although we'll come back to it in lectures 23 and 24,
as we try to develop a theory that describes everything there is to say in the universe, about the universe.
And we begin a look at the smallest systems we know of in nature, atomic and subatomic systems.
We want to understand the rules of physics that govern the behavior of the universe at the subatomic and atomic scale,
and those rules are bizarre indeed.
Those are the rules of quantum physics or quantum mechanics.
We had a problem with relativity.
The problem with relativity was I made you stretch your common sense notions of space and time.
But the space and time we were talking about in relativity were at least still related to your common sense notions of space and time.
You had to stretch them.
You had to recognize that your common sense notions were approximations or limited versions of the richer space and time that a relativistic universe gives us.
But at least the language, space, time, causality, matter, energy, that language still worked.
The language still described physical reality, even if we had to redefine and stretch and enlarge our definitions of the concepts.
With quantum physics, it isn't going to be that way.
With quantum physics, even the language of everyday reality fails us.
I've been waving around tennis balls and my big globe and basketballs and everyday objects to try to illustrate for you some of the meaning of relativity.
And those analogies worked.
They aren't perfect, but they worked.
Those analogies fail utterly in the quantum realm.
Occasionally, I still have to resort to them.
I'll pick up a tennis ball and I'll say, this is an electron.
But that's not what an electron is.
An electron is not a little hard sphere like a tennis ball.
What is an electron?
Well, I don't know.
Is it a wave?
Is it a hunk of energy?
Is it a little chunk?
What is it?
We don't really know.
We don't have a good feel for it.
Our language is not adequate to describe the world of quantum physics, the world of the atomic and subatomic realms.
That's going to prove very frustrating.
Quantum physics is, in a way, more abstract than relativity.
Some people lump relativity with classical physics.
It's still understandable in that sense.
Quantum physics is going to wreak havoc with our notions of causality.
It's going to give us a world which is basically governed not by cause and effect,
but some kind of a statistical association which philosophers and physicists are still arguing over the meaning of.
Quantum physics is a strange thing.
We're going to try to get at that strangeness as best we can.
Once again, I can't do it with the logical precision that I use to lead you to special relativity.
It's going to be more descriptive, like my analysis of general relativity.
But I am going to try to show you historically, again, why quantum mechanics had to arise,
why we were forced to some very bizarre conclusions about the way the subatomic world works.
Here's the plan for doing all this in the next few lectures.
What I want to do in this lecture is look at the questions of what matter is made of.
How did we begin to get an understanding of the nature of matter through, say, the early 20th century?
People have been asking questions about the nature of matter for thousands and thousands of years,
and we've been gradually narrowing down toward a sort of correct answer as to what the nature of matter is.
But just about the turn of the 20th century, problems arose in that description of matter,
problems that made classical physics at odds with what in fact was observed in laboratory experiments.
We want to look at the problems that these classical ideas of the nature of matter gave rise to,
problems that seemed irreconcilable when you tried to apply classical physics to describe what was going on in the subatomic world.
Then we want to resolve those problems, and the way we'll resolve them is with the ideas of quantum physics,
the idea of the quantum itself, of the discreteness, not only of the matter that makes up the universe, but also of energy.
And then, after we've explored quantum physics in several lectures and gotten somewhat used to the bizarre notions
of matter that isn't matter, energy that isn't energy, waves that are particles and particles that are waves,
then we'll resume this descent further into the heart of matter and look at the most fundamental particles that make up the universe as far as we know it.
Look at the really elementary things, the quarks, the electrons, and understand how they combine to make the matter of which the everyday world is constructed.
After we've done that, we need to look at how subatomic physics, the physics of the very small and the physics of the very large,
general relativity, cosmology, the physics governing the large scale universe, how we can put those two together to some extent
and understand the evolution of the entire universe.
And indeed, some of the greatest progress in physics and astrophysics over the last few decades has come from merging the studies of the very smallest
subatomic physics with the studies of the very large scale universe.
And we have now a very clear picture of how the universe evolved from what we think was a beginning a certain number of billion years ago,
and we think we know that number pretty well.
We have that understanding because we know the large scale structure of the universe determined by the curvature of space-time described by general relativity,
and we think we know what happens on the small scale.
So we'll do that in the next to the last lecture.
Then in the very last lecture, we're going to get rather speculative and ask, is it possible to do something that most physicists say is not yet near to being done,
and that is to develop a theory that combines quantum physics, the physics of the very smallest scales, the physics of the subatomic realm
with general relativity, the physics of the large scale curvature of the universe, of gravity, of the behavior of large scale objects.
There are deep profound physical and philosophical problems to doing that, but we're going to look at some promising leads, string theory in particular,
and we're going to ask, are we anywhere near a theory of everything?
Are we anywhere near one equation or one simple theory that tells us why the universe is the way it is, why it has electrons, why it has atoms,
why they have the mass they do, why it has curved space-time, are we anywhere close to that, are we near a theory of everything, and we'll end with that.
So that's where we're headed in the remainder of the course.
In this particular lecture, we want to look at the question of the nature of matter,
and then we want to see how that question gave rise to deep concerns that led ultimately to quantum physics.
I raised the question a few lectures ago, what happened if I took a glass of water and I began pouring water out?
Well, I can pour out half the water and I've still got water.
Half of that and I've still got water.
Half of that and I still have water.
And at some point in human history, it was an unanswered question whether I could continue to do that forever.
Is water continuously subdividable or isn't it?
Well, the Greek philosopher Democritus gave an answer to that question in 400 BC.
I don't think Democritus had a lot of good experimental evidence for his answer,
but he declared that ultimately the universe is made of indivisible particles, which he called atoms.
And these atoms were tiny, tiny entities.
He didn't describe them in any detail.
They came in different varieties and they, the atoms, were themselves indivisible
and they made up all the rest of the matter in the world.
This is essentially the first description of an atomic theory,
of a theory that says, ultimately, no, you can't subdivide that water infinitely many times.
Ultimately, you come down to individual particles and they are completely intact, indivisible.
You can't divide them any further.
Now, the joke's on Democritus because we, of course, now talk about splitting the atom,
but now we talk about smaller particles, quarks and electrons that are presumed to be indivisible.
So there's Democritus in 400 BC, first proposing atomic theory,
and indeed his word, atoms, means that they are indivisible,
although certainly the modern day understanding of atoms does not carry that connotation.
The chemist Dalton in the early 1800s looked at the different elements that make up the world.
Substances like oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, helium, nitrogen, iron, silver, gold,
or the fundamental elemental substances, they combined to form things like water, gasoline, rust, iron oxide,
and different, more complicated combinations.
But by Dalton's time it was known that there were certain fundamental elements that couldn't be made any smaller.
They weren't composed of different substances any more than that.
So Dalton looked at the elements and he made a table arranging the elements
in terms of what's now called atomic weight, in terms of the mass of the individual atoms,
the individual particles that made them up.
And Dalton was trying to explain the properties of chemistry.
Dalton was trying to explain how the atoms combined to make different substances
like hydrogen and oxygen atoms combining to make water.
And so this was a rudimentary sense of atomic theory.
But it turns out the weights or masses of the atoms are not a very good clue to their chemical behavior.
What really is a good clue to their chemical behavior is their electric charge in the number of electrons these atoms carry.
Now nobody knew about electrons and what they were at this time,
but it turns out that that electric charge is what's crucial in determining an atom's chemical properties.
And that electric charge, the number of electrons in the complete atom is called the atomic number.
And as opposed to the atomic weight, the atomic weight is the mass of the whole atom.
The atomic number is the number of these charged electrons in it.
Although, again, in the 1800s nobody knew about electrons at least early in the 1800s.
Well, in 1869 the Russian Mendeleev developed a table of the elements which was based ultimately on this charge,
although he didn't know exactly what he was basing it on.
And he arranged the elements in this table and found that there were regular repetitions of similar chemical properties.
For instance, the elements fluorine and chlorine have similar chemical properties.
The elements helium and neon have similar chemical properties, namely they don't react very much with anything.
The elements sodium and potassium have similar chemical properties,
and in fact their property is that they react violently with lots of things.
And Mendeleev noticed this similarity, and if you've studied any chemistry at all,
you've certainly seen the periodic table of the elements.
What the periodic table of the elements is,
is a classification of the elements ultimately by this number of electrons in the atom,
and that number of electrons determines, in fact the outermost of those electrons,
determine how the atom interacts electrically ultimately with other atoms,
and it's that electrical interaction that leads to all of chemistry happening.
So Mendeleev in 1869 developed the periodic table,
and so he's beginning to understand chemistry ultimately in terms of the properties of the atoms of the individual elements,
although the nature of those atoms was not at that point understood.
They were still atoms, they were still indivisible, as Democritus had proposed in 400 B.C.
But then in the late 1800s came a series of remarkable experiments.
Becquerel and France did an interesting thing.
He accidentally left some uranium-containing compounds in a drawer with some photographic film,
and to his surprise when he developed the film, it had an indication that light had hit it.
Well, it wasn't light that had hit it, it had marks on the film.
It was some kind of emanation from the uranium-like material,
and Becquerel had discovered nuclear radiation.
He had discovered radioactive materials, he had discovered the radioactivity of uranium,
and Becquerel's work was carried on by Marie and Pierre Curie,
and later by Marie's daughter, Irene, and her husband, Frederick Joliot Curie,
and together the Curies particularly discovered many, many other radioactive elements.
They studied the properties of radiation,
they learned a lot about the fact that there were some materials that seemed to emit substances from their atoms.
They had discovered subatomic particles, they had discovered that the atom was divisible.
Democritus was wrong.
Atom might have meant indivisible, but atoms in fact are not divisible.
And through the study of radioactivity, we came upon the notion that atoms are dividable,
and that indeed some atoms spontaneously spew out other particles.
Well, more to say about those other particles and some of their uses soon.
That was Becquerel's discovery.
Other physicists were experimenting with simple systems in which they would take a glass tube,
they would put a couple pieces of metal in the ends of it,
they'd connect those metals to the outside world to a battery,
and if they took most of the air out of the tube, they could see a glow occurring in the tube,
and they could conclude that some kind of rays were emerging from one piece of metal
and heading toward the other piece of metal.
When they studied these rays, they were called cathode rays,
and to this day, the TV tube in your TV set, the picture tube, or the tube in your computer monitor,
these are called cathode ray tubes because they involve these cathode rays,
they involve metal electrodes in which these rays are made to move.
Well, studying these rays, J.J. Thompson discovered in the late 1800s again
that he concluded that these rays were not continuous emanations,
but a type of individual particles, and Thompson had basically discovered the electron,
and he was able to measure properties of the electron,
wasn't able to tell you separately its mass and its electric charge,
but he was able to tell you the ratio of those two,
he was able to learn something about these particles,
and he concluded again that we had individual particles, these are subatomic particles,
these are parts of atoms, atoms are no longer indivisible,
Thompson has discovered the electron.
And on the basis of Thompson's discovery,
the first really viable model of the atom,
the model was put together by Lord Kelvin,
or invented by Lord Kelvin using the results of Thompson's discovery of the electron,
and I have a picture of it here, it's called the plum hooding model of the atom,
because what it consists of is a number of these newfound electrons,
these discrete individual particles, which Thompson discovered carried negative electric charge,
remember it was Ben Franklin who defined positive and negative,
and they don't really mean anything is missing or there, they're just names,
but there are two kinds of charge.
Thompson and Kelvin's plum hooding model said,
okay we have a number of these electrons, that's a certain amount of negative charge,
atoms are electrically neutral, they have no overall electric charge,
and these negative electrons are embedded in a plum hooding like gelatinous structure,
which consists of positive charge.
How much positive charge? Exactly as much positive charge as there is negative charge in the electrons.
So Thompson and Kelvin model is the plum hooding model of the atom,
and it's a model that suggests there are these individual discrete, very light by the way,
not at all massive electrons embedded in a kind of amorphous pudding of positive charge,
and the whole thing makes the atom electrically neutral.
By the way, experiments by Milliken with electrons later verified the charge itself on the electron,
and therefore since we knew the ratio of charge to mass, we also knew the mass of the electrons.
Milliken's experiment showed that electric charge is a quantized substance,
meaning it comes only in certain discrete hunks.
The electron charge seems or seemed through most of the 20th century to be the minimum amount of electric charge one could have.
We'll now see that the real minimum amount is about a third that, or we'll soon see that,
but nevertheless electric charge comes in these discrete little hunks, it's something that's quantized.
Electrons themselves, their existence, shows you that matter itself comes in discrete little hunks.
You could say it's quantized, it comes in discrete little pieces, it isn't continuously subdividable,
and I'm going to use that word quantized again and again and more and more as we go on.
So there's the plum pudding model of the atom.
Now in 1909 through 1911, Ernest Rutherford, who was a New Zealander working at that time in England,
and his associates Geiger of Geiger counter fame in Marsden,
did a series of experiments in which they probed the structure of matter by shooting high energy particles,
and in their case a thin gold foil.
We'll describe this experiment in some detail because it's kind of a paradigm for the way we still probe the structure of matter.
What we do is produce high energy particles of some sort, subatomic particles.
Today we produce them in high energy particle accelerators and the desire to probe deeper and deeper into the structure of matter
is what drives particle physicists' desire for ever bigger and more expensive particle accelerators, by the way.
But this is what we do, we accelerate these particles and then we smash them into matter and we see what comes out.
It's a pretty crude way, we can't get in there with tweezers and microscopes and look at the structure of subatomic matter.
So what do we do? We accelerate particles to high energy, we bang them into matter and we see what results.
A whole spew of particles comes out, we study those particles, we study their tracks.
I gave you an example of some particle tracks earlier when I showed you the phenomenon of para-creation.
We study those particle tracks and we try to figure out what went on,
and from that we infer the structure of matter.
Well, Rutherford's experiment was one of the first experiments that did that sort of thing.
Rutherford didn't have access to a particle accelerator, popularly called an atom smasher, although I don't really like that term.
Rutherford instead used the newly discovered radioactive particles that emanated from radioactive materials like the material radium that Marie Curie had discovered.
Radium in particular puts out a very high energy particle called an alpha particle.
It was later discovered and known to be a nucleus of a helium atom, but at that point it was just called an alpha particle.
It was a positively charged particle and it came out at high speeds.
And if you took a source of radioactive radium and you put it in a lead container so these alpha particles couldn't escape
and you cut a little hole in it, made a little tube of the lead, you could get a beam of these alpha particles coming out.
And Rutherford and Marsden used that beam to probe the structure of matter by shooting the alpha particles to this gold foil.
Now let me give you an analogy with that experiment.
Here's my analogy. Some toilet paper. Pretty thin stuff.
This toilet paper represents the gold foil that Rutherford and Geiger and Marsden used. It was a very, very thin sheet of gold.
Now imagine doing something like shooting a BB gun at this.
What's going to happen? Well, BBs are very tiny. They're going to go shooting right through.
They're going to tear a little hole where they go, but that's it.
You would be very surprised if you shot a BB gun at this piece of toilet paper and most of the BBs went through,
but a few of them bounced right back in your direction.
That would be unusual, remarkable, very difficult to believe.
That is exactly what happened in Rutherford's experiment.
Nearly all the alpha particles went right through the gold foil.
They experienced almost no change in direction. They went straight through.
They were undeflected, but a very few of them bounced back in the direction they came from.
How could that possibly be?
You think this piece of toilet paper is essentially just continuous stuff,
but what if the toilet paper had embedded in it very dense, relatively massive, but tiny objects?
If by chance one of your BBs hit one of those objects, it could bounce back and come back.
Most of the time it would go straight through, but once in a while it would bounce back.
Rutherford and Geiger and Marsden were forced to conclude from their experiment
that the nature of matter must be such that it's basically mostly empty space
because most of those alpha particles went right through as if they hit nothing.
But occasionally they hit something that was very, very small and very, very dense, but very, very massive.
They developed a picture of the nature of the atom that was very, very different from Thompson and Kelvin's plum pudding model.
They said instead there must be a very, very tiny object at the center of the atom.
They called it the nucleus. It must be extremely small, but it must carry most of the mass of the atom.
And most of the rest of the atom must be empty space, and that empty space has in it the few, the handful,
or whatever number it is, of electrons that are whizzing around that nucleus.
And so they developed a picture of the atom that looks something like this.
This is the Rutherford model. It looks like a miniature solar system.
This is a very bad picture. It's not to scale, and there are a lot of other problems with it.
It's not at all consistent with quantum physics, but it's a first guess at what an atom might look like.
I want to point out, though, that it's not to scale.
That positive charge at the middle, that represents the nucleus.
At that point Rutherford knew nothing more about what the nucleus was composed of.
Today we know a lot more about that.
That thing is about one ten-thousandth to one one hundred-thousandth of the diameter of the atom.
So if the atom were the size of a baseball stadium or something like that,
the nucleus might be a baseball right at the center, and all the rest of it is empty space
occupied by a very small population of electrons.
And what are the electrons doing according to Rutherford?
They're in orbits around the nucleus, just like the planets are in orbits around the sun,
except the force that's holding them in orbit is not the gravitational force,
but the electrical force of attraction between positive and negative.
And so Rutherford worked out this miniature solar system model of the atom,
and by 1911 that became the prevailing model for what an atom ought to look like.
And we have a very different sense of matter.
No longer is matter the solid stuff.
Matter that seems so solid is really mostly empty space.
That was Rutherford's solar system model of the atom.
And it's a model we have in our minds today.
Witness the picture of the atom behind me.
That's Rutherford's solar system model of the atom,
although we're showing several electrons in each orbit.
That's actually oxygen up there.
It has eight electrons in its orbits.
It's not really a very good picture of the atom,
as we'll see when we look further at quantum physics,
but again it's a good first approximation,
and it's certainly a lot better than the plum-putting idea of an amorphous atom.
The atom and therefore matter, as we know them, are mostly empty space,
and that's true of almost all the matter in the universe we know of,
with the exception of those objects like neutron stars that I talked about earlier,
which are in fact collapsed objects miles in diameter,
with the whole mass of a star,
and they are collapsed to the density of the atomic nucleus or bigger.
But all the other matter we know about in the universe
is basically mostly empty space,
with most of the mass concentrated in these tiny, tiny little nuclei
that Rutherford discovered by hitting them with the alpha particles
that he was bombarding his gold foil with.
Well, that's great.
Now we've got a model for the atom.
But there are problems with the models for the atom that were developed at that time.
And the problems are deep and profound,
and we need to look at them and you need to appreciate them.
First problem, atoms shouldn't exist.
Why not?
Well, we've got to go back to electromagnetism again.
Let me pick up an electron.
If I move an electron, say jiggle it up and down,
I create a changing electric field.
Remember what a changing electric field made?
It made a magnetic field, which is also changing,
and that makes a changing electric field, and so on.
That's the way I make an electromagnetic wave.
I make an electromagnetic wave.
In fact, anytime I change the motion of an electric charge, like an electron,
anytime an electric charge accelerates.
If I shake it up and down, I generate changing electric fields,
make changing magnetic fields, make changing electric fields, and so on.
And in fact, those electromagnetic waves that result are carrying away energy.
Where's the energy coming from?
It's coming from me shaking the electron.
If I stop shaking it, the electron will soon stop shaking
as the electromagnetic waves carry away the energy.
If I make the electron go in a circle, its motion is changing,
it will generate changing electric fields,
that will make changing magnetic fields,
and it will also generate electromagnetic waves,
and those waves will carry away energy,
and I'll have to keep supplying energy to make that happen.
Well, what's happening in Rutherford's atomic model?
Electrons are going around in circles like this.
And if you calculate using Maxwell's electromagnetic theory,
which we're quite sure is correct,
if you calculate the energy that will be emitted by electrons
spiraling around the nucleus,
you will find that that energy is lost in a very, very short time,
and the electrons will spiral into the nucleus and crash into it,
just like a satellite that's in low enough orbit
that it has dragged from the atmosphere
will soon spiral down to Earth and crash to Earth.
Same thing would happen to the electrons,
and the Rutherford atom would go out of existence in a fraction of a second.
That's a pretty profound problem with this model.
This thing simply should not be able to exist.
And yet atoms do exist.
Even if these atoms don't collapse, there's another problem.
When we look at matter and its emission of electromagnetic waves,
there are two ways we can look at matter.
If we take a dense piece of matter and do something like heat it up,
we will find it emits electromagnetic waves
in a whole variety of wavelengths, frequencies,
gravitational frequencies of the waves,
or, equivalently, if it's visible, light it's emitting colors.
That's what I've shown here, a continuous rainbow spectrum of colors.
On the other hand, if we take individual atoms
that aren't crammed together in a solid,
and the way we might do this is take a glass tube
and fill it with gas at relatively low pressure,
and then either heat up the gas
or maybe run an electric current through it.
That's basically what a fluorescent lamp or a neon lamp is, by the way.
We find that instead of getting a continuous band of light,
we get a discrete spectrum.
We get individual colors of light emitted
and mostly darkness in between.
The sodium lights, for example, that light our city streets,
emit a spectrum of discrete lines like that.
Neon signs emit a spectrum.
If you took the light from a neon sign
and sent it through a prism that breaks up light into its colors,
you would find a few or many discrete colors.
That's the spectrum of the neon atoms.
The Rutherford model can't explain that spectrum at all.
There's no understanding of why an atom
with electrons spiraling around in orbits
of different heights and diameters,
depending on how much energy they have,
should always produce single discrete amounts,
a light of single discrete colors,
wavelengths, frequencies, you name it.
Why should that be? No explanation whatsoever.
And yet we observed very clearly and had observed for 100 years
before Rutherford's model the existence of these spectra.
And we knew how to characterize them mathematically,
but nobody knew why they arose,
and Rutherford's model can't explain that.
So that's a second profound problem.
First problem, atoms shouldn't exist at all.
Even if they do exist, they emit light in discrete colors,
and there's no explanation in terms of Rutherford's
solar system model for why that should be.
There's another problem which is a little bit more subtle.
I mentioned what happens if we take a solid object
and heat it up, it will emit electromagnetic waves also.
It won't emit discrete frequencies though,
because the atoms are all kind of jostling together
and getting their individual atomicness smeared out a little bit.
That's a crude explanation for why we don't get these discrete spectra
when we have a solid object.
But something else does happen with a solid object,
and I'm going to demonstrate that here.
My solid object is the filament of a little light bulb here,
a high-intensity tube of light.
And I'm going to demonstrate what happens.
This light happens to be equipped with a dimmer.
And I'm going to demonstrate what happens when I turn this light on.
And for this light, you can picture any object which I heat up.
As I heat up an object, it starts to glow.
And at first, it glows a kind of dull red,
and this is about the lowest I can get this object.
It's glowing a kind of red-orange.
If you want it to glow even cooler,
think of an electric stove burner when you turn it on low.
You can't see it glowing, and then you turn it up,
and it just barely begins to glow a dull red.
If you want it to be on high,
it's glowing not quite as bright as this filament is.
Things can even glow with infrared light that you can't quite see,
like if you put your hand near a hot iron,
or near a hot wood stove,
or above a stove burner that's on low,
an electric stove burner.
You can feel that energy radiating from it.
That's infrared light that you can feel, but you can't quite see.
Well, by the time it gets hot enough, it emits visible light.
And here's an example.
This filament of this light bulb is emitting visible light.
What happens if I turn up the electric current through that filament,
giving it more energy?
Well, not just one thing happens, but two things happen.
One thing that's obvious is it gets brighter.
But a second thing happens is the color shifts.
From the red it started with, the reddish-orange it started with,
it becomes yellower from red to more orange,
and then it becomes yellower, and it becomes brighter,
but it also becomes whiter and whiter, and the color changes.
The color moves from the red end of the spectrum of rainbow colors
toward the yellow, and if I could heat it up enough,
it would move toward the blue, and so on.
It would ultimately move toward the ultraviolet and the x-ray,
but the filament would long since have burned out before then.
So two things happen as I increase the temperature of a hot glowing object.
One thing is its color changes.
Its color tends more and more toward the blue.
That's the dominant color.
It's emitting a whole range of colors.
It's emitting a whole rainbow-like spectrum,
but the dominant color is shifting more toward the blue.
And the other thing that happens is it overall gets brighter.
What does classical physics have to say about that?
Well, if you apply classical physics, which is basically electromagnetic theory,
the theory of how matter emits electromagnetic waves
when you jostle around the electric charges that make it up,
and you apply thermodynamics, which is the study of heat energy,
heat and energy as heat,
that's a subject which is ultimately grounded largely in Newtonian mechanics.
You apply those to a hot glowing object and you say,
what should it emit?
How much energy should it emit at different wavelengths?
Well, what we would like to say is when it's cool, it emits mostly in the red.
When it gets warmer, it emits more in the yellow.
When it gets even warmer,
it's beginning to emit more toward the greenish and so on.
It comes out as white in this case.
It's emitting a whole range of colors.
Well, that's not what classical physics says.
What classical physics says is it emits a little bit of energy in the red,
more in the orange, more in the green, more in the blue, more in the violet,
and most in the ultraviolet.
If you make it hotter, it emits more in all those colors,
but it always emits the most in the ultraviolet,
and in fact, it emits an infinite amount in the ultraviolet,
which is patently absurd.
But that's what classical physics predicted.
And that phenomenon, that prediction of classical physics,
was called the ultraviolet catastrophe.
It was called the ultraviolet catastrophe because of this prediction
that the most energy would be emitted as ultraviolet light.
Actually, people didn't know in those days about x-rays and gamma rays,
which are even higher frequency forms of electromagnetic radiation,
and the classical prediction is actually it emitted infinite amounts of energy
at infinite frequencies, which is where the gamma rays are getting up toward.
So it could have been called the gamma ray catastrophe,
but it was called the ultraviolet catastrophe
because that was the highest energy electromagnetic waves known at the time.
And the ultraviolet catastrophe, like the existence of atoms,
is another place where classical physics really confronts
in a very dramatic, contradictory way what reality has to show us.
Classical physics says every hot glowing object,
your body is a hot glowing object, so is the Earth.
All these things should emit an infinite amount of energy
and should be emitted in very, very short wavelengths,
very, very high frequencies like ultraviolet.
Obviously it doesn't happen,
or we'd all be bathed and boiled in infinite amounts of electromagnetic radiation.
So the ultraviolet catastrophe, the existence of atoms,
the existence of atomic spectra,
these all present profound contradictions
between the predictions of classical physics
and the reality that we can easily see in experimental situations.
It's going to take quantum mechanics to resolve those situations,
and that's where we move to next time.
