Welcome to the final lecture number 24 aptly titled Toward a Theory of Everything.
Now in the last 23 lectures we've been through a lot of physics and we've explained a lot about the physical world.
Think back a minute, we understand a lot more about the nature of space and time.
We know how electromagnetic waves work.
We know how the theory of relativity, general relativity predicts the bending of space and time by massive objects
and we understand how the motion of other objects follows as they go in the straightest possible lines in curved spacetime.
We know what protons are made of.
We understand that quarks bind together to make protons and neutrons and lots of other particles that were once thought to be elementary.
We've seen the whole panoply of the standard model of particles and forces
and how it can explain things as small as the development of individual so-called subatomic particles, nuclei and on upward.
We also understand how it can help us explain the early times and the origin of our universe.
In fact, the origin of the elements around us follow from the standard model of particles and forces.
We know how general relativity can lead to an understanding of the overall structure of the universe.
Raising the question is the universe closed or open? Will it expand forever or will it eventually close?
Do we then know everything there is to know? Can we explain everything that needs to be explained about our universe?
The answer is clearly no and for several reasons.
First of all, we have no idea why there are three families of matter.
We have no idea why the electron has the mass it does.
We have no idea why the quark masses are distributed as they are.
We don't know why there is this set of particles and not some other set of particles.
You could probably envision a universe that was made with some other particles.
Maybe you wouldn't be in that universe because maybe intelligent life couldn't exist, but maybe it could.
Why do we have the universe we do? Why does it have the basic constituents it does?
Why are there three fundamental forces? Maybe reducible to one and why do those forces have the properties they do?
We don't know the answers to those questions.
If we had a real theory of everything, a theory that could explain everything,
it would explain on first principles why there are electrons, why they are the way they are and so on.
We don't have that theory yet.
What we do have at the basis of our understanding of the universe are two very powerful theories.
One relativity, ultimately the general theory of relativity,
our theory of the large scale structure of the universe,
the curvature of space-time as shaped by the presence of matter,
our theory ultimately of gravity.
That's one theory we have.
The other we have is quantum physics,
ultimately at the subatomic level as embodied in our standard model of particles and forces,
the theory that tells us what particles we have,
how they interact and ultimately within the framework of quantum physics,
how we describe through that statistical probabilistic wave interpretation
how these particles are going to behave
and how they're therefore going to carry out the program of the universe, if you will.
But here's what we don't have.
We don't have a theory that deals with those two together.
Now usually that isn't a problem.
General relativity is important in explaining the large scale behavior of the universe.
It's important in explaining the orbit of a satellite around the Earth
if we really want to do it right, we use general relativity, not Newtonian gravity.
It's important in the large scale.
Quantum physics is important in the small scale.
We saw when we dealt with Schrodinger's cat
that although quantum physics may apply to large scale objects,
it probably isn't really very important there.
We can get away with classical physics.
We can get away ultimately with relativity,
general relativity or theory of gravity,
describing the behavior of macroscopic matter.
On the other hand, we don't need to think about general relativity.
We don't need to think about space-time curvature
when we deal with the atomic and subatomic realms.
It may be that there's a gravitational attraction
between an electron and a nucleus of an atom.
The nucleus may warp space-time,
but that is vastly overpowered by the electrical attraction, the electrical force.
And so gravity is completely negligible on the subatomic scale.
What that says in more sophisticated terms is
we don't deal in our everyday lives and even in the everyday lives of physicists
with places where space-time curvature is so extreme
that the curvature of space-time is on scales
that are comparable to the size of the atom
and the size of elementary particles.
And therefore, we never have had a significant occasion
to have to merge general relativity and quantum physics.
If we did, we'd be in trouble
because that's something we simply don't know how to do.
When would that become important?
Well, it turns out to become important on a scale called the Planck scale,
and I won't describe how we derive the Planck scale
except to say that it comes from taking the constant
big G that appears in the theory of gravity,
the theory of general relativity,
and the constant H that appears in quantum physics
and combining them in a certain simple way
and with other constants of nature,
and out comes a particular length.
And that length is about a 1 over 1 with 33 zeros after it of a centimeter.
It's a very tiny, tiny, tiny distance,
and it's called the Planck length.
And on scales much bigger than the Planck length,
and a proton is 1 over 1 with 13 zeros after it centimeters,
a 1 over 1 with 15 zeros after it meters,
it's 20 orders of magnitude,
20 powers of 10 larger than the Planck scale.
When we're dealing with things larger than the Planck scale
and a proton by that size is enormous compared to the Planck scale,
then we don't have to worry about
general relativity and quantum mechanics merging.
It's only when we get down to scale sizes that are so small
that we're dealing with things about 10 to the minus 33 centimeters in size
of 1 over 1 with 33 zeros after it
that we have to begin worrying about quantum gravity,
so-called quantum gravity,
the merging of quantum physics and general relativity.
Why is it that that scale becomes important?
I want to give you just the briefest sense of why that is.
Recall the uncertainty principle.
The uncertainty principle says that if we know the position
of an object accurately,
then we don't know anything about its velocity.
If we know the velocity of an object accurately,
we don't know anything about its position.
What does that mean?
Well, it means if we force ourselves to look
at a very small scale of space and time,
of a small scale of space in particular,
then anything that's in that small region,
we must be very, very uncertain about its velocity.
What that means is we can't know that its velocity is small
because if I said I had a very tiny region here
and anything that's in that tiny region
is also not doing very much,
that's a contradiction of the uncertainty principle
because to say I have a very, very small region
is to say I know very little about the velocities
of anything that might be in that region
and those velocities can be very large.
In fact, if I know they aren't very large,
then I'm contradicting the uncertainty principle,
so they may very well be very large.
And that kind of argument,
that uncertainty principle argument,
applies even to space-time itself.
It looks like to us a completely flat, smooth fabric
in one of those two-dimensional analogs
I've made of space-time,
maybe with some curvature over the large scale
due to the presence of large masses
like the Earth or the Sun or a galaxy
or something like that.
But basically smooth,
if we look at very, very small levels,
there are then fluctuations in the fabric of space-time
that becomes sponge-like
and like the boiling surface of boiling water.
Why? Because the uncertainty principle says
if we look in too small a region,
we can't know how much energy is there,
we can't know how much stuff is going on
and there must be lots of action going on there
because if we knew there weren't,
we would be violating the uncertainty principle.
So the uncertainty principle dictates that at very small scales,
this roiling and boilingness must affect space-time itself.
And it turns out that the scale at which that becomes important,
the scale at which the fluctuations
in the structure of space-time
become large in some sense,
so they aren't just minor perturbations
on an almost smooth background,
but they become large effects,
the dominant effect on the structure of space-time.
Is it scales about the Planck length?
10 to the minus 33 centimeters,
a 1 over 1 with 33 zeros after it's centimeters.
Tiny, tiny distance,
a distance we don't normally worry about,
but there it is.
If we ever have to worry about distances that small,
we have to have a theory of quantum gravity.
We have to have merged quantum physics and general relativity,
and that's what we don't know how to do.
When would this be important?
Four times when it might be important.
One is at the very center of a black hole.
Remember what happens in a black hole?
A black hole matter crushes inexorably through that event horizon,
and after that, the crushing of the matter
to an infinite density at the center of the black hole
is simply inexorable according to our current theory of black hole formation,
which is the theory of general relativity.
General relativity actually says
that if a black hole forms,
it becomes a singularity of infinite density at the center.
Now, that's probably absurd,
and that prediction of general relativity is probably wrong,
because as the matter shrinks toward that singularity,
eventually it gets compressed into the size of the Planck length,
10 to the minus 33 centimeters,
that tiny, tiny distance at which the structure of space and time
is now governed by these quantum fluctuations.
At that point, we don't have a theory that describes what's going on
because we have been unable to merge general relativity and quantum physics.
Why have we been unable to merge them again
because of these quantum fluctuations?
General relativity is a theory about the smooth and continuous.
It's not a quantum theory.
It doesn't talk about discreteness.
It doesn't know about things coming in little bunches and bundles.
Quantum physics, on the other hand,
is a theory about that discreteness,
and that results in the uncertainty principle
and these fluctuations in the fabric of space-time
at these very small scales.
So what's wrong is we don't know how to make general relativity a quantum theory.
We don't know how to quantize general relativity.
We don't know how to describe the gravitons
that would be the force carrier particles of general relativity in any detail.
We have not got a consistent theory that merges quantum physics and general relativity.
By the way, you might be asking the same question about special relativity,
and just to put that question aside,
by 1948 we had a good theory that merges special relativity and quantum physics.
It's called quantum electrodynamics.
Richard Feynman was one of the leaders in developing that theory,
the famous physicist Richard Feynman.
Quantum electrodynamics is basically a theory
that re-expresses Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism,
which you will remember led to relativity,
and Maxwell's theory is completely consistent with relativity,
rephrases it in a way that's consistent with quantum physics,
and that has been done and that is the most successful,
most well-tested theory of physical reality that we have,
the theory of quantum electrodynamics.
It assumes quantum physics and it subsumes special relativity.
It's sometimes called relativistic quantum mechanics or relativistic quantum physics.
We have that.
What we don't have is a combination of general relativity,
the theory of gravity, the theory of curved spacetime with quantum physics,
and therefore we can't explain things that are happening on space scales
smaller than this incredibly tiny Planck length.
There's one situation we know beyond the black hole
where that would be important to do,
and that is at times earlier than the Planck time,
which I mentioned in my timeline in the last lecture.
In that timeline, one of the earliest times I put,
the earliest time I put was 10 to the minus 43 seconds,
1 over 1 with 43 zeros after a second after the Big Bang started,
an infinitesimally unimaginably tiny time,
but after that time the universe had already expanded enough
that the density was already low enough
that we did not have to deal with scales as small as the Planck length,
and therefore we could treat the overall structure with general relativity
and we could treat the subatomic details with quantum physics
and the standard model and nothing contradicted that.
They were both approximations, but very, very good approximations.
But before that time, 10 to the minus 43 centimeters,
10 to the minus 43 seconds,
a 1 over 1 with 43 zeros after a second,
we have to do quantum gravity.
We can't push our understanding of the universe back further
without knowing how to combine quantum physics and general relativity,
and for the reasons I described,
for these fluctuations in the structure of spacetime,
the discontinuousness of quantum mechanics
versus the continuousness of general relativity,
that's a very difficult thing to do and we don't know how to do it.
If we could do it,
we would achieve the final step
in what is a long history of physics taking previously unrelated fields
and finding that they're described by one underlying principle.
And that's particularly true of the forces of physics,
these basic fundamental forces that govern all interactions in physical reality.
I want to take a moment and take you through that history
to give you a sense of just where it comes from
and how far we've come and how far we still have to go.
So I'm going to look at the unification of the fundamental forces
through the history of physics.
It's a process that's been going on and it continues to this day.
So the first force I want to mention is gravity
because that's certainly the first force that was experienced by humankind.
I argued a long time ago that Newton didn't discover gravity
by having an apple fall on his head.
Some cave person knew about gravity.
These know about gravity.
Birds certainly know intuitively about gravity.
So we've known about gravity for a long time.
Gravity itself, though, as a formal theory,
emerged with Newton in the late 1600s
and Newton, for the first time,
had unified terrestrial motion and celestial motion
and understood them to be aspects of the same thing.
So in putting gravity here on my picture,
I've already assumed one of the important unifications.
Before Newton's theory of gravity,
it was not understood that the motion of the moon
and the other celestial bodies was really the same thing
as the motion of an apple falling here on Earth.
Newton unified that with his theory of gravity.
Two other forces that are important are the electric force
and associated with it the study of electricity,
electric charge, electric currents, that sort of thing.
And separately, the force of magnetism,
the force of interaction between two magnets,
the compass needle and the Earth's magnetic field,
the force of magnetism,
those were studied originally as two separate forces.
But as you know from the lecture on electromagnetism,
the important point about the subject electromagnetism
is that it arose because physicists began to understand
the connections between electricity and magnetism
as those connections became more clear,
as it became obvious that that was not just a coincidence,
but an intimate connection.
Ultimately, it became evident that electricity
and magnetism are really two aspects of the same thing.
I didn't dwell on this when we did special relativity,
but one of the other things that special relativity mixes
besides space and time is electricity and magnetism.
What looks like pure electricity to one observer
looks like electricity and magnetism together to another observer.
Electricity and magnetism are two aspects of the same thing,
two sides of the same coin,
and Maxwell's unification in the 1860s
basically puts those together as one subject, electromagnetism.
And the electromagnetic force was one of the four fundamental forces
that was understood to be fundamental as far as we could tell
until about the 1970s and 1980s.
So we had electromagnetism and we've got gravity
sitting here as fundamental forces at this point.
The weak force was discovered in nuclear reactions
that was discovered in the early part of the 20th century.
It's a little bit obscure,
but again, it mitigates certain kinds of nuclear decays,
not all of them, and it's important on the sun and making the sun shine.
So it's one of the forces that's involved in nuclear interactions.
It's the weak force, and it was understood as a separate independent force of nature
through much of the 20th century.
But as I indicated earlier, in 1970, theorists succeeded
in describing the weak force and electromagnetism
as two aspects of the same thing, a further kind of unification.
And by the 1980s, experimental evidence accumulated
to confirm that this was indeed correct.
So by the 1980s, we had the electroweak force
as one of the fundamental forces.
Under different circumstances, it may manifest itself as the weak force.
The electromagnetic force and the electromagnetic force
under different circumstances may manifest itself as the electric force
and the magnetic force.
By the way, one of these features of these unified forces
is that when you go to situations where the energy is very high,
as it was in the early universe,
what now appear to us as separate forces were all unified
and just acted as one basic interaction.
So things are more complex now.
It's that big theme of the universe cooling and getting more complex.
And one result of that complexity is the fundamental force
or forces then become manifest as separate individual forces
that seem distinct until our theorists and experimentalists
go to work and figure out that they really are aspects of the same thing.
So we have the electroweak force.
And then we have the color force,
which many physicists would still call the strong force,
or even the nuclear force, but I like the word color force
because one of the aspects quarks have is called color.
It has absolutely nothing to do with color,
and the color force binds quarks that have different colors.
They're called red, green, and blue.
It means nothing in terms of regular red, green, and blue,
but the force is called the color force.
And the study of quarks and how they stick together
is called quantum chromodynamics
in analogy with quantum electrodynamics,
which is the relativistic electric force.
So we have the color force ultimately resulting in the strong force,
the nuclear force, and so on.
And here's where we stand basically today.
I argued earlier in my lecture on the standard model
and the structure of matter that we have three fundamental forces,
electroweak force, color force, gravity,
and we don't know how to unify them further.
Most physicists would argue we're quite close
to understanding the electroweak force and the color force
as aspects of some more fundamental underlying force.
We aren't there yet, but theorists are close.
We do not have the power or the energy with our accelerators
to create the conditions that would show us that unification,
not yet anyway, but theorists are working on that,
and we believe it will not be very long
before we understand the electroweak force
and the color force as aspects of one force.
And that would be called grand unification,
and we might call that force a grand unified force.
So watch for that.
That may happen in your lifetimes if not sooner.
In fact, all this may happen in your lifetime, but not sooner,
but the next one is a bit of a longer shot.
So there we are.
We may, in a matter of years to decades,
be down to two fundamental forces,
a grand unified force that breaks down into color force,
an electroweak force, further into electric and magnetic
and weak force, and so on.
The real challenge, and that's what the topic of today's lecture is,
is the further unification of gravity
with the grand unified force once we have the grand unified force,
and that would give us a theory of everything,
because that would unite all the known forces into one.
I don't know what we're going to call that force.
Some people call it supersymmetry
because of certain mathematical properties of the theories.
Others simply call it a theory of everything,
because if there's nothing left undiscovered,
there's nothing new, there are no unknown forces
that we haven't discovered yet,
then the theory of everything will describe all interactions
in the universe in terms of one fundamental basic force,
and we'll understand how, in different circumstances,
that force will appear as gravity or as a grand unified force
or as the electroweak force or whatever,
but we will understand it as one fundamental interaction.
That's one of the holy grails of physics
to find the theory of everything.
It may be a goal that is decades to centuries away.
On the other hand, there are at least some physicists
who believe we may have stumbled across a theory
that may be the way to the theory of everything,
and I want to spend the remainder of the course
the remaining few minutes of this lecture
describing that theory of everything.
That theory is called string theory.
String theory is remarkably different
from anything we've seen in physics before.
In our standard model of particles and forces,
we ultimately describe matter
in terms of a few fundamental particles,
which quantum mechanics aside,
we think of as little point-like objects, the quarks,
the leptons, the electrons, and so on.
Those are the fundamental entities.
In string theory,
one thinks of the fundamental entities very differently.
They're considered to be strings,
like a piece of string wrapped into a loop,
like this loop I have here.
This would be a string.
It wouldn't be as big as I have it here.
In fact, it would be about the Planck length long,
and the Planck length is 1 over 1
with 33 zeros after it of a centimeter.
It's a tiny, tiny thing,
but strings would be the Planck length in size,
and there would be basically one kind of string,
and the string could vibrate.
And it could vibrate in different ways,
maybe like this, maybe like this.
It could vibrate in different ways,
and each of those fundamental vibrations of the string
would correspond to a different elementary particle,
a different quark, an electron, what have you.
So all of matter would be made of one kind of thing, a string.
And then the things we think of as elementary particles
would be the allowed vibrations of these strings.
Just like a violin string has certain allowed vibrations
that are the notes it can produce,
the string would have certain allowed vibrations
which are the elementary particles.
And string theory, therefore, ought to predict something,
the standard model of particles and forces cannot,
namely the actual masses of the particles
of the so-called elementary particles.
Now, these strings are tiny.
A proton is about 10 to the minus 13,
a 1 over 1 with 13 zeros after it centimeters in diameter.
A string is 20 orders of magnitude smaller.
These are tiny, tiny entities if they exist.
Nobody's ever seen a string.
Nobody's very likely to see a string
in anything like the foreseeable future.
But nevertheless, we can mathematically analyze
the properties of entities like this
and see what they would say.
And in particular, we can try to analyze their properties
and see if those properties correspond
to the properties of the known elementary particles.
Now, how is string theory going to work?
How's it going to help us with the quantum gravity problem?
Let me give you two slight answers to that.
The current versions of string theory seem to result
in one of the modes of vibration has characteristics
like what we would expect the graviton,
the quantized gravitational force carrier to have.
So that's encouraging.
The other thing is the strings are about the Planck length
and that's the smallest thing there is.
We're used to thinking we can go smaller and smaller and smaller,
but if the smallest unit of matter is the size of the Planck length,
then it makes no sense to talk about scales smaller than that.
And that, in a crude way, sidesteps the question of
whether or not quantum mechanics and gravity are at odds
because we never get to scales where that's an issue.
So that's a simple way to get rid of the discrepancy
between general relativity and quantum physics
because the strings are simply the smallest entities
and they are already at a scale that's just barely big enough
to avoid that conflict.
How confident are we of all this, by the way?
Well, this is a fairly new theory.
As of strings theory were developed in the 1970s.
They enjoyed a brief surge of enthusiasm in the 1980s
and then there seemed to be intractable mathematical problems.
Nobody has yet produced a string theory
that exactly reproduces the particles of the standard model.
There are hints that it may be possible, but nobody's done that yet.
And string, enthusiasm for string theory faded in the late 1980s, early 1990s,
and then in 1995 there were a number of rather stunning breakthroughs
that got people excited about string theory again.
And it's only been in the years from 1995 onward
that people have really been enthusiastic about the possibility
that string theory may give us a theory of everything.
There are still a lot of enormous complications.
I have no time to go into all of them,
but I want to give you just a feel for some of the aspects of string theory.
I'd like to show you a slightly more sophisticated reason
why in string theory the problem of quantum gravity goes away.
Why this business of the fluctuations in the structure of space-time
become less problematic?
A slightly more sophisticated look at the issue.
I'm going to show you a picture here that describes a simple thing,
an interaction between two particles.
What I'm showing in this picture is a Y-shaped structure
in which the two legs of the Y are labeled A and B
and they represent two particles that are moving along through space and time
and time is going roughly to the right and a little bit upward in this picture.
These particles are moving along in space and time
and then they come together and they interact,
and maybe in a very simple interaction they join to form a composite particle,
which I'll call C, which continues on.
Now, in this description in which particles are really true point-like particles,
that interaction between A and B occurs at a single point.
It's right there, unambiguous.
It occurs at a single point in space and time.
It's an event.
In fact, let's impose on this a particular direction of time.
What it is that arrow describes the direction of time,
and this is now attempting to be a three-dimensional picture of four-dimensional space time.
I've suppressed one of the space dimensions,
but I've drawn here a flat plane, a two-dimensional space,
and it runs perpendicular to my time dimension,
as it needs to because the four dimensions are perpendicular in some sense.
So it's unambiguous that this interaction between particle A and particle B
occurs at a fixed point in space and a fixed time in time.
That's in somebody's frame of reference.
In somebody else's frame of reference, space and time are mixed.
That's what we find relativity does.
It mixes your time dimension and my space dimension and so on
when we're moving relative to each other.
So somebody else's time dimension might be that way,
and this is sort of a mixed picture,
partly in the new person's frame of reference
and partly in the old one where the ABC interaction still is.
But the point is, again, in that frame of reference,
the interaction occurs at a single instant of time and point in space.
And it's that instant-ness, that point-ness,
that the interaction is occurring at a really truly point
of arbitrarily small size
that is what gets general relativity and quantum physics in trouble
because there we are again dealing with those tiny, tiny scales.
What happens if A and B are not true little tiny point particles,
not even this big ball, but really truly infinitesimal points?
Not that, but instead are string-like loops.
They're moving through space like this,
and there's two of them moving,
and then they come on a collision course and they collide
and they merge to make one particle.
What would that look like?
Well, it would look something like this.
Particle A is now not a particle, but a loop-like of string.
Particle B is another loop of string.
They move along through space and time.
They merge and they go on as one string C,
representing a particle.
What if we place, impose these time arrows
and these planes representing a two-dimensional space
in this situation?
Well, what happens in the first case is we get a plane
that's cutting through that at one particular angle.
Where does the interaction take place?
Well, it takes place all over that plane,
not in one single point.
Now let's go to the other frame of reference
where that plane that represented two spatial dimensions
has a different orientation.
When we go to that other situation, that other frame of reference,
we find that the interaction now takes place
at different places on this complex-looking space-time structure
representing the two strings coming together.
There is no unique point in space-time.
There is no infinitesimal tinniness
in which this interaction occurs.
And the description of the interaction in string theory
is necessarily extended over a volume of space and time,
which is large enough, given the tiny but nevertheless
non-zero size of the strings,
to alleviate those problems of the discreetness of quantum mechanics
colliding with the continuousness of general relativity.
Amazing.
Now string theory requires some real weirdness to make it work.
One of the weirdest things is it no longer requires
that we have four dimensions of three of space and one one of time,
but that we have eleven dimensions.
Ten of space and one of time.
How can that possibly be?
Well, I'm going to give you a brief analogy
to how eleven-dimensional string theory can work,
and I'm taking this quite liberally from an elegant book by Brian Green
called The Elegant Universe.
It's in my bibliography, and you can read a brief paragraph about it,
and I urge you to read it if you'd like to know a lot more about string theory
than I'm going to be able to tell you in this short time.
Let's look at an analogy for how there could be eleven dimensions,
and we don't notice it. What would that mean?
Here's a picture which shows an ant walking along on a stretched piece of rope.
And we're looking at this from some distance away,
and we don't notice that the rope has any particular size.
If we look at that ant and say,
well, how is that ant free to move?
The answer is it can move back and forth along the rope, but that's about it.
It lives in a one-dimensional world.
It has only one dimension that it can exist on.
On the other hand, if we zoom in on that situation with a magnifying glass
and look again, we see the full size of that rope.
And if we look at the ant and ask what it can do,
there's the ant crawling on the rope.
The ant can move back and forth along the rope like it could before,
long distances back and forth along the rope,
but it can also move in a perpendicular direction around the rope.
The extra dimension that's there, the second dimension,
is not as extended as the first dimension.
It's so-called compactified. It's curled back up on itself.
And that's how the extra seven dimensions,
four of our regular extended space and time plus seven extra dimensions,
they're curled up in a compactified shape.
Unfortunately, they don't describe simple shapes like spheres,
but some very complicated looking shapes
described by very strange mathematics.
But nevertheless, the description of string theory says there have to be 11 dimensions
and seven of them are curled up in this way.
And it's the ability of the strings to vibrate.
The strings are small enough they can see these extra dimensions
like the ant can hear, and they can vibrate in the extra dimensions.
And that's what gives string theory its richness as a theory
in describing possibly all the elementary particles we see.
Well, if we get there, if we reach this theory of everything,
if string theory really does explain all these things
that we see in the universe around us,
gravity and the elementary particles,
have we come to the end of physics?
Is this the last physics course?
Once we've discovered that, we'll know.
And I want to give you just a few quick reasons why it isn't.
First of all, most of us who are doing physics are doing still old-fashioned,
or a lot of us are doing old-fashioned classical physics.
I work in the study of the Sun and its outer atmosphere.
We use Maxwell's equations and laws of gas behavior
that have been known about for 100 years or more.
We still don't know all the richness of phenomena that those laws can describe.
So we have a lot to do to understand the world as we see it
in terms of the theories that already exist, let alone a theory of everything.
So if we had a theory of everything, although it would in principle tell us everything,
we'd have a lot more to do to explain the phenomena around us.
There may still be other levels as we push back to smaller and smaller scales
or back to that time before the Big Bang.
You may think 10 to the minus 43 seconds.
Not much else happened before that.
But there could be infinitely many different and interesting eras
in which there's new physics going on there.
Remember the dark matter.
We don't know what most of the universe is made of.
That should be a sobering thought.
There's a lot more to explore about this universe.
And finally, remember my comment about Freeman Dyson's vision last time.
We, the intelligent conscious beings, may have the infinite future
of a universe that is evolving toward an unimaginable richness.
We may have that future ahead of us to explore
and appreciate this very rich and vast universe.
So stay tuned.
