Lecture 8, Uncommon Sense, Stretching Time
In the preceding lecture, I equipped you with this very high precision clock and this precision
meter stick and I equipped myself with a pair of them also from the same manufacturer.
They're identical.
I sat on the roadside and I put you first in a car moving at 70 miles an hour and then
I put you in a airplane moving at 600 miles an hour and then I put you in a spacecraft
moving past me at half the speed of light.
And we applied the principle of relativity to this situation and we asked what would
happen if each of us measured the speed of the same pulse of light that happened to come
from a traffic signal but could have come from anywhere else.
And we arrived at the conclusion that seems absurd to us that we in all those situations
measured identically the same speed for light even though you and I were moving relative
to each other at one point at half the speed of light.
Nevertheless, with our identical clocks and meter sticks, we reached the same conclusion
for the speed of light, 299792458 meters per second period, no discrepancies.
The fact of your motion relative to me made absolutely no difference.
Why?
Because we agree that the laws of physics are the same in all uniformly moving reference
frames.
That's all special relativity says.
And if that's true, one consequence of the laws of physics, the laws of electromagnetism
in particular, is that there should be electromagnetic waves and they should move at speed C. That's
what light waves are and therefore we all have to get the same value for the speed of
light.
But how can it possibly be?
How can it be that if you move past me at half the speed of light and we measure the
same speed for the same light beam that we get the same value when you're moving relative
to me at such a high speed?
It violates everything we know from our common sense.
How can it possibly be?
Well, it seems absurd actually for one particular reason because it violates our common sense.
And now I want to insult all of my audience.
The teaching company audiences tend to be a fairly sophisticated lot, but you're actually
very provincial.
You may think yourself a world traveler and have been all over the place, but you've spent
all your time basically crawling around at relatively slow speeds.
The fastest you've ever gone is 600 miles an hour in a commercial jet.
Maybe a few of you have gone supersonically in the Concorde or a military plane or something.
The fastest you've gone maybe at most is a couple thousand miles an hour relative to
this hunk of rock that we call planet Earth.
It's our home.
You have very little or no experience of moving at high speeds relative to anything that seems
to be significant to your life.
So you have a very limited provincial experience of the range of possible activities there
are in this universe, including moving relative to things that are important to you at high
speeds.
Now I have to put in a little parenthetical remark here.
You actually do move at speeds close to the speed of light relative to some things.
They're just things that aren't particularly important in your life.
For example, we've been talking throughout the course about that distant planet in that
distant galaxy that happens to be moving away from us at 80% of the speed of light.
Relative to that, you are moving at 80% of the speed of light.
And if you had business to communicate with the beings on that planet, you would certainly
have to take relativity into account.
You move at the speed of light relative to cosmic rays which are coming toward Earth
at 0.99999 the speed of light.
They don't play a major role in your life.
You hardly know about them.
But if they did, you would have to take into account relativity and it would be much more
obvious to you.
When you're sitting watching your, watching this course on video, for example, the electrons
that paint the picture on your TV screen are coming at you from the back of the TV tube
at about 30% of the speed of light.
Relative to them, you're moving at 30% of the speed of light.
That's not a huge speed compared to light, but it's significant.
It doesn't affect you because you don't think about those electrons when you watch TV.
But the engineer who designed your TV picture tube sure had to take relativity into account
or otherwise the TV picture would be out of focus.
So there are people in the world for whom motion at speeds near that of light is important.
An astrophysicist studying that distant galaxy does have to take relativity into account.
An engineer designing that TV tube does have to take relativity into account.
A cosmic ray physicist does have to take relativity into account.
Now, where did our common sense come from?
Well, think about how we developed our notions of time and space.
When you were a baby and were crawling around, you began to get a sense of what space meant,
what it meant to get from one place to another.
When you were a little kid and you were sitting in the back of the car on a long trip and
saying, Daddy, are we there yet?
You were beginning to develop a sense of time.
And that sense of time and space that you developed were coming out of that very limited
provincial experience of, as I say, crawling.
And I use that term to mean moving slowly compared to the speed of light.
Even 2,000 miles an hour in a supersonic airplane is far, far, far slower than the speed of
light.
You crawl around on this hunk of rock and that is your limited experience.
I would assert that if you had grown up able to crawl at 90% of the speed of light, relativity
would have been obvious to you.
You wouldn't need this course.
Nobody would need to go to school to study relativity.
It would be intuitively obvious to us.
If we were beings that were somehow based in interstellar gas clouds or something as
a science fiction novel by Fred Hoyle once described, and we tended to move around the
universe at speeds near the speed of light all the time, then relativity would be intuitively
obvious to us.
It would be our common sense.
The reason it's not common sense is simply because it's not in our everyday experience.
In order to appreciate relativity and to appreciate the richness of a universe in which the relativity
principle holds, I'm going to have to ask you to suspend the common sense.
It's a very difficult thing to do.
I'm not going to ask you to give up common sense entirely, though I'm going to ask you
to expand on it, to enlarge the possibilities.
That's what relativity asks us to do, and I think it's remarkable that this very simple
principle that the laws of physics are the same in all uniformly moving frames of reference.
It sounds very benign, is so immediately at such odds with our common sense.
But it is, and it is for the reason again that our common sense is built out of very
limited experience.
If you can abandon or at least agree to stretch your notion of common sense, then you're going
to encounter the richer universe that relativity offers us.
Now, let me make very clear, common sense isn't wrong.
If it were wrong, common sense wouldn't tell us how to throw a tennis ball or drive a car
or do many of the other, quote, physics experiments that we do here on planet Earth all the time
and do very successfully.
It's not that our common sense is wrong, it's that our common sense is limited.
Newtonian physics, if you will, is the physics of common sense.
It was built on our common sense notions of space and time.
Those notions proved to be limited.
Relativity tells us that, and the example from the last lecture of you whizzing by me
in a spaceship at half the speed of light and are still both measuring the same speed
for that light, that tells us that our common sense notions of space and time simply have
to be wrong.
But when the relative speeds involved in our lives are small compared with sea, small compared
with the speed of light, then our common sense notions are good enough.
They're not perfect.
Even me pacing very slowly around this room, there are slight differences in space and
time for me than for you because of my motion relative to you.
These effects are so small that they're essentially negligible in our everyday lives.
Even when you're traveling in a jet airplane at 600 miles an hour or in a supersonic plane
at 2,000 miles an hour, or even in an orbiting satellite going at 25,000 miles an hour, 17,000
miles an hour, 25,000 miles an hour on the way to the moon, these effects are very, very,
very small.
They're measurable, and there are a few instances, one of which is the global positioning system
of satellites, which I'll talk about a little bit later in the course, where relativistic
effects, even at the kind of speeds we use in everyday space travel or even airplane
travel, have measurable relativistic effects.
But for most of us, those are completely negligible.
So there's nothing wrong with our common sense, it's just very limited.
In fact, mathematically, if you take the equations of relativity and you reduce all velocities
to something much, much smaller than C, then those equations reduce to the ordinary equations
of physics that we knew about before relativity.
So common sense isn't wrong, it's just limited, and what I'm doing here is asking you to expand
your common sense.
I'm going to also ask you to watch your language.
And this is a plea not only to you in my audience, but also to some of my fellow teachers of
relativity, because it's very easy to make statements that violate the spirit of the
relativity principle.
You've heard about political correctness on our campuses, you have to make statements
that are in tune with the prevailing political norms.
Well, I don't want to get into that, but I do want to ask you and ask myself and ask
my fellow teachers of relativity to be relativistically correct in our language.
And what that means is, when you're describing what happens to space and time, be very careful
to avoid any statements that might suggest there is a preferred frame of reference, a
preferred state of motion.
Why?
Because there isn't a preferred frame of reference and there isn't a preferred state of motion.
The Copernican principle has been expanded through special relativity to say that all
uniformly moving frames of reference are equally valid places, situations to do physics.
So avoid any statements that would suggest anything to the contrary.
For example, in the last lecture when we put you in the first the car, then the airplane,
and then the spaceship.
And we said, well, we both measure the same speed for light and we said, how could that
possibly be?
And I simply hinted at the end of the lecture that it must mean that something is different
about our measures of space and time.
You might jump to the conclusion that, well, maybe the meter stick in the moving vehicle
shrinks.
Maybe something funny happens to the clock in the moving vehicle because the vehicle
is moving.
That's sort of the philosophy that Lorenzen Fitzgerald had when they suggested maybe
the apparatus, the Michelson-Morley apparatus, contracts in the direction of motion.
It's really this long, but because it's moving, it got contracted.
What's wrong with a statement like that?
What's wrong with a statement like that is the sense that somebody is moving and somebody
isn't.
Somebody, probably you think the person on earth, has the right to assert that they're
at rest and funny things are happening to clocks and meter sticks and space and time
for the people who are moving.
Nonsense.
You in the moving spacecraft, moving relative to me that is, you in the airplane moving
past me at 600 miles an hour, you in the car moving past me at 70 miles an hour.
Because those motions are uniform, you have every bit as much right to claim that you're
a place for doing physics.
You have no more right to claim you're the right place than I do.
We both have equal claim on doing physics and doing physics correctly.
That's what the principle of relativity says.
So don't think funny things happen to clocks and meter sticks or space and time because
things move.
The phrase because things move is a relativistically incorrect phrase.
You're allowed to say, I am moving relative to you or that clock is moving relative to
this clock that I'm looking at.
But you're not allowed to say that clock is moving and this one isn't and therefore funny
things happen to that clock.
That violates directly the spirit of the principle of relativity, which says all uniformly moving
frames of reference are equally good places to do physics.
And that means any uniformly moving clock keeps time just as well as any other uniformly
moving clock.
It's just as accurate.
Clocks don't become inaccurate quote because they move because no uniformly moving clock
has the right to say I'm at rest and all the other ones are moving.
What may be the case and in fact is the case is that different clocks moving relative to
each other keep different time.
But there's not one of them that can say I keep the right time and all the rest of you
are wrong because you're quote moving because nobody has the right to say I am moving.
I will even slip occasionally and use phrases that are not correct.
If I ever say the moving clock or this is moving, what I really mean is this is moving
relative to that.
That's why it's a relativity theory.
It says only relative motion matters.
Lecture three we went over this with the Galilean relativity principle.
Only relative motion matters.
Statements about absolute motion are meaningless.
They were in mechanics all along.
They became so in all of physics with Einstein's special relativity.
So everybody who's in uniform motion is in an equally good position to do physics.
So let's now move on and see what actually happens to space and time in special relativity.
We'll start with time.
We're going to be talking a lot in the next few lectures about events.
I just want to tell you what an event is so we make it very clear.
An event is something specified by giving both its place and its time.
For example, your birth is an event.
It occurred at a specific place and it occurred at a specific time.
Just to give the place, to say New York City, for example, is not sufficient to specify
your birth.
Just to give a year, 1960 is not sufficient to specify your birth.
New York 1960, that does it.
An event is a place and a time.
And events are the key things in relativity.
So we're going to talk a lot about events.
What I'm going to do now is give you a somewhat artificial-seeming example that I hope will
convince you of what exactly happens to time because of the principle of relativity being
true.
I'm going to imagine a device which I'll call a light clock.
Here's a picture of a light clock and you audio people have a picture of the light clock
in your booklet.
The light clock consists of a box, just a simple box.
At one end of the box is a light source and at the other end of the box is a mirror.
We're going to imagine a pulse of light leaves the light source, travels to the mirror, reflects
off the mirror and comes back.
And we're going to be interested in the time interval between two events.
And those two events are the departure of the light pulse from the light source and
the return of the light pulse back to the light source after it's bounced off the mirror.
If you will, this device is a clock and that's the fundamental ticking.
Tick as the light goes up, talk as it comes back.
There's one period of the clock and it keeps doing that.
We're just going to focus on one tick talk of the clock, one outgoing light pulse hitting
the mirror, coming back to the light source again.
And the two events are light pulse leaves the source, light pulse returns to the source
and we want to know what the time interval is between those two events.
So here's our light clock.
Now whenever you see pictures in relativity books or in my course or in anything dealing
with relativity, it's crucial to ask yourself and it's crucial to understand the answer
to the question.
In what frame of reference is this picture being drawn?
Many relativity books fall down I think because they fail to tell you that or sometimes worse
they'll draw pictures that are ambiguous, partly from one frame of reference and partly
from another.
And in relativity things tend to look different in different frames of reference and it's
important to catch that difference and I'll try to do the best I can sometimes I'll slip
but I want to tell you whenever possible what frame of reference I'm dealing with.
So the picture I'm showing you right now on the left side of the screen is a picture
drawn in a frame of reference at rest with respect to the light clock.
What that means is we're in a frame of reference, we put this light box or light clock here
and it's at rest with respect to us.
That's what I mean by saying this is a picture drawn in a frame of reference in which the
light clock is at rest or equivalently a frame of reference at rest with respect to the light
clock.
I'm assuming that I've got a uniformly moving frame of reference, you might say well maybe
it's at rest, well maybe it is at rest but being at rest is meaningless.
Maybe it's at rest on earth, that's a particular state of uniform motion.
Maybe it's at rest on Mars, maybe it's whizzing through space at 99% of the speed of light
relative to earth but as long as it's moving uniformly that's an okay frame of reference.
So I don't know exactly what the light clock is doing relative to earth, it doesn't matter.
The point is I'm drawing a picture here from a frame of reference in which the light clock
is at rest and in that frame of reference here's what's going to happen.
The light is going to leave the source, it's going to go up and hit the mirror, it's going
to return to the source, that's all that happens.
And the light is going to travel a total distance which is twice the length of the box and that's
all we need to know at this point.
What's the length of the light path for that light?
It leaves the mirror, it leaves the source, it travels up to the mirror, it reflects off
the mirror, it comes back and hits the source and we know how far it traveled, it traveled
twice the length of the box, no problem.
Now there are certainly plenty of other frames of reference that aren't at rest with respect
to the light clock or light box, equivalently through which the light clock is moving.
If I'm at rest with respect to the light clock and you go by me at 70 miles an hour in the
car then relative to you the light clock is in fact moving.
In fact suppose you go by me in that direction then judge from your frame of reference the
light clock is moving in the other direction relative to you and you might say oh but it's
really at rest, uh-uh that's not relativistically correct.
Both of those frames of reference are equally valid because they're both uniformly moving
frames of reference and no one has the right to claim that at rest or not.
So is the light box at rest, light clock at rest or not?
It is in one frame of reference, it isn't in another and that's just the way it is and
that's okay.
So let's look at that second frame of reference and see what happens.
So we're going to look at the same situation, the light clock, the emission of the light
that's the first event bounces off the mirror, comes back to the source, that's the second
event.
We're going to look at that sequence of events at those two events in a frame of reference
now in which the light clock is moving to the right.
That means relative to the frame in which the light clock is at rest that frame is moving
to the left and therefore the light clock looks like it's moving to the right.
It is moving to the right in that frame.
By the way, a word to avoid, you might want to say, but isn't it really at rest?
Again, avoid the word really in relativity.
It's a very, very dangerous word because really implies there's some special case, some special
frame of reference in which things are really the case in which they're really right.
The time is really this time, the length is really this length, this event really happened
before this event.
Uh-uh.
To use the word really is to sort of pin a specialness on one frame of reference.
So let's avoid that.
So here we are simply in a different frame of reference, a different place, a different
state of motion that is equally valid for doing physics.
It's a frame of reference which happens to be moving to the left relative to the first
frame of reference I discussed, the one in which the light clock was at rest.
And so in this new frame of reference, the light clock itself is moving to the right.
So it starts out, there it is, and like a little arrow to show that it's moving to the
right at some speed.
And to make this make any sense, that speed is probably pretty significant compared to
the speed of light.
We already expect that because we know that these relativistic effects aren't important
at very slow speeds.
You won't see these effects if you do this experiment, move the light clock at 70 miles
an hour or 600 miles an hour.
But if you move it at 80% of the speed of light, this will be a big effect.
So what happens?
The light flash leaves the source and it travels straight to the mirror.
But in this frame of reference, straight to the mirror means it travels like that at an
angle.
At the time the light pulse hits the mirror, the mirror is in a different location.
The light pulse still hits the middle of the mirror.
The same physical things have to happen.
In one frame of reference, the light pulse left the source, it hit the middle of the
mirror and it came back.
That's got to happen in the other frame of reference.
There's no question about what happens.
It's a question of interpretation about how long the intervals are between what happens
and so on.
So here we are halfway through the process.
The light pulse has hit the upper mirror.
It's in the process of reflecting off it.
It comes back and by the time it returns to the source, the lightbox is in a different
place.
Now there's nothing funny and relativistic yet.
I could have described this all in old-fashioned classical terms.
The light clock could be in a car which happens to be moving to the right and the first frame
of reference is the frame of reference of the car and the second frame of reference
is the frame of reference of an observer on the road who sees the car go by.
There's nothing unusual about this.
These are two different descriptions of the same sequence of events from two different
points of view, two different frames of reference.
Here's the crucial point.
In the second frame of reference, the one in which the lightbox is moving, notice the
light path.
The light path is longer.
Why is it longer?
It's longer because the light travels diagonally to get to the mirror, reflects and comes back
diagonally.
It's a longer path.
It still has the up and downness of the length of the box, but in addition, it has a component
of its motion in the direction the lightbox is going.
In classical physics, in old-fashioned pre-relativistic physics, we say, oh, well, that's okay because
the light is actually moving a bit faster in the right-hand frame of reference because
it has the motion of the lightbox imposed on it.
We could describe that in terms of the ether and so on if we wanted.
But now we believe in the principle of relativity.
The principle of relativity says the laws of physics are the same for all observers in
uniform motion.
All laws of physics, including the principles of electromagnetism, including their prediction
that there are light waves, including the prediction that those light waves go at speed
C.
So what has to be the case?
The speed of the light has to be the same in both frames of reference.
And yet in one frame of reference, the light is moving further than in the other frame
of reference.
This is where relativity comes in.
In our assertion that the light moves at the same speed in both these frames of reference,
that's what's going to give us all the trouble with time.
That's what gave us the trouble in the experiment of measuring the speed of the light flash
from the traffic light, too.
The assertion that all these observers had to measure the same speed.
Observers in both these frames of reference measure the same speed for light, but in the
left-hand frame, in the frame of reference, at rest with respect to the light clock, the
path length is shorter.
And we can conclude, in the left frame, we have a shorter path.
We've got the same speed, and therefore the time between the events is shorter.
In the frame of reference in which the light clock is moving to the right, we have a longer
path, but by the principle of relativity, we have exactly the same speed C for the light,
and therefore it takes more time.
And that's simply the way it has to be.
If you accept the principle of relativity, the very simple benign sounding principle
that says the laws of physics, including electromagnetism and predictions about light, are the same
in all frames of reference in uniform motion, then this conclusion has to follow.
The time intervals between those two events are different in the two different frames
of reference.
Now, you might say, oh, well, okay, this is just a peculiarity of this funny light clock
we're using here.
This is something that, you know, if I use the real clock, real clock, like this clock,
that result wouldn't happen.
But that's nonsense.
We've made a clock.
What's a clock?
A clock is a device that accurately, repeatedly, undergoes some kind of happening that is
periodic, that occurs over and over and over again.
In an old pendulum clock, that could be the swing of a pendulum once a second.
In this light clock, it's the bouncing of the light pulse from the source back to the
source.
In this modern quartz clock, it's the fundamental vibration of a quartz crystal that vibrates
32,700 and 68 times per second.
That's a power of two from one second, and when you divide that down with electronic
circuits, you get a ticking every one second, exactly 1.000 seconds.
A clock is simply a device that undergoes a repetitive periodic motion or change of
some kind, and that light clock is a perfectly good clock.
And what we are doing here is discovering not something about the light clock or not
something even about light, but something about time.
The phenomenon we've described here is called time dilation.
Time is different in different frames of reference.
Clocks do not keep the same time when they're moving relative to each other.
They're still perfectly good clocks.
There's nothing wrong with the light box when it's moving.
It's the same one.
It's just looked at from a different frame of reference.
It isn't keeping bad time, quote, because it's moving.
It's keeping perfectly good time in either frame of reference.
It's just keeping different time.
Time dilation isn't about light.
It isn't about light clocks.
It's about time itself.
Measures of time are simply different for different observers in relative motion.
The time interval between two events is not an absolute quantity.
It's something that depends on your point of view.
We're going to have to give up the absoluteness of time and soon the absoluteness of space
if we accept the simple principle that the laws of physics are the same for all observers
in uniform motion.
When you read books about relativity, you will often hear time dilation described by
saying moving clocks run slow.
There's two things wrong with that.
It's probably grammatically incorrect.
It should say slowly, but much more profoundly, it's simply not relativistically correct.
I'd like you to pause right now, turn off your VCR, turn off your cassette player for
just a minute, and think about what is wrong with the statement moving clocks run slow.
Why is that statement not relativistically correct?
Think about that for a few minutes.
When you're done thinking about it, start up again and we'll continue.
So what's wrong with the statement moving clocks run slow?
It implies there's something special about motion, special about movement, that there's
somebody who's not moving, for whom the clock is right and doesn't run slow, and somebody
else for whom because they're moving, the clock runs slow, nonsense.
Somebody can say, I'm moving and you're not, or you're moving and I'm not.
That's the whole point of relativity.
Moving clocks run slow is an absurd statement.
It's nevertheless used very commonly, including in physics books or books for non-science
people about relativity, to describe this phenomenon of time dilation.
One problem with the idea of moving clocks run slow is you might imagine yourself in
a spacecraft whizzing past Earth with a clock.
That's a moving clock, right?
And the moving clock runs slow.
So you might imagine in your frame of reverence, everything seems to have slowed down.
You watch the hands of your clock creeping slowly, and your heart beats slow, nonsense.
That frame of reverence is just as good a frame of reference for doing physics in as
any other frame of reference.
Things have to seem perfectly normal in that frame of reference.
If they didn't seem perfectly normal in that frame of reference, physics would be somehow
different there.
And the whole point of relativity is the laws that govern physical reality don't depend
on your state of motion.
They're the same for all observers in uniform motion.
Things can't seem strange.
Even if you're in a spacecraft whizzing along at 0.99999, the speed of light, everything
in the context of that spacecraft, in your frame of reference, your heart beat, your
aging, all that seems perfectly normal.
Time for you may be running differently than it does on Earth.
We'll get to that in the next lecture, but everything seems perfectly normal.
So what does time dilation really say?
Let me describe what it says.
Here's what it really says.
It doesn't say moving clocks run slow.
Instead, it says something a little more complicated.
It says, if I have two events and I measure the time between them on a clock that is present
at both events, remember the light clock when it was in the frame of reference where it
was at rest?
That light clock, that same box was present at the emission and the return of the light
flash.
We're going to now replace that light box with a couple of real clocks.
And so what does it say?
It says something like this.
It says, first of all, we're not going to say moving clocks run slow anymore.
That's bad, relativistically incorrect.
We're going to say a little more sophisticatedly.
The time between two events is shorter when you measure it with one single clock that's
present at both events rather than measured by two different clocks.
So here's the picture.
This is the picture that should come to your mind when you think about time dilation.
I've got two clocks, clock B1 and clock B2, and they're located at two different places.
And I've got another clock, clock A, whose state of motion relative to the other two
clocks is such that A will be present at clock B1 and then later will be present at
clock B2.
And the two events we're interested in are the first event, which is shown here, when
clock A passes clock B1.
And the second event, which will be when clock A passes clock B2.
Now you may be very tempted to say, oh, A is the clock that's moving.
And I've got an arrow showing that indeed A is the clock that's moving, and later clock
A will be above clock B2.
And in that sense, it is moving.
In the frame of reference of the clocks B1 and B2, and that's the frame of reference
from which this picture is drawn, remember I asked you to always think about what frame
of reference is the picture shown in.
In that frame of reference, clock A is indeed moving.
But that doesn't say clock A is absolutely moving.
It simply says clock A is moving relative to the frame of reference in which the two
clocks B are at rest.
They're at rest relative to some frame of reference, the one in which they're at rest.
They're at rest relative to each other.
I've put them that way.
I've glued them to the wall in that frame of reference.
Clock A is moving relative to that frame of reference, but clock A isn't moving absolutely.
Clock A has every right to say, oh, the clocks B are moving relative to me.
I'm not moving.
So that's why I don't want to call clock A the moving clock.
Clock A is simply a clock that happens to be present at the two events.
It's a single clock.
Clock A is present at the event of clock A and clock B coinciding, and clock A is present
at the event of clock A and clock B2 coinciding.
Neither clock B1 nor clock B2 is present at both those events.
What does time dilation say?
Time dilation says that the time elapsed on clock A between those two events will be
less than the time as measured by the two other clocks, and that's crucial.
It takes two clocks in one of the frames of reference and only one clock in the other
frame of reference to do this measurement, to determine the time interval between the
two events.
Now, this is not a mathematically oriented course, but I do want to tell you the actual
result of doing this measurement and calculating what the time differences should be.
There's a little formula, and we will use this occasionally, and any of you who have
had high school algebra and can use the Pythagorean theorem could easily go back to the light
clock picture and look at those diagonals.
Hint, diagonals have to do with the Pythagorean theorem, and you could calculate the time
in the one frame versus the time in the other frame, and you would find that the time which
I will call t prime, that's the little thing after the t for time on the left side of that
equation.
While t prime, that's the time measured on clock A, the one clock that's present at
both events, that time is the time measured on the other two clocks multiplied by a factor
1 minus v squared, square rooted, where v is the speed measured in terms of the speed
of light.
So if you're going half the speed of light, v is a half, and that number is always smaller
than 1, and therefore t prime is always less than t.
And we're left with the conclusion that time is simply not an absolute quantity.
The time interval between two events is relative, it depends on your frame of reference.
