Welcome to lecture 5, speed C relative to what? With a big question mark after it. This
is going to be a lecture full of questions, mostly questions about light and its behavior
and particularly its speed C. Before we get on to that, let me begin with a brief summary
of where we've been before now, a brief history of physics through the year 1900, because
at this point we're at the jumping off place for the theory of relativity. We're at about
the year 1900, not quite, and we're ready to jump into relativity and we have to put
together where we've been. So here's a very brief history of physics through the year
1900. In the year 1600 through 1750, we had Galileo, Newton, a lot of others developing
an understanding of motion, mechanics, the study of motion. They developed a mechanical
understanding of physical reality. They could explain the way the world worked in terms
of Newton's laws, gravity and other forces and predict the motion of objects. They had
a thorough understanding. And I want to emphasize two aspects of the Galilean-Newtonian vision
of reality that classical physics gave us. One is that the universe was deterministic.
We're going to come back to that. We saw that in the clockwork universe. We'll come back
to that when we get to quantum physics. The other thing was that a relativity principle
holds in Newtonian and Galilean physics. The laws of Newtonian physics or Galilean physics
work for anyone in uniform motion. That's the principle of Galilean relativity. So a
relativity principle holds in this branch of physics. Then from roughly 1750 to about
1900, Maxwell and a whole host of others developed the theory of electromagnetism that I covered
very briefly in the previous lecture. And that theory led to an understanding of all
electromagnetic phenomena, electricity, magnetism, the interactions of the two, and especially
light. Light was understood to be an electromagnetic wave, and Maxwell's equations made very definite
predictions about those electromagnetic waves. Specifically, they traveled at a known, calculatable
speed, the speed of light, 186,000 miles a second, one foot per nanosecond, etc. So
that's a brief history of physics to where we are about now. And now we want to ask some
questions about those two different branches of physics that are listed in that brief history,
mechanics, the study of motion, and the study of electricity and magnetism, including light.
Before we do, I want to introduce a new concept. It's a concept called a frame of reference.
What's a frame of reference? Well, you'd probably say it's something like your point of view.
And in physics, it is something like your point of view. It's basically sort of your
state of motion, the things that share your state of motion. If you're sitting here on
Earth and you're doing physics experiments, Earth is your frame of reference. When you
say, I see a car moving at 50 miles an hour, you mean the car is moving at 50 miles an
hour relative to the Earth and all the things that are attached to the Earth. If you're
in an airplane flying at 600 miles an hour relative to Earth, the airplane is your frame
of reference. And if you say, I think I'll stroll down the aisle at 10 miles an hour
or something, that's relative to your frame of reference relative to the plane. If you're
in a car moving down the highway and you want to do physics experiments in the car, the
car is your frame of reference. Your frame of reference is basically the things that
share your state of motion. So that's the idea of a frame of reference. And I'm going
to use that concept a lot in this and subsequent lectures. It's a crucial concept in relativity
because the relativity principle, Galilean or Einsteinian, is fundamentally about frames
of reference. So let's ask a very simple question. Let's ask the question, in what
frame of reference are the laws of mechanics, that is, the laws of motion valid? In what
frame of reference is this physics of the first half of our brief history of physics
valid? We already know the answer to that question. We answered that question in lecture
three with the Galilean relativity principle. The Galilean relativity principle said the
laws of motion are the same for all observers in uniform motion. Put that in terms of frames
of reference, it means the laws of physics, the laws of motion rather, the laws of mechanics
work equally well in all frames of reference in uniform motion. So if I'm here on Earth,
which as I explained earlier is to a good enough approximation in uniform motion, or
if I'm in that airplane moving through level, air, no turbulence at a steady speed to valid
frame of reference for doing mechanics, a frame of reference in which Newton's laws,
the laws of mechanics are valid. If I'm on Venus playing that tennis game, or even on
that planet in that distant galaxy moving away from Earth at 0.8 C, 80% of the speed
of light, long as that motion is uniform, that's still a valid frame of reference for
doing mechanics. Newton's laws will be equally valid there. I'll do laboratory experiments,
I'll verify Newton's laws, and those experiments will not be able to tell me I am or am not
moving. That's a meaningless question as far as mechanics is concerned. That's what
the mechanics principle of relativity, the Galilean relativity principle means. It means
that the answer to the question in what frame of reference are the laws of mechanics valid
is in any uniformly moving frame of reference. Known for hundreds of years, nothing special
about that, but it's such a crucial question, I want to emphasize it again. In what frame
of reference are the laws of motion valid? Answer in any uniformly moving frame of reference.
It's an easy question to ask, it's an easy question to answer, and the essence of the
answer is the Galilean principle of relativity that says the laws of physics are the same
for everybody in uniform motion, only it says the laws of motion, which was all the physics
that was known in Galileo's time, and I want to emphasize that distinction. It's the laws
of motion that are valid in all frames of reference, all uniformly moving frames of
reference. We now want to ask another question, equally simple. In what frame of reference
are Maxwell's equations valid? In what frame of reference are the laws of electromagnetism
valid? In what frame of reference is that second part of physics valid? Is it valid
in all frames of reference, in uniform motion, like the laws of motion are, or is there some
special frame of reference in which the laws of mechanics are valid, or laws of electromagnetism
are valid, and they're only valid in that frame? That's the question we want to concentrate
on in this lecture, and that's a crucial question in the evolution of Einstein's thinking
and relativity. So the question is, in what frame of reference are the laws of electromagnetism,
Maxwell's equations that I displayed for you last time? In what frame of reference are
they valid? Now that's actually not the question I'm going to ask. I'm going to ask an equivalent
question, and I want you to understand why it's an equivalent question. I'm going to
ask instead the question, in what frame of reference does light go at speed C? That special
speed of 186,000 miles a second. In what frame of reference is it true that light goes at
speed C? Why is that an equivalent question? Because one of the predictions of Maxwell's
equations is that there should be electromagnetic waves, which we now know include light, and
that those waves should travel at speed C. In a frame of reference in which Maxwell's equations
are valid, that prediction will be borne out. It will be true. In a frame of reference in
which Maxwell's equations are not valid, light will have a different speed. So the question,
in what frame of reference does light go at speed C, is equivalent, logically equivalent
to the question, in what frame of reference are Maxwell's equations valid? We're going
to ask that second question. In what frame of reference does light go at speed C? Now
there's one easy possibility. You might say, well, it's pretty obvious. It goes at speed
C relative to its source. So if I have a light bulb and it's emitting light, then that light
is traveling at speed C relative to the source of the light. And if I run with the source
toward you, the light will be moving toward you faster than C, but it will be moving at
speed C relative to the source. Maybe Maxwell's equations apply to the source of the light.
That's a nice idea, but it's not true. There's a lot of experimental confirmation that it's
not true, but perhaps the easiest comes from observational evidence of double star systems,
astronomical observations of double star systems. About half the stars in our galaxy, it turns
out, are double stars. There are two stars in close orbit, or some orbit, around each
other like this. We don't happen to live in such a system where we'd have two suns.
So here's a double star system, and it's going around like this. Two stars are going around
each other. Now notice what's going on. Here's a time when this yellow star is coming toward
you. Here's a time when this yellow star is going away from you. Now this star system
may be a long ways away from us, thousands of light years or something. That means light
takes thousands of years to get from it to us. If the speed of light dependent on the
speed of the source, the light leaving the yellow star when it's coming toward us is
going to get to us a lot sooner than the light leaving the yellow star when it's going away
from us. We may even see several images of the star as light from different positions
arrives at the same time because it took different amounts of time to travel and the star was
in different places at different times. We certainly won't see this nice simple motion,
which after all is what Newton's law of gravity predicts. If the speed of light dependent on
the speed of the source, we would see very strange things with double star systems. We
would be able to interpret what that double star system was actually doing, a nice simple
orbit, but we wouldn't see that. Well the fact is when we look at double star systems,
it's very, very clear that the speed of the light coming from the stars has no relation
to the speed of the source. The light comes by us at speed C regardless of what the source
is moving. So unfortunately the simple answer that light goes at speed C relative to the
source is plain and simple wrong. Now in the 19th century, physicists gave a different
answer to that question. They looked at other kinds of waves they knew about, sound waves.
They traveled about 700 miles an hour with respect to what? With respect to the air because
sound waves are disturbances of air. Earthquake waves travel through the solid earth at speeds
of several miles a second or more. Relative to what? Relative to the solid earth, which
is the thing which is being disturbed by the passage of those waves. Ocean waves travel
along the ocean surface at characteristic speeds that depend in the case of ocean waves
on how big the waves are. That makes them more complicated than electromagnetic waves
by the way. But what determines that? What is that speed measured relative to? It's measured
relative to the water. If the waves were in a flowing river relative to the bank, they
would have the river's speed added to the wave speed. It's very clear what the speed
of a wave means when it's a wave that's a disturbance of the air like a sound wave or
a disturbance of the water surface like an ocean wave or a disturbance of the solid
earth like an earthquake wave. Well, 19th century physicists were first of all very
thrilled with the success of Newtonian physics in explaining everything in mechanical terms
and they were still trying to think about electromagnetism as if it were mechanical.
They were trying to think of light waves as being very much like sound waves, mechanical
disturbances of some medium. So they came up with the idea of a hypothetical medium,
medium being like the air or the water. The thing that the wave is traveling through that
it's a disturbance of. And they called it the ether. And the ether had to have unusual
properties. It permeated all of space because light waves after all travel in the so-called
vacuum of empty space. For example, between the earth and the moon or the earth and the
sun. Sound waves don't travel there. Water waves don't travel there. There's no air.
There's no water there. Earthquake waves, there's no earth. But light waves do travel there.
Electromagnetic waves, radio waves, they travel through empty space or seemingly empty space.
So the ether had to pervade all space, going into the tiniest interstices of empty space
because we know that light travels in little vacuums. We make in vacuum tubes and things
like that. Light goes everywhere. So at least the material isn't opaque. So the ether had
to be very able to get everywhere. It also had to be very tenuous because after all the
earth goes around its orbit and has been doing so for billions of years and it isn't feeling
any drag like a satellite does when we launch it in too low an orbit and it feels dragged
from the earth's atmosphere and eventually spirals into the atmosphere and crashes to
earth or burns up. Earth hasn't done that with respect to the sun and it would if the
ether presented much resistance. So it had to be very tenuous. Furthermore, it has to
be very stiff for a reason that's a little bit more subtle. It turns out if you send
a wave down something like a stretched string, stretch a string and wiggle it and send a
wave down it, you'll find the wave goes faster if the string is stretched tighter. So the
ether, to propagate waves, move waves at a very, very rapid speed of 186,000 miles
a second, had to be very stiff, a property that's not really very compatible with being
very tenuous. So it was a strange substance that physicists of the 19th century proposed.
But it seemed essential to those physicists because they were steeped in this mechanical
view. Now if you're saying to yourself, wait, this is a preposterous substance, why on earth
did they make this? Why didn't they just say, light waves go through empty space? Well
if you say that, then you're back to the question with respect to what does light go
at speed c because empty space isn't something like a substance is. If I say light goes at
speed c relative to the ether, it's clear what I mean, but if I say it goes at speed
c relative to empty space, it's not clear what that means and you're left with a deep
philosophical question about your fundamental ideas of physics. So we're going to pursue
the 19th century answer for a little while. The answer is light goes at speed c relative
to this hypothetical substance, the ether. Now there's a philosophical problem here if
you accept this ether idea and it rises in the form of a dichotomy in the two branches
of physics I've just been describing. I've talked about the study of motion and how
in the study of motion a relativity principle holds. The laws of motion are the same for
anybody who cares to study them as long as that individual is in uniform motion. There
is no one special frame of reference where the laws of mechanics, the laws of motion
are valid. A relativity principle holds. But now we've asked the question for electromagnetism.
We said in what frame of reference does light go at speed c? I argued that that was equivalent
to saying in what frame of reference are the laws of Maxwell, the laws of electromagnetism
valid. And the answer is they're valid in this one special frame of reference, a frame
of reference at rest with respect to the ether. So we have a dichotomy. One branch of physics
obeys a relativity principle and the other doesn't. And that is to say the least philosophically
unsatisfying. But I urge you to think about the alternative and you'll quickly get mired
in greater philosophical difficulties. So that was where things stood in the 19th century.
We have this dichotomy. Physicists believe that the laws of electromagnetism were valid
in one special frame of reference, that the statement I am moving is meaningful in electromagnetism.
I am moving means I'm moving with respect to the ether, whereas I am moving is a meaningless
statement in mechanics. That means we ought to be able to do physical experiments involving
electromagnetism that will tell us whether we're moving or not. Now remember back to
the first lecture when I had you playing tennis. You played tennis on a cruise ship
on Venus and on this distant planet moving away from Earth at 80% of the speed of light.
And you had no problem with that. Maybe you had a little more problem with the second
thing I asked you to do or it was a little more obscure and that was heat a cup of tea
in a microwave oven. That involved electromagnetism. That's why I had you do that. And if you
were a believer in the status of these two branches of physics as they were at the end
of the 19th century, you would have told me, yes, I can play tennis on this distant planet
moving at 80% of the speed of light and it will work just the same as it does on Earth
because the relativity principle holds for the laws of motion. But you would say, no,
the microwave oven isn't going to work at all. The microwaves really are going to get
crashed to one side of the oven or left behind or something because that oven is moving at
80% of the speed of light relative to Earth and the laws of electromagnetism seem to work
pretty well on Earth. So we have this dichotomy in physics. However, we're going to plow ahead
with the philosophically unsatisfying dichotomy and we're going to ask another question. We're
going to ask, okay, there is this ether like substance. How is Earth moving relative to
the ether? Because if the ether exists, Earth must either be moving through it or not moving
through it. And I want to take you through some important logic. And this logic is crucial
because if you follow this logic, you will be forced to believe in relativity when we
get there. We're not there yet, but we will be soon. You'll be forced to believe in it
logically. You'll understand why it must be. So let's look a little bit at the question,
is Earth moving relative to the ether? And there are really two possibilities. One possibility
is that it isn't moving relative to the ether. If it isn't moving relative to the ether,
then Earth alone, one possibility is Earth alone among all the cosmos is at rest relative
to the ether. And that may be an absurd possibility, but maybe it's true. Or possibly the Earth
is at rest relative to the ether because the ether that's locally in Earth's vicinity
gets dragged along with it. Well, let's look at these two possibilities.
I think you can see that the first one probably isn't going to be very philosophically satisfying,
regardless of its physical content. It isn't satisfying physically either because it violates
the Copernican principle that the Earth isn't special. Let's look at the second one in some
degree of detail. Possibly the Earth drags the ether in its vicinity with it. And if
the Earth does what Mars does and Venus does in that distant planet, and everybody sees
themselves at rest with respect to the ether, even though different ether is moving with
respect to them, how could we find out if that's true or not? Of course, the other possibility
is the Earth is moving relative to the ether. So we want to rule out the first possibility
if we can, or rule out the second possibility. So let's look at the two sub-possibilities,
the possibility that the Earth drags the ether with it in its vicinity. Fortunately, there's
an astronomical observation we can make that will answer this question, whether the Earth
drags the ether in its vicinity with it, and presumably then whether the other planets
and stars and astronomical objects do that as well. The phenomenon is called the aberration
of starlight, and it involves the question of whether we have to look in different directions
to see the same star if we look at it at different times of year. Why would that happen? Why would
we have to look in different directions? Well, it has to do with the motion of the Earth in
relation to the motion of the light coming from the star, and the best way to explain
that to you is to give you an analogy involving an umbrella. So here's the analogy. Suppose
it's raining and raining vertically downward, and I want to keep dry. How do I do it? I
put an umbrella directly over my head. I'm standing still in vertically falling rain,
and I want to keep driest. I put an umbrella directly over my head. There we go. Stay nice
and dry. That's great, but now what happens if I want to move somewhere? I want to run
through the rain or walk rapidly through the rain. What should I do with the umbrella?
Should I continue it to hold it right over my head so it will keep my head dry, or should
I do something different? Well, I'm going to convince you that you should do something
different. Here's what happens if I run through the rain. I would argue that I have to tilt
the umbrella at an angle. That angle is going to depend on how fast I'm moving relative
to how fast the rain is falling. I'm going to have to tilt at an angle toward the direction
I'm moving in order to stay driest. Why does that work? Well, it works. You can understand
that by looking at what the situation looks like in my frame of reference. Right now we're
looking at a situation first where I stood still, then if I run, but I'm still drawing
that picture from the Earth's frame of reference, and I'm moving past the Earth, and the rain
is falling vertically. But in my frame of reference, it looks different. As I move
toward the falling rain, the rain looks to me like it's coming at an angle, and that's
the angle I have to tilt my umbrella at. And again, that angle depends on basically how
fast I'm moving relative to how fast the rain is falling. So I've got to tilt my umbrella
to stay dry. So here it goes. It's raining. I want to get from here to there. To do so,
I tilt the umbrella. I tilt it at an angle that depends on how fast I'm going. If I'm
walking slowly, maybe it's like that. If I'm running a bit faster, maybe it's more like
that. And you might say, how can that be? His head is exposed. Well, the rain that was
going to hit my head is long past by the time it gets there. The other rain has been intercepted
by the umbrella. Rain that would have hit my head when I had reached this point has
already hit the umbrella and has avoided me. So I actually do stay driest if I tilt the
umbrella in the direction I'm going at a tilt angle that depends on how fast I'm moving
relative to the falling rain. Well, that's all well and good. But what happens if instead
I drag some big volume of air with me? That would be analogous to the ether, the earth
dragging the ether with it, Mars, Venus, all the other astronomical objects dragging the
ether with them. What happens if they do drag the ether with them? What happens to the angle
I have to tilt a telescope to look at a star? What happens to the angle I have to tilt my
umbrella if a large volume of air comes along with me? Actually, some volume of air actually
does come along with me as I walk through the air. There's a small volume right next
to my skin that isn't moving. It's been caught by my skin and it moves along with me, but
it's only a tiny, tiny fraction of a millimeter. So that's not important. But what if instead
I drag a big volume of air several times my size? Big enough so that if the rain falls
vertically in the air above that isn't moving with me, it gets into the air that is moving
with me. It has time to get sped up by the motion of that air until it's moving along
with me. What happens then? Well, the rain is going to fall. It's going to suddenly hit
this volume of air that's moving with me. Temporarily it's not going to be moving at
that rate, but it's going to feel a wind-like force on it. It's going to speed up. Eventually
it's going to be moving with me, and then relative to me, it's going to be falling vertically.
Relative to somebody standing still on earth, it's going to now be moving at an angle within
that huge blob of air. Let's take a look at what that would look like. So here I am.
I'm running along. I've got this big volume of air I'm dragging with me. The rain is falling
in my frame of reference at what looks like an angle, but once it gets into this blob
of air, it's moving along with me horizontally, and so it falls vertically again, and I do
not need to change the angle at which I tilt my umbrella. So if in fact I drag a big volume
of air with me, then I walk along. I don't tilt my umbrella. I walk in a different direction.
I don't tilt my umbrella. Everything's fine. How can I tell if I drag a volume of air with
me? Simple. I do this experiment. I ask myself, how do I stay driest? I ask myself, at what
angle do I need to point my umbrella to stay driest? If the answer is, I need to point
it at some angle, and that angle changes if I change direction, because I always want
to point it in the direction I'm going, then I've got good evidence that I don't drag
a big volume of air with me. On the other hand, as I move around, no matter which direction
I'm going, I find I just hold the umbrella vertically, and that will keep me driest. Then
I conclude that I move a big volume of air with me. I drag a big volume of air with me.
Well, that's an analogy for this phenomenon of aberration of starlight that I mentioned.
In the analogy, the umbrella becomes a telescope. We're going to look at a distant star with
a telescope, so let me get a telescope. We're going to ask the question, do I need to point
the telescope in different directions, just like did I need to tilt the umbrella? What
corresponds to the rain? Well, it's the thing that was falling in that case. Here, it's
the thing that's coming to us from the star, namely the starlight. In order to see the
star, do I have to point the telescope in different directions, depending on how I'm
moving? I'm not going to run around the earth with a big telescope. I couldn't run fast
enough anyway. What I am going to do is take account of the fact that the earth in its
orbital motion moves about 20 miles a second. At one time of year, it's moving 20 miles
a second this way, but we're in a circular orbit around the sun. Six months later, I'm
moving 20 miles a second in a different direction. It's very much like the umbrella. Again, when
I moved in this direction, if I wasn't dragging the air with me, I tilted the umbrella like
this. When I get to the other end of the room here and I want to go back, I don't simply
hold the umbrella like that. That got me very wet. Instead, I tilt the umbrella in the other
direction, so I'm still pointing it in the direction of my motion, and then I stay driest.
The important point here is not so much the angle I had to tilt it at. The actual angle
would be hard to measure accurately with starlight. What's important is the fact that if I move
in a different direction, I've got to shift the actual direction the umbrella is pointing
so that it's always going in the direction I'm moving. That's the crucial point. If we
go to the analogy again, that means if I look at the star at one time of year, and I point
it in this direction, if I find out that six months later, I have to switch the direction
of the telescope. That is, it's still pointing at an angle, but before it was pointing this
way, now it's pointing this way, then I conclude that aberration of starlight is occurring.
The apparent position of the star is changing, and I conclude I don't drag a big volume
of not air, but in this case, in the analogy ether with me. So that is the phenomenon of
aberration of starlight, and we can actually do that experiment. Now remember what determined
that angle. The angle in the umbrella case depended on how fast I was running relative
to how fast the rain was falling. What's the analogy in the astronomical case? What's
the analogy that gives me the angle at which I tilt the telescope? It's a question of
how fast the earth is moving in its orbital motion relative to the speed of the stuff
that's coming down from the star, namely the speed of light. Well, the speed of light is
a big speed. It's 186,000 miles a second. We don't know the absolute speed of the earth
relative to the ether, but we do know that it changes by about 40 miles a second, because
one time we're going 40 miles a second this way, and six months later we're going 40
miles a second the other way. So the change in angle is going to be a very small change,
something like the ratio of 40 miles a second to 186,000 miles a second. It's going to
be a tiny angle, but we can measure it with astronomical telescopes, because what we
do is take a picture of a field of stars, and we look at the positions of the stars
on a photographic plate or more currently on an electronic detector, and we see if those
positions change with time of year, and we can measure that angle, and what happens when
we do that experiment? What happens is we find that the positions do indeed shift or equivalently
to get the star in exactly the same place on our photographic plate, we have to tilt
the telescope at a different angle. Aberration of starlight occurs. Back to our full picture
here of the aberration of starlight problem, the analogy with the umbrella, we see that
that rules out the possibility that we drag a big volume of the ether with us. So the
earth does not drag the ether with us, and that aberration of starlight is a convincing
demonstration of that. So where does this leave us? Let's go back to the logic we were
talking about before. We had two possibilities. We asked the question, is the earth moving
relative to the ether? One possibility, it isn't. The other possibility, it is. We want
to rule out one of those two possibilities. Well, on philosophical grounds alone, I think
it's sufficient, philosophical grounds alone are sufficient to rule out the idea that earth
of all the things in the universe, Mars, Jupiter, Venus, the sun, the center of our galaxy,
that planet in that distant galaxy moving away from us at 80% of the speed of light,
that all those things are in motion relative to the ether, but earth is not. That as earth
goes around the sun in its orbit, the entire ether throughout the whole universe moves
to partake of that motion and keep earth at rest relative to the ether. That's nonsense.
That violates everything Copernicus was trying to tell us that the earth is not special.
The earth is not the center of things. Furthermore, if you don't like that philosophical argument
for ruling out that possibility, there's plenty of observational evidence from astronomy
particularly that rules out the possibility that earth alone among everything is at rest
relative to the ether. Just isn't true. So then there was the other possibility that
would allow us to conclude that the earth isn't moving relative to the ether, and that
would be if the earth drags the ether in its vicinity with it, and the aberration of star
light observations allow us to conclude that that isn't the case. And therefore, we have
ruled out entirely the first possibility that the earth is not moving relative to the ether.
It must be moving relative to the ether. The second possibility is the case. And if it
is moving relative to the ether, then there must be a wind of ether blowing past the earth
because the earth is moving relative to the ether. The ether, alternatively, is blowing
past the earth just like if you stick your arm out the window of a moving car even on
a calm day. You feel a wind. It's the wind, the apparent wind caused by your motion through
the air. Similarly, the earth's motion through the ether should give rise to a wind of ether
blowing past the earth. We should be able to determine the speed and direction of that
wind. Why? Because we have a branch of physics which is valid only in a frame of reference
at rest with respect to the ether, and will give different answers in a different frame
of reference. And in particular, will give different answers depending on how we're moving
relative to the ether. So we should be able to design an experiment that tries to answer
that we know logically. We've ruled out the possibility that we're not moving relative
to the ether. We are moving relative to the ether, and we should therefore be able to
design some kind of experiment, if it's sensitive enough, that detects earth motion relative
to the ether, and answers two questions. How fast are we moving relative to the ether,
and in what direction? It's going to have to be a sensitive experiment because it's going
to involve questions of the earth's speed in relation to the speed of light because
we're going to ask electromagnetic questions. We can't answer this question with mechanics
because in mechanics, there's a relativity principle, and all frames of reference that
are uniformly moving are equivalent. But we can answer it with electromagnetism because
we had this dichotomy, and at the end of the 19th century, physicists believed that the
principles of electromagnetism were valid only in one frame of reference, the ether frame
of reference. We've ruled out earth being at rest in the ether frame of reference, earth
is therefore moving relative to that frame, and we're now going to set out and try to
detect that motion. And one of the most famous important experiments in all of physics did
be precisely that, and it's the experiment I'll be describing in the next lecture.
