Welcome to lecture nine, muons and time-traveling twins.
In the previous lecture, I introduced you to this notion of time dilation, the idea
that the time interval between two events depends on your frame of reference.
Time is no longer an absolute, and we did the time dilation experiment by thinking about
a special device, a light clock, but we concluded from that that this was really a property
of time itself.
Time is simply not an absolute quantity.
Different observers measure different time intervals between the same pairs of events,
and we described in some detail with a pair of clocks in one frame of reference and another
clock that moved between one clock and the other exactly what it meant to say that time
was different in one frame of reference than in another frame of reference.
Measures of time between two events simply are not absolute.
Now, I grant that you probably have great difficulty accepting this intuitively because
all your experience suggests that to say it's one hour, this class is one hour long,
or this lecture is a half hour long, or this airplane flight is two hours long, that that
has an absolute meaning.
It doesn't.
To say that the time between your birth and your sitting here is 40 years or whatever,
that is not an absolute statement either.
In different frames of reference, different observers will judge different time intervals
for the time difference between those two events.
Time is simply not an absolute.
You have trouble accepting that.
On the other hand, I hope you don't have trouble accepting Einstein's principle that
the laws of physics are the same for all observers in uniform motion, that all frames of reference
in uniform motion are equally good places for doing physics.
If you accept that, the logic I applied last time showing that this light path from the
light being emitted by a source in that light clock to the return to that source, that the
path was different in two different frames of reference, but if you believe relativity,
you believe that light goes at speed C in all reference frames, and that led us immediately
to the conclusion that the time intervals between those events were different in different
frames of reference.
I can't emphasize enough that this is not a property that is peculiar to that device
I used in the previous lecture, the light clock.
It's not even peculiar to clocks at all.
All measures of time, all processes, physiological processes, biological processes, chemical
processes, physical processes, all processes that measure time in any way are affected
in exactly the same way, because this is not something that happens and drags back the
hands of clocks and slows them down.
This is time itself that's different in different frames of reference.
Don't look for some mechanical thing that slows down the clocks because they're, quote,
moving.
That would be a relativistically incorrect statement to make.
It's simply that measures of time are different in different frames of reference.
Time is not an absolute.
Some things are absolutes, by the way.
He is not the theory that says everything is relative.
Nothing has any absoluteness, nonsense.
There are things that are absolute.
The laws of physics are the same for all observers in all frames of reference.
The speed of light, as a consequence, is the same for all observers in all frames of reference.
But some things that we used to think of as absolutes and applying to everybody, particularly
measures of time and, as we'll see soon, of space, are not absolutes.
Well does this really happen?
Does time dilation really occur?
We sure don't notice it when we drive around.
If I jump in my car in New York and drive to San Francisco and I compare my clock when
I get to San Francisco with the clock that's there that was synchronized with the clock
in New York when I left, I'll hardly notice the difference.
In fact, I won't notice the difference unless it's a super accurate atomic clock and then
I might notice a few billions of a second difference.
These effects are negligible in everyday lives.
But there are situations in which they become completely obvious and there are situations
eventually maybe involving interstellar space travel where we can put them to advantage.
Let me give you an example of an experiment.
This experiment was done in the 1950s with the particular goal of not only testing but
more demonstrating the principle of time dilation, demonstrating that special relativity is correct.
By the time this experiment was done, there was no question about special relativity being
correct.
I mentioned before it's one of the most tested theories in all of physics.
It's at the foundation of our understanding of physical reality.
So the experiment I'm going to describe is not the clincher that says, oh, Einstein was
right, but it's an experiment that demonstrates quite straightforwardly that it had to be
correct.
The experiment involves some clocks.
Now what's a clock again?
A clock is anything that regularly measures time intervals.
And the clocks in this case are tiny subatomic particles called muons.
And these muons are being created all the time in the upper atmosphere as high energy
cosmic rays which are themselves subatomic particles that originate sometimes in the
sun and sometimes in the vastness of the cosmos in our galaxy or maybe even outside
it.
And they come barreling through the universe at very, very high speeds.
And when they slam into Earth's atmosphere, they cause all kinds of nuclear reactions to
occur in the nuclei of the atoms they hit, and they produce different particles.
And showers of particles are coming down through the upper atmosphere of the Earth all the
time as these cosmic rays hit the upper atmosphere.
And among these particles are these subatomic particles called muons.
And the muons are radioactive as are many elementary particles, not really elementary,
because they break up into other particles.
We'll say more about that much later in the course.
But these particles are radioactive, and they decay, and they decay at a certain rate.
And the rate of their decay is what we're going to use as a clock in this experiment.
And we're going to demonstrate that these clocks, these muons, when they're moving relative
to us at high speed, seem to decay more slowly than they would if they were at rest relative
to us.
Now, seem is not quite a good word, because it implies there's something funny about their
frame of reference.
So let me change that to do decay at a rate which is different than if they were at rest
relative to us.
So let me describe for you this experiment.
Experiment was done on Mount Washington in New Hampshire.
Mount Washington sticks up about 6,000 feet into the atmosphere from sea level.
And there is a rain of muons coming down due to these cosmic ray interactions high in
the atmosphere.
And the particular muons that were singled out for this experiment were muons that were
moving at about 0.994 of the speed of light.
That's 99.4% of the speed of light.
That's pretty fast.
Relativistic effects will be quite dramatic at speeds like that.
So here come these muons, and the scientists measured how many muons per hour were coming
into a detector, a muon detector, a device that gave off a little flash of light whenever
a muon came into that detector and disintegrated.
They could tell how many muons were coming in.
And the number of muons coming into the detector was something like 600 every hour.
At the top of the mountain, there were a lot of muons coming into the detector.
Now the scientists can measure the lifetime of these muons, and when they stop one of
the muons, or stop a bunch of the muons in their detector, and they watch them decay,
they can determine the rate at which the muon's internal clock is running.
And they can conclude that even though these muons are traveling very, very rapidly, 99.4%
of the speed of light, they decay so fast that there should be very few of them left
when you get to sea level.
The prediction was that there might be about 25 or so when you get to sea level.
So here's the experiment.
Muons come down on top of Mount Washington.
You measure how many are coming down every hour.
Under your muon detector, they're coming about 600 every hour.
Pretty big number.
You study these muons and see how fast they decay, or maybe you just look up that information
in a book because the radioactive decay rates of these elementary particles are pretty well
known.
So you look up that quantity, or you measure it by watching the muons decay and detecting
them with Geiger counters and other radiation detectors.
And you ask yourself, OK, if they're decaying at that rate, and they're moving at 0.994C,
how many of them will decay between the top of the mountain and sea level?
And the answer comes out most of them will decay, and you'll expect on the average only
about 25 to survive every hour.
So that's the essence of the experiment.
It's kind of a statistical experiment.
You count the muons present at the top of Mount Washington, you're then going to go
down to sea level.
There's a wonderful movie, by the way, made of this experiment, an old 1950s movie, and
you see them moving all their apparatus down Mount Washington on these trucks and setting
it up again in Cambridge, Massachusetts at MIT, potentially at sea level to do the experiment
all over again down there.
And they carefully compensate for the thickness of the atmosphere, which affects the muons
and things like that.
And they get all that stuff right, and they set up the counters, and they expect to find
25 muons every hour if they don't believe in relativity.
And instead, what do they find?
Well, they expect very few muons at sea level.
What actually happens?
Actually most of the muons reach sea level.
It's over 400 an hour.
Most of the muons have survived.
Why?
Their internal clocks that cause them to decay radioactively are keeping time at a certain
rate.
The muons decay at a certain rate.
You expect it in the relatively short time, it's a few microseconds, a few millions of
a second, that it would take them to get from the top of Mount Washington to sea level.
Most of them would have decayed.
How do you explain the fact that most of them didn't decay?
Well their internal clocks must have been keeping time at a different rate than the clocks
in the laboratory.
The clocks at rest with respect to Mount Washington, the clocks at rest with respect to the laboratory
at sea level.
That's the explanation for what's going on.
You'll remember I introduced the time dilation factor near the end of the last lecture.
And this is about as mathematical as we're getting, and you don't need to worry about
this too much, but in fact the time measured on the quote moving clock of the muon, if
I may use that expression, again it's a relatively, relativistically incorrect expression.
The time measured on the muon clock, that was my t prime, that's given by the time measured
in the laboratory, by the clocks at rest with respect to Mount Washington, multiplied
by the square root of 1 minus the speed squared, where the speed is given as a fraction of
the speed of light.
Well 0.994 squared is about 0.99, and 1 minus that is about 0.01, so that's a very, very
tiny number.
It comes out to be about a ninth.
And what that says is, moving at 0.994C, the muons should be keeping time at one ninth
the rate of the clocks on earth.
And that is in fact completely consistent with the survival of about 400 muons to reach
C level, instead of the 25 you would expect if the clocks on the muons, their internal
radioactive timekeeping mechanism, if that were running at the same rate of speed as
the clocks in the laboratory.
So this is a fairly dramatic confirmation of time dilation.
It really does occur.
It's not the kind of satisfying demonstration you might like where I pick up a clock and
run past you, and show you time dilation that way.
We can't do that yet.
We can't move macroscopic objects at 0.994C, but we have plenty of subatomic particles moving
around at those speeds, and they very dramatically show time dilation.
And this example illustrates that beautifully.
So there's an experiment that verifies that time dilation occurs.
It really does happen.
And it really would happen if we could pick up that clock and move it at speeds approaching
that of light.
In fact, it really does happen even if we move that clock in a jet airplane, as I'll describe
later.
But let me give you now an example of what would happen if we could move macroscopic
that is big sized objects like people in spaceships at speeds substantially like that of light.
So we're going to do an experiment, or thought experiment, like Galileo and Einstein have
done before us.
We're going to do a thought experiment about a star trip, a trip to a distant star, and
we're going to imagine we have a spaceship capable of traveling at, say, 80% of the speed
of light.
Now, it may be technologically not possible to do this, at least at this point in humanity's
history, but there's nothing in the principles of physics that rules out what I'm about to
describe.
That's why it's a valid thought experiment.
It's something we could imagine doing, and we believe we know what the outcome of the
experiment would do, would be, because we understand the laws of physics.
So we're going to do a star trip.
And we're going to go from Earth to a star, which I'm going to say is 10 light years away
from Earth.
Now, let me take a minute and explain what a light year is.
I'm going to be measuring distances in the next few lectures in light years.
Sometimes in light minutes, sometimes in light seconds.
This is a measure of distance, not of time, even though it's got the word year in it.
It's a measure of distance.
What's a light year?
A light year is the distance that light travels in one year.
How big is that?
It's trillions of miles, but I don't really care.
It's 186,000 miles a second times the number of seconds in a year, which is about 3.15
times 31 million, roughly.
So multiply those out.
You'll figure out what it is.
But I don't care what it is in real distance.
It's a quarter of the weight in the nearest star, approximately, if you want to get a
feel for it.
It's much bigger than the solar system, for example.
That's not the point.
The point is it's a convenient measure of distance when you're talking about relativity
and speeds near the speed of light.
Because what's the speed of light?
Well, we know it's 186,000 miles a second.
We know it's one foot per billionth of a second, one foot per nanosecond.
We know it's 300 million meters a second.
But what is it in light years per year?
Think about that a second.
A light year, by definition, is the distance light travels in one year.
So what's the speed of light?
Real simple.
It's one light year per year.
That makes all the mathematics, all the arithmetic, very easy.
So I'm going to deal with distances, not in miles or meters or centimeters or nanometers.
I'm going to deal with distances in light years.
Sometimes I'll talk about light minutes.
For example, the sun is about eight light minutes from Earth.
What does that mean?
It means light from the sun, the time it leaves the sun until the time it gets to Earth, takes
about eight minutes.
Jupiter, at least at some points in its orbit, is about half a light hour from Earth.
What does that mean?
It means it takes light 30 minutes, the duration of one of these lectures, to get from Earth
to Jupiter or a radio signal, which is also an electromagnetic wave like light from space,
the Galileo space probe out at Jupiter now.
Going in orbit around that planet takes about 30 minutes for the radio signals from that
spacecraft to come back.
The moon, the moon is about one and a quarter light seconds from Earth.
One trip transit time to talk to an astronaut on the moon is about two and a half seconds.
You do a telephone conversation by satellite, and the satellites that carry those conversations
are 22,000 miles up.
There's a reason for that.
They orbit the Earth in exactly 24 hours, same as the Earth goes around and they sit
at one place above the Earth for that reason.
That round trip is about 40,000 miles or a fraction of a light second.
A foot is one light nanosecond.
You get the idea.
We're going to measure distances in light time units, light times time, and the light
year is the appropriate unit for measuring interstellar distances.
A light year is simply the distance light travels in one year.
So here we have this star trip and going at the speed of light, it would take therefore
10 years to get from the Earth to this star.
We're going to go in a spacecraft, which I've hypothesized is technologically capable
achieving speeds of 80% of the speed of light, 0.8C.
So here we go.
We're going to start out on this star trip at 0.8C and we're going to do a little math
to figure out how we get there.
Now hold on.
This is just arithmetic.
It's the fifth grade formula, distance equals speed times time, and I want to apply it to
that situation.
No relativity here at all.
Distance equals speed times time.
We know the distance.
It's 10 light years.
We know the speed.
It's 0.8C or 0.8 light years per year because the speed of light is one light year per year.
So distance, 10 light years equals speed, 0.8 light years per year times the time.
We can figure out how long it's going to take.
By the way, I don't believe in doing math problems unless I sort of know the answer already,
so I'm just going to think a little bit about the answer.
I'm going at 0.8 the speed of light, 80% of the speed of light.
If I were going at the speed of light, since that star is 10 light years away, it would
take me 10 years.
I'm going a little slower, so I expect an answer a little more than 10 years.
So let's do the math.
Time is going to be the distance divided by the speed.
It's 10 light years divided by 0.8 light years per year, and it all comes out nicely at 12
and a half years.
So that's how long I'm going to say from Earth that that trip is going to take.
It's going to take 12.5 years.
I measure time on Earth.
But what about in the spaceship?
The situation is very similar to our time dilation experiments, especially the last visual
I showed you in the last lecture, where we had two clocks at rest with respect to each
other and another clock that moved from one to the other.
The spaceship is carrying a clock.
That's like the clock that's present at both events.
The spaceship's clock is there when the spaceship passes Earth.
It's there when the spaceship passes the star.
We can imagine there are clocks on the Earth and star that are themselves synchronized
together, and we've got a perfect time dilation situation, exactly like we set up in the last
lecture.
So we can argue that the time in the spaceship is given by the time on Earth multiplied by
that relativistic factor, the square root of 1 minus the speed squared, where the speed
is measured in a fraction of the speed of light.
Again, if you don't like the arithmetic, don't worry about it, but it easily computes to
give us the answer.
Time dilation says t prime, the time in the ship's frame of reference, is the time in
the Earth's frame of reference, and again, there's nothing special here about Earth.
It's the fact that we have the two clocks in the Earth's star frame of reference, we're
assuming the Earth and the star are pretty much at rest with respect to each other.
Those two clocks versus the one clock carried by the ship.
So we're going to just apply that formula.
t, the Earth time, is 12.5 years.
We're going to multiply it by the square root of 1 minus 0.8 squared.
I chose those numbers for a particular reason, 0.8 squared is 0.64, 1 minus 0.64.
If you had changed from a dollar for $0.64, you'd get back $0.36, that's 0.36, the square
root of 0.36 is 0.6, so that factor is 0.6, and it all comes out to 7.5 years.
So if we look at the star trip, we start out at 0.8C, we travel to the star, Earth time
that's elapsed is 12.5 years, ship time that's elapsed is 7.5 years.
That's just the way it is, it's just like the muons.
Here we're keeping time in the spaceship at a smaller rate, about 0.6 the rate we were
on Earth.
In the muon case it was more dramatic because they were going not at 0.8C but 0.994C.
So that's what would happen if we could do this experiment.
Just exactly like the muon situation, just exactly like the situations I set up in the
last lecture.
You might ask me does 7.5 years really elapse in the spaceship, isn't it?
Really 12 years?
Suppose you're the pilot of the spaceship, what will you have experienced when you get
to the star?
Won't 12 years really of a 12.5 years, won't you really be 12.5 years older?
So 7.5 years will have elapsed for you.
Remember we're not talking about clocks here, we're not talking about something dragging
on the hands and slowing the clocks back because we're in a bad frame of reference.
All these frames of reference are good.
What we're talking about is the measures of time are different in different reference
frames.
7.5 years really have elapsed for the time traveling twin or the traveling twin there
in the spaceship.
So let's go back now and revisit that twin idea that I described in the very first lecture.
It doesn't take much to do the twin experiment from where we are already.
Already we've put one twin in a spaceship.
She's traveled the 10 late year distance to the star.
The Earth time that's elapsed is 12.5 years in her ship according to her ship clock, according
to her physiological aging processes, according to everything else that involves time, 7.5
years have elapsed.
However, she's now 10 late years away so it's a little bit hard to sort of look at her and
compare.
If she sends back a radio signal or a TV picture of herself, well, we've got to worry about
the travel time for that light and things get a little bit complicated.
Let's turn her around and let's bring her back right here on Earth where you, her twin
are sitting.
Let's see what things look like then.
Then there's no ambiguity.
You and the twin are right side by side.
No question.
Don't have to worry about time for light to get between you or radio signals or whatever.
So let's turn this ship around and let's head it back at 0.8C.
Now this is exactly the situation we just had except instead of leaving Earth, we're
leaving the star.
So we're going to head back at 0.8C and how much time is going to elapse?
Well it's exactly the same situation we just had.
The spaceship is carrying one clock moving between a clock on the star and a clock on
the Earth.
And of course it doesn't really matter whether there are clocks there or not.
All manifestations of time exhibit this effect.
So the ship is going to go back to Earth.
There it is.
And how much time has elapsed?
Well, Earth star time.
It was 12.5 years one way so it's 25 years round trip.
What about in the ship?
Well it was 7.5 years one way so it's 15 years coming back.
Twin hops out of the spaceship and he's 10 years younger than you are.
Can it be?
Isn't this just something that happened to the clocks but she's really experienced the
same physiological wear and tear in her body?
No.
She has experienced 15 years of time and you have experienced 25 years of time and you're
standing right next to each other and you're different and you were twins.
You're still our twins and yet you're 10 years apart.
Could it be?
Is it possible?
Yes, it is and it could be.
It's the reason this bothers a lot of people.
Has to do with, first of all it bothers you because you don't want time to do strange
things like that but even if you accept that time does strange things then you may ask
a more subtle question.
You may say, wait a minute.
You've been teaching me about everything being relative.
Well why can't the twin who jumps in the spaceship say, oh here's what I see.
I'm sitting in my spaceship, I see the earth going away at 80% of the speed of light and
that's a perfectly legitimate thing for her to say and then I see the earth turn around
and come back at 80% of the speed of light and so why isn't my brother 10 years younger
than I am?
Why don't 25 years elapsed for me and 15 years for my brother?
We can't have it both ways because we're standing there side by side and there is some objective
truth to either we're the same age or one's older and the other's older.
So who's right?
Why can't I simply reciprocate?
Why can't I do the same picture except draw it from my point of view, spaceship at rest,
earth zooms out 10 light years away, comes back and the traveler on earth should be younger.
Why not?
This is what bothers people.
Once they get beyond the notion that time gets messed up a little bit you begin to accept
that strange things are going to happen in time.
Why isn't this reciprocal?
Why does it happen like that?
Well there's a subtlety here and the subtlety is best understood if you remember what's
special about the special theory of relativity.
Special theory of relativity, special relativity is special because it applies only to uniform
motion.
It says statements about I am moving are meaningless.
It's meaningless for me on earth to say oh I'm at rest but the twin in the spaceship
is traveling.
It's similarly meaningless for the spaceship to say I'm at rest and the earth is traveling
those are both equally meaningful and equally meaningless statements.
Nobody has any authority to say I'm at rest and you're moving.
However in special relativity at least although motion doesn't matter, uniform motion doesn't
matter, changes in motion do matter because special relativity applies only to uniformly
moving reference frames.
Remember what uniform motion is, way back from Galileo and Newton, it's motion in a straight
line at constant speed.
If you do anything else, slow down and stop, speed up, change direction, turn around, go
in a circle, turn around, that's what happened in this experiment, then that motion is no
longer uniform.
There really is an asymmetry in this situation.
The two twins are not in the same situation as far as special relativity is concerned.
One twin, the one on earth is in uniform motion the entire time.
The other twin, the one in the spaceship is not in uniform motion the entire time.
There's a small interval when she's turning around.
During that interval, she feels great big forces just like if you turn a car very suddenly
on a high speed turn around a curve, you feel yourself thrown to the outside of the car
or you sit in an airplane while it's accelerating down the runway and you feel yourself pushed
back in the seat.
The traveling twin feels forces like that when her spaceship turns around.
Back on earth they don't feel those forces.
As far as special relativity is concerned, her motion has changed and that's a real thing.
That's an absolute.
She can't say I was moving and now I'm not moving but she can say my motion changed and
earth's motion did not change.
She's in two different frames of reference in this trip.
She's in one frame of reference going out and she's in a different frame of reference,
a different state of motion going back.
There is no symmetry between the two and so there is no problem with the fact that one
twin comes back younger.
Now you might think about this a little bit more and I'm just going to give you hints
of two answers to questions you might want to ask that I don't have time to go into in
detail.
This whole process can be treated from the point of view of general relativity which
treats completely arbitrary kinds of motion and it gives the same result.
You might ask what happens if the twins try to communicate with each other as they're
going.
Well, basically what happens is you will find that they can keep in touch with each other
and they can count up the number of signals each one sends back.
Suppose one sends back a pulse or a message every year.
You can count up those messages and it all works out and they come out to having spent
exactly the amounts of time we've calculated.
15 years in one case and 25 years in the other case.
This process really does occur and it's happening to all manifestations of time.
The twins' body really ages 15 years in the process of her trip.
Your body really ages 25 years.
It's not about clocks.
It's about time itself and all processes including aging that involve time.
Well, I talked in the beginning about time travel.
My first lecture was called Time Travel Tunneling Tennis and Tea, Time Travel.
In a way, your twin sister in this experiment has traveled into the future.
She's traveled 10 years into your future.
She's now only 15 years older and you're 25 years older.
Could she do better than that?
The answer is yes and to see that, I want to look very quickly once again at the time
dilation formula that we developed.
Again, this is something that if you've had high school algebra, you could derive yourself
so it's not very mysterious.
It simply says the time is measured and the space ship's clock is the time is measured
in the earth clock times this factor, 1 minus v squared square rooted.
And again, nothing special here about earth and spaceship.
This doesn't happen because you're in space or because you're in a spaceship.
It happens because you have one clock moving to be present at two events versus two clocks
that are at rest with respect to each other at those separate events.
Look what happens if v gets close to 1.
In our units, v equals 1 means the speed of light.
That square root gets close to zero and the square root of zero is zero.
So that number t prime can be made as small as you want.
In the case of the earth star trip, if the twin goes faster and faster, she can make
the time elapsed in her clock, not 15 years, but one year or one hour or one second if
she goes fast enough.
If she goes very fast, she'll be going at almost the speed of light and the trip will
take just a hair over 10 years out as far as earth is concerned and just a hair over
10 years back for just a hair over 20 years.
So for that earth star trip, the minimum time that could take in the earth star frame of
reference is just over 20 years for speeds that are very close to the speed of light.
But she can make that time as short as she wants, as close to zero as she wants by going
as close as possible to the speed of light.
Remarkable.
In that case, for a trip to a star 10 light years distance, she could come back almost
but not quite 20 years younger.
With the 0.8 speed of light, it was 15 years younger, it could be 20 years younger.
She can do better than that though.
She wanted to go to the Andromeda galaxy.
The Andromeda galaxy is the only other galaxy than her own that is just barely visible to
the naked eye.
It's sort of to the right of the constellation Cassiopeia and a clear night sky.
You can see it as a fuzzy little blob.
It's 2 million light years away.
So suppose she goes to the Andromeda, 2 million light years distant.
Now you might say she's never going to make it.
How can you go 2 million light years when the human lifespan is only 80 years or something?
But she can because she can go as fast as she wants and she can make T prime as short
as she wants.
She can get there in a year, say, or a day or whatever she wants, going as fast as she
wants.
If she's going almost the speed of light, the galaxy is 2 million light years away.
At the speed of light, that would take 2 million years judged by somebody in the Earth
and galaxy frame of reference.
They're essentially at rest with respect to each other.
So the outgoing trip takes minimum 2 million years, 2 million years coming back.
As far as somebody on Earth is concerned, that trip takes minimum of 4 million years.
But she can make it take as close to zero time as she wants.
And so she'll come back to Earth and she'll be 4 million years in the future.
Her twin brother, you, is long gone, civilization, as we know it, is probably long gone.
She's traveled 4 million years into the future and how much time has elapsed for her and
her body and her clocks and her spaceship and all those things, an hour, a day, 25
years, whatever it was, depending on how close that V is to the speed of light, how close
the V is to 1 in our equation.
Remarkable.
She can travel into the future.
That is a problem.
If she gets there and doesn't like what she finds, maybe Earth is gone, maybe civilization
has made a runaway greenhouse effect like on Venus and the planet is no longer habitable,
all kinds of things could happen.
If she doesn't like it, there's no going back.
She can't get back to her time.
She could leapfrog further into the future with another traveling, another trip.
In fact, she could get even further into the future.
She could get 2 billion years into the future by going to a galaxy a billion light years
away at such a high speed that her time is negligible.
Remarkable.
Time travel into the future is possible, but you can't go back.
Well, this sounds absurd.
Does it really happen?
It has happened and it's been demonstrated in an experiment which I list incidentally
in the bibliography for this course.
Some articles in Science Magazine from a couple decades ago took very sensitive atomic clocks,
put them in airplanes and flew them around the Earth.
One clock was left behind, other clocks went around in the aircraft, they went in a circular
path that's non-uniform motion, they came back, the two clocks were compared and they
differed in that case by about 300 nanoseconds, 300 billionths of a second.
Not a big amount of time but easily measurable by today's standards.
In that experiment, we had the effects of special relativity.
We also had some effects from general relativity because of changes in gravity with the airplane's
altitude and we'll get to those later.
But the fact is those experiments confirm remarkably, although with a fairly trivial
change in time.
With time dilation formula, the twin event really does occur.
The traveling clock really did come back younger, in that case by only 300 billionths
of a second, but it did come back younger.
Time travel to the future really can occur and it really is possible.
