Welcome to lecture 11. My title, Faster Than Light, Past, Future, and Elsewhere draws on
two of the problems that arise from the kinds of things we've been discussing, the non-relativity
of simultaneity, for example. The fact that events that are simultaneous in one frame
of reference are not simultaneous in another, and in fact that the time order of those events
is also relative. Event A may occur before event B in one frame of reference, and event
B before event A in another frame of reference. How can these things be? They're closely
tied with our notions of the past and the future, and what those concepts really mean.
They're also closely tied with a question that arises frequently when people study relativity,
and that is, why is it that nothing can go faster than light? I haven't asserted that
fact yet, but it's been in the back of my mind in a lot of the things I've been saying,
and now we need to bring it to the forefront. So today's lecture deals with these two questions.
What do we really mean by the past and the future? What about causality in a world where
the time order of events can be different? And what about this business of faster than
light? And how is that coupled with questions of causality? I want to begin by clarifying
a definition I gave you several lectures ago, and that's the definition of an event. In
relativity, events are the key things. Events really happen. You were born, that happened.
Human observers may disagree about the time interval between your birth and you're sitting
here watching this course or listening to this course, for example, but nobody disagrees
about the event of your birth having happened. An event is specified by giving the place
it happened and the time it happened, and that is complete and enough to specify the
event. We'll be talking again a lot about events. Now we saw several lectures ago that
the time interval between two events is a relative quantity. Time intervals are simply
not absolute. The time interval between your being born and your sitting watching this
course might be, say, 45 years. That is, in a frame of reference, at rest with respect
to the Earth. But to somebody whizzing by Earth in a high-speed spaceship going in uniform
motion, straight line motion at constant speed, that interval may be a very different amount
of time. Time intervals are relative. That's something we came to a while ago, and I hope
you're at least a little bit comfortable with that by now, even though, again, it is never
going to make intuitive sense, because intuitive sense is common sense, and common sense, again,
is built on that limited experience we talked about before. But in the last lecture we came
up with an idea that's perhaps even more radical, and that's the notion that the time order
of events may be different in different frames of reference. And I left us last time with
a question, how is that possibly consistent with our notions of cause and effect? How
can the time order of two events be different? How can observers disagree about whether event
A occurred before event B, or event B occurred before event A, when we expect of cause and
effect that the cause comes before the effect? Surely, your being born was a cause of your
now watching this course. If you hadn't been born, you certainly would not now be watching
this course. Don't observers all have to agree that your birth came before your watching
this course? Well, the answer to that question is yes. There are only some kinds of events,
only some pairs of events for which the time order can be judged to be differently by different
observers. I want to tell you a little bit more about what those kinds of events are.
The events for whom the time order can be relative are a special class of events that
are so far apart in space in some frame of reference, and this then turns out to be true
in all frames of reference, if they are so far apart in space that not even light emitted
at the time of this event can get to the second event. If the events are that far apart, then
it turns out that there are different observers who will see the two events as event A occurring
before event B, another observer will see event B occurring before event A, and there
will be other observers who see events A and B as being simultaneous. It's that class of
events, events that are so far apart, that are widely spaced in space that not even light
can get from one event to another. Those events are close enough in time that for some observers
they occur at the same instant. They're simultaneous, and for some observers event A occurs before
event B, and for some observers event B occurs before event A. Now, we're beginning to get
out of the realm where everything I say about relativity is going to follow absolutely logically,
so I'm not going to prove that statement to you. I'm simply going to assert it. It takes
a relatively small amount of algebra to demonstrate it, but I'm not going to do it. So you'll
have to take this somewhat on faith. The statement that the events for whom the time order can
be different for different observers are the set of events for which the distance between
the events is so far so great that not even light could travel from one event to the other.
Let's go back to the example of you're being born and then you're sitting here looking
at this course or listening to this course. How far apart are those events? Well, in space,
those two events both take place on Earth, so they're at most thousands of miles apart.
Could light traveling at 186,000 miles a second have traveled from the event of your birth
to the event of your sitting here now? Well, it could have done so in a tiny fraction of
a second and yet maybe 45 years have elapsed, so light has had plenty of time to get from
the event of your birth to the event of your sitting here now. Those are events for which
the time order cannot be different for different observers. All observers will say, for those
events, those events are close together in space and far apart in time. They're 45 years
apart in time judged by an observer on Earth. They're a few thousand miles apart in space,
which is a very short distance in terms of how far light can travel in 45 years. Those
events are, again, close together in space, far apart in time. No observer will think
or measure that you're sitting here watching the course occurred before you're being born.
All observers will agree that you were born before you watched this course. Not all observers
will agree that the interval between your birth and your sitting here now is 45 years,
however, for some that interval will be shorter. Depends on their relative motion, relative
to Earth, but all will agree that event of your birth comes before the event of your
sitting here now. On the other hand, consider another case of some events. Consider an event
that's happening right here now. You're sitting watching this video and an event that happened
at the time of your birth, but in the Andromeda galaxy, which is 2 million light years away.
Now, you were born 45 years ago, say. Well, light leaving the event of your birth could
travel a maximum distance of 45 light years. Why? Because a light year is the distance
light travels in one year. In 45 years, light travels 45 light years. Remember, a light
year is a unit of distance. It's a unit of how far in space things are separated, and
it's measured by how far light goes in one year. So in 45 years, light that left the
event of your birth could travel 45 light years. Well, that's nowhere near as far as
Andromeda, which is 2 million light years away. And therefore, the event that occurred
45 years ago at the time of your birth on Andromeda, and the event of your sitting here
now watching this course, those two events are events that there could be observers disagreeing
about when they occur, which one occurred first. They won't only disagree about the
time interval between them, they will disagree about which one came first. There are observers
for whom the event that occurred 45 minutes ago on Andromeda, or 45 years ago on Andromeda,
actually occurred first. You might say, well, didn't it really occur 45 years ago? Well,
if you start using that dangerous word really, you're saying, oh, there's something special
about the frame of reference of Earth and Andromeda, and observers moving relative to
them are in weird special frames that don't really count. And so things aren't right for
them can't do that. Relativity is the statement that the laws of nature, the laws of physics
are the same for all observers in uniform motion. So everybody has to agree about that. So everybody
has has equal perspective on deciding which event came first, and people disagree about
that observers disagree about that. In fact, there will be some observers moving in just
the right way relative to Earth and Andromeda for whom the event of your birth and the event
of your sitting here now and the event that occurred on Andromeda 45 years ago, as far
as the Earth frame is concerned, that those events are simultaneous for some observers.
They occur at the same time. And again, for some observers, your birth, you're sitting
here now comes first. For other observers, that event comes first. There's no contradiction
of causality. Why not? Because of that fact that I'm going to discuss at great length
in the second half of this lecture, the fact that nothing can go faster than the speed
of light. In particular, no information can go faster than the speed of light. And because
of that, for events that are so widely separated in space that not even light can get from
one event to the other, there is no way for the events to communicate. There is no way
for them to be causally related. And therefore, there's no contradiction with some observers
seeing event A before event B, and some observers seeing event B before event A. The events simply
cannot be causally related. And I want to explore that situation in a little bit more
detail with a specific example. In the late 1990s, we sent a wonderful space mission to
Mars, and we landed a little rover on the planet Mars. And you may remember the news
at the time the rover was rolling around planet Mars backing up to rocks, up sticking its
spectrometer into the rocks and analyzing them and so on, and having a great time rolling
around the surface of Mars and taking pictures. At the time that happened, Mars and Earth were
11 light minutes apart. What's a light minute? Well, again, it's a unit of distance. It's
the distance that light travels in a minute. You can figure out what that is in miles by
multiplying 186,000 miles a second by 60 seconds, and whatever that comes out, that's how many
miles in a light minute. But it's just easier to talk about light minutes. Mars was 11 light
minutes from Earth at the time that the Mars rover was running around on the surface. Because
Mars and Earth are both in orbit around the sun, they don't stay 11 light minutes apart
all the time, but that was the distance at that time. What does that mean? It means it
took 11 minutes for radio signals from Earth to get to Mars to tell the Mars rover what
to do, and it took 11 minutes for images being sent back by radio from the Mars rover
to get to Earth, or warnings that we got a problem, or computers shutting down as it
did several times, or whatever, to be sent back from Mars. 11 minutes is the communication
time using light or other electromagnetic waves between Earth and the Mars rover.
Well, I have a picture here that shows Earth and Mars and shows that there are 11 light
minutes apart. And I'm showing, in addition to this picture, a couple of clocks, one on
Earth and one on Mars. And we're going to assume that Earth and Mars are essentially at rest
with respect to each other. That's approximately true, not exactly. Their relative speeds are
some tens of miles a second, and that's so small compared to the speed of light that,
for all practical purposes, as far as relativity is concerned, they're essentially at rest
with respect to each other, and they define the Earth-Mars reference frame then. And so
these two clocks I've drawn are synchronized in that frame of reference. They both read
the same time at the same instant. We talked about that in some detail last time when we
know how to synchronize the clocks. Now here's the issue. Suppose something bad is going
to happen on Mars in five minutes. Here we are, we're sitting in the command center
for the Mars rover, and suppose a giant boulder is going to come rolling down and crush the
Mars rover, or one of those aliens we're looking for is going to emerge from a crack in the
Martian surface and reach out and grab the Mars rover and crush it. Is there anything
we can do to stop that? Is there any way we can affect that event? Is there any way we
can influence it? That event is going to occur five minutes from now. It hasn't happened
yet, at least in our frame of reference, in the Earth-Mars frame of reference. It's going
to happen five minutes from now. Is there any way we can influence that event? Well,
if we know about that event right now, it's the first time we know about it, there is
no way we can affect it. There is no way we can stop it. We can send a message to the
Mars rover and say, hey, boulder is going to fall on you, but the Mars rover will not
get that message for 11 minutes, and the boulder is going to fall and crush it five minutes
from now. Or watch out, alien coming out of the crack is going to get you in five minutes.
That message is not going to get there in time. It's going to be six minutes late, because
the shortest time a message can get from Earth to Mars is in 11 minutes, if you believe that
nothing can go faster than light. Keep that question in the back of your mind, because
I'll have more to say about that shortly. My example would still be the case if it were
10 minutes before the alien was going to reach out or the boulder was going to fall and crush
the Mars rover, even if we're 10.999 minutes. But if it were 12 minutes from now, then we
have the possibility of sending a message, which will get there in 11 minutes, and the
rover has time to react and get out of danger. So that 11 minutes is an important breakpoint.
Events that are more than 11 minutes from now in the future on Mars are events that
we here on Earth can influence, because we can send a light signal or a radio wave or
some other form of electromagnetic waves, the fastest things we have available to us,
or that any observer or experimenter or being anywhere in the universe has available to them.
We can send a light signal or an electromagnetic wave of any kind, and we can warn the Mars
rover, and if the event is going to occur more than 11 minutes from now, the Mars rover
will get our warning and it can react, at least in principle.
What that means is this. There is a time span from now till 11 minutes from now, and I'm
going to show that on the Mars clock, that we cannot influence. We can't affect events
that are going to occur on Mars in the next 11 minutes. And again, I'm talking about during
the era when the Mars rover is on the surface and Earth and Mars are 11 late minutes apart.
There is a band of time, a band of events that as far as we're concerned, we in the
Earth-Mars frame of reference are concerned, have not yet happened, and yet we can't influence
them. Events beyond that time interval, yep, we can influence them, but events in that
11-minute band from now till 11 minutes in the future, we can't influence.
Now, what if we're sitting here in mission control for the Mars rover, and in fact, that
boulder is not going to crush the Mars rover five minutes from now, but it crushed it five
minutes ago? Are we unhappy? No, because we don't know that yet. The Mars rover signal
Mars, we're still getting signals from the Mars rover. There are signals that left 11
minutes ago, and 11 minutes ago is before the Mars rover got crushed by the boulder.
It will be a while before we'll learn the bad news. It takes time for information to
travel because the fastest rate it can travel in the universe is, see, the speed of light.
So an event that occurred five minutes ago on Mars, similarly, cannot influence the here
and now on Earth. It can't influence us in the present. Later on, we'll know about that
event. The event of Mars rover getting crushed five minutes ago is not lost forever to us.
We'll know about it sometime, and then we'll be very unhappy, or the computer fails or
whatever else goes wrong. Something bad happens to the Mars rover five minutes ago. We do
not know about it now. Nothing that we, we can't do anything about it, not only that,
we don't even know about it. It can't affect us in any way. It doesn't make us unhappy.
It doesn't make Congress cut NASA's budget. It doesn't make anything happen right now.
It may in the future. But right now, an event that occurred five minutes ago on Mars has
absolutely no influence on us. And in fact, if you think about it, an event that occurred
nine minutes ago on Mars, or 10 minutes ago on Mars, or 10.99 minutes ago on Mars, those
events cannot influence the present event here on Earth. An event that occurred 12 minutes
ago on Mars, or 11.1 minutes ago on Mars, we can know about those. If the rover was
crushed 11.1 minutes ago, the signal has gone dead already, and we know that. So events
that occurred beyond 11 minutes ago, they can influence us, but there is a band from
now to 11 minutes in the past that cannot have an influence on us. And consequently,
there is a band that extends 22 minutes in extent from 11 minutes ago to 11 minutes
into the future of events on Mars that can have no causal relationship to events on Earth.
Why? Because if they're in the past, the light or other information coming from them
to tell us about them has not had time to reach Earth. If they're in the future, signals
from Earth have not had time to reach Mars and affect those events. And so those events
are, in a sense, out of touch with the present event on Earth. There is a band at Mars, which
is 22 minutes wide, which has no causal relationship to events on Earth. Those are the events that
are far enough away in space, 11 light minutes in this case, and close enough in time, within
plus or minus 11 minutes of time from the present event here on Earth, that that causal
influence can't exist. Because to have a causal influence, we need to send information telling
us something, the rover is over to do something, or it needs to send us information telling
us it's got troubles or whatever. And in that band, 22 minutes wide, plus or minus 11 minutes
from now, that causal influence cannot happen because no influence can travel faster than
the speed of light. So that's the situation with the Mars rover. And the event, event
A, the here and now on Earth in the control room of the Mars rover, and event B, any event
in that 22 minute window, centered plus or minus 11 minutes from right now on Mars, that's
event B, any event in that window, those are the kinds of events that are far enough apart
in space and close enough in time that some observers will see their time order differently.
That event five minutes from now, and the Mars rover is going to get crushed. There are
observers, or could be observers, moving uniformly through the solar system who would say that
event occurs before the event of me sitting here right now in mission control for the
Mars rover. And there's no contradiction because the events cannot be causally related.
Similarly, there will be observers who say those two events are simultaneous. And there
is no question of causality problems because again, they can't be causally related. Events
outside that 22 minute interval, it's a different story. They can be causally related.
Okay, well, let's expand this away from just Mars itself. Let's just talk a second about
what we mean by the past and the future in this context. If you ask a historian what
the past is, the historian will say, oh, it's all the things that have already happened.
What's the future? Well, it's all the things that haven't yet happened. But now we've got
an ambiguity because we've got this range of time on Mars, it's 22 minutes wide on
the sun, which is eight light minutes away. It's 16 minutes wide at the center of our
galaxy, which is 30,000 light years away. That band is 60,000 light years wide, 60,000
years wide in time, 60,000 years before the present time, 60,000 years, 30,000 years before
the present time, 30,000 years from the present time in that band. Events at the center of
the galaxy are uninfluencible by events now on earth and events now on earth can't be
influenced by them. In Andromeda, which is two million light years away, that band of
time is four million years wide. That's the band in which events on Andromeda cannot
be influenced by the present event on earth and they can't influence the present event
on earth. In a sense, those events are not in the past because they can't influence the
present here on earth and they're not in the future because we can't influence them.
They're in the elsewhere as it's called in relativity. There's a band of time now. Instead,
it's not just past and future anymore. There's not an abrupt demarcation. Instead, there's
a new zone of time called the elsewhere for Mars when it's 11 light minutes from earth.
The elsewhere are those events that occur in a 22 minute wide band plus or minus 11 minutes
from now. In a real sense, those events are not in the past or in the future. They're
in this mysterious elsewhere, meaning they can have no causal relation to the here and
now on earth. Now, don't get carried away by that strange word elsewhere. It doesn't
mean these events are lost forever. They are not connected to the present moment here on
earth, but if I wait a while on earth, events that are in the elsewhere will become in my
past. And a while ago, events that were in the elsewhere were in my future, are now in
the elsewhere were in my future. It's the present moment, the place and time of being
here and now on earth that those events in that 22 minute band are in the elsewhere.
They're not either in the past or future. In fact, we really need to redefine what we
mean by past or future. In relativity, the past becomes not the events that have already
occurred because different observers disagree about that, at least for events that are far
enough apart. And the farther away you go, as in the Andromeda case, the wider the span
of time involved. Four million years for Andromeda, 22 minutes for Mars. We have to redefine the
past as those events that can influence the present moment. And again, that's relative
to the present moment and its place. The events in the past on Mars relative to the here and
now, the present moment on earth, are those events that occurred more than 11 minutes
ago on Mars. What's the future? It's those events we can influence. On Mars, the future
consists of all those events that are going to occur more than 11 minutes from the here
and now on earth. All observers will agree that the here and now on earth occurs before
those events. They may disagree about how much time is elapsed between the here and
now on earth and an event that we think occurs 12 minutes from now on Mars, but they will
all agree that that event occurs later. They won't disagree about the time order of events
that can be causally related, similarly for the events in the past. So we have now a more
complex picture of time. We have the past, the future, and the elsewhere. And they're
all relative to that present moment. All this depends on nothing moving faster than light.
And that's one of the big questions that keeps coming up in relativity. Why can't anything
move faster than light? Let me give you a few explanations for that. They all boil down
low to the same thing, the principle of relativity that says the laws of physics are the same
for all observers in uniform motion. So none of them goes beyond that and every one of
them is therefore logically as good as any other. And the first one is in a sense the
least satisfying one, but it's also perhaps the most simple and profound. The laws of
physics are the same in all uniformly moving reference frames. One consequence of the laws
of physics is that there should be light waves and they should move at speed C. Therefore,
all observers in uniform motion should see light moving at speed C. Therefore, there
can't be an observer who's at rest with respect to light. Therefore, nobody can go at the
speed of light. Now, that sounds a little tautological and trivial, but that's as good
an explanation as we need. It isn't a very satisfying explanation, however. And let me
give you some more satisfying explanations then. A little more technically, this is the
one Einstein worried about when he was 16 years old. Remember, Einstein worried, what
would happen if you ran alongside a light wave at the speed of light? What would it
look like? Well, he'd see a stationary wave, a wavy pattern that wasn't moving. But a wavy
pattern that isn't moving is not a solution to the equations of electromagnetism, to Maxwell's
equations. It just isn't. That does not solve the equations. You plug the mathematical description
of a non-moving wave in and it doesn't work. The only thing that works is a moving wave
moving at speed C. So, a stationary light wave is not a solution to Maxwell's equations.
And yet, all observers in uniform motion have to have Maxwell's equations valid because
they have to have all the laws of physics valid. And therefore, there can't be an observer
who sees a stationary light wave. Nobody can move alongside a light beam. Nobody can move
at the speed of light. That's also not very satisfying, but it's at least an explanation.
And it's an explanation based ultimately in the principle of relativity that says all
observers see the same laws of physics, including the consequence that the speed of light should
be C. Well, you might start thinking of cleverer ways to do this. One way you might think,
you know those people movers in airports. Well, what if you put on top of one people
mover another one and another one and another one. Couldn't you get up to speed C? Or let
me give you a picture that shows the same idea. Here we have a rocket ship going past
Earth at 80% of the speed of light. Pretty fast. We've been using that hypothetical rocket
ship before. Suppose that's a big rocket ship made it as big as the planet Earth. Suppose
inside that rocket, I build a smaller rocket. And I launch that smaller rocket at 0.8 C relative
to the big rocket. So I've got a small rocket that's barreling down the big rocket at 0.8
C relative to the big rocket. Well, how fast is that small rocket going relative to Earth
then? Think about that a minute. Sure, it's going 1.6 C, right? Going faster than light
relative to Earth. Sounds logical, but it's not true. In that particular case, the small
ship is actually going about 0.97 C relative to Earth. Why? Well, I'm not going to go
through the mathematics of it, but just think a little bit about what's going on here. Measures
of space and time in the big rocket ship that's going past Earth at 80% of the speed of light
are different than they are on Earth. So when I say the smaller rocket ship is going 80%
of the speed of light relative to the big rocket ship, that does not mean it's going
1.6 times the speed of light relative to Earth. And in fact, the equations that describe
how velocities combine in relativity will never, ever, ever let you go at speeds faster
than light. In fact, if I replace the smaller rocket ship with a light beam going at speed
C relative to the big rocket, those same equations will then tell me the light is not going at
1.8 C relative to Earth, but it's going at exactly C relative to Earth, as indeed we
know it must, because the laws of physics with their implication that the speed of light
is C for all observers must hold in all uniformly moving frames of reference. So we can't get
to speeds faster than light by leapfrogging ahead, like this with multiple things going
at faster and faster speeds relative to each other. Let me remind you here, although I'm
talking about things like spaceships and observers and people, the real key in relativity is
not that no object can go faster than light, but that no information can be transmitted
faster than light. The maximum speed that information can be transmitted at is the speed
of light, and it can be transmitted by the things that go at the speed of light, which
may be only electromagnetic waves or maybe a few other kinds of entities in the universe,
we're not sure, but whatever they are, they are massless entities and they can go at the
speed of light, but that's the fastest anything can go, and light is the only thing we really
know for sure about that does that, and the speed of light is the upper limit to the speed
at which you can transmit information. So the key here is information. You cannot transmit
information at speeds greater than C, and we're going to get back to that when we talk about
a very peculiar quandary in quantum mechanics in one of the last lectures. Now, is there
something very special about light that's going on here? Be careful not to get too hung
up on light. Talking about light gives us a lot of insights into relativity, but relativity
isn't really about light. The constancy of the speed of light or the sameness of the
speed of light for everyone is just a minor part of relativity, a minor consequence. What
relativity is really about is space and time, in this case in particular about time. This
business of trying to leapfrog the rocket ship is only one example. There are more mundane
cases. Suppose, for example, a police car is going down the road at 50 miles an hour,
and I go past that police car and the police car clocks me going 30 miles an hour relative
to the police car. Can I get ticketed for going 80 miles an hour? Well, in practical
terms, yes. But actually, I'm not going 80 miles an hour relative to the road. I'm
going 79.99 and a lot of 9s and something because velocities don't quite add the way
you would expect them to. Why? Because the measures of time and space in the different
frames of reference from which you're trying to add the velocities are not the same. The
effect is negligible when we're talking about 50 and 80 miles an hour, but it becomes more
and more dramatic as we talk about speeds close to sea, and that's why in my spaceship
case, one spaceship going at 0.8c relative to another spaceship that was going at 0.8c
relative to Earth doesn't give me 1.6c relative to Earth. There's a law called the Relativistic
Velocity Edition Law, and that's what, in fact, again, following from the principle
of relativity makes this all work out. Now, let me add one important caveat before I finish
here. People are often asking me, wait a minute, I just read an article. There actually was
an article in recent years in one of the main physics journals that showed a picture of
a bicycle on the front and said, bicycling at the speed of light, because scientists
had managed to get light to go as slow as 38 miles an hour, and they think they're going
to have it down in a few years to one or two miles an hour in certain kinds of substances.
There's nothing wrong with that. There's nothing wrong with light going slower in material
media. When light goes through material substances, there's a complicated electromagnetic interaction
with the material, and the light is slowed down. That's how your eyeglasses work. That's
how the lens of your eyes work. That's how my contact lenses are working. The light is
slowed down in the process, the light waves bend, and that's what allows us to focus light
with lenses, for example. Light moves slower than sea in material media, and there can
be particles that move faster than light in those material media. In fact, when that happens,
something analogous to the sonic boom of a supersonic airplane occurs, and it's called
Cherenkov radiation, and we get a cone of bright light emitted by high-energy particles
that are moving, say, through water at speeds faster than the speed of light in water. That's
not a contradiction. The issue for us is the speed of light in vacuum, and that's the
only real issue. In fact, a more sophisticated look at the speed of light, and if we had
understood relativity intuitively when we started doing physics, this would be more
obvious to us than what we have now. A more sophisticated look at the speed of light is
it's really a conversion factor between space and time. We didn't really understand that
space and time were as intimately related as relativity makes them. It's the speed
of light that is the conversion factor between space and time, ultimately. And in the next
lecture, we're going to look a lot more about that conversion factor between space and time
and the relation between the two, and we'll also give you a more physically satisfying
explanation for why nothing can go faster than light. But like all the other explanations,
it's grounded in the principle of relativity that the laws of physics are the same for
all observers in uniform motion.
