Lecture 18, whose title is once again a question, wave or particle.
Here we focus on what in quantum mechanics is very much a schizophrenic nature for light.
Why?
Well think back to the last lecture when we saw how Einstein resolved the photoelectric
effect problem.
In the photoelectric effect you'll recall light hitting a metal surface ejects electrons.
Physical physics says that should happen, but it should happen slowly and in a way that's
independent of color.
Actually it happens immediately in a way that depends strongly on color.
And Einstein resolved that by saying the energy and light is contained in little bundles called
photons.
There's a minimum size for the photon for a given frequency of light is given by Planck's
formula E equals HF.
We're not going to worry about that so much today.
We're going to worry about the fact that there is a minimum photon size, a little bundle
that light energy comes in these discrete little bundles.
It's almost as if light were a particle.
And that's the reason for my title, wave or particle.
Is light a wave?
Well we've been assuming that all throughout this course.
But now along comes Einstein of all people, whose relativity theory is built on the idea
of light waves after all, and Einstein himself is telling us, no, light has at least some
aspects of particleness.
It comes in these little discrete bundles that act pretty much like particles.
They hit an electron and they bounce it out of the metal.
So which is it?
Wave or particle?
We're going to explore that today.
And to begin exploring it, we want to look briefly at a history of physicist's understanding
of light through the centuries.
If you're going to explain light, you've got to explain a number of its phenomena.
In particular, you've got to explain the fact that it reflects, that is, it bounces off
shiny surfaces like metals and mirrors.
You've got to explain the phenomenon of refraction, whereby light bends when it goes from one
transparent material like air to glass or the cornea of your eye or whatever.
That's what makes optical instruments possible.
That's what lets our eyes focus things.
What lets eyeglasses correct your vision and so on.
We've got to explain those phenomena.
We've also got to explain phenomena like color.
Isaac Newton in the late 1600s laid out a theory of optics in which he assumed that
light consisted of particles.
And by assuming that different colors corresponded to different kinds of particles and that refraction
was obvious.
It was like a ball bouncing off a wall.
That was easy to explain.
Refraction was fairly easy to explain.
He explained that by a change in the speed of the particle as it went into a different
medium, although he got it backwards from the way it really is, but he posed a very
successful theory of light.
Christian Huygens, who was approximately a contemporary of Newton's, had a different
theory of light.
He said, I think, light is a wave.
And for roughly 100 years or so, there was debate about whether light was a wave or a
particle.
And then along came a series of experiments that were done in the very early 1800s by
Young.
Young did a very simple experiment, which proved conclusively that light must be a wave.
So from about 1801, 1802 on, there was pretty conclusive proof that light behaves like
a wave.
Let me show you Young's experiment, because it's a very important one, and it's one that's
going to concern us again and again as we think about quantum physics.
Young did a very simple thing.
He took some kind of barrier, and he made two small holes in it, and he made those holes
very close together.
They don't have to be microscopically close, by the way.
You can actually do this experiment yourself by taking a microscope slide or some other
piece of glass, paint it black, take two razor blades and hold them right next to each other
so that blade ends are very close, scratch two slits in the black, and you can actually
do this experiment, especially if you have access to a laser, which makes it easier.
Young didn't have lasers, but he was able to do this with sunlight actually coming into
his laboratory.
So here we have a barrier of some sort with two slits in it.
That's the crucial thing.
I'm going to talk again and again about a two-slit system.
It's simply a system with two little pinholes or two little long slits that it's going to
let light through, and it's otherwise opaque to light.
Some ways away from that barrier, we have a screen, and what we're going to do is shine
light on the barrier, in this case from below, and we're going to ask, what do we see on
the screen?
Now if light consisted of particles, so here comes a beam of light particles.
What would happen?
What would happen is all the particles would be blocked except where they hit the barrier,
and then the light would go through, basically in straight beams, and we would see on the
screen two bright spots opposite the two slits.
That would be good evidence that light consists of a beam of particles, very clear, very unambiguous.
The particles are stopped except at the two slits, they go straight through at the two
slits, and they hit the screen directly opposite the slits, and we would see two bright spots
on the screen.
That would be what would happen if light consisted of a beam of particles.
What on the other hand happens if light consists of waves coming in?
Here come the incoming waves.
I've represented with these lines the crests of the waves, say, the places where the waves
are highest, in between they're lowest, and they undulate like that, so I've just drawn
you the wave crests coming in here.
What happens?
Well, I'm not going to describe in detail why this happens, but what does happen when
light goes through a very small barrier like this, and you may have seen this if you've
seen ocean waves going through, say, a gap in a breakwater or something like that, you'll
see them spreading out basically as semicircular wave fronts after the barrier.
What happens is light goes through these slits, the light waves, and each slit in a sense
acts like a source of circular waves that then spread outward from the slit.
Here, from the left-hand slit, are the waves that emerge.
They form a sequence of semicircular wave fronts that spread out until they hit the
screen, and if that were all, we would see the screen illuminated, essentially uniformly,
by that light.
But we've got another slit, we've got the right-hand slit, and it also acts like a source
of semicircular waves, and so now we have these two patterns of semicircular waves.
By the way, we could do the same thing with water waves or sound waves or other waves,
and similar phenomena occur.
In fact, we could do it if we had two, instead of slits, two sources that were oscillating
right in unison, but making it with two slits makes sure that the light waves are in fact
oscillating together.
So, basically, the slit system has simply provided us with two sources of waves doing
the same thing at the same time, but they're separated in space.
You can already see in this picture, there's an interesting kind of pattern here.
There are places, for example, where wave crests meet.
There's such a place.
In this dark spot in between is a place where two-wave troughs meet.
Here's another place where waves crests meet, another place where wave troughs meet.
On the other hand, somewhere about here is a place where a wave crests and a wave trough
meet.
Now, if you think back to our understanding of the Michelson-Morley experiment, that experiment
worked by using a phenomenon called wave interference.
The fact is, when two waves can be at the same place at the same time, unlike two particles,
and when they are, they interfere.
They may interfere constructively if two crests coincide.
They may interfere destructively if a crest and a trough coincide.
So, at the point I've got marked right now, where a crest and a trough coincide, there's
destructive interference, and there's essentially no wave there.
At this point, and in fact, at any point along here, this line, something like this, wave
crests are meeting wave crests, wave troughs are meeting wave troughs, and we have much
bigger waves.
The waves are enhanced by constructive interference.
So, what's this look like?
Well, along all those lines, and some more you could draw further out, wave crests are
meeting and wave troughs are meeting, and we have constructive interference.
In between, we have destructive interference at the midpoints in between, and the interference
ranges somewhere between constructive and destructive, changing gradually.
So, what are we going to see on the screen in this case?
In this particular case, we're going to see on the screen, alternating light, dark, light,
dark, light, dark bands.
Even though there are only two slits, the waves come through those slits, they form
these semi-circular wave fronts beyond the slits, and we see this interference pattern
consisting of light, dark, light, dark, light, dark bands.
It's a lot like the bands we saw in the Michelson-Morley experiment, which were caused by a similar
but not identical kind of phenomenon.
There we sent two light beams in different paths and recombined them.
Here we have two light beams forming these two sets of interfering concentric wave fronts
in that region between the barrier and the screen, and what we see on the screen is an
interference pattern consisting of light, dark, light, dark, light, dark.
Now, I've got an actual photograph to show you of what such an interference pattern looks
like, looks like.
This was taken by putting a camera film in place of the screen in a two-slit interference
pattern, and what you see here are in fact two patterns, one in red and one in green,
and if you think about that picture, I showed you how closely those light, dark, light,
dark bands are.
It's going to depend on things like how far apart the slits were and what the wavelength
of the light is in relation to that separation of the slit.
Here I shined a red laser and a green laser through the same double slit system, and if
you look carefully, you'll see that the spacing of the interference fringes, the bright versus
dark areas, is different for the red and green light, and that's because of the different
wavelengths of red and green light.
Red light has a longer wavelength, a lower frequency, green light has a shorter wavelength,
a higher frequency, so there's an actual set of interference patterns taken by putting
a camera film in place of the screen of a double-slit experiment and shining both red
and green laser lights simultaneously through that system.
We have a very clear experiment that shows that light behaves like a wave, and that experiment
was first done, it was difficult to do in the 1800s, it was done by Young, and he concluded
that light must be a wave.
Then we had Maxwell coming along in the 1860s and showing us what kind of wave is light
is as we now know an electromagnetic wave consisting of electric fields and magnetic
fields continually regenerating each other because a changing electric field makes a
magnetic field and a changing magnetic field makes an electric field and so on.
So we're very comfortable with the idea that light is a wave and that idea figured importantly
in Einstein's development of special relativity in 1905.
But now, in the next step in the evolution of our understanding of light, we have Einstein
again in the same year in 1905 saying, wait a minute, light is a particle or at least
it comes in these little discrete bundles called photons.
The wave energy is not spread out, it's bundled in these little bundles that are like photons
that are called photons and are acting like little particles, like little billiard balls
that can hit an electron and eject it from the metal in a photoelectric effect experiment.
So it's Einstein who tells us light seems to be a particle.
And now in 1905, light has acquired the schizophrenic personality.
Which is it?
Is it a wave or is it a particle?
In the photoelectric effect, that explanation requires a particle-like nature for light.
In the double-set experiment, interference is something that happens to waves.
It doesn't happen to particles.
Two particles can't be in the same place at the same time.
You'd get a very different pattern on that screen if light were a beam of particles.
You'd get the interference picture.
So which is it?
I have to describe one other experiment which was done a little bit later in the 20th century.
In 1923, there was an experiment done by Compton and it convinced any skeptics who didn't believe
in Einstein's photons.
And the experiment consisted of taking a basically free electron that isn't tied very strongly
to anything.
It's actually tied loosely to an atom and hitting it with a very high-energy photon,
an x-ray photon.
Remember, we have a whole range of electromagnetic waves from low-frequency radio waves, which
now that we've quantized things, have very low-energy photons, because energy is Planck's
constant times frequency, up through infrared and visible light and ultraviolet, and then
x-rays.
Beyond those are gamma rays.
So we're going to hit an electron with a high-energy photon, an x-ray photon, and we're going to
see what happens with x-ray light, with x-rays.
Classical physics says the following thing ought to happen.
Here's my electron.
Along comes an electromagnetic wave.
This is the same thing that happened classically in the photoelectric effect experiment.
Along comes the electromagnetic wave.
The electromagnetic wave sets the electron into vibration.
The electron in that process is taking a little bit of energy away from the electromagnetic
wave, so the wave goes on weaker.
Now the electron itself is oscillating, vibrating, accelerating electric charge, and we know
from Maxwell's electromagnetic theory that it will itself be a source of electromagnetic
waves.
So what the electron will do is radiate out electromagnetic waves in different directions.
That describes the process of so-called scattering of an electromagnetic wave by an electron.
The electron absorbs the electromagnetic wave and vibrates at the same frequency as
the incoming wave, because that's what's making it go up and down, and radiates back
electromagnetic waves of the same frequency that is the same color as the waves coming
in.
That's the crucial point.
The classical explanation for this scattering of an electromagnetic wave or scattering of
light off electrons is that the outgoing light that's scattered in different directions,
by the way, a process similar to this, although not off individual electrons, is why the sky
is blue.
The blue light gets scattered.
That scattering ought to take place at the same frequency.
That's the classical prediction.
What does quantum mechanics say?
Quantum mechanics says something like this.
I'm going to do the demonstration by taking now the light represented not as a wave, but
as a particle.
So here's a photon of light, and here's the electron.
And we're going to stage a collision between these two.
In comes the photon, and it's going to hit the electron.
And what happened?
Play it again.
Rewind if you need to.
Watch that collision again.
What happened?
The electron was sitting there at rest.
The photon came in.
It hit the electron.
The electron went off in one direction, and the photon bounced back.
That's like the light being scattered.
But notice what happened.
The photon gave up some of its energy to the electron, and it was quite clear in that collision,
and you could see that the photon came off moving slower than it was coming in.
It had lost energy.
Now here my analogy is a little bit imperfect, because photons can't slow down because they're
light and they go at sea.
What my stainless steel ball bearing representing a photon did was to lose energy.
It transferred energy to the electron.
If it were a real photon, a particle of light that moves at speed c, it can't slow down.
But what it does do is lose energy.
How does a photon lose energy?
A photon's energy is energy equals Planck's constant times frequency.
The way it can lose energy is by slowing down in frequency, lowering its frequency,
longering its wavelength.
It goes to lower wavelengths.
When you do the experiment, bombarding free electrons basically with x-rays, and you measure
the scattered light, the scattered x-rays coming off, you find they have lower frequency.
And the frequency is lower exactly as predicted by doing the simple physics of a simple billiard
ball-like collision between two billiard ball-like particles.
You have to do the collision using relativistic mechanics, not Newtonian mechanics, but if
you do that, and it's a thing a sophomore physics student can do, you will find that
the photons, that is, the x-rays come off at a longer wavelength, a lower frequency.
It's called the Compton shift, and that is a well-verified thing that happens, and it
shows very clearly that the interaction of those electromagnetic waves, quote, the x-rays
with electrons, is particle-like.
So we have very clear evidence for particle-like behavior of light, in that case of x-rays.
So now we have a real quantum quandary, if you will.
Light behaves like a particle, and light behaves like a wave, and which is it?
And I'm sure you'd love me to give you an answer.
This really waves.
It's really particles, but I can't.
The quantum mechanical answer is it's both.
It's got to be both, and this is an answer that's forced on us by that fundamental solution
to the quantum problems at the turn of the 20th century, namely that energy is ultimately
quantized in these little bundles.
In the case of light, that means light energy is distributed in little bundles, not spread
continuously, and those bundles act basically like particles, and the photoelectric effect
to some extent, and the Compton effect that I just showed you to a major extent, convince
you that light has a particle aspect.
On the other hand, we did an interference experiment, and we saw that light is a wave.
So which is it?
Is light a wave, or is it a particle?
That's the title of my lecture.
Well, let's try to find out.
Let's look at our double-slit system again.
So here it is.
We're looking at the two-slit system again, and we know what happens if waves come through
that barrier and through the two-slits.
We get an interference pattern on the screen that consists of light and dark and light
and dark bands.
But now we're in this quandary.
We don't know whether light is a wave or a particle.
Certainly this experiment suggests it's a wave, so where's the particle-ness of it?
Which slit did each photon go through?
How did the photons know to go through those slits and then bend themselves in such ways
that they would end up at the right places on the screen?
If light's a particle, we ought to be able to give a particle-like explanation for this
phenomenon.
Maybe.
Let's try.
Well, one thing we could think of doing is blocking one of those slits.
Let's block a slit and see if half the photons go through the other slit.
What ought to happen?
Well, you could speculate on things that might happen.
Perhaps we'd see the same interference pattern, but perhaps it would just be weaker because
now only half the photons are involved.
So let's do that experiment.
Let's block one slit, and so we'll be looking at only the photons that go through the other
slit.
So let's see what happens.
We're going to block the right-hand slit.
There we go.
And what happens?
We see a single spot on the screen, right opposite the other open slit.
We've destroyed the interference pattern completely.
What we've tried to do here is catch the photons in the act of behaving like particles rather
than waves.
And what have they done for us?
They've obliged us by behaving like particles, and their wave behavior is gone.
No interference pattern left.
We try to catch the photons going through a slit, and no wave behavior.
We've now made them behave like particles.
We're trying to catch them in the act of trying to say, OK, which are you, light?
Are you a wave?
Are you a particle?
And we try to see the particle-like parts of the light sneaking through these slits,
and we can't do it.
We get particle-like behavior instead of wave behavior.
We've destroyed the interference pattern that we were trying to understand.
Now you could imagine more subtle experiments you might try to do to achieve the same effect.
You might put little detectors that sat there at each slit looking at the photons and seeing
what they did.
The problem with looking at a photon is you can't look at a photon.
What you can do is absorb the photon because it's light, but if you absorb the photon,
that's what we did by our blockage of one of the slits.
Then the photon isn't there anymore, and it can't go on and make the interference pattern.
If you try to put anything that will detect the photons going by, if that thing is actually
capable of detecting the photons, then it's going to disturb them in some ways, either
change their paths, or maybe take them out of existence altogether, and lo and behold,
you will not get the interference pattern.
If you put photon detectors at those two slits and they actually detect the photons going
through, then you will find two spots on the screen just as if light was a particle.
You can't do it.
You can't catch it being a wave and a particle simultaneously.
If you try to catch the particles, they will oblige and be particles, but there will be
no interference pattern.
Very strange behavior.
So now you try one other thing.
You say, okay, these photons are doing some weird thing.
I mean, one photon comes through this slit, another one comes through the other slit,
maybe they somehow interfere to make this pattern on the screen.
So let's turn the intensity of the light down so low, make it so dim, that there's only
one photon at a time in this whole apparatus.
In fact, and this has been done, you could turn it down so low that sometime once a day
a photon leaves the light source and gets to the screen.
And then on the average, it's another day before another photon making that trip in
a tiny fraction of a second, does it?
So there's only one photon there at a time, so the photons aren't somehow interfering
one photon with another.
And then you must say, well, clearly that one photon that's in there, it either goes
through the left slit or it goes through the right slit.
There's no nonsense about interfering with lots of other photons because there aren't
other photons.
And what happens if you do that?
You build up an interference pattern that looks exactly like the one we saw before,
the wave interference pattern with bright, dark, bright, dark, bright, dark bands.
How did you do it?
How did each individual photon, being the only thing in the apparatus in 24 hours, the
rest of the time there's nothing going on and being a photon comes through, how did
it get to the screen?
Did it go through the left slit or the right slit?
The answer has to be it went through both slits in some peculiar way.
Light is both a wave and a particle.
Let me show you what would happen statistically if you did that experiment very slowly.
What I'm going to show you now is a simulation of the buildup of that interference pattern
by hits of individual photons on the screen.
It's going to look like a random process at first.
We're going to show one photon at a time for quite a while, and finally in the end we're
going to let a few barrages of photons hit the screen.
And you'll see at first what looks like a random process, but out of what will emerge
eventually this interference pattern.
Somehow the individual photons know to land on the screen in a way that eventually builds
that interference pattern.
Here we go.
Building up gradually.
It looks kind of random, but now you begin to see a kind of grouping there.
They're grouping in certain spots.
Those are the places where the bright spots in the interference pattern should be.
Somehow the photons, even though it looks random, are being guided to those spots.
And here we are as more and more photons come through.
We're building up and building up something that begins to look substantially like that
interference pattern.
Here they go, big barrages at the end, and there we have the interference pattern, alternating
bands of light, dark, light, dark, light, dark.
We built up that pattern with photons that went through the apparatus one at a time.
There was only one photon in the apparatus at any given time.
What is all this telling us?
It's telling us that light is both a wave and a particle, and there's no way around
it.
It's a dual nature.
It's both.
If you don't try to detect light, if you don't try to catch the individual photons, what
you will always find happening is that light, when left to its own devices, acts like a
wave.
If you try to do something to detect the individual photons that make up that light, like build
a photoelectric effect experiment, or put a camera film there, and the way a camera film
works is individual photons ultimately hit chemicals in the film and cause chemical reactions
that make the film brighten or darken at that point, then a particle-like interaction will
take place.
But if you leave the light alone and don't try to detect it, you'll see that it behaves
like a wave.
If you try to do a detection that ultimately requires interaction with an individual photon,
a Compton experiment where a photon hits an electron, a photoelectric experiment where
a photon hits an electron and ejects it from the metal, a photography experiment, a modern
charge-coupled device like is in your video cameras or in an astronomical telescope camera
these days in which a photon hits a semiconductor device and knocks electrons into higher energy
levels and creates an electric current, all those things are photon-like interactions.
If you try to detect the light, if you try to say, oh, I know that light consists of
particles, I'm going to find one, you will.
But if you leave it alone and don't try to find one, it acts like a wave and it exhibits
wave properties like interference.
It does both things.
If you want to insist that there are photons in the wave when you're not looking at it,
you can say that, but then you have to say that those photons went through both slits.
Somehow each photon, even when we did the experiment with only one photon in the apparatus
each day, that photon somehow knew about the presence of both slits.
That's a rather unproductive way of thinking.
I find it much more useful to say, oh, in that case, the light is manifesting itself
as a wave.
I understand how a wave can sample both slits.
The wave is a big spread out thing.
It goes through both slits, and that's fine.
I understand that.
I can't understand that with individual photons.
If I try to detect the individual photons going through the slits to see which slit they
went through, then they oblige and act like photons, and the wave interference pattern
disappears.
I just see a spot on the screen opposite the slit that I didn't try to block, for example.
Very strange schizophrenic behavior for light.
It's a wave and a particle both.
Is there any relationship between the wave and the particle aspects of light?
Or are these completely disjointed?
They're not disjointed.
There's a definite statistical relationship, and this is going to govern a lot of what
we say about the quantum mechanics, not only of light, but also of particles.
The relationship is this.
In places where the wave is strong, you are likely to find a photon if you try to detect
one.
In places where the wave is weak, low amplitude, not much waviness, you're not likely to find
a photon.
In the case where the wave amplitude is zero, at the darkest spots in the interference pattern,
you won't find a photon with zero probability.
Where the wave amplitude is big, where the waves have undergone constructive interference,
there's a good likelihood of finding a photon.
But the association is a peculiar one for a precise rigorous science like physics.
The association is statistical.
It's not that if the wave amplitude is five, you will find five photons.
If the wave amplitude is big, you are more likely to find a photon.
If the wave amplitude is low, you are less likely to find a photon.
It's the probability of detecting a photon that depends on the amplitude of the wave.
So what goes on in our two-slit interference pattern?
Well, we aren't trying to detect the photons till they hit the screen.
Let's not try to catch them on the way.
So the light behaves like a wave.
It goes through the two slits.
It does what waves do.
It creates an interference pattern on the other side.
There are places in that interference pattern where the waves interfere constructively.
They result in the bright spots on the screen.
There are places where they interfere destructively.
They result in the dark spots on the screen.
If you then go and try to detect the individual photons by putting a photographic plate at
the screen, by putting a photoelectric effect experiment at each point on the screen, by
putting a charge-coupled device, the modern light detector that we use in video cameras
and things on the screen, then you will detect the photons.
And you will detect them in proportion to the amplitude of the wave.
So where the wave amplitude is big, where the interference was constructive, you'll
detect lots of photons, where the interference was destructive, where the wave amplitude
is low, you will not detect very many photons.
But it's purely statistical.
There is no way of saying, yes, there will definitely be a photon here.
You cannot think of the photon as a little billiard ball that follows a precisely known
trajectory through that double slit.
If you want to explain the double slit experiment, you have to say, the light is a wave.
Going through that system.
But it also has photons in it.
I can't talk about the photons as they go through the apparatus.
If I try to talk about them and make some sense of it by measuring what they're doing,
I destroy the wave aspects of the light.
So I don't talk about the photons while they're going through.
I get this wave pattern.
I say, oh, I hear the waves are strong.
I'm likely to find photons.
I go to detect them and I find them.
But I can't say I am going to detect an individual photon at this point and at this time.
I can't say that with any kind of precision.
I can only stay statistically where the wave is big.
There's likely to be photons.
So quantum mechanics has given us a strange kind of light.
It's neither a wave nor particle.
It's in some sense both.
And the connection between the two is fuzzy, probabilistic, statistical.
Very strange thing for what's supposed to be the most precise, most rooted,
most fundamental of the sciences.
So there isn't really a contradiction between the wave and particle aspects of light.
They're not contradictory.
They are, in fact, as Niels Bohr said, complementary aspects of the same reality.
They're not contradictory.
They're complementary.
And Bohr elucidated a principle called the principle of complementarity, which gets us
out of any contradiction.
We say light is a way of a particle.
It's both.
And you say, oh, it can't be.
It's a contradiction.
Nope.
Bohr's complementarity principle says it's not a contradiction.
Both of those are needed for a full description of the behavior of light.
You can't explain the photoelectric effect experiment and the two-slit interference
experiment without invoking both aspects of light.
What does the complementarity principle say?
Well, Bohr's complementarity principle says basically this.
It says, wave and particle aspects of light are not contradictory, but complementary.
You've got to have them both to explain fully the properties of light.
Light acts as a wave in some situations, like a particle in other situations.
But you'll never catch it acting like both at the same time.
You'll never catch light in a contradiction.
Sometimes it acts like a wave.
Sometimes it acts like a particle.
What determines which it acts like?
What determines which it acts like is what you choose to do to it.
If you choose to do an experiment in which light is being asked to act like a particle,
it will oblige and it will act like a particle.
What's an example of such an experiment?
A photoelectric effect experiment, where you want light to hit individual electrons.
A Compton effect experiment.
A two-slit experiment in which you covered one of the slits.
Those are experiments in which you're suggesting light ought to behave like a wave and it obliges
you and does so.
You do another experiment in which you expect and set up for wave like, did I say wave particle,
in which you set up and expect wave behavior, then the light will act like a wave.
Example, the two-slit interference pattern experiment with both slits wide open.
So what determines what light acts like?
You do by setting up the experiment.
If you do an experiment looking for waves, like an interference experiment, you get them.
If you do an experiment looking for particles, like a photoelectric effect experiment, you
see the particle aspect of light.
Does this seem absurd to you?
If it does, you're in good company.
The physicists, too, in the early part of the 20th century, worried about this, were
really, really baffled.
And I want to end this lecture with a quote from Werner Heisenberg, who is one of the
real founders of quantum physics and whose uncertainty principle will be the subject
of the next lecture.
Here's what Heisenberg says.
They're in a meeting, in a gathering of physicists, and he's been talking with Bohr.
And he says, I remember discussions with Bohr, which went through many hours, till very late
at night, and ended almost in despair.
And when at the end of the discussion, I went for a walk alone in the neighboring park,
I repeated to myself again and again the question, can nature possibly be as absurd as it seems
to us in these atomic experiments?
