Welcome to lecture 12, whose title again consists of questions.
First question, what about E equals MC squared?
And second question, is everything relative?
Probably there's no more famous equation in all of science than E equals MC squared.
And in the popular mind, E equals MC squared is the essence of relativity.
Even in the teaching company's advertisements for this course,
the headline is often E equals MC squared.
Actually, although E equals MC squared contains a fundamental and crucial idea,
E equals MC squared was not part of Einstein's original 1905 paper on relativity.
In a sense, it's an afterthought.
Later in 1905, Einstein wrote a short paper that contained the essence of
the idea about E equals MC squared.
But it wasn't until 1907 that he elaborated on that idea at some length.
So in some sense, the equation E equals MC squared and
what it means are an afterthought to relativity.
So notice I've said everything I've said so far about space and time and
causality and past and present and elsewhere and future and so on.
Without any mention of E equals MC squared.
But when you begin to talk about relativity in terms of dynamics,
in terms about the behavior of objects and their energies and so on and
forces that act on them, then you begin to worry about things that lead to the
equation E equals MC squared.
So I'd like to describe what that equation means and
I'd like to dispel a lot of popular myths about the equation as well.
What does E equals MC squared really say?
Well, it asserts a fundamental equivalence between the two
major things that make up the universe.
What are the things that make up the universe?
Well, there's matter, the solid stuff of that tabletop and of the earth and
of my body and the more ethereal stuff of the air,
which nevertheless consists of ultimately atoms of quote solid matter.
You know about matter, it's tangible, it's real, we can grab hold of it.
The other major stuff that makes up the universe is energy.
And energy is a little bit less tangible to us.
What's energy?
Well, when I'm moving along, I've got energy.
Energy is motion in a sense or motion contains energy or
motion is a manifestation of energy.
If I lift a heavy object up against earth's gravity, like this,
I've given it energy, there's energy there.
If I stretch this piece of bungee cord, I've given it energy.
If I have a light wave traveling from the sun to the earth,
the electric and magnetic fields that make up that light wave contain energy and
the light wave is carrying energy to earth.
In fact, it's the energy that keeps us alive here on earth.
And it's coming at a big rate, about 1,000 watts on every square meter of earth's
surface.
Energy is an important part of the universe.
If there were no energy, everything would stop.
Energy is important and energy is the other stuff of the universe.
And before E equals MC squared, energy and matter were two separate things.
There were separate physical laws describing how they behaved.
Both of them are quantities that seem to exist and never change in amount.
If you've got a certain amount of matter, you always have that much matter.
It may change to different forms.
You may burn hydrogen and oxygen, for example, and make water.
But you've still got the same amount of matter, so it seems or seemed.
If you have energy, it may change form.
It may be electrical energy.
You may put it into an electric stove and turn it into heat.
You may put it into a microwave oven and turn it into microwaves.
And the microwaves may go into a cup of tea and turn into heat.
Energy transfers from one form to another.
You may have it as the stored energy, ultimately electrical energy and
the bonds that make up the molecules of gasoline in the gas tank of your car.
And then you step on the gas pedal, the gasoline burns.
It's converted to a different form.
The energy now is the energy of motion of your car and
of the heat coming out the exhaust pipe and the heat going out the radiator and
the heat of friction and all the other ways the energy in your car is in fact wasted.
But it's still there as energy.
So we had energy and matter, and we had separate rules describing their behavior.
And one of the rules is that both of those things are basically conserved.
If you have a certain amount of energy, you always have that amount.
If you have a certain amount of matter, you always have that amount,
even though they may change forms.
What does E equals MC squared do for us?
It asserts an equivalence between matter and energy, between mass, if you will,
weight, the measure of the stuff we have in matter and energy.
And what it says is this.
It says that if I have a hunk of matter, this tennis ball, say, and
I take its mass, its weight basically, and I multiply it by the square of the speed
of light, which is a great big number because the speed of light is 300 million
meters per second, 186,000 miles a second.
I multiply the mass of this thing by the speed of light squared.
I get a great big number.
That's the energy equivalent of this tennis ball.
If I could convert this tennis ball entirely to energy, I would have a huge
amount of energy.
And E equals MC squared says there is an equivalence and
at least hints at the possibility of converting this tennis ball entirely to
energy.
E equals MC squared says matter and energy are no longer distinct,
they're separate substances that make up the universe, but that they are
interchangeable.
And E equals MC squared describes, if you will, the exchange rate between matter
and energy.
Just like you have the exchange rate between two different national currencies.
Now we have two different currencies, if you will, that carry the substance of
which the universe is made.
One substance, mass energy, if you will, and there's a conversion factor between
them, and the conversion factor is speed of light squared.
Again, I hinted last time that we should think of the speed of light not as so
much as the speed, but as kind of conversion factor between ultimately
space and time, and coupled with that is the speed of light squared becomes a
conversion factor between mass and energy.
And as I pointed out, the speed of light is huge, the speed of light squared is
even huge, and consequently, the energy contained in ordinary matter is enormous.
If I could somehow extract from an ordinary raisin all the energy it contains,
annihilate the raisin completely and replace it with pure energy, I could power
a great big city like New York for a day.
So if I wanted to build a raisin power plant, all I'd have to do is develop the
mechanism that makes that conversion, and I'd go to the grocery store and I'd buy
a box of raisins, which probably contains a few thousand raisins, which is probably
enough for several years, and each morning I'd drop one raisin into my apparatus,
and that's all it takes to fuel New York City.
If I could convert mass to energy with 100% efficiency, E equals mc squared tells us
there is a tremendous amount of energy resident in all the matter around us.
Now, in the popular mind, E equals mc squared is associated with nuclear energy,
and Einstein and his equation and the theory of relativity are often held
accountable for the existence of nuclear weapons.
I remember watching a movie in eighth grade in which there was a nuclear explosion
occurred, and then in the aftermath of the nuclear explosion, Einstein's face came
on the screen to apply, this is the man responsible for all this.
So that's nonsense.
First of all, E equals mc squared is not only about nuclear interactions, it's not
only about nuclear energy, it's about all energy.
All energy and all mass are equivalent.
Anytime we do any process that results in a release of energy, we have decreased
the mass, the amount of matter in that system that released energy.
Anytime we do something that increases the energy of a system that stores energy,
we have increased the mass, increased the amount of matter in that system.
Let me give you some examples, many examples.
I take a discharged battery and I put it on a battery charger and I charge it up.
The battery weighs more after it's been charged, not because I put any physical
substance into it in the form of matter, but simply because it has more energy.
You'll never notice that difference weighing it because a battery is a very
inefficient energy storage device and a very small amount of energy goes in there.
If I take material from a plant, if I take the carbon dioxide and the water that
go into a plant and with the light coming from the sun through photosynthesis,
then make more complicated molecules like sugars.
And I weigh all the stuff that goes in, the carbon dioxide, the water, and I weigh
the sugar molecule that's produced by photosynthesis, it weighs a tiny, tiny,
tiny bit more.
Insignificantly tiny bit for chemical reactions like that because chemical
reactions, no offense to the chemists, are rather weak and puny.
But they convert matter to energy and vice versa.
When I burn gasoline in a car, the gasoline is converting some,
a very small fraction of its mass into energy.
It's not just nuclear reactions.
When I blow up a nuclear bomb or
want a nuclear power reactor, I'm also converting matter to energy.
And the only difference with nuclear reactions is I'm converting a much larger
fraction, about 10 million times more mass gets converted to energy in a
nuclear reaction than does in a chemical reaction.
It's still a very small and insignificant amount, less than a percent.
Nuclear reactions are not very efficient converters of mass to energy,
even though they're about 10 million times more efficient than chemical reactions.
In fact, if you do something as simple as burn a candle, and
you weigh the candle before you light it, and you weigh all the oxygen that
combines with the wax from the candle as it burns, and you weigh all the soot and
all the carbon dioxide that's produced as a result of that burning,
you will find the products of that combustion way less than what went into it.
By a very small amount.
But that small amount, when multiplied by C squared,
tells you the energy that was released from the candle in the form of light and
heat, for example.
Similarly, if you take two electric power plants that produce the same amount of
energy, the same amount of power, 1,000 million watts is a typical large size
electric power plant.
Take two 1,000 megawatt, 1,000 million watt electric power plants.
One burns coal, or rather dirty fuel, by the way,
that contributes dramatically to global warming.
And the other, fission's uranium, it's a nuclear power plant.
And for the coal burning power plant, you weigh all the coal that goes into it,
and all the oxygen that goes in to combine with that coal when it burns.
And you weigh all the stuff that comes out, the smokestack,
all the soot that's carried away from the electrostatic precipitators that remove
the particulate stuff from the air, and you weigh all the pollutants,
everything that comes out the smokestack, all the carbon dioxide, what have you.
You will find there is a slight difference in the weight.
And over one year, you can measure that difference between what went in and
what came out.
And if you multiply that difference by C squared,
that will be the energy the power plant produced.
Most of it, by the way, is waste heat that was dumped into a river,
probably, or a other body of water, some of it into the atmosphere, and
about a third of it went out as electricity.
If you do exactly the same thing for the nuclear power plant,
you weigh all the uranium that came in.
There's no oxygen to weigh, because there's no burning going on.
You weigh all the uranium that came in, and you weigh everything that comes out
of the plant, which isn't very much.
And you weigh the waste fuel that's left in the reactor after you're done.
After a year, you will find that the weight or mass of that system has also gone down.
And if these two power plants produce exactly the same amount of energy in a year,
the difference will be exactly the same.
They'll have lost exactly the same amount of mass.
That's the point I'm trying to make.
The E equals MC squared is not just about nuclear physics.
It's about all interactions that occur, and the nuclear power plant and
the coal burning power plant lose the same amount of mass in a year.
Convert the same amount of mass to energy if they produce the same amount of energy.
The difference is much, much more mass went into the coal burning power plant.
A 1000 megawatt, a 1000 million watt coal burning power plant typically burns
about 10 to 1500 car train loads of coal every week.
The nuclear power plant typically uses a couple of truck loads of fuel every
couple of years.
That's the difference.
That's that factor of 10 million in the efficiency of nuclear reactions and
chemical reactions in converting mass to energy.
But the process is in principle the same.
There is nothing intrinsically nuclear about E equals MC squared.
And I spent a lot of time on that because it is a great misconception
that E equals MC squared is about nuclear energy.
If it took E equals MC squared to discover nuclear fission, for example,
it would have taken E equals MC squared to discover fire.
It is not necessary to understand relativity to make nuclear bombs,
unfortunately, or fortunately, as the case may be.
But it's also not necessary to understand relativity to burn a candle or
to metabolize food in your body or to burn gasoline in your car.
Yet all those processes involve the conversion of mass to energy,
as described by the equation E equals MC squared.
A couple of other examples.
Our sun, which is really a large nuclear fusion reactor,
has very inefficient nuclear reactions going on in its core.
They're the reactions that ultimately produce the sunlight that I've described
takes that eight minutes to get from the sun to the earth and keeps us alive.
The sun is converting about 4 million tons of its matter to energy every second.
The sun is to a big weight loss diet, if you will.
It's losing energy, and it's therefore losing mass because E equals MC squared.
And the mass loss rate is about 4 million tons a second.
And if you multiply that by C squared,
that's a big amount of energy coming out every second.
It's about a one with 24 zeros after 100 light bulbs worth to give you an example.
So the sun is losing a lot of matter, 4 million tons of mass every second.
Even in situations where we're not burning something or
undergoing nuclear fission or nuclear fusion,
when we change the energy of a system, we alter its mass by E again equals MC squared
or M equals E over C squared.
For example, I lift up this heavy ball as I did before.
Now the entire system consisting of earth and the ball and
their gravitational field has more mass than it did before.
It has more energy because I lifted up the ball.
It has more mass also.
If I let the ball back down again, I get that mass back as energy.
We don't see the details of the energy conversion, but it's going on there.
It's the mass is a very, very tiny fraction of the total mass of the system.
It's a very inefficient process in that sense, but it's really happening.
Similarly, if I take this bungee cord, which I stretched for you before and
stretch it again, let's look at this bungee cord stretching in the context of E equals MC squared.
What happens when I stretch the bungee cord?
Well, energy conversion processes in my body result in the metabolizing of my food.
That actually lowers my mass somewhat because I'm converting mass to energy.
That energy manifests itself as motion as I pull against the bungee cord and stretch it.
If I weighed the stretched bungee cord now,
I would find it actually weighs a little bit more than it did before.
How much more?
Well, E equals MC squared, so M equals E over C squared.
I can tell you how much energy I put in by multiplying.
In fact, the force I pulled with, by how far I pulled it, that's how I would do that.
And if I take that number, E, and I say E equals MC squared,
I divide E by C squared, I get a tiny, tiny number.
That's the amount by which the mass of the bungee cord system changed.
Don't look for additional particles have gone in there.
I haven't added physical particles to it.
What I've done is added mass in the form ultimately of the energy associated with
the stretching of the molecules when I stretch the bungee cord.
It's ultimately stored actually in electric fields primarily because electric fields are
what hold molecules together.
So even a simple enact is stretching the bungee cord or stretching a rubber band.
Anything that stores energy in a system also increases the mass of that system
by an amount you can calculate from the equation E equals MC squared.
Now none of these processes I've described are very dramatically efficient at
converting mass to energy.
Even nuclear reactions convert typically less than a percent of the total mass
present into energy.
And for chemical processes like the burning of gasoline or
the explosion of a chemical explosive, those numbers are again down by a factor of
10 million even lower.
And then processes like lifting that ball or stretching the bungee cord are even
less efficient in terms of the amount of the fraction of the total mass of the system
that gets converted one way or another.
However, there are possible situations where we can convert matter to energy with
100% efficiency and back again.
We see those situations in subatomic physics cases.
And I'm going to show you an example now, which is a simulated picture of a reaction
that occurs actually quite commonly in large particle accelerators where we accelerate
high energy particles to very high speeds.
So let's look at this picture.
This is a simulation of what's called a pair creation event.
And I want to show you what we have here.
These two spirals you see are the tracks of two subatomic particles.
One of them is the very familiar electron, which is the particle that circulates in the
outer parts of atoms.
We'll get to that more in subsequent lectures.
And the other is a particle called a positron, which is exactly like an electron except it
carries a positive charge.
It's the electron's antiparticle.
There exists something called antimatter.
And every subatomic particle we know about has an antiparticle, which is its antimatter
opposite.
It's just like it except it's opposite and crucial properties like electric charge.
Now it's a remarkable fact that we can actually see the tracks of individual subatomic particles.
When we do that, they come out in these experiments with very high energies, and they move through
a medium like liquid hydrogen, or they move through an array of wires that can detect
the passage of their electric charge.
And from that, either they disturb atoms along the way, or they disturb these wire detectors.
And we can piece together what the paths of these subatomic particles look like.
And what we're seeing here is a situation where there is a magnetic field.
Remember, magnetism and electric charge are intimately related.
There's a magnetic field that's actually coming perpendicular to the picture, if you're
seeing this in your book, or perpendicular to the screen.
And that magnetic field causes the positron and the electron to go in spiral paths, and
they spiral in fact in opposite directions because they have the opposite electric charge.
So there's the electron's path, and there's the positron's path.
Now what happens at the middle where those two paths join?
Well, that's actually a creation event.
What has happened at the middle is that that electron and positron have been created out
of, well, I want to say nothing, but it's not quite nothing.
They've been created out of pure energy.
Pure energy in the form here of a burst of very high energy electromagnetic waves called
a gamma ray suddenly ceased to exist, and in its place appeared a pair of particles,
a pair of matter particles, an electron and its antimatter opposite a positron.
We haven't created anything new.
In the old days, before we knew about mc squared, we would say, oh, we've created matter out
of nothing.
Well, we haven't created it out of nothing.
What we've shown here is there's an equivalence between matter and energy, and we have created
matter out of energy.
We haven't created electric charge, which really is conserved and can't be changed because
we've created the negative charge of the electron and the positive charge of the positron, and
the total charge is still zero, which it was before.
So that's okay.
We have created mass, matter, where there wasn't any before, out of pure energy.
So that's a pair creation event, and that's 100% conversion of energy to matter.
We can go the other way, too.
If an electron and a positron come together, they will annihilate completely, and they will
send out two bursts in opposite direction of gamma rays, of high energy electromagnetic
waves, and those waves will have a characteristic energy.
The energy will be exactly the energy associated with E equals mc squared operating on an electron's
mass.
And in fact, there are places in the universe where dramatically high energies exist and
where this annihilation process is occurring all the time, and we can identify it by looking
at the gamma radiation, the gamma rays, with that particular energy.
So this is something that does occur in the universe, and it's 100% conversion of matter
to energy.
In order to make my raisin-powered power plant, what I'd have to do is actually go to the
grocery store and buy a box of raisins, and then I'd have to go to an anti-grocery store
in some anti-matter world if such a thing exists.
We don't think it does, but if it did, I'd have to buy a box of anti-raisins, I'd have
to very carefully keep them from touching any matter, and then somehow I'd have to drop
a raisin and anti- raisin into my power plant, and poof, they would annihilate in a burst
of energy.
Or my tennis ball, which I argued had some energy.
In fact, a big amount by E equals mc squared.
If I brought it together with an anti-tennis ball, then it'd have 100% conversion of matter
to energy.
That's not a process we operate on Earth at any but the smallest scales in our atomic
particle accelerators, but it is a process that in principle can occur, and it does occur
in some places in the universe.
In fact, in the very early universe, the early fraction of a second of the existence of
the universe, the temperatures were so high, and temperature corresponds to the motion
of particles, that the particles moving around were moving so fast that when they collided
with each other, the collisions often involved energies bigger than that needed to create
new particles.
In the very early universe, the number of particles, which we think of as sort of fixed
here on Earth, except for rare events in our particle accelerators or in cosmic ray
interactions, we don't see this annihilation or this creation of pairs of particles.
But in the very early universe, that was very commonplace, and the number of particles simply
wasn't fixed, as there was an interchange between matter and energy.
Now the universe is cooled to the point where that's a relatively rare thing, either here
or even out in astrophysical situations.
But it can occur, and it causes 100% conversion of matter to energy or the opposite.
So, let me give you just a brief historical aside on this question of nuclear weapons
and E equals MC squared.
Although Einstein was not responsible for nuclear weapons and E equals MC squared has
nothing to do with them, Einstein played a minor role in the development of nuclear weapons.
Leo Zallard, who was a physicist who first conceived the idea of nuclear fission, actually
suggested to Einstein that he write a letter to Roosevelt, President Roosevelt, saying
that the U.S. should get to work on a nuclear bomb because the Germans were in fact working
on one at the start of World War II.
And so Einstein agreed to sign this letter, and that helped get the U.S. Manhattan Project
going.
So there is a slight involvement of Einstein there, but it has really nothing to do with
E equals MC squared.
Later incidentally, Zallard founded the Council for a Livable World, which is an organization
which has worked to oppose nuclear weapons.
One more aspect of E equals MC squared before we go on.
Because energy and mass are in some sense equivalent, if I have energy, it exhibits an important
property of mass, which is a property we talked about in the context of Galileo, and
that is inertia.
It's hard to accelerate energy as well as mass.
And so if an object starts getting accelerated, it's now going faster, it has more energy,
it has more inertia, and therefore it gets harder and harder to accelerate.
And if we measure the inertia of, say, an electron, it looks something like this.
I'm going to show you a graph with the electron's inertia as a function of its speed.
An electron starts out with its normal inertia at slow speeds, but as the speed increases,
the electron's inertia and anything else's inertia increases enormously.
That makes it harder to change its motion and harder and harder to accelerate it.
So if you want a more physical argument for why nothing can go faster than light, the
argument is, as things get closer and closer to the speed of light relative to you, they
have enormous amounts of energy.
And that enormous amount of energy corresponds to an enormous amount of inertia and makes
it harder and harder to accelerate them, and it would take an infinite force and an
infinite amount of energy to get anything up to the speed of light.
I think that's a more satisfying answer as to why you can't get to the speed of light,
but it really is based in nothing more than anything else we've said, namely the principle
of relativity.
Finally, in the remainder of this lecture, the last one on special relativity, let me
move on to one last question, is everything relative?
People have said, yeah, relativity says everything's relative, and they even used that to justify
moral relativism and relativism and philosophy and relativism and aesthetics.
I think that's all nonsense.
For two reasons.
One is, I don't think the physics of relativity has much to do with those other disciplines,
at least in terms of making value judgments for them.
And second, everything is not relative.
Clearly, it's not.
The essence of relativity is not that everything is relative, but that some things aren't
relative.
What isn't relative?
The laws of physics.
All observers in uniform motion.
What else isn't relative?
The speed of light.
A consequence of the laws of physics being all the same.
And there are other quantities that aren't relative as well, and I want to describe one
of them in some detail.
I'm going to use an analogy here, which comes from, quite liberally, from a wonderful book
called Spacetime Physics, which is in your bibliography.
It's a delightfully written book by Taylor and Wheeler, who are experts on relativity.
It's at a little bit higher level than this course, but it's worth looking at.
And Taylor and Wheeler use an analogy of map makers, and these map makers are going
to ask about the distance between two objects.
So let's look at a picture that shows that.
Here's point A and B. These are just points on the surface of the earth, and I want to
get from A to B. And one map maker lays out a map, a grid of north and south lines.
It's based on true north.
And in this map maker system, we would say, how do we get from A to B?
Well, we go one, two, three, four miles east, and one, two, three miles north.
And that's how to get from A to B. And if we wanted to calculate the straight line distance
from A to B, it's the diagonal, and it's exactly five miles.
It turns out you can apply the Pythagorean theorem and get that.
Now there's another map maker who says, I'm going to use magnetic north, which is not
quite the same as true north for my map.
So the other map maker has a system that looks something like this.
Here we have the same grid, one mile squares, northeast, southwest directions, but they're
slightly different directions.
Now how do you get from A to B?
Well, a description would be, go one, two, three, four, and about two-thirds miles east,
and go about, oh, one and a half miles north, and you've got from A to B. That's a different
description of how to get from A to B. Why is it different?
Because this second map maker uses a different definition of north-south versus east-west.
But we're still talking about the same underlying physical reality.
And if this second map maker calculates the actual straight line distance from A to B,
it's still exactly what it was before, it's exactly five miles.
And we can see that by imposing both map maker systems on the same picture.
The descriptions of how you get from A to B in terms of how much eastward and how much
northward you go are different.
But the description of the actual distance from A to B is one and the same.
Now what's going on here?
In a sense, the second map maker's map, its east, its east-west direction mixes in some
of the north-south of the first map maker's map.
East-west, north-south, those are different dimensions, but they get kind of mixed up.
Each map maker's north-south and east-west get mixed together to make the other map maker's
east-west, north-south.
That's why they have different descriptions of the same underlying physical reality.
But the important point is, it's the same underlying physical reality.
The distance from A to B is invariant.
It's the same no matter which map maker you use.
Now what's this got to do with relativity?
Well the analogy is this, space is analogous to one of these directions, like say east-west.
Time is analogous to the other direction, say north-south.
Different observers in relative motion are like the two different map makers.
They have different perspectives on what's east-west and what's north-south, or what
are spatial intervals and what are temporal intervals.
That's why different observers come up with different times between two events and different
spatial distances between them, just like our two map makers come up with different amounts
of east-west to go from point A to B and different amounts of north-south.
But there's something they all agree on, and that something is a combination of, in
the case of the map makers, east-west and north-south.
They combine in a way to make an invariant, a true physical quantity that is objectively
real and they all agree on it.
That's the distance between points A and B. In relativity, it's a little bit different.
In relativity, there's an objective absolute, quote, distance, but it's not a distance
in space.
It's a distance in space and time taken together.
If you combine those time intervals that we've been talking about between events that
are different for different observers, and you combine that with the spatial interval
between the two events that's also different for different observers, every observer can
calculate an invariant quantity, and it's called the space-time interval between those
two events, and they all agree on that space-time interval.
Between two events, there is some reality in their separation.
The reality is not a separation in space and a separation in time, like we thought it was
before relativity, but it's a separation in a combined entity, which we're now going
to call space-time.
There really is a four-dimensional fabric to our universe, four dimensions, the three
dimensions of space, this way, this way, this way, three mutually perpendicular directions
combined with a fourth dimension, which I can't draw for you or indicate its direction because
I'm working in three-dimensional space, but the fourth dimension is time.
The way space-time breaks out into separate spaces and times differs with different states
of motion, just like the way physical reality of space for our map makers breaks out into
north, south, and east-west depends on their choice of compass directions.
Similarly, what's space and what's time differs for different observers in different states
of uniform motion, but they all agree on something underlying, which is the invariant space-time
interval.
Now, you calculate it in a slightly funny way, not the Pythagorean theorem, and I'm not
going to get into that, but they all agree on that.
There are, in fact, other quantities they all agree on.
There are quantities that arise in electricity, for example, that involve the electric charge
and the electric current that look different in different frames of reference, but they
come together to form a common factor that everyone agrees on, no matter what their frame
of reference.
There really is an underlying physical reality.
This underlying reality was summed up by Herman Minkowski, who was Einstein's mathematics
teacher, and later, as I said in an earlier lecture, became one of the people who gave
the best mathematical interpretation of special relativity.
What Minkowski said was this, henceforth, space and time by itself, space by itself
and time by itself are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union
of the two will preserve an independent reality, and that union of the two is spacetime.
We've just introduced it now as an abstract concept, but it's going to become a major
player.
It's going to play a major and active role in the development of general relativity,
which is the next topic we'll be covering.
