Lecture 17. Enter the quantum. We've come a long way now in our search for the structure
of matter, a long way from democratists in 400 B.C. proposing that the world was ultimately
composed of indivisible atoms. Now we're sitting at about the turn of the 20th century, plus
or minus 10 years, depending on which phenomena we're talking about, and we know that there
are atoms, unlike democratists, suggesting though they're not indivisible, we've already
seen subatomic particles, we've seen that the atoms have nuclei, they have electrons
going around those nuclei, so we know quite a bit about the structure of matter. But classical
physics, the physics of Newton, the physics of thermodynamics, the physics of electricity
and magnetism that was well known by the end of the 19th century, is in big trouble at
this point, and we have already three reasons why it's in big trouble. First of all, we've
got these atoms that shouldn't even exist. The electrons spiraling in their orbits around
the nuclei of Rutherford's atom should, according to Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism,
be emitting electromagnetic radiation, they should lose energy as a result, they should
spiral into the nucleus, that should take place in a fraction of a second, and we shouldn't
have atoms at all. Even if for some reason we could have these atoms, we have no explanation
for the fact that atoms emit particular discrete spectral lines, that is, particular colors.
They don't emit a whole rainbow of colors, they emit particular spectral lines unique
to each different element. No explanation for why this is. And finally, we have the
ultraviolet catastrophe, which I discussed in the last lecture. Also, which suggests
that all of us, or any hot glowing object, and we ourselves, or at least warm glowing
objects, should be emitting infinite amounts of ultraviolet energy, and clearly that's
absurd and doesn't happen. I want to add one more insult to classical physics, and I want
to go over it in a little bit more detail, because its explanation is actually one of
the clearest instances of why we must have quantum physics. Hold on, by the end of this
lecture we'll have resolved all these crises, but we'll have resolved them by introducing
an entirely new world view, the world view of quantum physics. So let's take a look at
this phenomenon that, again, adds another insult to classical physics. It's called the
photoelectric effect, and it's a phenomenon that was studied since the late 1800s, since
about the 1880s. And in the photoelectric effect, we do a very simple thing. We take
a glass tube, put two metal electrodes in opposite ends of it, one of them a flat metal
surface, at least, that we can expose to light. We connect the apparatus up to a battery and
a meter to tell us if electric current is flowing. And we shine light through the glass
tube onto one of the metal surfaces. So what happens? We shine in the light, the light
hits the metal surface, and lo and behold, electrons are ejected from the metal surface,
and if we have the battery connected up, the electrons can flow through the empty space
of the evacuated tube to the other electrode, and then through the surrounding wires and
through the meter, and they constitute an electric current, and we can measure how much current
by measuring the flow of current with the meter that I've indicated in the picture here.
We can also adjust the strength of the battery, that is, its voltage, and see what effect
that has on the electrons, and that way we can actually measure the electron's energy.
So this is the photoelectric effect, and it was well known by the turn of the 20th century.
In fact, it's the basis of an early version of the so-called electric eye, basically a
light sensor, the kinds of things that are used in automatic door openers. They're used
in your garage door openers to sense whether there's an object in the way of the garage
door opener. They're used in a whole variety of applications where we want to sense whether
light is there or not. This particular kind of device, a glass evacuated tube with metal
electrodes, has been supplanted by solid state devices, semiconductor devices that work much
more reliably and are much simpler and cheaper to build. But nevertheless, this constitutes
an early technological device of some importance for sensing light electrically. That's beside
the point here, though. We want to ask the question, how does classical physics explain
the photoelectric effect? Well, classical physics can explain the photoelectric effect.
The photoelectric effect is the effect where electrons are ejected from a metal surface
when light strikes the surface. How does classical physics explain that? Well, in classical
physics, light is an electromagnetic wave. An electromagnetic wave consists of electric
and magnetic fields. An electron is an electrically charged particle. It experiences forces when
there's an electric field. So here comes a light wave, an electromagnetic wave, onto
this metal surface. Metal is characterized, by the way, by its electrons, at least some
of them, being entirely free to move throughout the metal. They're not tied to particular
atoms, like they are in insulating materials. That's what makes a metal different. So here
are these electrons. Here comes the light. The electrons experience the light, and they
begin oscillating up and down, vibrating up and down, in response to the vibrating electric
field of the light wave. Remember, a light wave changing electric fields, make changing
magnetic fields, and so on. So that's what the electrons do, and they gain energy from
the light wave. And eventually, they should gain enough energy that they can break the
electrical bonds that hold them to the metal, and they can come flying out. So far, so good.
The problem is this. In a wave, energy is spread out over the entire wave. Think of
an ocean wave coming at you on the beach. The energy of that ocean wave is not concentrated
in one place, it's spread over the entire wave. And so a single electron, which is a
tiny, tiny entity, is intersecting only a tiny, tiny fraction of the total energy carried
by that wave. It should take a long time for the electron to build up the amount of energy
that would be needed for it to eject itself from the metal. And you can calculate that
time for typical conditions, and it's a long time, minutes, hours sometimes, depending
on the strength of the light. So that's what classical physics says. It says electrons
should be ejected from the metal surface, and they should be ejected after a while,
after the time it takes them to build up the right amount of energy. Now, if we turn the
intensity of the light up, that time should go down a little bit. Classical physics says
something else. It says the color of the light shouldn't matter. Who cares what color the
light is? If the light is redder, the electromagnetic wave is oscillating more slowly, but it's still
carrying the same energy, and the electrons should take about the same amount of time
to build up the energy needed to eject themselves. So the color of the light shouldn't matter,
and it should take a long time for the electrons to build up the requisite energy. So that's
how classical physics explains the photoelectric effect. The electrons absorb energy from the
light wave, and eventually they're ejected, and the color of the light really is irrelevant
to that process. What really happens, what really happens in the photoelectric effect
experiment, is somewhat different. You turn on the light, and bingo, electrons come out
immediately. Even if the light is quite dim, turn on the light, bing, you've got electrons
coming out immediately. Why? Furthermore, color does matter. If you have light that's
toward the blue end of the rainbow spectrum, or into the ultraviolet, you get electrons
coming out, and they come out with substantial energy, and the bluer you go, or the more
into the ultraviolet you go, the more energy the electrons have coming out. You can measure
that by varying the voltage on the battery and seeing how much electric field it takes
to stop the electrons. So you can measure the electrons energy, and you find that they
have more energy as you make the light bluer. Furthermore, if you make the light redder
and redder, they come out with less and less energy until you reach a certain color as
you move toward the red, for which no electrons are ejected at all. So if I change the light
color to a color that's red enough, no matter how intense the light, no electrons come out
whatsoever. Completely at odds with the classical prediction, that the color shouldn't matter
because all the color is determining is the oscillating frequency of the electromagnetic
wave and has nothing to do with the energy. So we have two real contradictions here with
classical physics. Classical physics says it should take a long time before those electrons
come out, and classical physics says the color shouldn't matter. We do the experiment and
we find the electrons come out immediately, and the color matters a lot. If the color
is too red, they don't come out at all. If it goes toward the blue, they come out, and
they come out with increasingly higher energy. So we got another big problem here. Now we've
got four problems. We've got the existence of atoms. They shouldn't exist because the
electron should spiral into the nuclei emitting electromagnetic radiation. We've got the spectra
of atoms, the individual, the street colors of light they emit, no explanation for that.
We've got the ultraviolet catastrophe that we should all be glowing with infinite amounts
of ultraviolet energy, and now we have the photoelectric effect that says, well, this
phenomenon should occur, but it shouldn't occur, according to classical physics, in
the way it actually does occur. It should occur slowly and in a color-independent way
when in fact it occurs instantaneously almost and in a way that depends very significantly
on color. How do we resolve these problems? This is the big crisis for classical physics
around the turn of the 20th century. I'm going to go through the resolution of this
crisis in pretty much historical order. That's not the most logical progression pedagogically,
but I think it's important to do it historically because it establishes when concepts were
introduced into the idea. In a way, the most difficult of these problems to understand
conceptually is the problem of the ultraviolet catastrophe. In fact, I gave you no hint about
why classical physics predicts that this occurs, and I'm going to give you now just the briefest
explanation of why the ultraviolet catastrophe, that sense that a hot glowing object should
emit infinite energy as you move toward the ultraviolet end of the spectrum. The reason
is a little bit subtle, but the reason is this. What's causing this energy to be emitted
from a hot glowing object? Ultimately, it's vibrations of the individual atoms in it,
emitting electromagnetic waves. Those atoms can vibrate, according to classical physics,
with any vibration frequency they want. There's a law in classical physics, classical thermodynamics,
study of heat that says when a system has different ways of having energy, it will share
all those ways equally. That's called the equi-partition theorem. It turns out if you
look at the ways an atom can vibrate, there are more and more ways as you get to higher
and higher frequency bands. If all those share energy equally, two things should happen.
First of all, there should be an infinite amount of energy shared by all these possible
ways of vibration, and most of that energy should be in the very high frequency range,
which in those days was known as ultraviolet. That in a nutshell is why classical physics
predicts the ultraviolet catastrophe. Well, Max Planck in 1900, German physicist, was
able to resolve the ultraviolet catastrophe in a way that to him wasn't particularly satisfying.
What he did was look at the equation that predicted the ultraviolet catastrophe, and
he basically said, can I fudge this equation in a way that will prevent the ultraviolet
catastrophe occurring or from being predicted. He found a fudge factor he could put in the
equation that would get rid of the ultraviolet catastrophe and would in fact make the spectrum
of light emitted by a hot glowing object, that continuous range of colors emitted by
a dense hot glowing object as opposed to a single atom that emits a discrete spectrum.
He could match the spectrum of a hot glowing object, which as we saw last time gets brighter
and also shifts from the red toward the yellow toward the green and so on as the temperature
goes up. He could match that with his fudge factor. After introducing his fudge factor,
he looked at what the fudge factor meant physically. First he put it in mathematically, and then
he looked at what the fudge factor meant physically. What the fudge factor turned out to mean physically
was it put a restriction on the amount of energy a vibrating atom could have basically.
What it did is this. It said, suppose I have an atom vibrating with a certain frequency
back and forth 100 times a second, a million times a second, a billion. I don't care. However
many times a second that atom is vibrating back and forth and therefore emitting electromagnetic
waves at that frequency, there is a minimum amount of energy that that atom can have at
that frequency, a very minimum amount. It's a tiny amount, but it still can't go any
smaller. You can't have half that amount. You can't have three quarters of that amount.
You can't have five eighths of that amount. You can't have one and a half times that amount.
You could have twice the amount, or three times, or ten times, or one time, but one
time is the minimum amount of energy you can have in that particular vibration frequency.
What that does for the ultraviolet catastrophe is to take those very high frequency vibrations,
the ones that were contributing the infinite energy in the ultraviolet, and give them so
much energy because the energy is proportional to the frequency of vibration, the bigger
the frequency of vibration, the bigger that minimum energy, and I'll show you that in
an equation in just a moment, the bigger the frequency of vibration, the bigger that
minimum energy. For the very highest frequency vibrations, Planck's equation predicts, the
energy required to get them vibrating is so big that it's very unlikely that it will happen.
So the high energy vibrations don't occur. There isn't an infinite amount of energy.
Most of the energy is not in the ultraviolet, but lower down in the visible light for normal
temperatures, and the ultraviolet catastrophe goes away.
The formula that Planck used is actually very simple, and again, this is a non-mathematical
course, but it's a very simple formula, and I want you to just appreciate briefly what
it says. So here's Planck's formula. What's rescuing
us here from the ultraviolet catastrophe is this idea of energy quantization. The energy
is now coming in little discrete bundles, a certain minimum amount for a given frequency
of vibration. Here's Planck's equation. It says E equals
HF. It's that simple. E energy is something H, some number H, which I'll talk about more
in a minute, times F frequency. That's all it says. E is HF. What do these things mean?
F is the frequency of these atomic vibrations, or as we'll soon see, the frequency of a light
wave or some other process that has a frequency. Frequency means how many times a second does
this occur? How many times a second does the atom vibrate? How many times a second does
the electron go around the atom? How many times a second does the electric field of
a light wave reverse direction? That's what frequency means.
E is the energy, and E, the number you're going to get by applying this formula, is
the fundamental unit, the minimum amount of energy, the little bundle of energy that goes
with that particular vibration frequency F. For a given vibration frequency F, you apply
this formula to F, you multiply F by this number H, and you get the minimum amount of
energy you're allowed to have at that vibration frequency.
What's H? H is a new constant of nature and a very important one. H is the constant of
nature of the 20th and 21st century. It's the new thing that's been introduced. What
is H? It's this proportionality that tells you how small or how big are these little
fundamental units of energy that you can have associated with a given vibration, and the
name Planck's constant obviously honors Planck's discovery of this equation. There is a new
constant of nature in quantum physics. It's called Planck's constant. It's given the symbol
H, and it represents the proportionality between the frequency of vibration of some kind of
system, like a vibrating atom or a circulating electron or whatever, and the energy associated
with that. Planck's constant, very simple equation. Energy is Planck's constant times
frequency. There's a new link here, and the link is between energy and frequency. It wasn't
there before. Frequency of vibration before was totally independent of energy. In classical
physics, you give me a vibrating atom or a vibrating mass attached to a spring or a car
with bad shock absorbers is bouncing up and down, and it can have any vibration frequency.
No longer true in quantum physics. It can have vibration freaks, and the minimum energy
it can have with that vibration frequency is H times F. It can have two H times F, three
H times F, 101 HF, a million and 39 HF, but it can't have half HF or one and a half HF
or pi HF or 2,493.97 HF. It has to have an integer number of that fundamental unit of
energy, E equals HF. So what has Planck done? He's quantized energy. He said energy comes
only in little discrete bundles. How big are the bundles? That depends on the vibration
frequency associated with this process. The bundles are of size HF. Great. We've got
quantization. So that rescued us from the ultraviolet catastrophe. That's in 1900. The
next rescue came in 1905, that famous year when Einstein published a number of papers,
three of which were seminal. Remember one of them convinced people atoms existed. The
other one was special relativity that we spent quite a few lectures on. The third seminal
paper was Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric effect, and Einstein proposed the
following. He said, I think that the energy in light waves is quantized. Comes in little
bundles. It isn't distributed evenly all over the place like a wave. It comes in little
bundles. It's like it was a particle. And that explains the photoelectric effect because
in the photoelectric effect we turn on the light and to our surprise electrons are ejected
almost immediately. Why does that happen? Well, says Einstein. It happens because although
in classical physics it would take a long time to extract this spread out energy from
the wave. In fact, the energy isn't spread out in the wave. It's distributed in little
discrete bundles here and there throughout the wave. And there's a good chance that as
soon as we turn on the light, one of those little bundles will hit an electron and eject
it. So that solves the first part of the photoelectric effect crisis. It tells us why the
electrons are ejected immediately. If the energy is quantized in these little bundles
instead of being spread out all over the light wave, we're okay because we can eject electrons
immediately as soon as one of these little bundles hits them. Those little bundles are
now called photons, little particles like things of light, little bundles of light energy.
Photon, that's the word. It's a word you hear a lot these days because we have a lot of
technological devices using photons. Now says Einstein, how big are these photons?
What's the energy of the photons? Well, remember what a light wave is. It's a vibrating system
of electric and magnetic fields. It's vibrating with some frequency. For an AM radio wave,
that's about a million times a second. For an FM radio wave, it's a hundred million
times a second. In your microwave oven, it's 2.4 billion times a second. For visible light,
it's about a one with 14 or 15 zeros after it, times a second. But it's a vibration
at a certain frequency. What's the energy associated with the photons with the little
bundles of that vibration, says Einstein? The answer, let's go back to Planck's equation.
It's exactly the same. It's E equals HF. That's the minimum amount of energy you can
have in light of frequency F, says Einstein. E equals HF. That explains the second part
of the photoelectric effect because it takes a certain minimum amount of energy to get
an electron ejected from that metal, to tear it free from the electrical forces that are
holding it in the metal. If the light is too red, and red corresponds to lower frequency,
blue and ultraviolet to higher frequencies, if the light is too red, F is too small, and
HF, the bundle size, the amount of energy is simply too low to eject the electrons.
No matter how bright we make the light, a bundle hits an electron and it just can't knock
it out, no matter how bright we make it, no matter how many bundles we have. So Einstein
does the same thing Planck does, but Einstein does it for light waves. He quantizes the
energy in a light wave. He says the energy in light comes in little discrete bundles
called photons, and they have low and behold an amount of energy given by E equals HF.
And it explains both aspects of the photoelectric effect. Well, that took care of the photoelectric
effect. It took care of the ultraviolet catastrophe. We're still left with the problems of atoms,
two problems of atoms. One, they shouldn't exist because the electrons should spiral
into the nucleus. Two, they give off these discrete spectra, and we have no explanation
for that. In 1913, the Danish physicist Niels Bohr, who is one of the great towering figures
of 20th century physics, proposed a new model for the atom, a new picture of the atom, an
elaboration on Rutherford's picture of the miniature solar system. And you're going
to find Bohr's proposal a little bit unsatisfactory, and it is. But it held sway for about 10 years
from 1913 until it was supplanted 10 to 15 years, so it was supplanted by the full theory
of quantum physics, which we'll get to in a few lectures. And Bohr said the following.
He said, I'm going to apply quantization, this idea that things are quantized, to the
atomic orbits, to the electron orbits. Instead of the electron in the atom being allowed
to be anywhere, any distance from the nucleus, like a planet and the solar system, can be,
presumably. I believe, said Bohr, there are only certain discrete orbits allowed. Only
certain distances from the atom are allowed. Now, you might expect me to say Bohr's quantization
condition was the energy of those electrons is h times their frequency, but it was a little
more complicated than that. The formula actually involves not the energy directly, but something
called the angular momentum, which is a measure of sort of rotational motion. And that was
what Bohr said was quantized, and he said the angular momentum is simply Planck's constant
divided by something dealing with how fast the electrons are going times their mass.
We don't need to get into the details of the formula. If you want to know it, it's L equals
h divided by twice the momentum, mv, also called p, twice the momentum of the particle.
But that's not important. What's important is Bohr quantized the electron orbits. He
said only certain electron orbits are allowed, and they are described by a quantization condition
that quantizes this property angular momentum, according to some formula Bohr gave, and no
other electron orbits are allowed. And the important point is the quantization condition
involves Planck's constant h once again. Bohr said something else. He said when an electron
is in one of these orbits, it doesn't radiate electromagnetic waves. Why? Sorry, no explanation.
This was just a postulate Bohr gave. He said electrons in these allowed orbits do not radiate
electromagnetic waves. That solves the problem by fiat of the fact that atoms, classical
physics says atoms shouldn't exist. In Bohr's theory, atoms do exist because once an electron
is in one of these allowed orbits, it doesn't radiate electromagnetic waves.
But atoms can radiate electromagnetic waves if an electron is in a higher orbit and jumps
down to a lower orbit, which it's allowed to do. And in the process, its energy changes
by a certain discrete amount, because if the angular momentum and the orbits are quantized,
so is the energy, although the quantization formula for the energy is a little more complicated.
But the energy is also fixed. Each orbit has a different energy. And if the electron jumps
from a higher orbit to a lower orbit, a certain precise amount of energy is emitted. Electromagnetic
radiation occurs then at a certain precise amount of energy. In fact, electrons do try
to fall eventually down to the lowest orbit available to them, but the lowest orbit is
not crashing all the way into the nucleus. There's a minimum orbit they can have, a minimum
quantized amount of this angular momentum and therefore of energy.
Now let's go back to the energy quantization formula for photons, for light, E equals HF.
What does this say? Well, now we have a certain discrete amount of energy that an atom can
emit as an electron jumps from one level to another. Maybe if it jumps from a higher level
down, a different amount of energy can be emitted. There are certain discrete amounts
of energy that can be emitted by an atom as electrons jump among these orbits. Well,
if we have a certain discrete E and we have Planck's constant, that means there are only
certain discrete frequencies or equivalently colors of light that can be emitted by atoms.
And that phenomenon explains the spectra of atoms. And in fact, Bohr's quantization condition
on what orbits were allowed not only explains the existence of atoms and the fact that we
should expect a discrete spectra, in fact, it predicts spectra that are exactly what
we observe when we take light from an atom, run it through a prism to disperse it into
its separate colors and measure carefully what the frequencies or wavelengths of those
colors are. Breathe beautifully with Bohr's theory.
So although Bohr's theory is built on this funny ad hoc assumption that the energy levels
of the atom are quantized and the atoms simply don't radiate electromagnetic waves as long
as the electrons stay in their allowed orbits, and no good physical reason given for that,
nevertheless, this ad hoc theory explains a great deal. In particular, why atoms exist,
what their spectra are, and in fact, the actual experimentally determined numbers for the wavelengths
of the emitted spectra. What do all the resolutions of all these
crises have in common? They have one thing in common. They have Planck's constant H. And
what Planck's constant H is doing in each of these crises, the ultraviolet catastrophe,
the photoelectric effect, and the Bohr atom, is causing a quantity that in classical physics
was believed to be continuous, to be allowed to take on any value. It's causing some quantity,
energy in the case of the ultraviolet, energy of a vibrating system in the case of the ultraviolet
catastrophe, energy in a light wave in the case of the photoelectric effect, angular
momentum, and therefore energy of an electron in orbit. It's quantizing those quantities.
It's saying they cannot take on a continuous range of values. They can only take on certain
discrete values which are predicted by the equations, E equals HF, in the simple case
of atomic vibrations and light wave, a little more complicated formula in the case of the
atoms. But they all involve Planck's constant, and they all involve the statement that, nope,
you can't have a continuous range of things. You can only have certain discrete amounts.
It's again like my egg analogy. You go to the grocery store, and if you didn't know
that eggs came in discrete amounts, you could say, oh, I'd like a tablespoon of eggs for
this recipe, and two and a half teaspoons for this recipe, and 1.4379 cups of egg for
this recipe. You can't do it. Eggs don't come that way. They come in discrete amounts.
And when you go in the grocery store and see the eggs and cartons, that becomes obvious
to you. The reason quantum physics isn't obvious to us, the reason these discrete energy levels
are discrete amounts of energy in the light wave, discrete energy levels of the atom,
discrete energy levels of the vibrating atoms in the ultraviolet situation, the reason we
don't see that discreteness, the reason we think everything is continuous is because
Planck's constant is a tiny, tiny, tiny number. Here's how tiny it is. Let's take a look.
Here's Planck's constant rescuing us with energy quantization, but how big is Planck's
constant? Well, it's tiny. It's 1 over 1 with 33 zeros after it, approximately. I'm doing
a very bad thing here. I'd mark my students down for this because I haven't put any units
on that. It doesn't really matter what the units are. This is approximate, but in the
kinds of units we use to measure everyday objects like feet and seconds and things.
Actually, this is its value in the meter kilogram seconds of system of units. In fact, it's
about 6 times 10 to the minus 34 in that system of units, but we don't need to worry about
that. The thing is, it's a very, very tiny number by comparison with anything we do on
the regular macroscopic scale of our everyday lives. What does that mean? It means the gradations
in energy levels, particularly in everyday objects. Here's a tennis ball. What if I start
vibrating this tennis ball up and down? Well, if we really believe quantum physics, this
can have only certain discrete energies, but vibrating it twice a second, f is 2, h is
this tiny, tiny number, 2 times that tiny, tiny number is minuscule. The distance between
allowed energy levels of this tennis ball is so minuscule it might as well be perfectly
continuous. That's why we don't notice quantization in the world of everyday experience, even
in the world the size of a bacterium or something like that. We don't notice quantization, but
when we get down into the atomic level where the minimum bundle size of energy becomes comparable
to the energies objects have, electrons going around in atoms, vibrating atoms, the energy
it takes to eject an electron from a metal surface in the photoelectric experiment, then
we begin for the first time to notice energy quantization. The key, the essential thing
that makes quantum physics different from classical physics is this notion that not
only does matter come in discrete little hunks like electrons, we've already found that out,
but so does energy. At least in some situations, the situations I've described here, there
is a certain minimum amount of energy that you can have for a given frequency. Energy
is quantized. In essence, quantum physics is the theory that says, or the fact that
Planck's constant isn't zero. If Planck's constant were zero, the minimum amount of
energy we could have would be zero, and we could have any amount running continuously
from zero on upward. There really would be a continuum of energies. Electrons really
could be anywhere in the atoms, and the atoms would emit light of all colors. There really
would be a continuum of energy spread throughout the electromagnetic wave, and the minimum
energy would be so small that it really would be zero, essentially, that it really would
take a long time for the electrons to gain that energy. There really would be ultraviolet
frequency vibrations of arbitrarily small size, and there would be a lot of them, and
there would be an ultraviolet catastrophe. But no, it's the non-zeroness of Planck's
constant that rescues us from all that. It's the non-zeroness of Planck's constant forcing
on us a world in which energy comes in these discrete amounts that makes quantum physics
different from classical physics. Quantum physics is the physics of H being not zero.
It's in a way like relativity. If you think about relativity, we sort of get a sense,
our gut sense of the speed of light is really so fast it's essentially infinite, and relativity
is the theory that says, no, it's not quite infinite, it's finite. If you let C go to
infinity, relativity would reduce to classical physics because we'd never be anywhere near
the speed of light if it were infinite. Relativity is really the theory that says speed of light
isn't what you think it is infinite, it's a little bit less. 186,000 miles a second.
Quantum physics goes the other way. Quantum physics is the theory that says, no, Planck's
constant, the number that sets the fundamental graininess discrete in the scale of the universe
isn't zero, which would give us a continuous availability of energy. It's small, but it's
not zero. And that quantization, that fundamental graininess of the universe is going to be
what leads to all the strange results of quantum mechanics that we'll now be exploring.
