Lecture 7, Einstein to the Rescue
It's now the year 1905 and physicists have been puzzling for several decades over the
null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment.
Why was there no fringe shift?
Why didn't we detect the Earth's motion relative to the ether?
The best we have going is the Lorenz Fitzgerald contraction hypothesis suggesting the apparatus
got compressed and the idea being that all objects perhaps get compressed in the direction
of their motion relative to the ether.
Physicists are reluctant to give up this notion of the ether for reasons that will be very
obvious in just a moment.
You may think we can give it up, but hold on.
Let me begin with a few historical touches here about Einstein in the year 1905 and what
Einstein was like.
One hears a lot about Einstein, one hears, for example, that he was actually rather dull
as a child.
That's not true.
What he was in school was very rebellious, and some of the trouble he got into in several
schools, especially a very rigorous German school he attended, was that he simply couldn't
put up with rigorous discipline.
He wanted to study and work on his own, and this led him to problems throughout his academic
career.
But he was not dull.
He was noted for his intelligence, although he didn't necessarily do well in all his courses.
In particular, he didn't do particularly well in some mathematics courses, and one of his
mathematics professors named Herman Minkowski was very distressed about this, and Minkowski
nevertheless later went on to become a major interpreter of relativity in mathematical terms.
So Einstein was a rebel, but he wasn't dull.
There's also a rumor that he talked rather late, and this is probably true, and Einstein
himself probably embellished this a little bit.
He claimed at some point that he didn't talk till he was three years old, and perhaps his
talking late had something to do with a brain in which he could visualize abstract ideas
better than most of us can.
I don't know about that.
Einstein was an interesting character, although he published his paper on the special theory
of relativity in 1905 and wrote it in a matter of only about six weeks after he got the key
insight that led to the idea.
He had been thinking about this problem for many, many years.
When he was 16, for about 10 years in fact, when he was 16, he asked the question, what
would a light wave look like if I ran alongside it at the speed of light?
That's an interesting question.
It may have occurred to some of you also.
Why is it an interesting question?
Well, it's a particularly interesting question because if you believe Maxwell's theory of
electromagnetism, you know that that theory predicts the existence of light waves, and
light waves should move at speed C.
If you run alongside a light wave at speed C, you see a structure that looks like a light
wave, electric and magnetic fields in the particular configuration of a light wave, but it's not
moving relative to you.
That's not a solution of Maxwell's equations.
If you believe in the ether paradigm, you simply say, well, I'm not in the ether frame
of reference, so I don't expect Maxwell's equations to be correct.
I don't expect the laws of electromagnetism to work in this frame of reference.
But Einstein puzzled about this.
He really worried, what would a light beam look like if I ran alongside it?
Another thing that bothered Einstein came out of shaving.
He's sitting there shaving in the mirror, looking in the mirror, and he wondered, what
if I started to run with this mirror in front of me?
Walk along, still continue to shave, no problem.
What if I run faster?
What if I run at the speed of light?
The light leaving my face that's going to bounce off the mirror, never going to get
to the mirror because the mirror is moving away at the speed of light.
So as I reach the speed of light, will the mirror suddenly go dark?
By the way, Einstein's Mirror is the title of one of the more recent books I've put
in my bibliography for this course you might be interested in reading it.
It draws its name from this particular pondering of Einstein's.
What would happen if I ran at the speed of light?
The light wouldn't be able to catch the mirror, the mirror would go dark.
Well, those are things Einstein pondered about before 1905.
When he reached 1905, he was still a young man.
He was only 26 years old.
Most of us think of Einstein, as in the picture I'm showing here, as a very old, rather interesting
looking character with this grizzled face and this wild white hair.
We forget that Einstein did some of his most creative work, in fact, basically all his
most creative work, as a very young man, and in 1905 the year he formulated the special
theory of relativity, Einstein was a young father, 26 years old, that's four years beyond
college graduation age.
He had a young child and a young wife who was a fellow physics student of his, and he
was working in a position as a patent clerk in the Swiss Patent Office.
He actually enjoyed that position because he was working with patents and technological
devices, so that was interesting to him.
He also had plenty of spare time to work on his own ideas in physics, including the theory
of relativity.
Why was he a patent clerk, rather than a physics professor?
Because of all the classmates of his from his graduate school class, he was the only
one who was not recommended for a professorship upon graduation.
He had trouble finding an academic position.
Again, not because he wasn't smart, but because he walked to his own drummer, he was a rebel,
he was difficult to work with in an institutional setting, he simply was not recommended for
a professorship, and it was a while before he achieved a professorship, once his relativity
fame became established, it was no problem for him.
In 1905, he's working in the Swiss Patent Office.
He's watching a lot of trains and clock towers in Switzerland, thinking a lot about time
and space, and he's writing papers, and he actually published a number of papers in 1905,
four significant papers and some smaller ones, and of the four substantial papers, three
of them were really seminal in the history of physics.
One of them, the one I'm going to talk about today, is the paper that introduced to the
world special relativity.
The second paper was a paper that was on the subject of Brownian motion, which is the
behavior of very small particles, little dust motes or little bacteria or things like that,
that you might see through a microscope as they're jostled around by the invisible particles
that make up, say, a solution like water.
And Einstein published a paper on Brownian motion, and that was the paper that convinced
the few remaining skeptics in 1905 that were still some skeptics who didn't believe there
were atoms.
They didn't believe in the reality of atoms, and Einstein's paper on Brownian motion convinced
the remaining skeptics of the reality of atoms, so that was a seminal paper in physics.
The second important paper is, well, the third important paper is one I'll have a lot more
to say about later in the course when we deal with quantum physics, because Einstein interpreted
the results of the so-called photoelectric effect experiment, which again we'll describe
in detail, to give an interpretation in terms of the new quantum ideas.
He was the second person to introduce the idea of the quantum, and he was the first
person to apply it to the nature of light, and we'll have a lot more to say about that.
That was a really crucial and important paper.
And the third paper, the fourth paper of the batch of four significant papers, was not
particularly interesting.
It was a run-of-the-mill paper.
Later in that year, he also published a paper in which he introduced the seeds of the idea
behind the equation E equals MC squared, and I'll have a lot more to say about that.
But at this point, I want to suffice it to say that E equals MC squared, which you may
think of as the essence of relativity, was not even in the original paper on relativity
that was published in 1905.
So what did Einstein have to say?
Well, he published a paper which was not called the special theory of relativity.
It was called On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies, and I want to emphasize that title
because I argued when I introduced you to electromagnetism that electromagnetism was
crucial in understanding the evolution of relativity theory.
Relativity is really an outgrowth of electromagnetism, and you now know why.
Because electromagnetism raised the questions with respect to what does light go as speed
c.
In what frame of reference are the laws of electromagnetism valid, a question that had
already been answered for mechanics, for the study of motion way back in Galileo's time,
and that now begged for an answer in terms of electromagnetism?
And we've been looking for that answer, and we got some logic that told us that the answer
should be there.
Is the motion relative to the ether?
And then we did the Michelson-Morley experiment and found there was no answer to that question.
There's still left with that question, in what frame of reference are the laws of electromagnetism
valid?
And Einstein's paper, a direct outgrowth of electromagnetism, was called On the Electrodynamics
of Moving Bodies.
By the way, I have to give you one other historical aside here, which I find fascinating and a
real reflection of Einstein's genius.
There is, among historians of science today, still some debate about how much the Michelson-Morley
result influenced Einstein's thinking.
There have been some people who've argued in the past that he may not even have known
about the Michelson-Morley result.
That's probably not the case.
He makes reference in his paper to quote unsuccessful attempts to find the light medium.
He's surely referring there to some of the early experiments at trying to detect Earth's
motion through the ether, and he may well be referring to the Michelson-Morley experiment.
But how much the Michelson-Morley experiment influenced his thought?
We don't know.
And it may not have been very much.
For us, learning about relativity, it's crucial to understand the Michelson-Morley experiment
because we need that absolute hard and fast logic that tells us inexorably we have to
get to relativity.
Einstein, who thought about the way the world ought to be and said, I think the world ought
to be simple.
I think it ought to behave this way.
He may not even have thought much about the Michelson-Morley experiment.
He may have thought instead that this is just the way the world has to be.
I need a simpler world than the one I see, and here's the theory that describes that.
So what did Einstein do?
Well, basically, he declared the ether to be a fiction, something you may have had at
the back of your mind in the last few lectures.
Why are we going to all this trouble about the ether if we're going to have trouble
finding the Earth's motion through it?
The problem is, once you give up the idea of the ether, you're left with that question
with respect to what does light go at speed c, in what frame of reference are the laws
of electromagnetism valid?
So what did Einstein do?
He declared the ether as a fiction, no more ether, and he asserted instead the principle
of relativity, the same principle of relativity that Galileo had talked about, the principle
of relativity that in Galileo's time said the laws of physics are the same for all
observers in uniform motion, and it said that because in Galileo's time the laws of motion
were basically all there was to physics, pretty much.
We've modified that since to say Galilean relativity states the laws of motion, the
laws of mechanics are valid in all uniformly moving frames of reference, and then we've
introduced this new branch of physics, electromagnetism, and we asked the same question for electromagnetism
in what frame of reference are the laws of electromagnetism valid with respect to what
frame of reference does light go at speed c?
Well Einstein declared the ether was a fiction, and he asserted the principle of relativity
again for all of physics.
In that sense relativity is a profoundly conservative step, what had been known for hundreds of
years that the laws of physics, or the laws of mechanics at least, didn't depend on your
state of motion as long as that motion was uniform, that had been known for hundreds
of years, that's the Galilean principle of relativity.
Einstein simply reasserted that relativity was true for all of physics, it's that simple.
And I introduced you to this idea in the very first lecture, and I introduced you to it
through the microwave oven and the tennis match.
The tennis match represents motion, mechanics.
The microwave oven represents electromagnetism, and I think you drew the conclusion in your
mind that it made eminent sense that both those things, the game of tennis, a physics
experiment in mechanics, and the microwave oven, a physics experiment in electromagnetism,
would work the same on the cruise ship, on Venus, and even on that distant planet in
distant galaxy moving away from Earth at 80% of the speed of light.
So to you, this idea probably makes very good sense.
In fact, it probably makes more sense to us at the turn of the 21st century than it did
to people at the turn of the 20th century who were steeped in the idea that there had
to be an ether.
To us, we know about the existence of distant galaxies moving away at 80% of the speed of
light, and it makes eminent sense that microwave ovens should work the same there as they do
here.
So I think you can accept what Einstein had to say, at least at present, in a sort of
gut way that maybe wouldn't have been possible around 100 years ago.
You can accept the principle that the laws of physics are simply the same, all laws of
physics for anybody who is in uniform motion, in any reference frame in uniform motion.
And that is all Einstein said.
That is it.
Let's take a look at that statement.
It's an important statement.
It's special relativity.
The statement of special relativity is simply the statement that the laws of physics are
the same for all observers in uniform motion, and that's it.
I want to make a couple of comments about this statement.
I mean, you can assert that to your friends and say, I know everything there is to know
about Einstein's special theory of relativity, because that is everything there is to say
about it.
The laws of physics, all the laws of physics are the same for everybody in uniform motion.
Any frame of reference in uniform motion is an equally good place for doing physics,
period, and that's it.
Couple of comments, though.
First of all, if you read Einstein's original paper and you read older textbooks that talk
about this, you'll find that Einstein didn't quite put it this simply.
He had what he called two postulates.
One postulate was this one, that the laws of physics are the same for all observers.
And the other postulate, which he said seemed to be in contradiction with this but wasn't,
is that the speed of light is independent of the speed of its source.
I gave you some observational evidence earlier why that was the case, why we know that's
the case, that the speed of light doesn't depend on the speed of the source, that evidence
involving double star systems.
Einstein asserted that as a second postulate.
I think a more modern way of looking at relativity is to simply state this principle, that the
laws of physics are the same for all observers in uniform motion.
All frames of reference in uniform motion are equally good places for doing physics,
and that includes experiments in electromagnetism and measurements of the speed of light, and
we'll get to that in just a minute.
So this suffices.
One statement, the laws of physics are the same for everybody as long as they're in uniform
motion.
There is no preferred frame of reference.
There is no preferred state of motion.
The Earth is not special, that distant planet and that galaxy moving with respect to Earth
at 80% of the speed of light, that is not special.
No place, no state of motion is special, at least as long as it's uniform motion.
That gets to the second point I want to make about the statement of special relativity.
You hear the word special, you might think this is kind of neat and really super.
Special doesn't mean that in this context.
Special means this is a specialized theory.
It applies only to a limited special case.
It applies to the case of uniform motion only.
In the context of special relativity, non-uniform motion doesn't count.
The laws of physics are not the same, at least in the paradigm of special relativity, in
frames of reference that are undergoing non-uniform motion, that are accelerating, that are changing
speed, that are rotating, that are airplanes undergoing turbulence, that are cruise ships
in rough seas, that are planets in circular motion around their stars, maybe.
That one's a subtle one, and we'll get to that later.
In fact, as I argued a little earlier, it's sometimes difficult to decide whether we have
a frame of reference in uniform motion, and all of special relativity has a slightly slippery
foundation for that reason.
There is a general theory of relativity that generalizes this statement to all motion that
takes away the in-uniform motion clause, but it's a much more difficult theory.
We'll spend less time on it, but we will get to it later on in the course.
So for now, we're talking about special relativity, and special relativity means specialized
to the case of uniform motion.
It doesn't say everybody is equal as far as the laws of physics are concerned.
It does say everybody who's in uniform motion is equal as far as the laws of physics are
concerned.
If you can find one frame of reference that's in uniform motion, and the Earth, although
it's not quite, is moving uniformly enough that special relativity applies to the Earth
to a very good approximation, not perfectly, but to a very good approximation.
If you can find one frame of reference that's essentially in uniform motion, then any other
frame of reference that's moving at a constant speed in a fixed direction relative to that
one must also be in uniform motion.
So if you can find one, you can find others.
And we at least can find approximate uniformly moving frames of reference, such as the Earth
and the other planets, and spaceships moving at constant speed and space, and relative to
say the Earth, and airplanes moving through calm air, and so on.
So we have frames of reference in which this is true.
But again, we're going to get further a little bit later.
It's going to be important, though, to remember that special relativity works only in uniformly
moving frames of reference, because we are going to come across a situation in the next
few lectures where we do have some non-uniform motion, and you have to remember that, because
that non-uniform motion, the laws of physics do not work when the motion is non-uniform.
Now I asserted that Einstein's relativity is a very conservative statement.
It's a conservative statement because it reasserted for all of physics, particularly for electromagnetism,
when it had already been true for the physics of motion, for Newton's laws, for the classical
physics that came before the study of electromagnetism.
Einstein reasserted relativity.
He's very conservative.
He says, what Galileo already knew is now true for all of physics.
But it's not only conservative, it's also radical.
And it's radical because, as you will see in the rest of this lecture, it does very,
very strange things to our notions of space and time.
And that's what most people think of when they think of relativity.
They think of E equals mc squared, but then they immediately think of things like the
twin example that I started this course with, an example that we'll revisit in a couple
of lectures in some detail, and understand exactly why it has to be.
Relativity does strange things to space and time.
I didn't want to emphasize that up until now because I want you to understand that relativity
is much simpler than that.
Relativity is the statement that the laws of physics are the same for all observers
in uniform motion.
And I want you to have two feelings about that statement.
One is, it makes good gut sense.
Why is Earth special?
Why should Earth or any other frame of reference be special?
In an era when we know about distant galaxies moving away from Earth at 80% of the speed
of light, it makes no sense to think that the laws of physics work here on Earth or
in some frame of reference that Earth is not moving very fast relative to, but then they
certainly don't work in a distant galaxy.
What's so special about us?
Nothing.
So it makes good gut sense.
I also want you to understand the inexorable logic that led us to us.
Let us to it.
The statement that, the question in what frame of reference are the laws of electromagnetism
valid, the attempts to answer that question in 19th century physics terms with the ether,
the contradiction that said the Earth is not at rest with respect to the ether, then
the Michelson Morley experiment coming along and said, but the Earth is at rest with respect
to the ether, that contradiction.
We were driven inexorably to that.
The reason I want you to think both about your gut feel and that logic is because in
the next few lectures we're going to be doing those very strange things to space and time
and you will find those things unacceptable.
You will want to fight against them intellectually, but they must be the case and they must be
the case if you believe this simple statement that the laws of physics, all laws of physics
including electromagnetism are the same for all observers in uniform motion.
If you believe that and you have the logic leading you to it and you have the gut feel
for a universe which is so vast and full of objects moving at such high speeds that it
ought to make sense.
So this is the simple statement of relativity.
This is special relativity.
Laws of physics are the same for all observers in uniform motion.
By the way, although this is often called the theory of relativity, I really like to
avoid the word theory because it conjures up in most people's minds the idea, well this
is just a theory.
Evolution is just a theory.
We shouldn't be teaching it in schools because it's just a theory.
We don't know that it's true.
Well, that's hogwash.
It's hogwash about evolution and it's hogwash about relativity.
Relativity, special relativity particularly is one of the most solidly verified quote
theories in all of physics.
It's much more correctly verified than Newton's laws which turn out only to be an approximation.
Special relativity is true to many, many decibel places of accurate measurement as far as
we can tell.
It is a very accurate description of physical reality at least when we're dealing with
frames of reference in uniform motion and we're avoiding questions of gravity, we'll
get to those in general relativity.
So I don't like to think of special relativity as a theory.
Sure it's a theory.
Could it be proved wrong?
Very, very, very unlikely.
Could it be modified slightly?
Probably not.
It may be expanded upon with the general theory of relativity and maybe something beyond
that but it's not wrong.
It's not just a theory.
It's really one of the foundations of our understanding of physical reality and along
with it go these very strange things that happen to space and time.
Now let me get to those things now.
Why after all did it take Einstein's genius to come up with special relativity?
Here it is a simple statement.
You can go out and make this statement to your friends.
I know relativity.
The laws of physics are the same for all observers in uniform motion and that is really it.
There is nothing else to it than that statement.
There is no other foundation from that all else follows and if you ever get stuck in
relativity just go back to that statement.
It's all there.
Why was that so hard?
Well Einstein puzzled about it for ten years and six weeks roughly before the paper on
special relativity was finalized, Einstein said, I suddenly got the answer.
The key was time.
Einstein was able to give up his common sense notion of time and accept something very strange
and different about the way time behaves and then he was easily able to come up with a
special theory of relativity and everything went ahead from there.
To see why it took on Einstein to do that though, let's take a little bit more logic
from this statement.
Here's the special theory of relativity or the special relativity.
The laws of physics are the same for all observers in uniform motion.
Einstein's statement in 1905.
This includes electromagnetism.
For the first time, Einstein brought electromagnetism under the same relativity principle that had
already governed mechanics.
Part of electromagnetism and this is why I spent a whole lecture on electromagnetism
and showed you Maxwell's equations and all the mathematics of them because I wanted you
to see that they led inexorably to the prediction of electromagnetic waves and that those electromagnetic
waves move at a known, calculable speed, see 186,000 miles a second, etc.
Includes that prediction.
In what frame of reference are the laws of electromagnetism valid?
That's the question we've been asking for two lectures.
Now we have Einstein's answer and it's a very simple answer.
For any observer in uniform motion, in any frame of reference in uniform motion, the
laws of electromagnetism are valid.
Any frame of reference in uniform motion.
What that means is all predictions of electromagnetic theory are valid in any frame of reference
in uniform motion, including the prediction that electromagnetic waves travel at speed
C and what that means is the answer to our second question with respect to what does
light go at speed C, which we saw was equivalent to the question in what frame of reference
are the laws of electromagnetism valid.
The answer to that question must also be the speed of light is C with respect to any
uniformly moving frame of reference.
Any uniformly moving observer will measure C for the speed of light.
So therefore all observers in uniform motion will measure the same value for the speed
of light.
So far so good.
That's a direct consequence of our belief in the fact that the laws of physics are the
same in all frames of reference in uniform motion, all laws of physics, including as
Einstein added the laws of electromagnetism with their prediction that there are light
waves and those light waves move at this speed we call C.
That prediction must be true in all uniformly moving frames of reference.
Therefore anybody who's in uniform motion measures the speed of some light and they get the answer
C for that speed and here's where it gets difficult for you.
Even if they're moving relative to each other.
And I believe that was difficult for Einstein, I believe it's difficult for any of us in
our gut to accept this, but it has to be true if you accept the principle of relativity.
If you accept the principle of relativity, then it must be true that all observers as
long as they're moving uniformly will measure the same value for the speed of light even
if they're moving relative to each other.
And I want to give you an example that illustrates that.
Let me begin with a picture of the example.
We're going to try to measure the speed of light.
So here you are or here I am standing by the roadside and I'm looking at a traffic light
and that traffic light is going to flash and emit some light waves and those light waves
are going to go by me at speed C.
And I'm going to measure that speed by taking some simple measuring apparatus.
I'm going to take a meter stick, a stick that's exactly one meter long and I bought
it from a reputable company so I know it's exactly one meter long and I'm going to take
a beautiful, perfect clock which can measure very, very precise time intervals and what
I'm going to do is I'm going to notice with my clock when the light reaches the front
end of my meter stick and when it passes the back end of my meter stick, I'm going to
measure on my clock the time that takes, I'm going to take speed equals distance divided
by time and from that I'm going to calculate a speed for light.
Now that's not actually how we calculate the speed of light of course.
This clock would never do.
This distance, well it's a little short but actually we could measure the speed of light
over this distance.
My undergraduates at Middlebury College by the way in their sophomore year regularly measure
the speed of light over a distance of about 30 feet.
They send a laser beam down to a mirror about 30 feet away, it bounces back and they use
a high speed clock, it's a device called an oscilloscope that notices when the light
beam leaves the laser and notices when the light beam returns and makes a little blip
on a screen and the distance between those blips is a measure of how long the time is
between the departure and the return of the light beam and they can measure the speed
of light to an accuracy of about a tenth of a percent in a simple undergraduate laboratory
thanks to modern technology, particularly a laser that we can switch on and off in about
a nanosecond, in about a billionth of a second, that by the way was built by another undergraduate
of mine.
It's not a difficult thing to do and with a little more fancy technology but certainly
within the realm of what we have, one could easily measure the speed of light over a distance
as short as a meter, one simply couldn't do it with this clock.
But I'm going to pretend we can or I'm going to pretend that this clock has the capabilities
to measure the speed of light very, very, to measure times as short as the time it takes
light to go a meter, very, very accurately.
By the way, since the speed of light is 300,000 kilometers a second, that's 300 million meters
a second, that time is one 300 millionth of a second.
That's roughly the time a fast computer does a calculation, so it's not an unheard of kind
of time.
It's about three or four nanoseconds because light travels one foot per nanosecond and
that's about three feet, a meter is about three feet.
So it's not an immeasurable time, we regularly measure times of million times shorter than
that in physics laboratories.
So that's a reasonable measurement to try to make.
Now here's what I'm going to do.
So I'm equipped with this meter stick and this clock and I'm going to measure that
speed of that light as it goes by me.
Now you're going to go past in a car at 70 miles an hour.
Before you got in the car, I equipped you with an identical meter stick and an identical
clock and again we bought them from the same reputable company, they came off the same
manufacturing run, they're identical, absolutely identical.
You're going by in that car, you take your meter stick, you hold it up, you notice
when the light passes the front of your meter stick, you notice when the light passes the
back of your meter stick, you do the calculation of velocity equals distance divided by time
and you come up with an answer for the speed of light.
You are moving relative to me at 70 miles an hour.
If that picture I showed you of wave speed and the ether worked, you would measure a
speed for c of 186,000 miles a second plus 70 miles an hour, whatever that comes out
to be.
You don't.
If you change the principle of relativity, you measure exactly the same speed I do exactly.
Well, I'll give you the number, it's 299798458 meters per second, that's the exact value
for the speed of light.
It's an exactly defined value, it's so well known that it's now used to set the standard
measure of length.
The meter is now defined in terms of the speed of light rather than the other way around
and we get exactly the same value, exactly, even though you're moving relative to me
at 70 miles an hour.
How can that be?
Worse, I'll put you instead in a jet plane, again equipping you with the same clock and
the same meter stick.
Now you're going 600 miles an hour relative to me, you're in uniform motion, the laws
of physics are equally valid for both of us and you measure the same speed for the light.
Exactly, 299798, 299792458 meters per second, same answer.
Same light also.
Let's make it even worse.
I'm going to put you in a high speed spaceship and it's going to be going past me at a half
the speed of light.
Are you going to get one and a half C for the speed of light you measure?
If you think you do, then you're thinking non-relativistic and you say, oh, it's only
on earth that the speed is really C. There's something special about earth, it's the special
frame of reference.
Nonsense, there is no special frame of reference.
All frames of reference in uniform motion are equally valid and both those observers
will measure C for the speed of light.
And to make that clearer, let me take away the ground, which doesn't matter at all, and
take away the traffic light.
Just got some light going by and we're both going to measure it.
And I'm, this is now from my point of view, I say, oh, I'm at rest, light's going by me
at C, you're going by me at one half C, and yet you measure the same speed for light that
I do.
You are equally equipped to say or equally justified and saying, oh, I'm at rest in my
spaceship and that other observer is going past me in the other direction at half C because
no frame of reference is preferred.
All frames of reference in uniform motion are equally valid.
How can this possibly be?
It must be that something funny has happened to clocks and meter sticks, but you're not
justified in saying, oh, something funny happened to the spaceship measuring instruments
because the spaceship is moving.
No, there's nothing special about your frame or the spaceship's frame.
Something funny must have happened not so much to the clocks and meter sticks, but to
space and time themselves.
And that's what we'll be exploring in the next few lectures.
