Lecture 15. Black holes. Here we look at space-time curvature and the extreme predictions
of general relativity in their absolute utmost extreme. Let me begin, though, with a very
simple question. What goes up must come down, right? Throw the ball up, down it comes. Up,
down it comes. Throw it a little faster, it goes up higher, stays there a little longer,
down it comes. Throw it faster still, it's up higher, stays longer, but back it comes.
What goes up must come down, right? No. And the reason what goes up must not necessarily
come down has to do with the fact that gravity, either as we describe it in Newton's theory
or in general relativity, is a force, if you look at the Newtonian picture, or a distortion
of space-time, if you look at the Einsteinian picture, that gradually decreases with distance
from the source. When I put that massive steel ball on my plastic sheet, it distorted
the plastic strongly in its immediate vicinity, but far away from the big steel ball, the
plastic was hardly distorted. It was almost flat. If I had rolled the ball, the small
ball very far from the big one, I would have hardly noticed a deviation from a straight
line path, because the distortion weakened with distance from the big, massive ball.
Similarly, in Newtonian theory, gravity falls off as the inverse square of the distance
from the gravitating center like the sun or the earth or whatever we're talking about.
Well, it falls off so rapidly, again, as one over the distance squared, that once you begin
to get some distance away from a gravitating object, it gets very easy to get further and
further away. And what that means is it takes only a finite amount of energy, not an infinite
amount of energy, but only a finite amount of energy to get infinitely far from a gravitating
object. And the way that manifests itself is with a number we call the escape speed.
If I'm standing here at the surface of the earth and I throw my tennis ball up in the
air, don't throw it very fast down, it comes. Again, if I throw it faster, it goes farther.
If I throw it fast enough, and for earth surface, that speed is about seven miles a second,
it will leave the earth, it will get farther and farther away from the earth. As it gets
farther and farther away, earth's gravity will weaken, and at a speed of seven miles
a second, it will have enough energy that it will never be brought all the way to a
stop, never turn around and come back to the earth's surface. It will escape to infinitely
far from the earth, and by the time it gets very, very far from the earth, it will hardly
be moving, but it will have just barely enough energy to get infinitely far from earth. If
I throw it a little faster than seven miles a second, then it can easily get infinitely
far from the earth and have energy left over to spare. So there's a special speed called
the escape speed, which is the speed it takes an object thrown, if you will, or given an
initial impulse from the surface of a planet, or surface of the sun, or any point in space
for that matter, to escape the gravitational influence that's around it. For the earth,
escape speed is about seven miles a second. For the sun, escape speed is about 400 miles
a second. For the moon, escape speed is less. We have sent objects into space with speeds
that exceed escape speed from earth, and even the speeds that exceed escape speed from the
sun's influence, at least when you're already out as far as the earth's orbit. The pioneer
and Voyager spacecraft, for example, are traveling beyond the outermost planets already, and they
have escape speed relative to the sun. They will escape the gravitational pull of the
solar system, which is dominated by the sun, the most massive object in it, and they will
travel forever through the galaxy, not escaping the galaxy, but escaping the solar system,
because they left earth and left the solar system with a speed greater than the escape
speed necessary to do that. So there's this concept of escape speed, and that's an entirely
Newtonian concept. We've known about that for hundreds of years. We know what escape
speed was. We know how to calculate it. It's a simple idea. It's shocking to you, perhaps,
because you think what goes up must come down. Earth's gravity does extend infinitely far
through space. The distortion of space time caused by the earth does, in principle, extend
forever. But in fact, it weakens so radically, with distance, that you can throw something
with a finite amount of speed, seven miles a second for earth, and it will escape forever.
What's this got to do with general relativity and the subject of this lecture, namely black
holes? What's got the following to do with it? What determines escape speed? Well, one
obvious thing that determines it is the mass of an object. If I doubled the mass of the
earth, that would make escape speed increase. The other thing that affects it is the concentration
of that mass, how close one is to the center. If I took the earth without changing its mass
and compressed it smaller, I would make escape speed from its surface bigger. If I compressed
it still further, escape speed would get bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger and
bigger. Well, we know from special relativity that there's an ultimate upper limit to the
speeds we're allowed to achieve, and the ultimate upper limit is the speed of light. What if
I were to compress the earth more and more and more and more and more until its escape
speed approached the speed of light? If I compressed it to that extent, I would have
an object where escape speed was the speed of light, and I simply could not throw the
tennis ball up or any other object up because I can't achieve speeds greater than that of
light. I was talking in the last lecture about how gravity in the solar system is weak,
how the effects of general relativity are subtle in comparison with the effects of Newtonian
gravity. The distinctions are very small and difficult to measure. I said I'd tell you
now what I mean by weak gravity, and now I'm in a position to do that. Weak gravity corresponds
to situations where the escape speed is much less than the speed of light. Escape speed
from earth 7 miles a second. Sounds pretty fast, but it's nothing compared to 186,000
miles a second. Escape speed from the sun 400 miles a second, impressive number, but
it's still nothing compared to 186,000 miles a second for the speed of light. On the other
hand, if I compressed the earth to the point where the entire mass of earth, you, me, the
Pacific Ocean, Mount Everest, the molten core of the earth, all the things that make up
the earth were compressed to the size of a basketball, well, escape speed would still
be considerably, considerably smaller than the speed of light. But if I compressed earth
to the size of about a ping pong ball an inch or so in diameter, at that point the escape
speed would approach the speed of light. Strong gravity means being in a situation where the
escape speed is some reasonable fraction of the speed of light. Ten percent, you're
getting there. Fifty percent, ninety percent, that's extreme gravity. General relativity
tells us that we can achieve situations where escape speed is a significant fraction of
the speed of light. It takes major compression of an object to do that. It would take squeezing
the earth to a diameter of one inch. It would take squeezing the sun to a diameter of about
four miles before escape speed at the sun approached the speed of light. It wouldn't
take as much to squeeze the galaxy. And the entire universe may already almost be at the
density where escape speed from it is the speed of light, whatever that might mean, and we'll
get back to that in lecture number twenty-three. So in principle it would be possible to squeeze
the earth to the point where it's escape speed is the speed of light. In principle, it's
possible to squeeze the sun to that point. But it would take extreme squeezing to do
either of those things. Well, the possibility of escape speed equal or greater than, equal
to or greater than the speed of light is what defines the object of my lecture today, a
black hole. Black holes are objects whose escape speed exceeds the speed of light. That's
the definition of a black hole. Why is it a black hole? It's a black hole because nothing
can escape from an object whose escape speed exceeds light. Nothing, not even light. So
black holes, by definition, are black. No light can escape from them. They're completely
invisible in that sense, although there are some subtle reasons why they're not in quantum
mechanical terms, and we'll talk about those briefly in another lecture. But black holes
are essentially, in this picture we're describing with, completely black because nothing, not
even light, can escape from inside the black hole. A black hole is simply an object that
has been compressed to the point where its concentration of mass is so high that the
escape speed from its surface is greater than the speed of light. So what is a black hole
like? Well, right now I'm talking about them as theoretical objects that general relativity
tells us can exist. At the end of this lecture I'll describe to you why we think black holes
really do exist and how we think we've detected them. Let me talk a little bit abstractly
about a black hole first. Here's this object. Maybe it's the earth that we've compressed
smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller, and finally the escape speed has exceeded
the speed of light, and the object compresses still further perhaps, and now there's a tiny
mass inside there. We'll see later it may actually shrink to zero size, but it's surrounded
by a region at which the escape speed is the speed of light. Within that region the escape
speed is greater than light. Outside that region the escape speed is less than light.
So there's a special region in space. It may not have any matter there. It may be completely
empty, but there's a region where once you cross it you're inside that black hole in
the sense that you're now in a region where the escape speed is greater than the speed
of light and there's no way you can escape from that region. That region is called the
event horizon. It's called a horizon because like the horizon you see when you look out
across the earth it's a sort of point of no return. Once an object crosses that event
horizon it can't get out. It's trapped inside that black hole. It's lost forever to the
outside universe. Now what happens inside a black hole? Well, I have to tell you one
other thing about a black hole. Remember a gravitational time dilation? Remember when
I held up these two clocks and I argued that the clock at the lower level was running actually
slightly slower because it was in a stronger region of stronger gravity, a region of greater
space time curvature than the upper clock. A minuscule effect here, an effect that nevertheless
could be detected in that experiment in a 74 foot tower at Harvard University, but there
is a gravitational time dilation. Now imagine this smaller clock being near the surface
of a black hole. Gravitational time dilation becomes dramatic. In fact, at the event horizon
at this point of no return of a black hole, gravitational time dilation becomes effectively
infinite. Time essentially slows down. If you were to fall into a black hole, here's what
would happen. Suppose I were watching you. Suppose I were sitting on earth and I were
watching you fall into one of these black holes. Unfortunate for you, but let's let
that happen. I would see you falling and falling and falling. Let's suppose you communicate
with me by sending a radio signal or you're on the radio and you're talking to me all
the while or on your cell phone or whatever. What would happen? I would see you falling
toward the black hole. But as you fell toward the black hole, you go into regions of stronger
and stronger gravity. That is greater and greater space time curvature. The gravitational
time dilation increases and increases and increases. What that means is things you say
getting to me seems slower and slower and slower. As you approach the event horizon of
the black hole, I see all passage of time, as far as you're concerned, come to a stop.
You freeze on the edge of the black hole and I never see you cross the horizon. In fact,
if you have a powerful enough rocket, before you cross the horizon, you can blast your
way back and you've found another way to travel into the future. Because as time has
slowed down from you near the boundary of the black hole, it's ticking along for me
at the regular ordinary rate it does back here for me. A lot of time elapses for me.
Very little time elapses for you. Before you've crossed the event horizon, you can blast your
way out and come back to me and a lot of time will have elapsed for me and very little for
you and we have the twin situation again. But this time done gravitationally instead
of with a trip to a distant star and turning around and coming back because of our high
speeds and special relativity. This is a gravitational kind of twin situation.
So a black hole is very strange in that right at this event horizon, the gravitational time
dilation becomes infinite. In fact, the Russians have a very different name for black holes.
They don't concentrate on the blackness of them because no light can escape. They concentrate
instead on this gravitational time dilation going to infinity at the horizon, the event
horizon of the black hole. They call them frozen stars because many black holes, not
all of them are believed to originate from stars that have collapsed. And as that collapse
occurs, we watching it from outside would see the collapse happen first rapidly and
then slower and slower and slower. And then we would see the material tend to freeze at
the event horizon. It's called a frozen star. It's frozen in that process of collapse. In
fact, you can debate philosophically whether black holes even exist at all because when
a black hole starts to form, we in the outside universe never see the material cross the
event horizon because the gravitational time dilation becomes infinite. It's a remarkable
thing that black holes do to time. By the way, there's something that black holes don't
do though that a lot of people think they do do. People imagine black holes go around
sucking up everything in the universe. If there's a black hole, it sucks everything
in. Well, nothing could be further from the truth. Black holes are like any other gravitating
object. If the earth, for example, were suddenly compressed to that ping pong ball sized diameter
that would make it a black hole, nothing different would happen to the moon in its orbit. The
moon in its orbit, which senses the total mass of the earth, not whether it's compressed
into a black hole or in a sphere 8,000 miles in diameter, that has nothing to do with how
the moon behaves. All the moon notices is the total mass of the earth. The moon would
continue perfectly happily in its orbit. In fact, if the earth shrunk to a ping pong
ball sized black hole, many objects that now hit the earth, like meteors and so forth,
comets occasionally would be much less likely to do so because the earth would be so much
smaller. The difference with a black hole and the thing that makes a black hole's gravity
inexorable is once something has crossed the event horizon, there's no going out. So black
holes can only grow. They can gather in more and more matter and they don't go around sucking
up things. But if something happens to fall into a black hole, it doesn't get out. And
that's the origin of this idea that black holes go around sucking up things. They don't.
But if things do happen to intersect them, if things happen to be attracted by the black
hole's gravity and are on such a path that they'll collide with it, then they fall in
and they don't come out again. Now, what happens to you falling into this black hole from your
point of view? Well, that's a very different story from what I see happening. Remember,
I see you falling toward this black hole going slower and slower and freezing on the surface
of the event horizon. But now we get into the principles of relativity again. Remember
what relativity says? It says a freely falling frame of reference is the closest we come
to those truly uniformly moving frames of special relativity. If you're in a small enough
freely falling frame of reference, small enough that you don't notice those tidal forces due
to variations in gravity from place to place, those tidal forces due to the curvature of
the spacetime. And even at the event horizon of a black hole, that curvature is not infinite.
So you can get into a small enough frame of reference that you won't notice it. Relativity
says if you're in a freely falling frame of reference, this is the simplest place to do
physics. Everything seems perfectly normal. Things obey the law of inertia. They go in
true straight lines in your frame of reference. You don't feel any forces. You don't feel
anything unusual. So what happens to you as you fall into the black hole? Why? You simply
sail right across the event horizon and in you go. Now sooner or later, you're going
to be in trouble. The reason you're going to be in trouble is sooner or later, those
tidal forces are going to become so dramatic, the curvature of spacetime to put it in relativistic
terms is going to be so big that you'll be stretched as the picture I showed in the last
lecture show. You'll be stretched from head to foot as you fall in and you'll be compressed
the other way and eventually you'll be torn apart, unfortunately. But that need not happen
before you cross the event horizon. It certainly would happen if you fell into an earthed mass
black hole that was the size of a ping-pong ball because you're much bigger than that
thing. You'd certainly notice strong tidal forces if you fell into a sun-mass black hole
four miles in diameter and even if you didn't notice them at the event horizon, you'd be
crushed pretty soon thereafter. But you could fall into a black hole with the mass of the
galaxy and you wouldn't notice anything in a while before you felt those tidal forces.
But you're drawn inexorably to the center and that's the end of you eventually. But
the point is, and this is where relativity comes in, relativity says a freely falling
frame of reference, everything seems perfectly normal. You cross that event horizon and you
don't notice anything unusual. And it's got to be that way if you believe what relativity
says. Relativity says the principle of equivalence makes a freely falling frame of reference
the simplest possible place for doing physics. But here's the remarkable fact. When you cross
the event horizon because the gravitational time dilation has become infinite, that means
you're already in the infinite future of the folks back home. That's one way of looking
at why you can't possibly go back. It would be absurd if you did. So you're sitting on
your watch, you jump out of your space-crip and you start falling toward the black hole,
fire a little jet pack to get you going, start falling toward the black hole. You watch your
watch and it's a finite amount of time, ten minutes, an hour, three years, whatever it
takes depending on the size of the hole and how far away you are from it when you cross
the event horizon. But you don't notice anything unusual. But at the moment you cross the event
horizon because of gravitational time dilation, all of eternity is passed back home. Very
strange things, black holes, due to space and time. Well, that's an abstract view of
black holes and what they do in the curvature of space-time they engender. Do these things
exist? Well, in that philosophical sense I just mentioned, they may or may not exist.
There may be things that are in the process of forming black holes, but are these frozen
stars on the surface of which they haven't, on the event horizon of which nothing has
yet crossed as far as the outside world is concerned. But that doesn't make any difference
because if we jumped in with the matter that was falling into those objects we would see
that indeed there were black holes, there were event horizons and we would cross that
horizon and be done for. So practically speaking it doesn't matter whether the black holes
have yet formed or not. If you get out of our frame of reference far away from the hole
and get into a frame of reference with the matter falling into the hole, the hole is
really there. So black holes could exist. How could they be formed? Some process has
to occur that is dramatic enough to compress matter in ordinary situations like the size
of a star say to the size of a few miles across. Do such processes exist? Well, we believe
they do. There are explosions called supernovas that mark the ends of the lifetimes of particularly
massive stars. Stars of a mass say 10, 20 times that of the sun. These stars end their
life often in a dramatic explosion that results in an outburst and a spewing out of much of
the material of the star into the interstellar space. Some of that material by the way goes
on to form new stars and planets and life and that is in fact where we came from. The
material of which were made was cooked up in a star that exploded and spewed that material
out into space. We're not concerned with that here. Take the teaching company astronomy
course to look at that in more detail. We're concerned with what's left after the star
has exploded and puffed off its outer part. There's a core which is sometimes compressed
from the size of say the sun a million miles across to sizes of a few miles across. And
we have good theoretical reasons to believe that if this core has a mass of more than
about three times the size of the sun, once it gets down to these small sizes it simply
can't sustain itself against its own gravity and it must collapse inexorably to a black
hole. General relativity predicts that this must take place. And so what we see out in
the universe are several kinds of situations where we think black holes exist. One situation
is where one of these supernova explosions has occurred and it's occurred in a binary
star system. Now I used the example of a binary star system several lectures ago when I wanted
to convince you that the speed of light didn't depend on the speed of its source. So we had
two stars going around each other like this. And we were talking there about light from
these two stars and how we knew that meant the speed of light didn't depend on the speed
of the source. But what if one of these stars undergoes a supernova explosion, say this yellow
one? It blows up and it collapses to form a very dense core. And what if these two stars
are very close together? What can happen is matter from the remaining normal star can
start flowing through space toward the black hole. Typically it will form a disk of material
spiraling around the black hole and that material will rub against itself and several things
will happen. As it rubs against itself it will lose energy and it will spiral tighter
and tighter until it actually falls into the hole. But another thing that will happen
is rubbing against itself it will heat up and it will emit copious amounts of energy
typically in the form of x-rays. So our best evidence for black holes of a stellar sort,
that is black holes formed by stars might come from looking in binary star systems.
And I have here an artist's conception of what such a system might look like. On the
one side we have a distorted star. It's some kind of normal star but it's very close to
this black hole, close enough that it's been distorted by the black hole's gravity.
This is essentially a tidal effect. The ocean tides are a modest distortion of the earth
by the gravitational effects of the sun and the moon. Here the effect is much more dramatic
because these two objects are in a very close orbit. Now we can't see the black hole itself
because it's black. But you see this disk of material, let's call it an accretion disk,
because the material is accreting or falling onto or into the black hole. We see this accretion
disk, we see the black hole, we see the gas stream and the material forms this disk and
spirals around and into the black hole. Now we never can see this system as this artist's
conception shows it. These systems are all far too distant for us to actually image this.
But what we can do is observe the different parts of the system spectroscopically. We
can look at the light that is part of that gas stream. We can look at the light that
is part of the original star. We can look at the light that's coming from the gas that's
spiraling around the black hole. And we can infer things about the motions of those gases
without actually being able to see or resolve the individual structures there. And we've
studied a great many of these binary, so-called compact binary star systems. And they come
in several classes. In one case, we have as the compact collapsed object, not a black hole,
but a neutron star. And those situations are easy to identify because these neutron stars
typically spin around and they emit regular pulsations. So if we see the regular pulsations,
that's evidence that this is not a black hole system. If we don't see the regular pulsations,
that's some evidence that it may be a black hole system. Furthermore, we know Newton's
laws of gravity or Einstein's general relativity, although Newton's laws are good enough for
the motion of the two stars in this case. We can figure out from the observed motion,
and we can observe the motion by looking at the light coming from the two objects, even
if we can't see the two separate objects. From the observed motions, we can infer the
masses of the two objects because we understand the laws of gravity. And if we determine that
the small object, the compact one, the one that we can't actually see at all, is bigger
than about three times the mass of the sun, we're pretty justified in inferring that it's
a black hole. In recent years, we've had even better evidence for that. We've seen systems
where the energy emitted by the system is much less than we might expect it to be. And
the interpretation there is that the black hole is dragging, the energy associated with
the in-falling material is falling across the horizon of the black hole before it has
a chance to be released as, say, visible light or x-rays or some other form of radiation
we might detect back on Earth. So the energy is actually being dragged into the black hole.
And because nothing can come out of the black hole, energy itself can't come out. And so
that energy is lost to our universe forever. And these black hole systems are these systems
in which the energy appears to be less than we might have expected coming out. A good
evidence that we're actually seeing material that is disappearing or is about to disappear
across the event horizon. So we've been studying black holes in binary star systems for perhaps
about almost 30 years, about 30 years. And these systems are now well classified in the
first couple of decades of their study. There were a lot of skeptics who didn't really believe
objects as bizarre as black holes could exist. But for a handful of systems, it's now become
quite clear that there is no interpretation known to the laws of physics that makes any
sense except that these systems contain black holes. And so we think that black hole systems
are probably fairly common throughout our galaxy. And we have definitely seen and identified
a few of them. And this change has occurred in astronomical thinking, I'd say only over
the last 10 years. And particularly in the last five years of the 20th century, we've
come to realize that the black holes really are a standard part of, if you will, the astrophysical
repertoire. They're out there, they're real things, and we have to think about them. And
again, the first place we really saw them was in these binary systems where the material
spiraling into the black hole emits copious amounts of x-rays, and so we can see that
material. Again, we're not seeing the hole itself. That's why it's easy to identify the
hole in a binary system, because in a binary system, we can see it through its effect on
surrounding matter. If a black hole were out there isolated in space, and there may be
some, we would have difficulty seeing it. Although it might do gravitational lensing
on passing objects it passed in front of, and there might be other ways to detect it,
but not as easy as detecting these x-ray emitting systems of gas spiraling around black holes
in binary star systems. But another place we think there are black holes, and sort of
outstripped binary systems as the most common location of black holes in the universe are
the centers of galaxies. We now believe that black holes, very massive black holes, probably
lurk at the centers of most galaxies. It's almost certain that our own Milky Way galaxy
has a rather modest three million sun mass black hole at its center. Some of our neighbor
galaxies, which are not terribly different from our own, have black holes of many tens
of sun masses, 40, 50, 100 sun masses, black holes at the center of the galaxies. How do
we know this? Well, one of the instruments that we've used to find this out is the Hubble
Space Telescope, which can look with remarkable precision, and not only with visible light,
but also with x-rays, ultraviolet, and a host of other approaches, a host of other regions
of the electromagnetic spectrum can look into the cores of galaxies, and it can look
through clouds of dust with different wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation. So we can probe
the inner cores of galaxies. And what we see when we look in there are stars, and then
further in gas, moving at enormously high speeds. And we can calculate the speeds. In
some cases, the speeds are close to the speed of light, and we can calculate what kind of
object, how big the object would have to be, and how massive it would have to be for gas
to be spiraling around it at these enormous speeds. And we come up with a very clear answer
that these objects are so small that they can't be big, extended objects like clusters
of stars. They have to be very small, compact objects, and black holes are the best, and
in some cases, the only candidates. We see gas spiraling and spiraling around these black
holes, or these objects at the center of galaxies, and we're quite convinced now that they are
black holes. We believe that the black holes at centers of galaxies like ours aren't doing
much anymore. That's because although some material is still falling into them, the galaxy
has evolved enough that much of its matter is in stars, and the stars aren't falling
rapidly into the black hole at the center. But we believe in the early years of galaxies,
when the galaxies had a lot more gas and dust in them, those black holes at the center were
basically powerhouses of energy. As the material fell into the black hole, again, rubbed against
itself, got very hot and emitted copious amounts of energy, and we believe now that's
the mechanism that powers what for years were the mysterious quasars, distant objects, billions
and billions of light years away that seemed as bright or brighter than an entire galaxy
of stars, and yet were very small and compact. We believe we were looking or looking at the
black holes that were formed at the centers of then primordial galaxies. So we think black
holes are the engines, if you will, that power quasars by drawing in all this matter,
having matter spiral around and fall into them, heating up and giving off all these
x-rays. So we believe that supermassive black holes, millions or billions of sun, lurk
at the center of most galaxies. We believe they even lurk at the center of our own galaxy.
Well, that's real astronomy. That's evidence that black holes exist in our universe. There
are some more speculative things we can say about black holes, too. Black holes are actually
very simple objects. They've been likened sometimes to elementary particles like electrons,
because black holes have only mass, electric charge, and they may be rotating. And there's
a number that describes how rapidly they're rotating. They don't have any other properties.
Why not? Because anything that falls into the black hole can't come back out again. So
we don't care what that stuff was. The black hole contains no information about what went
into it other than total mass, electric charge, and how fast it may be rotating. So black
holes are destroyers, if you will, of information, and they're therefore very, very simple objects.
They're characterized by only a few basic numbers, mass, electric charge, and how fast
they're rotating. And if you examine rotating black holes, and the mathematics of rotating
black holes is much harder than the mathematics of non-rotating black holes and wasn't solved
till the second half of the 20th century, if you look at rotating black holes, you find
some remarkable interpretations of the mathematics. For instance, there are interpretations that
suggest that rotating black holes can lead to so-called worm holes, which are bridges
through space-time that might connect to other parts of the universe. And such worm
holes, if they existed, might be at the other end white holes in which matter that was pouring
into the black hole in this region of the universe might be pouring out in the other
region of the universe. Now, there's absolutely no evidence for such things, although occasionally
this idea has been invoked to explain inexplicable astronomical phenomena. But the equations
seem at least to permit that kind of interpretation. If you've seen the movie Contact, Jody Foster
goes rattling along through a wormhole that this advanced civilization has discovered
to a distant region of space-time and gets there much quicker than she could by the normal
route, because this is a bridge, a tunnel, from one region of space-time to another,
which is possible in a curved space-time. Well, I think that's very speculative, but
black holes connecting to remote regions of the space-time? Who knows? It might be possible.
I think black holes make an interesting point. When the equations of general relativity first
predicted the existence of black holes, people kind of dismissed that. Then they began to
take them seriously, and today most astrophysicists tell you, yep, black holes exist. I think
it's an example of a richness that our universe has that we need to appreciate. Here are these
equations of relativity. They predict something that might be possible, and lo and behold,
bizarre as these objects are, we find them. It's as though the universe is trying to make
possible all the things that might be. In general relativity, certainly predicts some
bizarre things, and the black holes are probably the most bizarre of those things.
