Lecture 13, a problem of gravity.
We're now halfway through the course, and at this point you have a pretty solid understanding
of Einstein's special relativity.
It's grounding in the principle of relativity that the laws of physics are the same for
all observers in uniform motion, and many of the consequences of that statement.
You understand them with a logical grounding, which is pretty solid.
In the rest of the course, we're going to be a bit more descriptive, a bit more brief,
and I'm not going to be able to ground everything as much in that logic.
In the next three lectures in particular, we're going to look at Einstein's general
theory of relativity, the extension of special relativity to the more general case where
we don't have to worry about things just being in uniform motion.
The general theory of relativity is remarkably a theory of gravity.
It doesn't seem at first that it should be, and in this lecture we're going to explore
why that is.
What would a general theory of relativity be?
Well, in essence, a general theory of relativity would state the laws of physics are the same
for all observers, period.
The laws of physics are the same in all frames of reference, period.
It doesn't matter what their state of motion is.
No state of motion is special, but that seems absurd on the face of it.
After all, if I'm in that airplane moving through smooth air, I can eat my dinner, but as soon
as I hit turbulence, my French fries are flying all over the place, and the peanuts are jumping
out off the tray table and going all over the airplane.
It doesn't seem that the laws of physics work there the same way they did in a uniformly
moving reference frame.
Making general relativity is much more difficult.
It took reformulating the laws of physics in such a way that, indeed, they are independent
of your point of view, that the laws of physics are basically the same for all observers,
and that was a difficult thing to do.
Again, the airplane, a ship in a stormy sea, that twin who turned around when she got to
the distant star, they feel these forces on themselves.
When you're in a car rounding a curve, you feel forces on yourself that aren't there
when you're going in a straight line.
Something is different.
How do we reconcile that?
How do we make a theory of relativity that says all those states of motion are perfectly
good states for doing physics?
It seems difficult.
It seems perhaps impossible.
But historically, general relativity arose as a theory about gravity, and it did so because
as soon as one tries to ask about motion that is not uniform, one is dealing with acceleration,
and as soon as one starts dealing with acceleration, one finds there's a very close link to gravity,
and in this lecture, we're going to explore that link.
Let's talk a little bit about Newton's theory of gravity that I introduced way back in the
beginning of the course.
Newton describes gravity as a force, and it's a force that's exerted between distant objects.
The earth here reaches out and pulls on the moon, and the moon, as a result, goes in its
circular orbit, falling, if you will, away from its straight line path at a rate that's
set by the force that the earth is exerting on it.
Well, that's an interesting description, and it's one that serves us very well for sending
spacecraft to Jupiter, or putting satellites in Earth orbit, or calculating the positions
of the planets, or the position of the moon, so we can see when there's going to be any
clips of the sun, or so we can land a spacecraft there, or whatever.
But nevertheless, it's a description of gravity which is philosophically unsatisfying in a
way I described quite a while ago when I introduced the field concept, and now that we know special
relativity, it's unsatisfying for two important reasons.
First of all, this action at a distance idea can't be right.
It can't be consistent with relativity, because if something happens to the earth over here,
we know that the moon cannot respond instantaneously.
Information about something happening to the earth, it disappears, or whatever, cannot reach
the moon in any time shorter than about a second and a half, which is about the travel
time, a second and a quarter, the travel time for light from the earth to reach the moon,
because no influence, no information can travel faster than light.
That's the whole point I was making in the last few lectures.
So the instantaneous action at a distance built into Newton's theory of gravity is simply
inconsistent with special relativity.
The other problem is a little bit more subtle.
In Newton's theory, the force of gravity depends on the distance between the objects.
Remember, that's how he reasoned that there was a one over distance squared falloff in
the strength of the gravitational force.
Newton actually calculated the acceleration of the moon, compared the distance the moon
was from the center of the earth, with the distance the falling apple was from the center
of the earth, squared things, and lo and behold, it worked out right.
But there's a problem with distances, because we know that distances depend on your point
of view.
Distance is not an absolute.
Distance depends on the observer.
And so there's a great big ambiguity in Newton's law.
How do we apply Newton's law in a situation where distance is not a well-defined quantity,
where distance is relative, where distance depends on the point of view on the observer,
on the observer's state of motion?
Something is wrong with Newton's law of gravity.
It cannot be consistent with special relativity.
Einstein knew this.
So he knew that if he was going to develop a theory of gravity, he was going to have
to somehow move beyond Newton.
And at the same time, by incorporating gravity, it turns out the problem of making a theory
that deals with non-uniform motion also gets solved.
The mathematics of general relativity and the conceptual basis of general relativity
is much more difficult than that of special relativity.
And I can tell you right now, you won't come out of my three lectures on general relativity
with anything like the depth of understanding you have of special relativity.
But I hope to give you a glimpse of this theory in all its richness, and I hope to spend some
time on some of the contemporary applications of general relativity in astrophysics, particularly
to black holes.
So let's move on and look at really what is the fundamental basis of the theory of general
relativity.
The fundamental basis, in a way, goes back to Galileo.
Remember Galileo's famous experiment that may or may not have occurred?
Galileo's purported to have dropped two objects of different mass off the Leaning Tower of
Pisa and discovered that they fell with the same not speed, but the same acceleration.
Objects experienced the force of gravity in Newton's description, and they fall toward
Earth with a constant force acting on them, at least near the surface of the Earth, where
gravity doesn't change much with height.
They fall with an acceleration, and their speed increases at a steady rate, and the
point is that all objects do that in the same way.
So I'm going to drop this massive basketball and this much less massive tennis ball, and
they basically fall with exactly the same acceleration, hit the ground at the same time, despite
the fact that this one is much more massive.
Now why is that?
Well, this one is indeed much more massive.
Many lectures ago I put these two balls on the table, and I hit each one with the same
force, and you found the massive one accelerated much less than the tennis ball.
Why?
Because same force, bigger mass, less acceleration.
Newton's law, F equals ma.
So why do these two things fall with the same acceleration?
Well it must be that there's a bigger force acting on the big basketball than there is
on the little tennis ball, and big and little here mean massiveness, not size.
This is more massive, it weighs more.
So when I drop these two objects, they both fall with the same acceleration, apparently
because the force acting on each one, the force of gravity, is proportional to its mass.
That's a profound point.
That's a point that for many years was regarded as simply some kind of strange coincidence.
Let me tell you a little bit more about that point.
When I accelerate this basketball by pushing it on the table, I can actually determine how
massive it is by applying a known force and seeing how much it accelerates, and using
Newton's law, F equals ma, to calculate what its mass is.
If I apply the same force to the tennis ball, it accelerates more, and I can determine that
it is less massive, and I can calculate that quantitatively.
Those experiments and the property, the mass of those objects that I'm thereby measuring,
have nothing at all to do with gravity.
I never mentioned gravity.
I'm moving those things horizontally on a tabletop.
I could do the same experiment in interstellar space, or intergalactic space, far from any
gravitating object, has nothing to do with gravity.
On the other hand, I do another experiment.
I weigh these two objects by hefting them against gravity, and I find their weight, which
is basically a measure of the gravitational force Earth exerts on them, is in direct proportion
to their mass as I determine it by trying to push on them.
Now, that's a strange coincidence.
This property of these objects that makes them hard to accelerate, a property that has
nothing to do with gravity, seems to be proportional to the same property that determines how much
force Earth exerts on them, and it's because of that proportionality, or might as well
call it an equivalence, that these two objects fall with the same acceleration.
The tennis ball is less massive, but the force, and it therefore takes less force to give
it a given acceleration, but on the other hand, the force of gravity is less in exactly
the same proportion.
Sometimes those two properties, the property that determines how hard it is to accelerate
something, that property is called inertial mass, because it's about the inertia of the
object, and the other property that determines how much force the Earth's gravity or any
other object's gravity exerts on the object, that's called the gravitational mass, and
the remarkable fact is that the gravitational mass and the inertial mass seem to be the
same thing, even though they deal with very different aspects of reality, and the properties
of these objects, one with how hard it is to push it, with nothing to do with gravity,
and the other with what force gravity exerts on it, and that has nothing to do with pushing
this, yet they seem to be the same property.
That equivalence of gravitational mass and inertial mass was, for centuries, an unusual
coincidence.
Einstein made it the cornerstone of general relativity.
Einstein declared that is the basic principle.
Inertial mass and gravitational mass are exactly the same thing.
That principle, that they are the same thing, is basically called the principle of equivalence.
Let me now describe the principle of equivalence, and exactly what it implies for acceleration
in gravity, because the principle of equivalence, the principle that the inertial properties,
how hard it is to accelerate an object, and the gravitational properties, how much force
it feels as a result of the gravitational attraction of Earth or some object, the fact
that those two properties are the same, leads to an equivalence between the effects of gravity
and the effects of acceleration that makes the two indistinguishable, and ultimately,
if you want to know why general relativity becomes a theory of gravity, it's because
of that indistinguishability.
If you'd like logically to generalize special relativity, remember that was specialized to
the case of uniform motion, if you want to generalize it to non-uniform motion, you're
then talking about accelerated motion, motion that changes, motion that isn't straight line
at constant speed.
I've just told you that acceleration, effects of acceleration, and the effects of gravity
are indistinguishable because of the principle of equivalence, and therefore, the minute
you start talking about accelerated motions, you're also talking about gravity.
That's why general relativity becomes a theory of gravity.
Let's take a look in some detail at the principle of equivalence.
I've got a picture here which shows an unfortunate human being who's in an elevator in which
the cable has been cut, and this poor individual is in so-called free fall.
That is, the individual, the elevator, and all the contents of that elevator are falling
freely toward the Earth, there are no other forces acting on it, we're going to elect
air resistance, it's falling freely, it's not sitting on the ground where the ground
would be pushing up on it and supporting it.
What if I take a ball out of my pocket and I drop it in this freely falling elevator?
Well, what happens?
The elevator is falling downward with a certain acceleration, it happens to be 32 feet per
second of speed every second you fall, or 9.8 meters per second every second you fall,
but the number isn't important.
The important point is, as Galileo showed us, it's the same for all objects.
So me, the ball, and the elevator are all accelerating downward with the same acceleration,
and what that means is if I take the ball out of my pocket and put it there, it just
sits there.
It seems to me to be weightless.
It isn't really weightless because gravity is really pulling down on it, the force of
gravity is its weight, but it seems to be weightless.
Now, this is a bad situation to be weightless in, because pretty soon that falling elevator
is going to crash into the ground and then forces that are not the force of gravity,
but rather the forces of the Earth pushing up, which are ultimately electric forces
of the crushing of the atoms in the Earth and so on.
Those are going to act with disastrous consequences for the elevator and its passenger.
But there are situations where one can be in, quote, free fall without running into
this danger, and the most obvious one is being in an orbiting spacecraft.
As I described when I talked about Newton's vision of orbits, a spacecraft in a circular
or even elliptical orbit is simply falling.
It's falling around the Earth, it's deviating toward the Earth from the straight line path
it would follow if there were no force acting.
It is just as much in free fall as this elevator.
In fact, it's more so because there's no air resistance up there.
But weightlessness in a spaceship has nothing to do with being in outer space.
The unfortunate number of books, especially children's books on the subject of science
that say, oh, people are weightless in space because there's no gravity in space, hogwash.
If there were no gravity in space, the space shuttle would go off in a straight line at
constant speed obeying Newton's first law, the law of inertia, and we'd never see it
again.
In a circular path, in Newtonian terms, that's because there's a force acting on it.
Why are astronauts weightless?
Because they and their spaceship and everything in the spaceship are in free fall, they all
experience the same acceleration, and that's ultimately because their inertial masses,
how hard it is to accelerate them, and their gravitational masses are the same thing.
That's why astronauts are weightless.
So the astronauts are, in fact, in this situation, but more safely so because their path does
not happen to intersect the Earth.
Another example, if you've seen the movie Apollo 13, Tom Hanks floats weightlessly around
the cabin of an airplane which is made to go in a free fall trajectory.
It's basically in free fall during the time the astronauts are weightless.
At the time Apollo 13 came out, the newspapers were full of wonderful reviews saying how
cleverly they had simulated the weightlessness of outer space.
Nonsense.
The weightlessness that went on in that airplane was exactly the same as the weightlessness
that occurs in an orbiting spacecraft.
It's the weightlessness that occurs for any object or any system that is falling freely,
that is moving under the influence of gravity.
I don't care whether it's falling down or falling around, it's moving under the influence
of gravity, and that's enough.
Okay, now what's this all got to do with the principle of equivalence?
Here we are, we're weightless in this freely falling elevator.
There's another situation in which we would be completely weightless, actually be completely
weightless, and that is if we were in intergalactic space far from any gravitating object, so
far from any galaxy that gravity is completely negligible, and if I'm in that elevator, in
that situation, and I take a ball out of my pocket, it just sits there.
There's no force acting on it.
Those two situations, according to the principle of equivalence, are in fact indistinguishable.
If I'm in that freely falling elevator and I don't have any windows or anything, and
you don't have any way of knowing what's going on outside, and you start pulling balls
out of your pockets or any other physics apparatus, and you do experiments, there is
no way to distinguish the situation of being in free fall near the surface of the earth
from the situation of being in intergalactic space where there is no gravity, until you
unfortunately smash into earth and other forces act, but those two situations are indistinguishable.
That's what the principle of equivalence is saying.
Another thing it's saying then is that we can actually take away gravity, we can eliminate
gravity, we aren't really eliminating it in some sense, but we can make it seem to go
away by going into free fall.
We can transform it away, and I'll have a lot more to say about that in just a minute.
So being in free fall, you don't notice, ironically, the very gravity that is in principle making
you fall.
By the way, there's another important consequence of this.
In that situation where I'm in uniform motion in intergalactic space and there's no gravity
involved, if I push on that ball, what will it do?
Well, it will do what the first law says.
It will accelerate briefly while I push on it, and then it will move in a straight line
at constant speed, obeying the law of inertia, the first law of motion.
This is a situation that acts exactly like, this is a uniformly moving situation, exactly
the kind of situation in which special relativity is valid.
But the situation of being in the freely falling elevator or being in an orbiting spacecraft
is equivalent.
And therefore, we have an answer to that question I posed back with the beginning of special
relativity.
So we find a frame of reference that is truly in uniform motion.
Well we don't.
But the next best thing we have is a freely falling frame of reference.
It's a little bit hard to believe because that freely falling frame of reference is accelerating
with respect to Earth.
But what this says is that freely falling frame of reference is the closest we can come
to a uniformly moving frame.
And if it's very small, and I'm going to say what that means in a few minutes, it essentially
becomes like a freely, like a uniformly moving frame of reference.
The closest we can come to the frames of reference in which special relativity is valid
are freely falling frames that are small.
And I'll show you why small in just a minute.
Now there's another equivalence, and it's the equivalence between this situation where
I'm sitting at rest on planet Earth in my elevator, and I take a ball out of my pocket
and I drop it, and the ball falls with an acceleration of 32 feet per second to the
ground.
This situation is equivalent to another situation in which I'm in intergalactic space, and I'm
in a spaceship which is in fact accelerating due to a rocket motor at exactly that same
acceleration.
And if I take a ball out of my pocket, it obeys the law of inertia.
It basically just sits where I left it, having whatever motion my hand had when I let go
of it.
But the whole rocket or rocket powered elevator is accelerating in this case upward in the
direction upward on your screen, and so the bottom of the elevator pretty soon bumps into
the ball, and the ball appears from the point of view of the elevator to accelerate downward.
So those two situations are equivalent, and we can't tell again in any small localized
laboratory which of those situations we're in.
Are we at rest near a gravitating body, or are we off in interstellar space far from
any gravity, and we're being accelerated?
Acceleration and gravity effects mimic each other.
In fact, in big space stations that we plan to build, space stations will be set rotating
to simulate the effect of gravity because of the accelerated motion.
Acceleration and gravity have indistinguishable effects, at least on the small scale.
What does this have to do with general relativity?
Well, here's where Einstein's genius kicks in.
Einstein said, look, if we're going to make a general theory of relativity, the laws of
physics have to be the same in all reference frames, including these freely falling frames
and so on.
If there's a quantity that exists in one frame of reference but not in another, that
quantity doesn't have objective reality.
It's like in special relativity, measures of time and space differ in different frames
of reference.
In some frames of reference, two events are simultaneous, and there's zero time between
them in another frame of reference, they're not simultaneous, and there's some time between
them.
That time does not have an objective reality because it depends on your point of view.
And Einstein says the same thing here.
Quantities that are there in one frame of reference and not in another can't be objectively
real.
That makes this enormous leap.
Because I can transform gravity away, because I can make it not seem to be there by jumping
into a freely falling frame of reference, gravity as we know it is not a real thing.
That's a remarkable statement, but that's what Einstein says.
This big, heavy force I feel pulling me toward Earth, that's not real because there's a frame
of reference I can get into by going into free fall, by taking myself away from contact
with the floor.
I'm in a frame of reference in which I don't feel gravity, and so gravity can't be real
if that's to be as legitimate frame of reference as any other frame of reference.
So gravity can be transformed away.
What then is gravity, says Einstein?
We've got to find something that can't be transformed away, and there is something that
can't be transformed away, and it's something subtle, something that was known about Newton's
time, and it's called, in Newton's theory of gravity, the tidal forces.
These are forces that are due to slight deviations in gravity from one place to another.
For example, if I put this tennis ball here, it feels a gravitational force toward the
center of the Earth.
If I put it over here, the center of the Earth, because the Earth is round, is a slightly
different direction.
If I put it here, it feels a stronger gravitational force than here, because the gravitational
force weakens with distance from the Earth.
The fact is, gravity varies slightly from place to place, and those deviations are responsible
for the tides.
Gravity of the sun and moon pull differently on one side of the Earth than on the other,
and that's what causes the tides.
That's why those are called tidal forces.
Let's take a look at those tidal forces.
Here we are again in a freely falling laboratory, and I'm going to take two balls out of my
pocket and I'm going to let them fall.
And now I've drawn the laboratory big enough that I notice the curvature of the Earth.
Down below is the Earth.
What do those balls do?
They fall toward the center of the Earth.
You'll notice, as I just described, toward the center of the Earth isn't quite the same
direction for the two different balls.
So what happens?
As they fall toward the center of the Earth on paths that take them toward the center,
they actually come closer together.
Now that's something all observers agree about.
The observer in the freely falling frame of reference notices, doesn't know about falling,
but notices these two balls drifting slightly together.
An observer on the Earth says, oh, I see what's happening.
They're falling on these converging paths.
They disagree about the interpretation of what's going on, but the phenomenon is real
for both of them.
Those two balls appear to drift together.
That's something real that cannot be transformed away.
Notice it's not something that you could experiment with with a single point of particle.
A single tennis ball wouldn't tell you that.
Well, something as big as a tennis ball would ultimately, but a single point, like an electron,
you couldn't learn that from one point.
You've got to have an extended object or a couple of objects to tell you that.
So what happens as we fall?
Well, two interesting things happen.
The balls, which are now this far apart, come closer together.
Something else has happened here.
If you look carefully at this picture, you'll see it.
What's happened to me?
Well, I've become squeezed a little bit this way because the particles in me are also falling
toward the center of Earth coming closer together.
Furthermore, I've become stretched in the vertical direction.
Why?
Because gravity is slightly weaker at my head than it is at my feet, and so I'm somewhat
stretched.
Now, for Earth, these effects are something we never, ever feel because Earth's gravity
is so weak.
If we were as big as this picture has us, if my height were a substantial fraction of
the size of the Earth, then I would feel these effects, and they would be very noticeable.
But if I'm in a small enough frame of reference, a small enough freely falling laboratory,
I don't notice these effects.
If I'm in a laboratory the size of a real elevator, don't notice them.
But if I'm either in a large laboratory, large compared to the size of the Earth, comparable
to the size of the Earth, or if I'm in a place where gravity is extremely strong, and we'll
be talking about those places in the next couple of lectures, then these effects will
become dramatic.
And the point is, these effects cannot be transformed away by going to a different frame
of reference, so they must be real.
So for Einstein, the reality of gravity is what, for Newton, was a very subtle residual
in the differences in gravity from place to place.
Einstein takes away Newtonian gravity itself.
It simply doesn't exist, and it's replaced with this very subtle effect.
And Einstein doesn't think of it as a force.
It's not that those two balls are attracting each other.
That's a different story.
We're making them small enough that their own gravitational attraction for each other
is truly negligible.
But what we're saying instead is, there is something that's causing them to come together.
What is that something?
Well Einstein identifies that something with the geometry of space-time.
This is probably the hardest idea to grasp in general relativity.
In the last lecture, I introduced the notion of space-time.
It was sort of a framework, a stage in which physical events took place, and I showed you
how different observers broke space-time into space and time in different ways.
Let's say space-time was still pretty much like a combination of ordinary space that
we understand and ordinary time that we understand.
And now in general relativity, Einstein says space-time has properties.
And what are the properties?
It has geometry.
And its geometry is not necessarily the geometry that you learned in 10th grade, the geometry
of Euclid, the geometry that says, for example, if you have a line and another line, there's
one line parallel to it and they never intersect.
Or a triangle has 180 degrees if you add up the angles.
Those are statements of Euclidean geometry.
They seem to make intuitive sense.
But Einstein says the geometry of the universe is not Euclidean geometry, not the geometry
of parallel lines that never intersect, not the geometry that you learned in 10th grade.
But nevertheless, it's a four-dimensional geometry.
It is in some way curved.
And the curvature, the geometry of space-time, is what gravity is all about.
And this is a very, very difficult thing to picture.
But here's what Einstein says.
I'm going to try to do this by an analogy.
I have here a large ball.
It's a chalkboard ball.
I can write on it with chalk.
And I'm going to pretend that the two-dimensional surface of this ball, it's two-dimensional
because I can move in one of two mutually perpendicular directions on it.
I'm going to pretend that the two-dimensional surface of that ball is an analogy, an imperfect
one, but an analogy with a four-dimensional space-time that is curved because the ball
is, in fact, curved.
If space-time were not curved, I wouldn't be showing you this ball, but I'd be showing
you a flat blackboard.
And that would be like Euclidean space-time.
That would be a two-dimensional analog of four-dimensional Euclidean space-time that
we would have in the absence of gravity.
But Einstein says gravity is the curvature of space-time.
And then he formulates a very simple law of motion.
Remember we raised the question, is there a natural state of motion?
And by the time we got to Galileo and Newton and even into special relativity, the answer
was yes, it's uniform motion in a straight line.
In general relativity, the natural state of motion is to be in free fall, to be moving
under the influence of nothing but gravity.
But in general relativity, gravity isn't some force that influences you.
It's the geometry of space-time itself.
And the law of motion becomes very simple.
It says an object that's not under the influence of any forces.
You might want me to say accept gravity, but I'm not going to because for Einstein, gravity
is not a force.
It's the geometrical structure of space-time.
An object that's not moving under the influence of any forces, electric forces, pushes and
pulls from people, whatever.
Then the object moves in the straightest possible line in curved space-time, the straightest
possible line in curved space-time.
But that line is not necessarily a Euclidean straight line like you learned about in 10th
grade.
Let's try to draw a straight line in curved space-time.
You've all actually done this exercise.
At some point I'm sure you've studied how an airplane gets from San Francisco to Tokyo.
It doesn't go west across the Pacific Ocean.
It goes north.
Why?
And then south.
Because that's the great circle.
That's the shortest route on the curved globe.
You fly from New York to Europe and you go a lot further north than either New York or
Europe.
Why again?
Because the shortest path on a curved surface is a so-called great circle, part of a diameter.
And that's the best way to get from point A to point B. That's the shortest, straightest
possible path.
So here's point A and here's point B. And I want to get from one to the other.
I go on the straightest possible path in curved space-time and it's a path like that.
That path is straighter than other paths I can draw.
That's a straight line in curved space-time.
And if I drew the whole straight line, it would go all the way around the globe and connect
back on itself, something no straight line in Euclidean geometry ever did.
Now, there are other straight lines.
For example, here's another straight line that intersects that one, but a while later,
those two lines are parallel.
They're running completely parallel to each other.
So those are parallel straight lines.
And yet the parallel straight lines intersect.
This is not Euclidean geometry.
It's a different geometry.
And it's that intersecting of the parallel straight lines that tells us something unusual
is going on here that we have a curved geometry of space-time.
Now again, this is an imperfect two-dimensional analogy for something that's happening in
a four-dimensional curved space-time, hard enough to think of and hard enough to picture.
But go back to my example of the two objects falling near the surface of the Earth and
coming together.
They were falling on essentially straight line paths, but those straight line paths are
in a curved space-time and they begin to converge.
And that convergence is analogous to the convergence of these two parallel lines in this curved
space-time, in this imperfect analogy for the four-dimensional curved space-time of general
relativity.
It's very hard to picture that.
It's especially hard to picture that because you want to say, oh, but there's a third
dimension in which this is curved.
But in Einstein's theory, there isn't a fifth dimension in which the four-dimensional space-time
is curved.
The four-dimensional space-time is all there is.
It's as if I said the surface of that globe is all that exists.
And if that were true, you could nevertheless do experiments with geometry and drawing lines
and things, and you would have to conclude that there was something funny about your surface,
that it had this property called curvature.
And for Einstein, that property of curvature is gravity.
So let me summarize what Einstein says about gravity.
Gravity is the curvature of space-time.
And how does matter move?
It moves very simply.
In the words of Taylor and Wheeler, it gets its marching orders locally.
It simply samples the local geometry of space-time and moves in the straightest possible path.
What could be simpler?
There's an unanswered question in all that, and the unanswered question is, why is space-time
curved?
What curves space-time?
That's the other half of the general theory of relativity, and that's the part we'll
deal with in the next lecture.
