Lecture 6, Earth and the Ether, a Crisis in Physics
In the previous lecture we asked the question,
in what frame of reference are the laws of motion valid,
and we gave the same answer we gave back in lecture 3,
and the same answer you realized was true in lecture 1,
namely they're valid for anybody in uniform motion.
Then we went on and asked a similar question
for the laws of electromagnetism that we had just learned about,
including their prediction that there were electromagnetic waves
and the electromagnetic waves moved at a certain speed,
the speed c, the speed of light.
So we asked the question,
in what frame of reference are those laws valid,
we found that was equivalent to the question,
with respect to what does light go at speed c,
and then I introduced the 19th century answer to that question
with respect to the ether, a hypothetical medium
that permeated all of the universe
and was the medium in which light waves are a disturbance,
similarly to the way that the air is the medium
in which sound waves here on earth are a disturbance,
or the ocean is the medium
in which water waves are a disturbance.
And then we asked the logical question,
how is earth moving relative to the ether?
And we've been through a series of very rigorous logical steps
in an attempt to answer that question,
and we're part way there now,
and we're going to continue that logic today.
And I want to do this with considerable rigor
because at the end of today's lecture
we're going to be in a real crisis in physics,
and I want you to understand how we got to that crisis
and how difficult it's going to be to get out of it.
So let me just review briefly the logic
that got us to where we are now.
We asked the question,
is earth moving relative to the ether?
There are two possibilities.
Either it isn't, or it is.
We looked last time in considerable detail
at the possibility that it isn't moving relative to the ether.
There were two possibilities then.
Either earth alone among everything in the cosmos
was at rest relative to the ether.
That's an absurd conclusion
given the Copernican principle
that the earth is not a special place in the universe.
It's particularly absurd
in light of what we know from modern cosmology,
namely that there are places in the universe,
distant galaxies in particular,
that are moving away from us at speeds
that are very close to the speed of light,
80, 90% of the speed of light.
It's absurd to imagine that everything in the universe
is pinned to the earth
when there's such a wide range of speeds
relative to earth throughout the universe.
We ruled out the first possibility
that earth alone among everything in the universe
is at rest with respect to the ether.
We ruled that out basically philosophically
on Copernican grounds.
I also guarantee you it's also ruled out
on grounds from observational astronomy
and other measurements we can make,
but it suffices to rule it out on this philosophical ground.
The second possibility was that the earth
drags the ether in its immediate vicinity with it,
and presumably so do all the other astronomical bodies.
We looked at the possibility that that was true.
I gave you an example involving an umbrella
and trying to keep dry in the rain
as I move through the rain,
analogous to the earth moving through the ether
and having to point a telescope in different directions,
and astronomical observations convince us on that basis
that the earth does not drag the ether
in its immediate vicinity with us.
So we ruled out that possibility as well,
and together then we've ruled out the possibility
that the earth is not moving relative to the ether.
So we're forced to the logical conclusion
that the earth must be moving relative to the ether.
If it is moving relative to the ether,
then just as a rider in a convertible car
is feeling a wind going past them
even though the air may be still because of the motion of the car,
similarly, if earth is moving through the ether,
there must be an ether wind blowing past the earth,
and we ought to be able to detect that wind somehow.
We can't detect it by a mechanical means,
by the laws of motion,
because they're the same in all frames of reference.
They don't care about the motion of the ether,
but we should be able to detect it
with some kind of electromagnetic experiment,
some kind of experiment involving electricity and magnetism,
because we believe in the ether paradigm
that the laws of electricity and magnetism are valid exactly,
only in the ether's frame of reference,
and if we're moving relative to the ether,
we should be able to detect some subtle differences.
So the other possibility is that the earth
is moving relative to the ether.
That's the only possibility we have left,
and if that's true,
there must be this ether wind blowing past earth,
and we should be able to detect that ether wind,
and in particular, to measure both its speed and direction,
and that's what we want to try to do.
Let me carry this a little bit further
and suggest how we might do that.
If you have a wave of any kind,
and let me talk first about a sound wave here in air,
if you have a wave that travels at a certain speed
with respect to its medium,
in the case of a sound wave, that medium is air,
sound waves go about 700 miles an hour with respect to air.
That's incidentally why jet planes travel
no more than about 600 or so miles an hour
because they don't want to go supersonic.
It requires a whole different engineering to do that,
so that kind of sets an upper limit
to the speed of everyday airplanes.
Speed of sound is about, anyway, 700 miles an hour,
about 1,000 feet per second.
That's why when you hear, when you see lightning
and count the seconds till thunder,
every five seconds represents about a mile
because the speed of light is almost instantaneous
and the speed of sound is about 1,000 feet a second.
Anyway, speed of sound, about 700 miles an hour.
If there's a wind blowing at, say, 50 miles an hour
in the direction the sound waves are going,
the sound waves will be going relative to the Earth
and relative to you if you're standing still on Earth
at 750 miles an hour.
So what's that look like?
The wave speed, that's the important point.
The speed of these sound waves depends on the wind speed
and on the direction of the wind.
I'm showing a picture here which shows you standing at rest on Earth.
A blob of, at this point, air surrounds you
and the air is at rest.
And there's a series of sound waves coming at you
at 700 miles an hour relative to the air.
And they're also moving at 700 miles an hour relative to you
because the air is at rest relative to you.
The speed of sound is 700 miles an hour relative to the air.
The air is not moving with respect to you.
Therefore, this sound is going 700 miles an hour
with respect to you.
If, on the other hand, the wind is blowing toward you,
and I put a little arrow here on the blob of air
to represent the fact that the whole air is moving,
the air is carrying the sound waves.
The sound waves are moving at 750 miles,
700 miles an hour relative to the air.
Let's say the wind is blowing at 50 miles an hour.
Then the sound waves are coming at 750 miles an hour relative to you.
So the wave speed that you measure,
the speed of sound that you measure,
is different than it would be if there weren't a wind blowing.
In this case, with the wind blowing in the direction
the sound waves are moving toward you,
you will get a speed that's greater, 750 miles an hour.
If, on the other hand, the wind is blowing away from you,
but the sound is still coming toward you,
then the speed of sound will be reduced for you.
It's still 700 miles an hour relative to the air,
but because the air is blowing away from you at, say, 50 miles an hour,
the sound waves are going past you at only 650 miles an hour.
So the wave speed depends on the wind speed and the direction.
Incidentally, you might speculate about what would happen
if the wind speed were exactly the speed of sound.
Those sound waves would never get to you.
Well, let's redo this example,
but now let's talk about light and the ether.
If we talk about light and the ether,
my blob of air, the medium in which sound waves propagate,
now represents the ether.
The sound waves now become light waves.
Light waves travel at a known speed,
the speed c, 186,000 miles a second,
300,000 kilometers a second,
one foot per nanosecond relative to the ether.
That's the 19th century hypothesis.
So if we're at rest with respect to the ether,
we will measure c for the speed of sound
and we will measure c for the speed of light.
And we'll measure c for the speed of light
no matter which way the light is moving,
because the ether is still with respect to us,
but we've ruled out the possibility
that the ether is at rest with respect to earth
or earth is at rest with respect to the ether.
We know the ether must be moving with respect to earth
or earth is moving through the ether,
There must therefore be an ether wind blowing past the earth.
And therefore, in some directions,
depending on whether light is moving with the ether wind
or against the ether wind or maybe sideways to the ether wind,
the speed of light should have different values.
And if we can build a sensitive enough experiment
and send light in different directions,
we should be able to detect that difference.
And we should be able to use that difference to calculate
the speed of the earth and the direction of the earth
relative to the ether.
That's the experiment physicists wanted to do in the 19th century.
There were a number of attempts to do that experiment.
Early attempts failed for a number of reasons,
some of them fairly theoretical and some of them
because they simply weren't sensitive enough.
The problem is we already know that even though earth must
be moving relative to the ether, that's
what our logic told us, that motion can't be very, very fast.
If that motion were, say, 90% of the speed of light,
it would be very obvious to us that Maxwell's laws
of electromagnetism work differently in some directions
than others.
It would be very obvious that the speed of light
was different in different directions.
If we are moving relative to the ether, which logic tells us
we are, that motion is not real fast compared
to the speed of light.
That already should raise up your hackles a little bit
because if there are people out there on planets or distant
galaxies moving away from us at 80% of the speed of light,
they must be moving pretty fast relative to the ether
because, remember, they don't drag the ether with them.
But we are moving relatively slowly compared to the ether
and we want to find out just how fast that is.
We can't move very fast at all on earth relative
to the speed of light.
But we do have a faster speed available to us,
and that's the speed of the earth in its orbit around the sun.
As I mentioned before, that speed is about 20 miles a second.
Now, we don't know how fast the whole sun and the solar
system are moving relative to the ether,
but we do know this.
We do know that at one point in the year,
if we're moving at 20 miles a second this way,
six months later, we're moving at 20 miles a second
the other way, and that's a difference in speed
of 40 miles a second from going 20 miles a second this way
to 20 miles a second that way.
And we have that difference in speeds to play with.
And 20 miles a second is not big compared to the speed of light,
but at least it's not absolutely negligible.
By the way, for you mathematically inclined types,
these experiments depend not on the ratio of the speed
of the object through the ether to the speed of light,
but on the square of that ratio, which
is an even smaller number.
Take 20 miles a second or 40 miles a second over 186,000
miles a second.
That's a tiny number squared.
It's even smaller.
So these experiments have to be very sensitive.
I'm not going to describe the earlier attempts,
but I'm going to describe in some detail
the attempt that was carried out in the 1880s
by the American physicists, Michelson and Morley
at Case Institute in Cleveland, Ohio.
And this was an experiment they started in the early 1880s.
By 1887, the experiment was sensitive enough
to detect motion 10 times slower than the known motion
of the Earth in its orbit.
So it was clearly sensitive enough to detect the motion
of the Earth through the ether.
No question about that at all.
And I want to spend a good bit of time
describing this experiment because it really
blocks us into this crisis we're going to get to
by the end of this lecture.
So let's take a look at the Michelson-Morley apparatus.
The Michelson-Morley experiment consists schematically
of several parts.
It has a light source, it has two mirrors,
it has a viewer, and it has a device called a beam splitter.
And the beam splitter is nothing but a lousy mirror.
It's a piece of glass that has had silver coated on it
or aluminum coated on it, but not thick enough
to make it a really good mirror.
It reflects about half the light that hits it,
but about half the light gets through.
Today we use slightly more sophisticated devices,
but that was what was used in Michelson-Morley's day,
and it works quite satisfactorily.
So the beam splitter, think of it as a mirror,
half the light that hits that mirror goes through
and half the light is reflected.
So let's see what happens when we turn on the light source
in the Michelson-Morley apparatus and send a light beam out.
Out comes the light beam and it hits the half-silvered mirror.
Some of it goes straight through and hits a distant mirror.
Some of it reflects off the half-silvered mirror,
bends at a right angle because the mirror is placed
diagonally and hits another mirror.
So what we've established here are basically two arms.
There's a path from the half-silvered mirror
to the upper mirror, and there's a path for light
to travel horizontally from the half-silvered mirror
to the right-hand mirror.
The light has been split and it's gonna travel
on two different paths.
It then bounces off these flat mirrors and comes back.
So back comes one light beam, back comes the other light beam,
they join at the half-silvered mirror,
some of the light goes straight through,
some of the light is reflected in each case,
and the important point is there is light
that's been recombined, the original light left the source,
traveled to the half-silvered mirror,
split into two beams that went out
in two mutually perpendicular directions,
came back and joined and goes into a viewer.
This is the experiment with which we're going to try
to detect Earth's motion through the ether.
How are we gonna do it?
What we have in this Michelson-Morley apparatus,
these two paths for the light to travel,
these two arms, the one that goes vertically,
the one in this case that goes horizontally,
although the whole apparatus was actually laid out
horizontally on the ground.
Let me just give you a little historical description
of this apparatus before I go on.
We can today build something that looks very much like this
on an optical table,
which is just a big, heavy hunk of metal
that doesn't vibrate much about this big,
and we can build this apparatus
and pretty much carry out an experiment like this
using lasers and modern optical components.
Michelson-Morley couldn't do that.
They actually floated their apparatus
on a 13-foot diameter slab of stone
floating in liquid mercury.
Sensitive optical experiments have to be isolated
from vibration, and it took a lot of effort to do that.
And furthermore, they had lots of mirrors
and the light bounced back and forth many times
to make the light paths longer.
But in principle, this is what the apparatus looked like.
What we're going to try to do is detect differences
in the travel time for the light on these two paths.
For now, think of those two paths
as being identical in length,
but I'm gonna assure you that isn't at all crucial,
and I'll show you why in just a minute.
Now, it's not good enough simply to time the travel time
with the light on the two paths with a stopwatch.
We just don't have stopwatches accurately enough,
accurate enough.
We couldn't even do that.
Well, in today's technology,
we might just barely be able to actually time the travel time.
But in the 1800s, that was impossible.
Instead, Michelson and Morley used a much clever
and more sensitive method to try to detect a difference
in travel time for the two light paths.
They weren't concerned about the actual value
of the speed of light in two different directions.
That didn't matter.
All that mattered was whether the speed of light
was different in two different directions.
That's enough, knowing how different it is
and knowing the different directions
to tell you something about the speed of the Earth
relative to the ether.
Why do you expect a difference in travel time?
Suppose there's an ether wind blowing in this apparatus.
Suppose the wind is blowing horizontally
from right to left, for example.
I assert that it will take light longer
to travel up this path and back
than it will to travel along this path
and back at right angles to the wind.
You might say, well, why is that?
Why should it take any longer to travel upstream and back?
Think about a boat rowing in a river.
If I were rowing upstream and downstream,
would it take me just as long if there were no current
or if there were a current?
You might say, well, if you row upstream, you're slowed down,
but if you row downstream, you're sped up
and it all comes out in the wash, but that's not true.
And the reason it's not true is very simple.
If I row the boat upstream,
because the river is trying to push me backwards,
I'm spending a lot more time on the slow leg of the trip.
I'm spending a lot more time
when I'm fighting against the river
than when I come back and the river is speeding me up.
And the result of spending more time going slowly
means the overall time takes longer.
It actually also takes longer to go across the river
and back because I've got to angle myself
a little ways upstream to land on the opposite shore,
but that effect is much less
because I'm not working directly against the current.
You could work out the mathematics of this
if you want using the Pythagorean theorem,
but you don't need to.
Take my word for it.
It takes longer to go upstream and back
than it does to go across the wind and back again.
So if there is an ether wind blowing past the earth
and we orient this apparatus,
so one leg is in the direction of the wind
and the other leg is perpendicular to it,
then we should be able to see a difference
in travel times for the light beams.
How are we going to detect that difference?
Well, that was the genius of the Michelson-Morley experiment.
And incidentally, this design is used to this very day
as a sensitive measurement of distances or optical properties
because the clever idea that Michelson-Morley had
works so well and is so very, very sensitive.
So let's take a look at how it works.
To do that, we need to understand
the phenomenon of wave interference.
So the picture I'm showing here
has a little picture of the Michelson-Morley apparatus
in the upper right corner
to remind you what we're talking about.
Wave interference is the following thing.
When two waves combine,
as they do in the Michelson-Morley experiment
after they've gone their separate paths
and come back together again,
they may be in step with each other,
as I show for two waves here.
These two waves are exactly in step.
This is what would happen
if they had traveled identical paths in identical times.
They would be in step,
and when they combine,
they would make a wave that was bigger.
That's one possibility.
That's called constructive interference.
The waves combine constructively to make a bigger wave.
We're gonna see more about interference later
when we get to quantum physics.
So that's one possibility for interference.
On the other hand,
what if the path lengths are different
or the times that are taken are different
because of the ether wind,
and the two waves arrive slightly out of step?
In fact, what if they're out of step
by just the right amount that the crests,
the peak of one wave,
line up with the troughs of the other?
Then when those waves combine, we get nothing.
Darkness, no light.
That's wave interference.
What's happening in the Michelson-Morley experiment
is we're combining two waves
that have traveled on two different paths.
If the path lengths are identical
and the speeds of light are identical,
they're gonna come back in step.
We're gonna get constructive interference.
If the path lengths are identical,
but the speeds are different,
we're gonna get different interference.
It may be destructive,
it may be partially destructive.
In fact, the situation is a little bit more complicated
than that.
The light beam is not perfectly straight,
but it spreads out a little bit
and parts of the light travel at slight angles
and they travel slightly different paths.
And the result of all this is
what an observer looking in the viewer sees
is something like this.
This is an actual photograph taken
by putting a camera at the viewer
of a Michelson-Morley experiment.
And what you see are a band
of what are called interference fringes.
You see light and dark and light and dark
and light and dark.
This particular one was done with red laser light,
the same kind of red lasers you see in supermarket checkouts.
That's why we have that color.
So we see alternating bands of light and dark.
The light bands, the bright bands,
are due to waves that traveled the two paths
and came back interfering constructively.
The dark regions are due to waves
that came back and interfered destructively.
And again, because light is leaving the source
at slightly different angles
and traveling just slightly different distances,
we get this whole range of bands.
Here's why it doesn't matter that we build the apparatus
with exactly the same length arms.
I don't care if the arm lengths are different.
That will just make the interference pattern
shift slightly right to left.
But once I build the apparatus,
that interference pattern will sit there
and it will look like that unless something changes.
And here's the key to how the experiment works.
Michelson-Morley said, let's do this experiment now
when the earth is going this way,
relative in its orbit around the sun.
We'll get a certain interference pattern.
Let's do the experiment again six months later
when the earth is moving in a different direction.
And if the interference pattern shifts,
and that's all that matters,
if the interference pattern shifts,
then we know that the change in the orientation
of the apparatus relative to the ether wind
caused a change in the relative times
it took the light to travel the two different paths.
We don't care absolutely how long
it took to travel those paths.
We don't care that the paths were the same length.
All we want to know is,
is there a shift in the interference fringes?
Not only do we do the experiment at different times of year,
but we also do the experiment at different orientations.
And that's why Michelson and Morley floated their apparatus
in a great big bath of liquid mercury.
OSHA would have a big problem with all that liquid mercury
and mercury fumes today.
But they floated the whole thing on a big stone slab
which floats in mercury because stone is less dense
than liquid mercury.
And they were able to rotate the entire apparatus.
Why do they need to do that?
Well, several reasons.
Suppose it happened that they started out
in a situation where the apparatus happened to be aligned
with one of its paths along the ether wind.
So here's the apparatus, once again,
I'm showing now a big picture of the whole apparatus
with the light beams.
And here comes the ether wind.
So the ether wind in this picture is blowing
from right to left.
The whole apparatus is immersed in this ether wind
that's blowing past the earth.
And in this configuration,
we expect a travel time for light
on what in the picture is the horizontal path.
Remember the whole apparatus
that was lying horizontally on the earth.
We expect a longer travel time on this path
than we do on this path.
Now, we're not gonna know that
just by looking at one interference pattern.
We're just gonna see one pattern of interference
looking at the viewer, a sequence of light and dark bands.
We don't know which path is longer at this point
and which path is shorter because we don't know
if the two paths have exactly the same length and so on.
That's not important.
What's important is what happens if we say,
okay, now let's rotate the apparatus to different angles.
I mean, it might have been.
We don't know which way the ether wind is blowing.
We might not have had this configuration.
Let's rotate the apparatus to a different orientation.
There it is in a different orientation.
If this picture is correct
and the ether wind is blowing at us from the right,
then in this case, the two paths
are gonna take the same amount of time
if they have the same length.
Whether they have the same length or not,
that's not crucial.
What's crucial is the interference pattern we get
in this case is going to be shifted somewhat
from what it was before
because the light traveling the two different paths
is gonna take different amounts of time than it did before.
And consequently, we're gonna see a shift
in the interference pattern as we rotate the apparatus.
Let's rotate it another 45 degrees
till it's now 90 degrees from where it was before.
Now this beam, which originally was going against
and with the ether wind is now going across it.
So now the travel time on this path is shorter
and the travel time on this path,
which was originally the path
that was perpendicular to the wind.
This path is now parallel to the wind
and its travel time is longer.
And that's gonna result again
in a shift of those interference fringes.
And I wanna emphasize this about this experiment.
This is not an experiment to measure the speed of light
in two mutually perpendicular directions.
It's an experiment to determine
whether the speed of light differs
in two mutually perpendicular directions.
And the way we detect that difference
is by looking at the interference pattern.
In one case, we learn nothing from that single case.
We rotate the apparatus
and we see if the interference pattern shifts
and the amount of shift tells us something
about how different the times were along those two paths.
So you say, well, maybe Michelson and Morley
just could have done this experiment in one day,
just sitting there and rotating the apparatus
and seeing how much the interference pattern shifts.
But they had a worry about that.
They were worried, what if by some unlucky chance
on the day they chose to do the experiment,
the Earth in its orbital motion happened at that moment
to coincide with the ether.
So at that moment, the Earth happened to be at rest
with respect to the ether.
Now that doesn't bother us so much.
That doesn't violate the Copernican paradigm so much
because it's okay instantaneously by chance
for the Earth to happen to be at rest relative to the ether.
Pretty soon it's not going to be.
And in fact, six months later,
it's going to be moving in the opposite direction
in its 20 mile a second orbit around the sun.
That'll give it a 40 mile a second speed difference
from when it was at rest with the ether.
And so if we do the experiment at different times,
we should be able definitely to detect this change
in the interference pattern and therefore the motion
of the Earth through the ether.
Well, what happened when the experiment was done in 1887?
What happened was there was never, never,
in any orientation at any time of year,
there was never any shift in the interference pattern,
not, no shift, no friend shift, nothing.
What's the implication?
Here's an experiment that was done to measure
the speed of the Earth and direction of the Earth's motion
through the ether.
It was an experiment that was 10 times more sensitive
than it needed to be.
It could have detected speeds as low as two miles a second
instead of the known 20 miles a second
that the Earth has in its orbital motion around the sun.
It didn't detect it.
What's the conclusion from the Michelson-Morley experiment?
Well, the conservative conclusion is there's no friend shift.
But what's the implications of that conclusion?
The implication of that conclusion is
the Earth is not moving relative to the ether.
If the Earth were moving relative to the ether,
the path lengths, the times to travel the two paths
and the Michelson-Morley apparatus would have differed
either at different times of year
or in different orientations.
We would have detected that as a shift
in the interference pattern,
a shift that was easily measurable for speeds much less
than the known speed of the Earth in its orbit.
And we would have seen that shift, no shift.
So-called null result,
one of the most famous experiments in physics
did not give the result it was intended to give.
Michelson and Morley confidently expected
their experiment would measure the direction
and speed of the Earth's motion through the ether.
Result? Zero.
No interference pattern shift, no friend shift,
no motion through the ether.
Now think back to the logic that got us to this point.
We argued that the Earth is either at rest
with respect to the ether
or it's not at rest with respect to the ether.
We ruled out it being at rest with respect to the ether
because we ruled out Earth alone
among all the things in the universe being at rest
that totally violated the Copernican paradigm.
We ruled out the possibility that there was a blob
of ether surrounding the Earth
that was being dragged along with Earth,
so locally the Earth was taking the ether
in its vicinity with us
and locally the Earth was at rest with respect to ether.
We ruled that out
from the observations of aberration of starlight.
That ruled out the possibility
that Earth is not moving relative to the ether.
The only possibility left is the possibility
that Earth is moving with respect to ether.
That has got to be true.
We're forced to that conclusion
by the beginning of this lecture.
Now we've gone through the Michelson-Murray experiment.
No result, no friend shift,
no detection of any change in the speed of light
in different directions.
Conclusion?
The speed of light is the same in all directions.
How could that be?
That could be only if the Earth is at rest
with respect to the ether.
Because as I described earlier with that sound example,
if the Earth is moving through the ether,
then the speed of sound, speed of light
will differ in different directions
and that's exactly what the Michelson-Murray experiment
was designed to detect.
So we have a real serious contradiction.
We've ruled out the possibility that the Earth
is at rest with respect to the ether.
We confidently do an experiment
that's designed to show us exactly how fast
and in what direction Earth is moving relative to the ether.
The experiment is sensitive enough to measure that
and it gets the answer zero.
It says the Earth is not moving with respect to the ether
and that's exactly the possibility we ruled out.
That's a deep and serious contradiction
that hits physics in the 1800s, particularly in 1887.
How can that be?
Well, it took a lot of physicists thinking about that.
What could be going wrong?
Is there something wrong with the basic hypothesis
of the Michelson-Murray experiment?
Is the experiment not sensitive enough?
No, the experiment is sensitive enough.
Does wave interference not really occur?
No, wave interference had been discovered for light
in the early 1800s and it was a well-known phenomenon.
Light was known to be a wave, it was known to interfere.
There's nothing new in all that.
What's new is that Michelson and Morley
are masters of experimental technique
and were able to put together an experiment
that was clearly and demonstrably able to measure
the effect they were looking for.
So what could be wrong?
Well, there were some hypotheses developed.
The Irish physicist Fitzgerald
and the Dutch physicist Lorenz
both pretty much independently came up
with one hypothesis and these two physicists
deserve some of the credit for the development of relativity
because their hypothesis was in one sense correct
and in another sense not correct.
They assumed that somehow the motion of the experiment
through the ether caused the whole apparatus
to compress in the direction it was moving
as though the push against the ether,
which is strange because the ether
doesn't exert any resistance to objects
like planets moving through it,
somehow the push against the ether or something
caused the apparatus to shrink.
If the apparatus shrank,
let's look at the apparatus again
in the direction of its motion,
then this leg, the leg running parallel to the ether wind,
the leg on which light was going to take
a longer time to travel
because it had to go upstream and then come back,
if that length were shortened by just the right amount,
that would compensate for the longer travel time,
the slower speed of light going against the ether wind.
And Fitzgerald and Lorenz proposed
that that's what happened.
They called this, this is now called
the Lorenz Fitzgerald contraction hypothesis,
sometimes just called the Lorenz contraction.
They calculated how much that contraction would have to be
in terms of the speed of light
and the speed of the apparatus relative to the ether,
and they found there was an answer.
They could get that would allow that effect to go away.
It would allow the experiment to give no friend shift,
the experiment to be unable to measure
the speed of the earth relative to the ether
because the whole apparatus had shrunk.
It's a strange hypothesis.
It's an ad hoc hypothesis.
We'll see later that it has seeds of truth in it,
but it has absolutely no theoretical basis.
And it still assumes that there is an absolute frame
of reference in which if we put this apparatus,
it has the right length.
And if you move it relative to the ether,
it somehow gets squished.
A very ad hoc assumption, no physics behind it,
no theoretical basis, very unsatisfying.
This is now the late 1800s.
The stage is set for 1905 when Albert Einstein
is gonna come on the scene, and Einstein
and his resolution of this contradiction
will be the topic of our next lecture.
