Welcome to lecture 10. The first part of my title for lecture 10 is escaping contradiction.
People who study relativity at first seem to be stuck with the idea that there are awful
lot of contradictions here. There seem to be a lot of things that could not really be
true. How can we possibly have time dilation? How can we possibly have the twin being younger
and yet the other twin isn't younger? These seem to be contradictions. Most of the contradictions
are resolved by a fact that's spelled out in the second half of my title, namely that
simultaneity is relative. What it means to say that two events are simultaneous occur
at the same time actually depends on your frame of reference. And we're going to explore
that in some detail in this lecture. This is about the most technical look we're going
to have at special relativity, not mathematical, but we're getting pretty much into the thick
of it and drawing conclusions thick and fast from ultimately the principle of relativity.
If you're feeling a little bit lost at this point, you might want to hit rewind and go
back to the last couple of lectures and convince yourself that you see how all this must follow
from nothing more than the principle of relativity, that the laws of physics are the same for
all observers in uniform motion. There is nothing else coming in here. There is nothing
new, nothing beyond that. We're just exploring the implications of that one simple fact.
And I'd like to look at a seeming contradiction that may or may not have occurred to you yet,
but is implicit in our discussion of time dilation. And that rather poor phrasing of
it by the phrase, quote, moving clocks run slow. What's wrong with that phrase, of course,
and I asked you to think about this at one point, what's wrong with that phrase is neither
clock has the right to say the other is moving and I'm at rest. Each frame of reference
is equally is an equally good frame of reference reference for doing physics. Each is entitled
to say, oh, I'm here and you're moving relative to me. The other frame to say, yeah, well,
but you're moving relative to me and they're both right. And I want to explore the implications
of that briefly for this statement that, quote, moving clocks run slow. And I think
I'll show you in the process why that's such a bad phrase to use in describing time dilation.
Here's your clock. You're at rest with respect to that clock. And I'm going to go by you
with my clock. I'm moving relative to you. And if you wanted to set up one of those time
dilation experiments, you would say, oh, Wolfson's clock is the moving clock. Mine's
the clock at rest. His clock runs slow. Now the way you would set that experiment up,
remember, is to have a second clock and compare the time when my clock passes your first clock
and the second clock and so on. But the essence of the statement you would arrive at is, oh,
Wolfson's clock is running slow because he's moving relative to me. Now naively, you might
think, well, if my clock is moving slow compared to yours, yours must be moving fast compared
to mine. But that violates the spirit of relativity because the spirit of relativity says no frame
of reference is special. My frame of reference is just as good a frame of reference for doing
physics as is your frame of reference, provided at least I'm moving uniformly. Remember, it
was that non-uniformity of the twin's motion when she turned around at the distant star
that broke that symmetry. But at this point, I'm simply going to be moving past you in
uniform motion. And my frame of reference is just as good a frame of reference as yours
on Earth. Nothing special about Earth or Earth's state of motion. I'm in just as good a frame
of reference as you are for doing physics. And therefore, I should draw exactly the same
conclusions you do in exactly the same situation. So what conclusions do I draw? Well, I'm at
rest in my frame of reference and I see your clock going by me. Your clock's moving relative
to me and therefore your clock must run slow. And if I wanted to set this up very carefully,
I would take a second clock in my frame of reference and I would watch the time when
my first clock passed yours and my second and so on. And I'd do the time dilation experiment
exactly as we did it in the preceding two lectures. And I would come to exactly the
same conclusion that your clock moves slow compared to mine, runs slow compared to mine.
How can that possibly be? There's one of the seeming contradictions of relativity. Two
clocks are in relative motion. Each one must conclude that the other runs slow. If that
weren't the case, then we would have an asymmetric situation and one of them would be able to
say, oh, that one's moving fast and this one's moving slower. That one's at rest and
this one isn't at rest. And that's exactly what relativity precludes us from doing because
relativity says all the laws of physics, all the conclusions you draw from the laws of
physics are the same in all uniformly moving frames of reference. How can that be, though?
Well, the resolution lies, as I said, in the second half of my title, Simultaneity is relative
and we'll come to that in a minute. But before we do, let's look in a little bit more detail
about exactly how we do this time dilation measurement. Here we've got two clocks, clock
A and clock B, and we're raising the question, who's moving and who's running slow? Here's
what clock B thinks. Clock B says I'm at rest, A is moving, so A runs slow. But A says,
no, I'm at rest, B is moving, so B runs slow. That's exactly the situation I just demonstrated
for you. So which one of these clocks is right? Well, the answer is both are right.
How are we going to resolve this? How are we going to understand that this is not a contradiction?
Well, let's look at the situation in the reference frame of clock B and how clock B would really
set up an experiment to prove or show that clock A is, quote, running slow. Here's how
clock B would do it. It would do exactly what we've done in the previous couple of lectures.
We would have a couple of clocks in some frame of reference. That's clock B's frame of reference.
Those clocks are at rest with respect to each other, and clock A is going to move relative
to that frame of reference in such a way that it goes from clock B1 to clock B2, and we're
going to compare the elapsed time on clock A with the time that elapses on clocks B1
and B2. We already know the answer. The time elapsed in clock A is going to be shorter
by that square rootish factor. That doesn't matter. It's going to be shorter. That's the
important point. That's the situation in B's frame of reference.
Now, we have to look at one other thing that I didn't mention before when we set this experiment
up. B has two clocks, and in order for this experiment to have any meaning, in order for
the time interval measured on those two clocks to make sense, B's got to make sure those clocks
are synchronized. That is, they both point to 12 noon or 10 o'clock, as is shown in the
picture, at exactly the same time. Otherwise, they're not keeping time right. They may be
running at the same rate, but unless they're also synchronized, they point to the same
time at the same instant. We've got a problem, and we won't be able to do the measurement
carefully or accurately, because one of the clocks won't have been set right. No problem.
You start some operation and synchronize watches, folks. Well, everybody's watch got to read
the same thing if we're going to be talking about the same time. The same is true here.
To do this experiment, clock B1 and clock B2 have to be synchronized. They have to be
running at the same rate. Well, they are because they're perfect clocks, and they're in the
same frame of reference. That's no problem, but they also have to be set to the same time
at the same instant. I didn't stress that before because it was so obvious, but in fact,
it's not quite so obvious. It's a bit subtle, and now I want to stress it. I want to raise
the question how, in fact, would one synchronize those clocks, because they are, after all,
located at different places. One thing we know we cannot do is bring them together,
set them, something like this, bring them together, set them till they read exactly
the same rate, and then run this one over here. Because if I do that, this clock has
spent some time in a different frame of reference, and then it's keeping time at a different
rate, and then they have failed to be synchronized, that will not work. There are ways to synchronize
the two clocks, though. For example, if I know how far apart they are, let's say they're
one light year apart. Pretty far, but that's a good example. Let's say they're one light
year apart, or let them make a one light hour apart. That'll be easier. Make them one light
hour apart. What do I do? At noon, I set clock B1 to noon, and at the same instant, I send
out a light flash, and I say, hey, B2, when you get that light flash, set yourself to
what should it be? Not noon, but one o'clock, because we know it's taken one hour for the
light flash to go one light hour. That will achieve and that will assure that those clocks
are synchronized. But notice it's a little bit subtle, because the way I can communicate
between the two clocks, the fastest way I know how is by sending a light signal or radio
wave or some other electromagnetic wave, and that takes time because that wave travels
at speed C. I cannot simply bring the clocks together and then separate them, because then
one of them at least has to go in a different frame of reference. There's a more symmetrical
way of synchronizing them if I'd like. I could go into the position in my frame of reference
that's midway between the two clocks, and I could send out a flash of light, and I could
say, okay, folks, when you get this flash of light, both of you set yourself to time
zero or some specified time, whatever it is. And whether or not we get the absolute time
right in that frame of reference, we at least will have the two clocks saying the same time
at the same instant, if in fact we send out this light flash from a point midway in between
them. So it is possible to synchronize two clocks that rest with respect to each other
in a frame of reference, but it is a little bit subtle, but it's entirely possible to
do, but we do have to take into account the finite speed of light. So we assume we've
achieved that synchronization and we've achieved it in this frame of reference. So here's the
situation, clocks B1 and B2 are synchronized, and again, that was so obvious I didn't even
mention it before, but now it's crucial to an understanding of what's going on. Back
to the second half of my title, first half, escaping contradiction. Here we have the seeming
contradiction, clock A says clock B is running slow, clock B says clock A is running slow.
How can it be true for both of them? I asserted it had to be true for both of them. It is
true for both of them. How is it not a contradiction? Escaping contradiction, simultaneity is
relative. Let me say that in great big letters. Events that are simultaneous in one frame
of reference are not simultaneous in another frame of reference. Two events that occur
at the same time in one frame of reference do not, cannot occur at the same time in another
frame of reference. I'm going to ask you to accept that statement for the next five or
ten minutes, but then I'm going to prove it to you before the end of this lecture. I'm
going to show you why that has to be. Events that are simultaneous in one frame of reference
are not simultaneous in another frame of reference. There is an exception to that. I just ought
to mention in case you get thinking about this, the exception is two events that occurred
exactly the same place and the same time. Those two events can be simultaneous, but they're
really essentially the same event then. If two events happen, if I snap this finger and
snap this finger at the same time and the same place, literally the same place, those
two events are simultaneous by anyone who cares to observe it because they take place right
at the same place, but the minute they're separated in space, I snap my fingers simultaneously.
There are observers for whom those events are not simultaneous. There are observers for
whom this snapping occurs before this one and there are observers for whom this snapping
occurs before this one and you say to yourself, yeah, but you really snapped them at the
same time. If you say that, you're saying Wolfson's frame of reference is special. It's the only
frame of reference where things are really true. I don't believe in relativity. I can
throw this whole course out the window because I don't accept the principle of relativity.
If you say they're really simultaneous in my frame, you're singling out a special frame
of reference in which the laws of physics are right and they aren't right in all the
other frames and that simply isn't what relativity is about. What relativity is about is the
statement that the laws of physics are the same in all uniformly moving frames of reference.
So if there is another uniformly moving frame of reference in which these two events are
not simultaneous, then that is just as legitimate a picture of reality and indeed in that frame
of reference, the events are not simultaneous and there's no really about it. To me, they're
simultaneous. To an observer in another frame of reference, they're not. We'll see why that
is by the end of the lecture, but let's see what that does to the problem, the contradiction
we seem to have with the time dilation situation in which clock B says, oh, clock A is moving
relative to me. It's running slower. Clock A says, oh, clock B is moving relative to
me. It's running slower. And I say they're both right. They are both right. Here's how.
We're going to look at the situation next in clock A's frame of reference. We've been
looking all the while in clock B's frame. We've been drawing the picture of the two
clocks in B's frame of reference and the one clock moving between them. Let's now look
at the situation in clock A's frame of reference. And remember, events that are simultaneous
in one frame of reference are not simultaneous in another. I'm going to prove that to you.
Hold on to that for just a little bit. What are simultaneous events we're talking about
in this case? Well, the simultaneous events were the setting of the two clocks in B's
frame of reference. Clock B1 and B2 were set to the same time at the same instant.
In my picture, they were both set to read 10 o'clock at the same instant. How well there
was this synchronizing process. B1 sent out a light signal and B2 set itself to the time
B1 told it, the time B1 was reading when it sent out the light signal, plus the time it
took the light signal to travel and then they were synchronized. Or we put somebody midway
in between them and they sent out a light flash in both directions and the two clocks
set themselves to the same time when they received the light flash and then they were
synchronized. So they've been synchronized in B's frame of reference, in the frame of
reference in which those two clocks are at rest. But clock A is moving past from B1 toward
B2 relative to that frame of reference. And I've just told you, again, not yet with proof
but I will prove it soon, I've just told you that events that are simultaneous in one frame
of reference cannot be simultaneous in another frame of reference. I take that back a little
bit. Another frame of reference moving on a line between the two events. They can't
be simultaneous. Moving sideways might be. Events that are simultaneous in one frame
of reference are not simultaneous in another frame of reference. Well, here we have clock
A moving on a line between clocks B1 and B2, the events of setting the two clocks in B's
frame to say 10 o'clock, which is what they show in the picture. Those events are simultaneous
in B's frame of reference, therefore they cannot be simultaneous in A's frame of reference.
So from A's point of view, the two clocks do not read 10 o'clock at the same time. That's
what it means to say the events are not simultaneous. What are the events? The events are the events
of the two clocks reading 10 o'clock. Those events are simultaneous in B's frame. We set
the two clocks together to 10 o'clock. They therefore cannot be simultaneous in A's frame,
therefore as far as A's concern, the two clocks cannot point to 10 o'clock at the same instant.
And so what does the situation look like in A's frame of reference? Here's the situation
in A's frame of reference. It sees clock B1 and clock B2 going past it to the left.
Why to the left? Because in B's frame of reference, we had clock A moving past to the right. So
clock A sees clock B1 and B2 moving to the left. And I haven't again proved rigorously
why it happens this particular direction, but in fact, it's the case that clock B2 in
the setup of this situation in which B1 and B2 are moving past A to the left and B2 is
further to the right. B2 will be reading a later time at the instant that B1 reads 10
o'clock. So that's the situation from A's point of view. Now remember what occurred
in this whole time dilation thing. The elapsed time on A was shorter than on B1 and B2. It's
measured for the event of A passing B1 and then A passing B2. From A's point of view,
B1 passes A and then B2 passes A. A measures an elapsed time, which is short. A says, wait
a minute, clocks B1 and B2 should be running slow, so they should measure a shorter elapsed
time. Well, they sort of do, but the problem is clock B2 is ahead. And so even though clocks
B1 and B2 are, quote, running slower as far as A is concerned, because it's completely
reciprocal, because clock B2 is ahead, when A compares the time on clock B1 and the time
on clock B2 and when they pass, it will see that clock B2 is further advanced. Why? Because
B2 is already ahead of the game. So what if it's running slower? It's already ahead in
time because the events of the two clocks reading 10 o'clock were not simultaneous.
So there's the key to that contradiction. It is really true that clock B, the B clocks
say clock A is running slow. It's also true that clock A says the B clocks are running
slow. Everybody agrees that the difference in time between clock B2 and clock B1 for
the events of the clock A passing B1 and then B2, everybody agrees that that interval is
longer than the interval elapsed on clock A between those two events. Everyone agrees,
but the interpretation is different. The interpretation in B's case is, oh, A is running
slower. So of course, less time elapses. The interpretation A is a little more complicated.
A says, well, the clocks in B are running slow. If they were synchronized, then less
time would elapse in B, but they're not synchronized. Clock B2, the rightmost clock, is further ahead.
So the elapsed time I get by subtracting the measurement in B1 from the measurement in
B2 is still longer than the time on clock A, even though those clocks are running slow.
Now A's interpretation is those clocks were not synchronized. That's a bit to think about.
You might want to go back and review that a few times, but there is the way out of the
contradiction. It really is true that if a clock goes by me and I say, quote, it's running
slow, it can say my clocks are running slow and there is no contradiction. And the lack
of contradiction comes about because events that are simultaneous in one frame of reference
are not simultaneous in another. Well, why is that?
Let's revisit that star trip we took in the last lecture. Here's the star trip. We had
a trip of what seemed to be 10 light-years distance. We were going at 0.8C. I'm going
to assert now that that trip is not 10 light-years distance as measured in the spaceship's
frame of reference, and we can easily see why that is. The spaceship, after all, is
moving at 0.8C, and it goes some distance, which we thought was 10 light-years, but I'm
going to show you it isn't 10 light-years now. It's going at 0.8C, 0.8 light-years per
year. We know that it takes 7.5 years. We figured that out. So distance equals speed
times time, which is 8 tenths of a light-year per year, times 7.5 years, and that comes
out six light-years. It must be the case that the distance between the Earth and star in
the ship's frame of reference is not 10 light-years, but six light-years. It would be a contradiction
if that weren't true. Distance equals speed times time wouldn't be true. It is true, and
the answer is that the distance is different. The spatial interval is different. That shouldn't
surprise you. We've already seen that temporal intervals, the interval between two events
in time, is different in different frames of reference. Now I'm telling you the interval
between two events in space, the interval between the event of the ship passing Earth
and the event of the ship passing the star, is different in a different frame of reference.
In this case, the difference is given by the original distance in the frame in which the
two objects were at rest multiplied by that factor 1 minus v squared. So if I take this
meter stick, this is true of any object. If I take this meter stick and I move it along,
in my frame of reference, it's a perfectly good meter stick. It's a meter long. But if
you measure it, and I'm coming toward you, say, at 0.8C, you'll measure this meter stick
to be 60CM long. There's that square root of 1 minus 0.8 squared factor coming in again.
It's really a meter long? Well, you can try to say that, but if you say that, you're
saying the frame of reference where it's at rest is the special frame. Not in a way that's
a special frame for the meter stick, but if somebody else is in another frame of reference
and they measure it and they get 60CM, 0.6 meters, they're right too. Measures of space
are not absolute anymore than measures of time are. It's not a surprise. Space and time
are the things we had to give up the absoluteness of when we accepted the absoluteness of the
laws of physics. The fact that the laws of physics are the same for all observers in
uniform motion. We gave up space and time being absolute. When we first did that first
experiment where I handed you a clock and a meter stick and I put you in a car or an
airplane or a spaceship and we determined that you measured the same speed for light
that I did, how could that be? Well, I said, well, something strange must have happened
to your meter stick or your clock or maybe both so that despite the fact that you're
moving relative to me, you get the same answer for the speed of light that I did. Well, something
quote, strange has happened to both clock and meter stick because something strange
has happened to time and space. But be careful. That strange word is another dangerous loaded
non-relativistically correct one. Things are perfectly normal in your frame of reference.
That's a meter stick. It measures a meter long. That's a perfect clock and it keeps
perfect time. It's just the time it's measuring and the space the meter stick is measuring
are not the same quantities that my stick and my clock are measuring. They're different
quantities. We'll see later on that they are in fact aspects of a more unified four-dimensional
quantity, which we all agree on that has to do with space time. We'll get to that soon.
But in fact, measures of space and time are no longer absolute in relativity and we simply
don't notice the fact that measures of space and time are relative to the observer because
we don't have a lot of observers whizzing around at speeds that are a substantial fraction
of the speed of light. But in fact, that's the case. Measures of space and time are not
absolute and we now know how to find them out in these simple cases. In cases like the
time dilation experiment, we know the time on the clock moving from here to here versus
the two clocks that are at rest with respect to each other is smaller by that factor square
root of one minus v squared. And similarly, the distance between two events is smaller
by that factor one minus v squared in this particular kind of example.
So I've convinced you now of something called length contraction. The length of an object,
if you want to be really precise about it, the spatial interval between events of the
one end of the object passing and another end of the object passing and so on, if we
want to be really rigorous about it. But let's just say the length of an object is greatest
in a frame of reference where the object is at rest. When I'm at rest with respect to
this meter stick, it's one meter long. When I move it like this, it's still one meter
long with respect to me, but it's shorter with respect to you by that factor square root
of one minus velocity when the velocity is measured in terms of speed of light squared.
That's called length contraction. It's also called the Lorentz contraction. Again, after
that Dutch physicist Lorentz or the Lorentz Fitzgerald contraction, after the Dutch physicist
Lorentz and his Irish colleague Fitzgerald, who as I described after the Michelson-Morley
experiment came up with the idea that maybe objects compress in the direction of motion
due to their motion through the ether. They came up with the right formula. They came
up with this phenomenon. They just had no basis for it whatsoever. They thought there really
was a real length and the ether somehow compressed things. Well, things do compress in the direction
of motion, but it's not because some physical effect of the moving squeezes them together.
Don't look for that any more than you look for something tugging back the hands of the
clock to slow down the clock. These are effects that are happening to space and time themselves,
not to the objects that are in space and time. The meter stick is shorter because space itself
is different in that frame of reference, not because the meter stick has somehow squished
with respect to some absolute space. So don't get yourself talking non-relativistically.
Don't say it really is such. Don't look for the atoms to move a little closer together
or something. All measures of space are contracted in that different frame of reference relative
to what they were in another frame of reference, but neither frame is justified in saying I'm
the right one. How does this lead to non-simultaneity? How does it lead to the relativity of simultaneity?
Well, that's actually quite easy to see once you accept the fact that length contraction
occurs. Let me give you a couple of examples where length contraction is important though
before we go on. It doesn't bother us in everyday life again because we don't move at speeds
that are near that speed of light, but there are a number of situations in high energy
physics particularly where we worry about it a lot. Remember those muons that were coming
down Mount Washington? Mount Washington is 6,000 feet high, not to those muons. The muons
seem out Washington. Length contracted and it's only 700 feet high. That's why they
last so long. They're only going 700 feet. Time dilation, length contraction, they're
aspects of the same thing. The different measures of space and time in different frames of reference.
If you've ever been to Stanford University, driving down Interstate 280 in California,
you cross a very, very long concrete structure. It's two miles long. You cross it just south
of the northernmost exit to Stanford University. It's the Stanford Linear Accelerator. It's
two miles long. It's a giant particle accelerator that accelerates subatomic particles to speeds
almost out of light. Electrons get up to .9999995 the speed of light in that thing. In the electrons
frame of reference, the Stanford Linear Accelerator two miles long in the Earth's reference
frame is only three feet long. Isn't it really two miles long? No, because the electrons
frame of reference is just as good as yours for doing physics and for asserting the reality
of physical entities and for doing physical measurements and stating the results. It's
really three feet long to those electrons. And if the engineers who designed it didn't
take that into account, it wouldn't work at all. Similarly, your TV tube is shorter by
a factor of square root of 1 minus .3 squared, which isn't a big factor, but is measurable
to the electrons barreling down it to paint the picture than it is to you and me sitting
here in the room where the TV tube is. And if the engineers who designed that tube didn't
take that into account, the picture would not be in focus. So there are cases where
length contraction is an important phenomenon. There are cases where objects are moving at
speeds approximately that of light or close to that of light. Okay, let's go on now and
use this fact of length contraction to look at why events that are simultaneous in one
frame of reference can't be simultaneous in another frame of reference. I'm going to imagine
a situation in which two identical airplanes pass each other. And I'm going to draw the
situation in three different reference frame. One in a reference frame where both are moving.
So these two airplanes are going to be coming at each other from opposite directions in
this frame of reference. They're going to pass each other. I'm sitting in this frame
of reference. The two airplanes are moving with respect to me. They're moving at the
same speeds, but in opposite directions. And so they're already going to be length contracted.
So here are the two airplanes coming at each other. And I've drawn them a certain length.
And that is their contracted length. That's not the length they would have if I were
at rest with respect to them. That's a shorter length. And I'm going to ask the question
about two events. And the events are the coinciding of the tail of the upper airplane and the nose
of the lower airplane and the nose of the upper airplane and the tail of the lower airplane.
Those are the two events I'm concerned about. And again, this goes far beyond airplanes.
This is about any two events as judged in different frames of reference. In this frame
of reference, the two airplanes are the same length because in this frame of reference,
they're moving at the same speed. And although their length contracted, their length contracted
by the same amount. So what happens when they get opposite each other? Well, you can see
that the tail of the left of the upper airplane and the nose of the right airplane are side
by side at the same instant that the nose of the upper airplane and the tail of the lower
airplane are side by side. The two events of the tails and noses coinciding are simultaneous
events in this frame of reference, in the frame of reference where the two airplanes
are moving at the same speed. Now let's look at that in a different frame of reference.
Here's going to be a frame of reference where the upper plane is going to be at rest and
the lower plane is going to be moving therefore faster than it was in the frame of reference
where both were moving. So what's it look like? We have a great big airplane long. That's
its rest length. That's a length in a frame of reference at rest with respect to us. And
the lower airplane is foreshortened even more and it's moving very fast whereas the upper
airplane in this frame of reference is at rest. What happens? Well, the first of the
two events we were worried about is the nose of the upper airplane coincides with the tail
of the lower airplane. Obvious. But at the same instant, the tail of the upper airplane
and nose of the lower plane are not coinciding. In fact, it's a while later that that second
event occurs. The two events that were simultaneous in the first frame of reference, the frame
in which the two airplanes were moving toward each other at the same speed, those events
are not simultaneous in this other frame of reference. And we can go to yet another frame
of reference. We can go to a frame of reference in which the lower airplane is at rest. And
what's going to happen there? The lower airplane is at rest. It's now its normal, quote, rest
length, the length that has in a frame of reference at rest with respect to it. The
upper one is foreshortened just like the lower one was last time. And what event is first?
It's the event of the tail of the upper plane coinciding with the nose of the lower plane.
And a while later, the next event that occurred first in the previous frame of reference now
occurs later. So events that are simultaneous in the first frame of reference are not simultaneous
in the other two frames of reference, and it's even worse than that. Their time order
is in fact reversed. In one case, this event occurs later. In the other case, this event
occurred first. Not only are the events not simultaneous, but their time order is even
relative. Whoa! Does that mean your death can occur before your birth in some frame
of reference? Fortunately, it doesn't. There is only a certain class of events for which
the reversal of order is possible. There are events that can be simultaneous in some frame
of reference. Not all can. There is no frame of reference in which your birth and death
are simultaneous. I guarantee you, and we'll see why soon. In fact, we'll see why in the
next lecture. We're going to explore the question of causality. Is it possible for events to
have their time order reversed without throwing out the window, the whole concept of cause
and effect, because we usually think cause occurs before effect? And if the time order
can reverse, what's happened to causality? We'll see that in a minute.
