to get started here. Hope everybody can see and hear okay. So today I'm going to
talk to you about the Dead Sea Scrolls Bible and I'm using Bible and scare
quotes because obviously nobody was carrying around the Dead Sea, you know,
a printed Bible or even a handwritten Bible. But the books that are part of the
Hebrew Bible, they are represented in the Dead Sea Scroll Library to some extent
and that's what I want to talk about. Just as I start I want to introduce you
to some resources because I'm teaching a course this semester on the Dead Sea Scrolls
so I have everything right here and I know many of you are very interested. I
would say the number one book that I would recommend, I got to figure out how
to show this at the right angle without the glare, but it's Vander Cam and Flint.
I think you all can see that. The meaning of the Dead Sea Scrolls, you can get it in
paperback. Highly recommended. This is the book on the scrolls. You really need
it to be able to talk much about the scrolls or all of their background and
to know the history and what they contain and who wrote them and how to date them
and all the theories, all the interpretations. That book is a book
that I always use and with all of my students. And as far as reading the
scrolls, which is also important, I always tell the story in the 90s when I was
lecturing here in Charlotte, North Carolina. When the scrolls were on exhibit
here in Charlotte and there was this huge exhibit and we had a lecture at the
Jewish Community Center. It was standing room only. It was unbelievable. They had
to get chairs and open up the side. Everybody's interested in the scrolls
and they had just been released through Robert Eisenman's efforts and Herschel
Shanks at Bar Magazine and others. I was somewhat involved in that. And after my
lecture, a woman came up and she said, oh Dr. Tabor, I'm so glad we have the
scrolls finally because about probably a third of the scrolls had not been
released until the 90s. So there was a big campaign. Some of you will remember
Herschel Shanks really spearheaded it in Bar Magazine, but Robert Eisenman I think
was really behind the scenes. And he's the one who actually got the photographs
and then had them published. And then they were all public finally. So this is
the complete Dead Sea Scrolls in English. It's a penguin paperback. The editor is
Geza Vermish, V-E-R-M-E-S. I guess his name is not even on the front, but it's on
the side I think. Not even the side. So he didn't write them. He doesn't want his
name on, but he's the translator and it's a great addition. It has over a hundred
pages of introductory material and then it also has lots of commentary and
helps as you read the scrolls. But the main thing is it has the scrolls in
English. So I really want to recommend this. So this woman was saying, oh I love
the scrolls and I had a version of an earlier version of this and I said, oh
have you read them yet? And she goes, oh no I haven't read them, but I just love
that we have them. So I think a lot of people are in that situation where we
talk about, oh finally we got the scrolls, but then you don't even read them.
Maybe kind of like the Bible with people who love that we have the Bible, but
they've never read it. Then I want to mention this is the year of the scrolls
because here's a life magazine, the Dead Sea Scrolls, after 75 years. The race to
solve an ancient mystery. You can get this at newsstands, grocery stores and so
forth. I also, I ordered it from Amazon and then this one is very nice. This is
the Dead Sea Scrolls. The subtitle is 75 years since their historic discovery.
Both of these are worth having, but I would want the VanderKam and Flant the
book. Most of the people listening to me in this audience I think are really good
students and they like to study. Now that's in English. If you study Hebrew,
which I know some of you do, you want to get it. It'll have a different cover.
This is an edition I've had for several years. I think it's red now. Anyway, it's
called the Dead Sea Scrolls Study Edition. Be careful if you order it because
there's a study edition that is just English, but as you see when I open this
up, get a nice page of Hebrew here to show you. You can see you've got the
English on one side and the Hebrew on the other. This is Martinez, the editor.
Florentino Martinez. He's a good friend of mine. I see him at conferences. He works
in Spain, in Madrid, I think, or maybe Barcelona. Yeah, I think Barcelona, but
he's provided this wonderful study edition for students who want to read
the Dead Sea Scrolls with Hebrew as well. Let me also mention that's
introductory that I've recently put on my YouTube channel, which is, let's see,
James Tabor videos. You can find it on YouTube. I've been putting up a lot of
things. I've put up some things even this morning, but I've got three recent
lectures that I did at the Biblical Archaeology Seminar over the years. One is
called, let's see, I wrote this down, the exact names. Who wrote the Scrolls? So you
can look at that. Dead Messiahs Who Don't Return. And I didn't tend that title to
be kind of shocking or provocative, but at the end, I say, you know, one thing
about all Messiahs, they've all died and they haven't come back yet. And I was
mainly talking about the Teacher of Righteousness, who's the leader of the
Dead Sea Scroll community. And then a third video, the Dead Sea Scroll calendar.
You know, there are several Jewish calendars that are being used in the
time of the Second Temple period for Christians the time of Jesus. There are
three different main calendars, a lunar calendar, a solar lunar calendar, a
solar calendar, and then it has to do with how you calculate the months and so
forth. And I've got those up. And if you go to my blog, JamesTabor.com, I upload
some documents. Here's a sample. These are printed documents that you can look
at that go with the videos. So that's enough for education. The only other
thing I would mention is the Wikipedia article. I know professors are not
supposed to recommend Wikipedia to their students, but you know what, some of the
Wikipedia articles are just excellent. If you want to go into some controversial
thing or political thing, they can be tough. And I know religion can be
controversial, but something like the Dead Sea Scrolls, the videos are, I mean,
the articles in Wikipedia are fabulous. They really are. Very, very complete
article. So that would be a good thing to read, too. You can print it out and
study it if you don't know about the, much about the Dead Sea Scrolls. So I
hope this lecture or lesson or class, I guess I could call it, would encourage
you to delve into the Dead Sea Scrolls themselves. They certainly are the
greatest archaeological discovery in our time. And I want to mention one
other book. I think I have it here somewhere. Let's see. I thought I laid it
down. It's, I was going to show Ross's book. Yeah, I got it. Because this is
about a Dead Sea Scroll as well. The question is, was it a forgery or was it
authentic or a genuine scroll? And then when would it date? So if you haven't
heard about this, it was featured the other night on Coast to Coast. It's
really getting out there and Ross has got a whole slate of interviews set up as a
result of this book. So you should, most of you, I think many of you in this
audience have heard of this, but in the back, there's a translation of what
might be maybe the oldest and most important of all the Dead Sea Scrolls.
We haven't been able to find it because it's disappeared, but Ross does a good
transcription and translation of it. And I want to include that as well as part
of the Dead Sea Scrolls. To read more about that, just go to themosiscroll.com,
which is Ross's website. You can order the book through several means,
including Amazon. Amazon, I think, is the publisher of it, or not the publisher,
but the vehicle through which it was published. And also a blog where Nichols
has put up a whole lot of entries about the scroll and everything about it. And
in the last issue of Bar Magazine, I wrote an article with Edan Dershowitz,
who's also working with us on the Moses Scroll, arguing that it is very likely
authentic, that it's an authentic Dead Sea Scroll. But that's not what I'm talking
about today. So all of that is plummeting. So what are the Dead Sea Scrolls? We've
got 15,000 manuscripts or fragments of manuscripts. That's huge, representing
probably 600 different works or books. And yet some of the books that are
represented might just have a teeny piece or two that you could fit on just one
page and just a fragment. And some of the fragments are the size of like a
matchbook cover or even a thumbnail with only a couple of letters. So when we say
15,000 fragments, don't get too excited like you're going to have complete
copies of things. However, there are some complete copies of some of the scrolls.
They were mostly found in Cave 1 and then Cave 11 and then the Copper Scroll in
Cave 3. And Cave 1 was just a treasure because you had something called the
Community Rule, which is the charter of the group that wrote the scrolls or wrote
the sectarian scrolls. I'll explain that in a minute as to what these 600 books
are. Books that they wrote about their own group and their own movement kind of
like the Christians have the New Testament as their writings. So the Dead Sea
Scroll group had their own writings. And another one is the Thanksgiving Hymns,
which some of which were written by the teacher, their leader, we think, like he
uses the first person. We think he actually wrote these. So we've got that
from Cave 1. You've got as well the War Scroll from Cave 1 and a number of other
scrolls that are very complete. So if you break down the scrolls, about 30% of
them are written by the group. We call them the sectarian scrolls. These are the
scrolls where the group is talking about how they were formed and what they're
all about and what their vision of things is and what their history is and so
forth. So that's like almost a third are written by the group. And those are the
ones I specialize in. And then there's another 30% that are copies of texts that
they didn't write, but texts that are not the Hebrew Bible, but books that you
would recognize the names of, even if you haven't read them, like Jubilees, the
Book of Jubilees. They love the Book of Jubilees. It fits their solar calendar
that they used. And Enoch, not all of Enoch because Enoch is an Ethiopic, the
complete thing that we now have, but they had of the five parts of Enoch, they
had four of them and they did use them. And in fact, some of the Aramaic Enoch
texts are the oldest copies of Enoch that we have. And Enoch is quoted in
the New Testament in the Book of Jude. And there are a lot of other references
in the New Testament, just allusions to some of the language of the Book of
Enoch. So people in the Second Temple period from, let's say, about the Maccabees
down through Bar Kokba, or down through the destruction of Jerusalem and on to
Bar Kokba, 1st century CE, they're making use of these books and using them
all during that period. And then what we want to do today, 40% of the Dead Sea
Scrolls are copies of books of the Hebrew Bible. So I want to introduce you to a
book if you don't know it. I highly, highly recommend this book. I'm going to
read you the blurb on it in just a minute, but I want you to be able to see it
or get a screenshot of it. The Dead Sea Scrolls Bible, the oldest known Bible
translated for the first time into English. And the authors are Abeg, Flint, and
Ulrich. And it's really an amazing production. So what is this? Of those 40% of
the Dead Sea Scrolls, of the 1500 fragments, 600 volumes, the ones that
are copies of the Bible are in this book. So you actually have the Dead Sea Scroll
Bible. What it says at the top, over a thousand years older than any previously
discovered biblical manuscripts with material never before published or
translated, including hundreds of new and different readings and several lost
Psalms that actually could conceivably go into the book of Psalms. There's a Psalm
151, for example, that the Oxford Annotated RSV actually includes as well as
the new Oxford RSV. So highly recommend this book, because this is what I'm
going to talk from today. So who wrote the scrolls just before we start? Who is
this group so that we know something about them? I could give a complete
lecture on that, and I did. I mentioned I have a lecture on YouTube, and you can
find it on YouTube and listen to it with a lot of supplementary material on my
blog that goes with it. But usually people say, oh, the S-scenes wrote the
scrolls. The Dead Sea Scroll group are the S-scenes. Well, obviously they didn't
write all the scrolls, because you've got books like Jubilee's and Enoch that they
didn't write, and you've got the Hebrew Bible, which they didn't write. But that
30% is written by the group, and some of those even by the teacher himself. And so
we could talk about scrolls that they wrote and who they were. I don't think
the word S-scene is very helpful. I think the group that wrote the scrolls is
described by Josephus as the S-scenes. So if you go to book two of the Jewish
war, you can read his long description of the S-scenes. And he's very positive
about them. But remember, he's writing for the impervest patient. He's living in
Rome. It's around 75 CE after the destruction of Jerusalem. And he wants to
talk about the traditions of the Jewish people and the schools, philosophical
schools, as the way he describes them. Pharisees, Sadducees, and S-scenes. And so
he presents them in Hellenistic guard. And also he presents them in ways that the
emperor would not find objectionable. Now that we have the scrolls, you can call
them S-scenes if you want, but don't go to Josephus for your definition of S-scenes
because he makes them kind of quietists and pacifists and they're a secluded
group. They sound a lot like the Pythagoreans. And then of course he makes
the Pharisees sound like Epicureans. And he makes, I'm sorry, the Sadducees. And
then the Pharisees he would make, he would describe in ways that would remind
you of the Platonists, or particularly the Stoics probably. So you see what he's
doing. So to understand the Dead Sea Scroll group, again, it's better to read
their own self-description. And what they, what we come up with, if you read the
Dead Sea Scrolls, the books that they wrote, I would describe them like this.
You ready? An apocalyptic, messianic, new covenant group, baptizing, you have to
be baptized, and I'm using, it's a mikvah, it's Jewish mikvah, but probably in
a running stream like the Jordan River, or the Dead Sea. You could presumably be
baptized in the Dead Sea because you probably want to hold your eyes really
tight when you go under, but you could do that. And maybe they did baptize in the
Dead Sea. So apocalyptic, messianic, new covenant. They claimed that they were the
people of the new covenant. They were, God has established the new covenant. They
were the ones separatists, communal living, and preparing the way in the desert, the
Aravah, Isaiah 40, verse three. Just as the New Testament opens in the Gospel of
Mark, with John the baptizer out in the desert, along the Jordan Valley, preaching
and baptizing and people and people say, who are you? And he says, I'm the voice of
one calling in the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord. So when I say they're
people of the way, that might remind you of something in the Book of Acts, the
New Testament Book of Acts, because they also pick up the same language. So people
of the way means people of the desert way, people that are following the Torah,
according to the interpretations of this group, and what we call halakha or
interpretations of Torah. So whether you call them messians or not, basically go to
the scrolls for a definition. Now, none of those terms would describe the Pharisees.
None of those terms would describe the Sadducees. And yet those terms do describe
this group. And I would say every one of those terms also describes the Jesus
movement. So when the scrolls were discovered, people were very, very
excited and keen, but also a little nervous, because it's like we found an
apocalyptic messianic group thinking they're preparing the way in the
wilderness, saying they're people of the New Covenant, communal living, separatists,
baptizing into the group and so forth. They're doing all of these things. And
basically my screen went out. I'm going to put it back. It doesn't matter, but I'd
rather not talk to a blank screen. So give me just a second. I need to probably,
sorry about that. This is probably going to happen over and over. So anyway,
where was I? I was talking about the, oh, how people were maybe a bit nervous
because they would think, well, you know, is this like a precursor of the
Jesus movement? Or, you know, did the Jesus move a kind of copy or did they
come from this group or whatever? But we're not going to talk about that
today. So, but it is a good topic to talk about the relationship of the
Jesus movement, the John the Baptist movement, followers of James the
brother of Jesus, how they might have related to the Dead Sea Scroll group.
I've written a lot about that in my books, such as the Jesus Diocese. Now, as
far as the 40% of the scrolls that do have the Hebrew copies of the Hebrew
Bible, there's one book supposedly missing. And it just so happens that it's
not missing anymore. Some of you who want to look this up, you could paste the
URL maybe in one of the chats on YouTube or Facebook. But recently, just
recently, the book of Esther has been identified as fragments of the Dead Sea
Scrolls. So if you've ever heard, and you still read this, if you look it up,
that they had copies of all the books of the Hebrew Bible, except for Esther in
the Amaya. Well, Esther has now been located. And it's an article at the
website, thetora.com. So if you go to thetora.com, it's called newly deciphered
Comron Scroll revealed to be Esther. So it's really easy to find. It's by, let's
see, Rabbi Asher Tovlev. And it's a really exciting story because you know why
they hadn't identified Esther? Because somebody spilled some wine on it. And it
was stained and you couldn't make it out. But now through photographic means,
they've been able to make it out, which is really amazing. So what we want to do
today, I'm going to switch on my reading light here, where I can see better what
I want to do is I want to take this Dead Sea Scroll Bible. And I want to pick five
different, let's see, is it five or six, one, two, three, actually, it's four
different references, but some of them have more than one. I'm going to pick four
or five places within here. You see, I've got a mark here, where the Hebrew Bible
that we have, the Masoretic text differs from the readings that are in the
scrolls. And that's what I want to talk about. Now, here's the problem with that.
Many people talk about the Hebrew Bible. I've got a Hebrew Bible right here. This
is the standard scholarly edition of the Hebrew Bible. It's called the BHS,
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgart, Densia Stuttgart, the German. It's where it was put
out, put in Latin. It's referred to as the BHS. And you can see here on the page,
if I put it really close at the bottom, that you've got all of these variant
readings. So even though people talk about, I want to go by the Masoretic text,
you have to realize even the Masoretic text, the traditional Hebrew text, like
some of you use the Koran Bible, K-O-R-E-N. It's a standardized text that's
been standardized by the rabbis of hundreds of years ago, but there are
variants. And many of you probably remember or know Bart Ehrman, who is the
New Testament scholar. And he was trained at Princeton. And when he learned as a
student that there are all these variants in the New Testament, it really
disturbed him because he was raised as a very conservative Christian and
whatever the traditional Byzantine texts of the Greek New Testament said, he
just felt it had to be perfect without any kind of mistakes or variants. And
then when he began going to graduate school and finding out that there are
literally hundreds of variants, now what you'll often hear is, well, the Masoretic
text, it doesn't have any variants. You know how people count the letters and
they do these Bible code things. But all you need is one variant and the whole
Bible code is thrown off, right? Because all the letters would then shift even by
one letter. And so I'm not too fond of the Bible code concept because I happen
to know that the text you're searching is just one of several copies of the
Masoretic text. The one that is used by in the BHS is the Leningrad Codex. It's
the oldest copy of the Hebrew Bible Masoretic text, as we call it. The
traditional texts is maybe another way to refer to it. That's complete. There's
the Aleppo Codex that's a little bit older, but part of it was destroyed by
actually anti-Semites who raided the place and tried to burn the scroll. But
fortunately, most of it did survive and it's on display in Jerusalem. If you've
been there and seen that, it's in the shrine of the book there in Jerusalem. So
anyway, when you talk about the Hebrew Bible, here's what we've got. We've got
the Masoretic text, but it does have variations. At the bottom of every page,
you can see these other readings of other copies of it because copyists make
mistakes and variations creep in over the centuries. We've also got what's
called the Septuagint, LXX. You'll see it abbreviated. That's a translation of
the Hebrew Bible that we think was made in the second century, DCE. And we do
have manuscripts of the Septuagint, quite a few that have survived. And it
doesn't always read the same as the Hebrew Bible either. So you've got other
versions. And then the Samaritan Pentateuch. Now that's only the five books of
Moses, but the Samaritan Pentateuch does differ in places with the Masoretic
texts. So that would be three different versions of the Torah, at least. And of
the Hebrew Bible in general, you would have two versions, the Masoretic texts
with its variants, as well as the Septuagint. And of course, the Septuagint
would have variants also. And then you add the Dead Sea Scrolls, which is not
complete because we don't have absolute copies of every single book of the
Hebrew Bible. But it is, in fact, another tradition. And sometimes the readings of
the Dead Sea Scrolls agree with this Septuagint. The first or second
example we're going to have today, we're going to consider today, actually agrees
with the Greek, not the Masoretic texts. And so scholars have been busy now for
75 years doing all of these comparisons and trying to figure it out. This
bothers some people. I hope it doesn't bother you who are listening. I don't
want it to bother you. Tell my students, I don't want it to bother them either.
Because what you don't want to do is trade one fundamentalism for another. Many
of, I was raised in a fairly conservative Christian tradition. And the
tradition I came out of, the Campbellite or Churches of Christ, they would have
said by and large, although they're probably liberalized a little here and
there over the years. But they would have said, you know, the Bible is inspired
and it's perfect and it has no mistakes. And they just don't like variations. And
yet there are variations. When I first took Greek, I've got my Greek New
Testament here. This is the Greek New Testament. And you can see it's very,
very similar. It's got all of those variations at the bottom of the Greek
text. So we shouldn't wish for something that we don't have. We have
different versions of the Hebrew Bible, different versions of the New
Testament, actually different versions of every single book from antiquity. This
is actually a treasure of riches. We want that sort of thing because we want
all the possible information we can. Now, when the Dead Sea Scrolls were
discovered, Cave One, there were 10 jars and only one had scrolls. And Cave
One in the jar with the seven scrolls that were in that jar was a complete copy
of the book of Isaiah. I've got a book over here with the original colored
pictures that Trevor did, the scholar Trevor living in Jerusalem at the
Albright. Beautiful pictures that are still used today in color. So everybody
wondered, well, if you compared the Isaiah of the Masoretic text, the
traditional Hebrew text, with the Dead Sea Scroll copy, because the Leningrad
Codex, the oldest copy of the Masoretic text, is about a thousand AD CE. And the
Dead Sea Scroll Isaiah is probably 150-200 BCE. So you've jumped back over a
thousand years, probably 1200 years. It's hard to date exactly. But in that
amazing, so you want to kind of compare it. It is our book of Isaiah. It has the
same number of sections and chapters and it essentially has the same contents. But
there are thousands of variations where it reads differently. And sometimes those
variations agree with the Septuagint or the Samaritan penitent. Now usually,
people will say, well, it was essentially the same. And that's true. And it's also
false. But it probably depends on what you mean essentially. It is
essentially the same. But essentially the same doesn't mean you shouldn't notice
the differences, as I'm going to show you today, because the differences could be
significant. And get ready for this. Some of the readings in the Dead Sea Scrolls
parallel the Moses Scroll. And Ross Nichols is currently working on a project to
compare all the readings of the Dead Sea Scrolls of Deuteronomy. And did you know
some of those are Paleo-Ebru, actually written in the ancient script, with the
Moses Scroll transcript that we have. And that's going to be a pretty long
project. But he has begun that project. So that's going to be pretty interesting.
And I'm going to show you one of those today, one of the parallels, where the
Moses Scroll reads the same as one of the Dead Sea Scrolls, which is very,
very interesting. It sounds like maybe it's not a forgery, because I don't
think Moses Shapiro had copies of the Comron Scrolls, at least, that were
found in 1947. I would encourage you all to, when you think about, you know,
fundamentalism and the Hebrew faith, and what it is to follow the God of Israel,
and so forth, to have an open view that there are pillars of the faith, the
call of Abraham, the Torah given at Sinai, the prophets, and so forth, that
seem to be bedrock for all forms of Judaism and Hebrew faith, even Gentiles
that adhere to the Hebrew faith. But essentially, you know, you don't have
to have a set view of what the text has to be, if it doesn't conform to what
we're discovering or what the facts are. And I think most of the people in
these particular audiences of the United Israel World Union, which is sponsoring
this talk that I'm presenting here, this class, I think most of the people who
follow Ross Nichols' teaching week by week, he teaches on this channel every
week at the same time. And you're used to this, like you want all the
scholarly information possible, and I'm glad that that's the case. It's not a
threat, it's a treasure trove of riches to delve into these things. So let's
start with Deuteronomy chapter 5 verse 12. If you have a Hebrew Bible, whatever
translation doesn't matter, because it'll probably be the Messeridic text, go
ahead and turn to Deuteronomy 5, and you will then have the standard version of
the traditional Hebrew text. So it's on page 154 in this Dead Sea Scrolls Bible.
If you have the book, you can follow along with the book. And it has to do
with the 10 words. One of the ways of describing people say, what is United
Israel World Union? It was formed in 1944 by a Jewish correspondent and Bible
student. His name was David Horowitz. And David Horowitz coined the idea of
decalogue faith for all nations. And we like that very much. The idea would be
the essential faith around the 10 words, the 10 commandments, should be for the
whole world, not simply for Jews. And so the decalogue faith. And as you know, one
command of the decalogue faith is, in fact, the Sabbath, to keep the Sabbath.
Today is the Sabbath. So either remember or observe the Sabbath day. So verse 12
does in fact say, observe the Sabbath day, keep it holy, as the Lord commanded you.
And it's actually the divine name, Y-H-V-H, which they write in Paleo Hebrew, by
the way. Six days you will labor and do all your work, but the seventh day is a
Sabbath to the Lord your God, and so forth. You should do no work. Now in Deuteronomy,
you have this idea that the reason you do this is because God brought the people
of Israel out of Egypt. And that's also in Exodus 31 as the reason. But as you
know, there's also the idea that God has commanded you to keep the Sabbath. For in
six days the Lord made heaven and earth and the sea and all that is in them, and
rested the seventh day, so that the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it.
Now that's not in the Masoretic text at this spot of Deuteronomy. It is in the
Moses scroll. So there's the example. And there's one of this, the Dead Sea Scroll
copy. It's actually 4Q Deuteronomy. It's called from Cave 4. It's a fragment of
Deuteronomy. It has the idea that the Sabbath goes back to the creation. So
it's connecting to Genesis 1 and 2 in the same way that the Moses scroll does.
And if you compare Exodus 20 and Deuteronomy 5, you can see the two
versions. So this could be seen as an attempt to harmonize, like let's give
both reasons. But on the other hand, it could also be seen as maybe a tradition
that the Dead Sea Scroll group is preserving that would be older than
the later tradition that we know as the Masoretic text. So that's the first
example I want to give. The second one is a couple of verses. It's in what's
called the Song of Moses, and it's Deuteronomy 32. So if you go to Deuteronomy
32, and you can see down at verse 8, a very well-known verse that says,
when the Most High separated or gave to the nations their inheritance, he
separated humankind, and he set the bounds of the peoples according to the
number of the children of Israel. That's the Masoretic text. That's probably what
the translation says that most of you are reading, depending on which one you're
reading. However, in the Dead Sea Scroll portion, it says, according to the
sons of Elohim, the children of God, and it uses Elohim. Isn't that interesting?
Because Elohim is also used in the Moses Scroll, as you know. Many of you know
read about it or read the book. So the sons of Elohim. Now the sons of Elohim
could be considered the children of Israel, I suppose, but because of another
verse in this same chapter, or in the same song, if you go down to verse 43,
it's pretty clear that it's talking about the sons of God, or the Bene Elohim,
as it is in Hebrew, that are the hosts that surround God.
Did I say Psalm 82? Remember, it talks about how God sits and is surrounded
by all of these gods, or Elohim. So here's what verse 43 says in the Dead Sea Scrolls,
and this would be a 4-Q Deuteronomy also. K-4, the copy of Deuteronomy.
It reads like this. This is going to be different from what you have if you have the
Maseridic text. Rejoice, O heavens, together with him, and bow down to him all you gods,
for he will avenge the blood of his sons, his children, his
banim, and will render vengeance to his enemies, and will recompense those who hate him, and will
atone for the land of his people. And so it's actually talking about bow down to him you gods,
this reference to you gods, or in the Sattuagen even has sons of God, which seems again to be these
ruling powers that are spoken of a number of times in the Hebrew Bible. I think I have this
book handy, let's see. If I do have it handy, I recommend. This includes the New Testament too,
but the part on the Hebrew Bible is really good. Michael Heiser's book, The Unseen Realm.
Michael has an article online. You can look it up called The Bene Elohim, The Sons of God. It's
really good. He did his dissertation on that subject, and he's a real expert on it. It's
something to really study. So here you have a text in the Dead Sea Scrolls that is talking about the
Bene Elohim as seemingly parallel to Psalm 82, meaning these heavenly beings, not simply talking
about the flesh and blood Israelites. So I think that's pretty interesting as we go along.
Now, Isaiah 53. Isaiah 53 is really, really interesting. It was in Cave One in that jar
that had the seven scrolls, and it's a complete copy of Isaiah. Actually, I'm going to pull up
my copy here to show you because it's so beautiful. I want you to see, and I think this is the color
one. Yep, this is the color one. So you can buy this. These are the photographs that Trevor
originally made. You've got the black and white in the color. Absolutely gorgeous photographs. If
you've been to Israel and been to the shrine of the book, there's a replica of this scroll wrapped
around the central scroll display area where you can see it almost like it's wrapped around
like a Torah scroll. And Israelis have fun taking their kids to see the Dead Sea Scrolls because
any kid in Israel can just read Isaiah right off the page, even though it's in this Herodian script.
So it's pretty amazing how things have not changed. However, does Isaiah have changes?
Often, I remember when I first studied this, I was in a more conservative school, Abilene
Christian University, and there was more an emphasis on, you know, it's basically the same
as the Masoretic Text, and it is. It's basically the same as the Masoretic Text, and it's quite
remarkable that Isaiah is preserved to that degree. However, it does have interesting readings that are
different. A few of them are pretty minor, but I'm going to mention a few of them, but some of them
are quite strikingly different. So Isaiah 53, which is the famous Suffering Servant Hymn of Isaiah,
one of the four Suffering Servant Hymns, as they're traditionally known by scholars,
Hebrew Bible scholars. And I'm going to read verse three. He was despised and rejected by others,
and, I'm reading the Dead Sea version, and a man of sorrows, and familiar with suffering,
and like one from whom people hide their faces, and we despised him and did not value him.
So the footnote explains that he was despised is the Masoretic Text. Remember, he was despised and
rejected. Many people have that memorized. Notice this says we despised him, and so in the Dead Sea
Squall version of Isaiah, it's in the first person that we, and that would go with verse four.
Surely he has borne our sufferings and so forth. If you go on down to, let's see, verse eight,
in the middle of verse, just the last part of verse eight, for he was cut off from the land of
the living. He was stricken for the transgression of my people, and it's actually his people.
Instead of Ami, it's Ammo, his people in the Dead Sea version. Does that make a difference? Does
that make a difference? Well, you can write it down and study it and think about it. You have to
read the whole chapter and think about it. But this is a version that has some parallels. And
remember, some of these are also, these readings that we're going over today, are also paralleled in
the Septuagint, the Greek translation, meaning that the Greek translators were also using a copy of
the Hebrew Bible that would be closer to what we have in the Dead Sea Scrolls. Verse nine says,
And they made his grave with the wicked. I believe the Masoretic text has he made, doesn't it? Let's
see. He made maybe? Yeah. They made. So it's plural. They made his grave with the wicked,
and with rich people his tomb. And if you remember, the Masoretic text has this strange plural
with a rich man in his death's plural. And some people have really gotten off on that and talked
to try to apply it to Jesus and say, well, maybe he survived the cross and then died later. So he
has deaths, not death and all kinds of ideas people have come up with. But this just says,
with rich people was his tomb. As he was buried in a tomb, or this person's buried in a tomb,
I'm not talking about Jesus here, although he had done no violence nor was any deceit in his mouth.
Yet the Lord, and this is Yodhe Vavhe Hashem, but the Lord was willing to crush him,
and he made him suffer. So I think, let's see, he made him suffer, MT. Right. That's,
I'm not sure that, I don't have the MT open, so I'm not sure that that's not so significant for us
right now. Now here's the one I think is most interesting, verse 11. You ready? Verse 11. When
I first studied the Dead Sea Scrolls, I did a number of interviews. I remember Zola Levitt.
Any of you remember Zola Levitt? Had that very popular TV program. He was very excited about
this reading of the scroll. Because in the Dead Sea copy of the scrolls, it says,
out of his suffering, his soul will see light. Out of his suffering, his soul will see light
and find satisfaction. The idea of his soul seeing light
is not in the Masoretic text. There's nothing like that. It just says he will see the suffering of
his soul. But to see light or his very, very diffidence, very clear in the scrolls, what that
would mean? It was interpreted probably by second temple groups that might have used a text like this
to maybe mean resurrection. Because toward the end, it talks about him
seeing his offspring and rejoicing and so forth and dividing the spoil. And so you could see how
the Dead Sea Scroll group would think that their teacher, who they felt fulfilled this, the teacher
of righteousness they called him, he was their leader, and they saw him as a kind of a new Moses.
But they would feel that basically that this person maybe is going to suffer and be buried,
but also see light. And I cover that in my lecture, Dead Messiahs Who Don't Return,
because they expected him to return and he simply didn't.
There's some other things. This book is nice because whenever there's a difference,
it puts it in italics. And otherwise, it's the Masoretic Text. So it's really easy to use. And
then you look down on the footnote and you see what the Masoretic Text had, what the Septuagint had,
and what the Samaritan Pentateuch had. So Isaiah 53 is interesting. There's some differences that
might be significant. Finally, and I think this one is really, really interesting, Malachi, the
last of the Hebrew prophets, the famous passage in chapter three that is quoted in the New Testament
and applied to John the Baptizer, I call him the Baptizer, Yocanon Hamat Ville, John the Dipper.
I'll read it to you in the scroll version. You ready? Therefore, behold, I send my messenger
and he will prepare the way before me and they will suddenly come to his temple, the Lord whom
you seek and the messenger of the covenant whom you desire. Behold, he himself comes, says Hashem
of hosts, the Lord of hosts, the Eternal of hosts, but who can endure them? They come,
meaning when they come is the idea. Now, did you notice any difference in what you probably have,
the Masoretic text? It looks like it's two figures, two messiahs. The Lord here is not the divine name
when the Lord comes to his temple. That's Adon, L-O-R-D, the Lord, the master, the Adon of the
earth, so to speak, could be a Messiah figure. So let me read it again. Therefore, I will send my
messenger, that's one figure, he will prepare the way before me and they will suddenly come to
his temple, the Lord whom you seek and the messenger of the covenant. This group believed in two
messiahs. They believed in a priestly messiah, this Dead Sea Scroll group, and a Davidic messiah.
So they believe that both messiahs were coming, and here you see two are talked about
in the Dead Sea Scroll version of Malachi. And then, excuse me, let me get a little drink of water.
Who can endure them when they come? Who can endure them when they come?
Which is original? I'm just tempted to think that the plural is the more original because we have
texts like Zachariah 6 that talks about the two messiahs. Earlier in Zachariah, with the two olive
branches and the lamp stand, there are the two sons of fresh oil, one on the right and one on the left.
And in Zachariah 6, you talk about the Davidic figure, the branch sitting on his throne,
and then a priest standing by his side. So when you read the Dead Sea Scrolls, they believe in the
coming of two messiahs. They talk about the coming of the messiahs of Israel and Aaron. Israel would
be the messiah of Israel, the Davidic ruler, the king, and the messiah of Aaron would be the priest.
So the Dead Sea Scroll group had three figures. I've written a lot about this. I've got articles
about it. I've got an article on my blog called 123 messiahs question mark. So you can look that up
jamestaber.com if you want to read more about that. But I'm thinking during the Second Temple period,
there were expectations for three figures. If you go by the scrolls, here are the figures.
A prophet like Moses, a kind of second Moses who would come, sort of middle figure. That would be
the lampstand figure who's the adorn of the whole earth, the Lord of the whole earth. And he's able
to inaugurate the new covenant. That was their view. And they believe that he had come, the teacher
of righteousness. They say things about him that are quite extravagant. For example, they say to
him, God has made known all the mysteries of the prophets, all the mysteries of the prophets. Amazing.
And we have books like the Habakkuk Peshir. That was also cave one. And that one jar, one of the
seven scrolls that was found. It's in the translation. You can read it. And it takes the Old Testament
or Hebrew Bible book of Habakkuk and then interprets it verse by verse. But it sees it in the light of
the history of the group, the Dead Sea Scroll Group, so that they actually apply it to their teacher.
So the lecture I gave or the YouTube video I gave was a bar lecture, biblical archaeology,
society lecture. Dead Messiahs Who Don't Return goes into that in great detail,
so you can listen to that to get more details. But I'm thinking that essentially they're waiting,
they have him, and then they're waiting for the two Messiahs. But I don't see any evidence in any
of the scrolls that the two Messiahs ever showed up. And what happens is the teacher's killed.
And on Yom Kippur, the priest, the wicked, he's called the wicked priest, because he's the priest
they think is illegitimate, the priest in Jerusalem, probably one of the high priests that we know about.
Depending on when you date the scrolls, it could go anywhere from the Maccabean period down to even
into the first century. I tend to think the teacher thrived in the first century BC. But we have priests
all the way through that period that are serving in the temple, and Josephus preserves their names.
We have all the names of these priests during this period. Well, this group considers one of them
a wicked priest, and he comes down on Yom Kippur. Now, here's a question. How could he travel on
Yom Kippur to the desert community at Comronus? I mean, I'm assuming for now that Comronus is
where the group was and where the teacher was. And some people would say there's no absolute
evidence for that. But I think it's a good possibility. How would he come on Yom Kippur?
Isn't the high priest in Jerusalem supposed to go into the temple on Yom Kippur? So he couldn't
be traveling down and persecuting this teacher of Comron unless they're using a different calendar.
And they are. Constantly on the scrolls, it says over and over again that I'm looking at my text
messages. Sorry, getting buzzed, but it's just this, that, and the other. Constantly you read about
the idea of the calendar being different in the days, months, seasons, and years being different
because they're using a solar calendar. And it's a beautiful calendar. It's a very interesting calendar
of, if you take a look at my YouTube lecture on my YouTube channel, it's called the Essene calendar
made simple. Believe it or not, you can make it simple and you can even put it on a single page.
I've got somewhere a page. I don't know if I have it right here, but I'm going to put it up on my
blog with that lecture where you can see what kind of calendar they had. As far as I know,
these two messiahs, though, didn't come. So the wicked priest, as his call came down and
persecuted the teacher, it's possible the teacher was killed. Maybe we're not absolutely sure about
that. And then the group decides that the end will come because remember it's an apocalyptic group.
They think they're going to live to see the end just like the followers of Jesus. And it didn't
come. And they say it's going to come in about 40 years. And then when 40 years passed, they,
instead of losing their faith, they talk about God has prolonged the seasons, has prolonged the
time. Very similar to the kind of thing you find, say, in Peter, I think, isn't it? Second Peter,
God's long suffering. You know, he doesn't always do things according to what people thought.
And they also conclude that all the times predicted by the book of Daniel have been
fulfilled, but the end didn't come. Therefore, not that we're wrong, but, you know, that our
interpretation is wrong, that they weren't fulfilled, because they haven't been fulfilled.
They believe that God is giving more grace, more time, and it's going to be longer. And even though
the date was right, God decided not to send the wrath and the judgment and the end of the age
on time, which would have been 40 years after the death of the teacher. How did they come up
with that 40 years? They believe there's a final cycle of 10 jubilees, 49-year jubilees, 490 years.
They interpret Daniel 9, the so-called 70 weeks prophecy, and they've placed their teacher in the
10th week. And then they begin to talk about in the final 49-year period, everything will come,
and then it didn't come. It didn't happen. And so they're basically disappointed. And they decide
that God has decided to prolong the days. How long did the movement last? It's hard to know,
but given this flexibility with the text of Habakkuk, I think we could presume that they went
into the first century. I would think some of the followers of John the Baptist and Jesus might have
had grandparents and parents that had known the teacher and maybe were kind of part of that general
Messianic movement. Eisman calls it the Messianic movement of Palestine. He uses the term Palestine,
which the scholars use to describe the Holy Land, but the Messianic movement of the land of Israel.
And I would say that there are probably remnants of that, because if you look at the Jesus movement,
there's just, as I mentioned, a lot of parallels. Not only the apocalyptic wilderness, new covenant
kind of thing, but also the idea of sacred meals, a bread and wine that you couldn't partake of.
It's called the pure meal of the saints, the specified ones. They're very separationist
in terms of their piety and their idea. They have a council of 12 and an inner council of three.
Does that remind you of anything? And yet the Jesus movement is very, very different from what
you read in the scrolls in terms of interpreting the Torah. The best example in this lecture is not
on that, but I want to kind of close with this, where you get a feeling of what they're all about.
In the scrolls, it says that if a beast or animal falls into a pit on the Sabbath,
you must not help the animal out, because it's the Sabbath. And there's a command in the Sabbath
that you stay in your dwelling. And they took that very literally. Literally, you don't leave the camp.
By the way, latrines, they don't even go outside the camp on the Sabbath to go to the toilet.
Josephus mentions that about the Essenes. He presents it as something admirable,
like, wow, they're so dedicated. They go for 24 hours without going to the toilet.
And some of you know that Josephus and I, a few years ago, we think we discovered the latrines
that come run exactly as the scrolls describe northwest of the camp, 1,000 cubits to 2,000
cubits away from the camp, hidden from view, is the area where we did soil samples and we think we
located their latrines. There's a cemetery nearby with over 1,100 graves, mostly male,
and there's some dispute about the female, because there are a few women,
and they haven't all been excavated just to sample. But Zias thinks that the women are
later burials of veteran women. They just took advantage of a local cemetery. They're not ancient.
But by far, most of them are men, and therefore possibly come run as a celibate community.
So you do get these parallels, which also get differences. Jesus says, I think it's in Luke,
which of you would not take a beast out of a pit on the Sabbath, as if to say,
anybody would do that. And believe me, you know, this picking grain on the Sabbath story that's
in Mark chapter 2 and Matthew chapter 12, where the disciples picked grain. The scrolls specifically
say that you must prepare your meals before the Sabbath. That's in the Torah, right? So you can,
that's considered, you didn't prepare that before the Sabbath. Also, it's threshing or harvesting,
which is forbidden on the Sabbath. So they, the scroll people back in the days of the teacher
in the time when these things were written, the sectarian scrolls, they would just be appalled
that the disciples of Jesus are harvesting barley and popping the grain in their mouth when
they're famished. And if you remember, the response of Jesus was not like, oh, well, sorry, we broke
the law, but it was basically like, well, you know, the Sabbath's made for people, not people for the
Sabbath. So the idea of being humane to an animal or taking care of human need on the Sabbath,
which the Pharisees also taught, and they made certain allowances to allow you to keep the
Sabbath in less of a strict way. Whereas the carites later did not. And I'd have to check with
Namia Gordon to see today how they're defining the dwelling. Because if you can't go out of your
house during the Sabbath, you're dwelling. Does that mean your literal house you live in,
like the rooms you inhabit or apartment? Or does it mean your town? Or does it mean your city?
If you're in a large city, all these things are interpreted differently by Judaism over the years.
Some of you might know there is around the city of Jerusalem today a wire or thread like
element upon poles all the way around the city. And that the rabbis define Jerusalem as the dwelling
of the people in Jerusalem. So you don't go out of your dwelling, meaning you don't go out of the
city of Jerusalem, but you can go anywhere in the city of Jerusalem. This group would have been
horrified at any of those kinds of interpretations. I think they would have been very upset with Jesus
for any number of things that he did. So I don't think Jesus is part of this.
Some people think John the Baptist is and they try to make him really rigid and conservative.
But you know, the only traditions we have of John the Baptist, he's actually pretty accommodating.
He talks to Roman soldiers. He talks to tax collectors and blesses them and says,
you're fine. You can come in the movement. Of course, everybody has to repent. But I mean,
he seems like he's more accepting. I would put John the Baptist Jesus and James sort of on a plane,
even though they might have had some differences. So this is an election on the Jesus movement,
but because it's another parallel second temple, apocalyptic movement of the time I want to mention
it. So they're taking both movements, the Jesus movement and the Dead Sea Scroll movement.
They're reading these texts and we have to wonder what version. We know the Qumran group
was reading the version that we just studied, but is there evidence that in the New Testament that
some of the texts that were being quoted were actually, they're quoting more the Septuagint or
the Dead Sea Scrolls and the answer is yes. That's why some of the readings differ quite a bit,
because they're quoting a different version. They're not just changing the Bible they're using.
I guess you could say a different text of that particular book of the Bible.
So I hope that has been interesting to you. You'll get the Dead Sea Scroll Bible, delve into it.
I'm particularly excited about what Ross will be able to uncover in looking at all the scrolls of
Deuteronomy from the Dead Sea's collection and comparing them to the Shapira Scroll.
As I said earlier, that could be quite telling because Shapira would not have known
these versions of Deuteronomy in Hebrew if there are parallels and we've already seen a couple.
Then how would he have forged the document and made up readings that are later going to be discovered
in 1947 in caves? But remember he found the Moses Scroll in a cave wrapped in land with
the sticky residue around it. It sounds kind of like the discovery of the Qumran Scrolls.
So some of you are going on the trip with us in October and we'll do other trips as well in the
future if you can't make this one. But one of the things we're going to do is stay in the desert
for three nights I think and we're going to visit Qumran and we're going to visit Masada and we're
going to walk around these caves and it's going to be very exciting. Dead Sea Scroll news breaks
all the time like that Esther Scroll discovery that I just told you about. During the time I've
been teaching my Dead Sea Scroll class this semester we've had several major news stories on the
Dead Sea Scrolls break. So it's really an exciting field to be in. I'm really really interested
and fascinated with the Dead Sea Scrolls. I've studied them for years and I hope this will
encourage all of you to study them too. So Shabbat Shalom and wish you all well.
Thank you.
