Before actually getting into the math, I want to start with two warnings about this talk.
The first warning is about kind of the cognitive load involved in the discussions we're going
to have, because there's going to be three primes at any given time.
And we have to be very careful to separate the rules of them, because sometimes they'll
be equal, sometimes they'll be different, and so on.
Three completely arbitrary primes, and so I also need different letters for the three
different primes, so I'm just going to set that up right now.
So there's going to be p, there's going to be l, and then there's going to be a nu,
kind of a finite place of the rational numbers, if you like.
And they play three different roles, so what role will the p play?
Well, we're going to have some base scheme that we're going to be considering, and the
p will indicate if, for example, it's a scheme over fp, so a scheme in characteristic p,
then that will be that p.
So if we're living in characteristic p, our geometric object, then that's the p.
What will the nu's be doing?
Well, they'll index realization functors, so.
For motives.
Okay, I'll explain a bit more about what I mean by that in a second, but more or less
for every prime nu, there's going to be a different realization functor on motives.
And then this l is where our invariants will live, so we'll live at the prime l.
So for example, we could have a class in something like h, yeah, I don't know, h2l-1 with coefficients
in fl, so we could have something in there that will pop out from the story.
Okay, so that's the first warning, about three primes.
Second warning is about motives, so motives.
And the warning is that I will not precisely say what I mean by a motive, and in fact I'm
not even thinking of a precise definition of motive.
So imprecise in this talk.
So I'll state a conjecture, which says for every motive something happens, and then that
conjecture is a priori not mathematically well-defined, because I haven't said what
I mean by motive.
I don't even know what I mean by motive, to be completely honest.
However, I will say enough to, and this is the important part for me, to say how you
can extract from this concrete consequences that can be verified.
So I'll tell you enough about motives, so that you can take this conjecture and make
it into an honest conjecture by plugging in various things, and so on.
So you can think of it as kind of meta-language for making more precise conjectures.
And maybe everyone has their idea about what a motive is, and I invite you to plug it into
this and make your own form of the conjecture.
Okay, so with that out of the way, maybe I'll actually start with what, I'll start with
motives.
So, so I'll start by recalling the basic idea, maybe in the simplest context, let's say K
is an algebraically closed field.
Then I guess the phenomenon that motivated the theory of motives was that there are many
different cohomology theories for, say, smooth proper K varieties.
So for example, you have Duram cohomology, let's say if, let's just say if K is characteristic
zero for our purposes here.
And you also have a closely related thing called Hodge cohomology, which is associated
graded for filtration on Duram cohomology.
And it's actually this one that's going to be more important for us, so I won't even
recall what this is, but this is just, so direct sum over P of H star minus Px, and
then you do the P forms on X.
So it's a graded vector space over the base field.
But then also for every new, for every prime new, you have a realization functor as well.
So this is also for K characteristic zero.
So if nu is not the same as the characteristic, then you have l-addict cohomology.
Or nu-addict, sorry.
So this here is a graded vector space over K.
This here is a vector space over the field of nu-addict numbers.
But also if nu is equal to the characteristic of K, then you have the crystalline cohomology,
which is, I should put the nu in there.
So that's a vector space over, well, yeah, vid vectors of K with P inverted.
So yeah, so yeah, so then this is equal to P, I guess, right.
So you have this whole wealth of cohomology theories, and they look different.
I mean, they live over different fields, for example.
But there are many common features in all of these different cohomology theories.
They all have Poincare duality, they all have some Kunith formula.
The dimensions are all always the same, which is not so obvious from the definitions.
And there are also some comparison isomorphisms between them.
Oh, I didn't write down the Betty cohomology, but over the complex numbers, there's also
Betty cohomology, which has Q coefficients.
And there are various comparison isomorphisms between them if your field has a certain specific
nature.
And this plethora of cohomology theories with various extra structures and relationships
between them led, I guess, Grotendieck to posit this idea of motives.
So that's very strange that it's squeaking, okay?
So idea of Grotendieck, there should be a category, some kind of linear algebra category, complicated
linear algebra category, not vector spaces over a field, but something much more structured,
let's say motives over K, and the universal cohomology theory.
So smooth, proper varieties over K, values and motives.
And then there should be so-called realization functors.
So there should be hodge realization going to graded vector spaces over K if the characteristic
of K is zero.
There should be new attic realization functors to QV vector spaces, and et cetera.
All of these different cohomology theories you have should be explained by realization
functors.
And these should be additive tensor functors.
So you always have additive structure and tensor structure you can play with in this
category here.
So it's a category of linear algebra, and it kind of is supposed to explain all the
different cohomology theories, or refine all the different cohomology theories.
So may I ask a small question?
Yes.
So in the best conjecture, so, of course, using algebraic cycles one can construct some kind
of, but this is what golden dictates, but anyway, for cormorant, you have h i for all
i.
So you should have a sequence of cormorant functors to m k.
This is what you made, the m k is the kind of...
Thank you, yes.
Yeah.
Yeah, thank you very much.
I was too imprecise here.
So for all i, you have h i, which goes into there.
And the i corresponds to this star that I was writing before.
Yeah, thank you.
And there's, and sort of...
No, but for x, the i, you don't have a monoidal spectrum.
No, that's right.
That's right.
Yeah, yeah.
Yes.
Okay.
Right.
And actually related to this, well, there's something important.
So, yeah.
So for example, for all x and for all i in natural numbers, say, we get an object h i x in this
mode of category.
And an important, a simple but important example is if you take h 2 of p 1, I should say this
category is q linear, so I'm working with q coefficients here.
Yeah, so this h 2 of p 1 gets no special notation.
It's called q minus 1.
And an important, if you look in a usual co-homology theory at h 2 of p 1, it's a one dimensional
vector space, so it's invertible under tensor product.
So then you posit that that should also happen in the category of motives, so this should
be tensor invertible.
And the dual is called, or the inverse is called, by definition, q 1.
It's called the Tate Twist.
And it's an important because it's the kind of thing that shows up in Poincare duality.
If you formulate Poincare duality in this context, this is kind of the appropriate dualizing
object or it's tensor powers.
But another much deeper but important structure on this category you have is a canonical grating.
So this is called the grating by weights.
So then weights, so there's supposed to exist a decomposition of this category as a direct
sum over w of, so these are the objects of weight w.
And it's supposed to have the property that h w of x always lies in this weight w sum
and now it's important to not get confused here.
This is not, this is just a say an abelian category, so it's not a derived category,
so in some sense everything's living in degree zero.
But nonetheless, there's supposed to be enough structure on this category of motives that
given a co-homology of a smooth projective variety, you can tell which co-homological
degree it came from, just from sort of this plain linear algebra, so to speak, in this
category of motives.
So this is, was motivated by the vaconjectures where over a finite field, for example, you
have an action of the, any base change to the algebraic closure, you get an action of
Frobenius and the eigenvalues of Frobenius will tell you the complex absolute values
of the eigenvalues of Frobenius will actually tell you what weight you lived in, which co-homological
degree you came in, even if you don't a priori remember the co-homological degree.
So yeah, so it's an important structure and it will play actually a big role in the, in
the talk, so.
Oh, thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, yes, thank you, mm-hmm, yeah, okay.
Any other questions about this basic motive philosophy here?
Okay, so, so actually I'm not just going to be talking about motives over a, well, algebraically
closed field or a field, but motives over a more arbitrary base, and I'll be even more
vague about that, so, so more generally, can you consider motives over s, for s a scheme,
and it should be thought of as kind of families of motives over, I don't know, residue fields,
bar, as x varies over all points in the scheme, so, a sort of a smoothly varying family of
motives, and for example, so if you have a, a proper smooth map of schemes, then you should
have an object, I guess maybe notation r, i, p, lower, star, q, so whatever this means,
it should be an object in this category, and so it's, it's collecting together the motives
attached to the, the geometric fibers of this smooth proper map, which are then smooth proper
varieties over a field, okay, and again, you should have a weight grading, and you have
a tape motive, which is invertible, and so on, now, what do the realization functors
look like in this case of motives over a, a base scheme, so let's, so, so actually for
the moment, so for the moment, we consider only the case where s is actually a q scheme,
I'll say a bit more about the general case, maybe towards the end of the talk, but just
to keep things simple at first, let's be in characteristic zero, then, you know, to a
motive over s, we have these various realizations, so for example, there's the hodge realization,
and this lands in graded vector bundles on s, again, just collecting together the hodge
co-amology of the fibers, in the case where you have the motive attached to a smooth proper
scheme, but then also for all mu, you get a realization with values in least q nu sheaves
on the etol site, so that's the kind of thing you get when you have a family of varieties
and you look at a new attic co-amology, so I'll recall that at least z nu sheave is kind
of a compatible collection of locally constant z mod nu to the nz sheaves on the etol site,
locally constant in finite rank, and then so you have some compatible system of them,
you imagine the inverse limit, that's at least z nu sheave, and these things are kind of
like that, except, well, up to isogyny, you could say, and now I'm waiting for Gabor to
ask a question.
Exactly the question I was predicting, yes, yes indeed, so there's two different things
you could mean by this, so you could ask, maybe you only want a lattice z nu structure to
exist locally, this distinction is not relevant for the talk, I mean, for two reasons, one
is if you start with one of these guys, you're always going to have a lattice, so that doesn't
matter, but also all the constructions that I discussed for least q nu sheaves, they also
work just fine even if you don't have a global lattice, so if it only exists at all locally,
all the constructions will be at all local, so the distinction is not important for the
talk.
Okay, so that's kind of, so this is where we're going to be playing, we have some motive,
and it has these different realization functors, and what I want to explain, a strange conjectural
relationship between these realization functors, these different realizations.
So there are objects of completely different nature, but what I'm going to say is that
somehow to each one of them, you can extract the same kind of object, which I'll turn
to and explain next, and then if you start with something here, and you do all these
realization functors, you get the same kind of object, there's going to be a relationship
between them, and then after that I want to explain the evidence for this conjecture
and some practical consequences that you can extract from it, some known consequences.
Okay, so what goes in the black box up there?
So that's where our prime L comes in, so choose a prime L, then this black box that
I'm going to describe is going to be least sheaves, not over QL or over ZL, but over
the L-addict sphere spectrum, okay, so L-addict sphere spectrum, but they're going to be of
rank one, so to speak, they're going to be invertible least sheaves over the L-addict
sphere spectrum on the atoll site, so there's some stable homotopy theory object that's
coming in here, and note that there's some funny things about this, these are pure linear
algebra, even Q linear algebra, but somehow then you extract something over this base
which has a lot of torsion, so it's a little bit of a funny story where some rational story
gives you a bunch of torsion information, and then there's things you can say about
it, but yeah, so what is this notion of least sheaves?
Well, there's different ways of giving the definition, but you can imagine writing the
L-addict sphere spectrum as some kind of limit of a tower of things which only have finitely
many homotopy groups, and maybe where the bottom one is Z mod L to the N, and all those
other homotopy groups are finite, and then it's not difficult to set up a notion of least
sheave over the sphere spectrum just in the same way as you do for least ZL sheaves, for
example, but just to write down a precise definition here, let's say it's the invertible objects,
so pick in another way of saying it, as you can look at like a tall hyper sheave, sorry,
it's redundant, in the category of like L complete spectra, if you look at the tensor
invertible objects there, okay, so what am I saying?
I'm saying from any of these, ah, yes, from any of these kinds of objects here, you can
get such an object here.
So let me now explain that, so first case, so suppose given a vector bundle on S, not
a graded vector bundle, but just an honest vector bundle, I want to explain how to extract
one of these guys, so then V, you make a geometric, you kind of make the family of vector spaces
parameterized by S, which is incarnating this vector bundle, and then you also have the
zero section, which I'll call E, and you can use some kind of six-functor formalism in
this context, so you make the dualizing object in this world, which lives on V, and then
it's going to be kind of constant, because this is a vector space, you just take the
fiber at zero to get an object over the base, and I'll call this SLV, because what it kind
of is, is the one point compactification of V sort of viewed in a tall, a tall stable
homotopy theory.
So it's the object that controls duality, homological duality in this situation here,
and the definition in the new added case will actually be pretty much the same, strangely
enough.
So yeah, it's the second case, so let's say L in…
So in the first case you forget about the grading?
Yeah, yeah, the grading, I'll explain, yeah, there's no grading in the first case, so
it doesn't quite, it doesn't yet plug into the hodge-core module, I'll explain how to
plug it in in a second.
So let's say if L is a least Q new sheaf on SA tall, then you can do something a little
bit funny, which is, in some sense you can also view this as a sort of geometric object
living over S, and you can, it's a group object, it's an abelian group object, you
can take its classifying stack, it also has a projection, it has a canonical base point,
and I claim there's also a six-functor formalism for such things, and you write down the same
formula, and we'll call that the L at X sphere attached to L.
Could you just briefly recall the definition of S L?
Ah, yeah, so S L is the L complete sphere spectrum.
No, no, no, I can tell you something about it, it is a spectrum, so it has homotopy groups,
and the zeroth homotopy group is the allatic integers, and the ith homotopy group is the
L part of the ith stable homotopy group of spheres, yeah, yes, exactly, yeah, yeah, okay,
I don't expect you to really understand what, I mean this is, yeah, really understand the
details of this necessarily, but just to give you an idea, okay, so let me, let me now,
so okay, so this is, so to an object which is relatively concrete, for example a vector
bundle I've attached to an object which is relatively obscure, some kind of least sheaf
over the sphere spectrum, or to one of these guys something relatively obscure, now let
me explain what kind of concrete invariance you can extract from this situation, so what
can be concretely extracted from such, such S L V or not such objects of, just a sec, sorry,
again, yes I can comment on that, so let's say we're working over a point or an algebraically
closed field, then you know you still have a six, it's then you have this thing you can,
it's a finite dimensional Q new vector space, it's a locally compact house door space in
particular, you certainly have a six functor formalism without the L, but what you don't have
is Poincare duality, I mean it's kind of clear such a thing, in contrast if you had the real
numbers there's going to be no Poincare duality for that, so you could write down this definition,
but it wouldn't be an invertible object, it would be some huge thing which is basically
a distribution space on your locally profinite set, which is the underlying topological space
of such an L, but when you pass to the classifying stack it's basically a reflection of the fact
proved by Lazard that you have Poincare duality for Piatic League groups that when you do the
analogous construction in that situation you really get an invertible object, okay?
Maybe not okay, but I'm going to move on anyway, yeah, so yeah right, so
So, excuse me, so if you take at least ZN shape instead of Q new shape, at least Z new shape,
yeah, then you get again an invertible object which is the same as for the associated Q new shape.
Exactly, exactly, to infect this is kind of local because up to a few maps the B doesn't depend on
which lattice you choose. Completely, completely, but the reason for doing it this way is you get
extra functoriality, so yeah, you get a GLN Q new acting on the whole situation as opposed to just
GLN Z new, so yeah. And do you need to use here some pro et al site or you know with,
okay, maybe this is a technical thing because I'm not sure how it looks like. Yeah,
no, I mean, yeah, you should use some pro et al site for sure, yeah, to define objects like this, yeah.
Okay, but in the end I mean the, you know, you can get something that lives there. Okay, right,
so the first invariant is rather banal, so if you have a least sphere L invertible least
shape over the sphere, then you get just a continuous function from S to the integers,
so yeah, at every point you get an integer which just records the dimension of the sphere.
So these, in some sense, these dualizing objects that I've written down, they live in some degree
and you extract that degree and that's the very first, the discrete invariant you get from the
situation. And what is it in each of these two cases? So maybe, ah, I have three boards, okay.
Sorry? Yeah, all right, oh, if I were more organized I could have maybe, yeah.
Okay, so for V in Vect S, then what is the dimension of this
one point compactification here? It's two times the rank of the vector bundle.
Two times, because remember in a tall, in a tall theory of, well, the,
well, you sort of think by analogy with over the complex numbers and usual topology and a
d-dimensional thing over the complex numbers is two d-dimensional as a real thing, so the
promcright duality will be put in degree two times the naive dimension, so that's the reason for this
two here. Yes, yeah, that was the definition of this object here, yeah, right, okay.
What about L in least, where, what was it, up there, least q nu S a tall, then what's the dimension?
So it depends on whether or not nu is equal to L, right, so if nu is equal to L, it's just equal to
the rank of L, this time without multiplying by two, but if nu is different from L, then it's zero.
And in fact, in fact, in this case, if you choose
a z nu lattice, you get a canonical trivialization.
Of the whole sphere, so where am I,
yes, in degree zero, yes, yeah, I mean, in the second case, you take L to be a least,
but least you can have, I mean, co-connective, I mean, whatever, I mean, it's not necessary
to be connective. No, no, I mean, it lives in degree zero, my least sheaves,
yeah, they're totally classical objects, these least sheaves. No, no, no, every, no,
here and here, they're just living in degree zero, there's nothing.
The first case. Here, yeah, yeah,
it's not classical. Well, this isn't, no, this is,
okay, okay, thank you. Yeah, sorry, could you say what did they mention?
Oh, yeah, so what is this, this dimension function up there? Yeah, so, okay, again,
if you restrict to a point of s, then you're just getting an invertible, yeah,
ellatic spectrum, and that lives in some degree, we take its homology and you get a
billion groups sitting in some degree, you look at what degree it sits in,
yeah, so it's some kind of sphere and you just ask what dimension is the sphere, yeah.
So, is that related to the dimension for a dualizable object in an
exhibition model that I would tell you? Well, I mean, this, this and this are,
but, no, this is something different, yeah, no, it's, it's comological shift more than dimension,
yeah, okay. Oh, but now I have a problem, right?
Yeah, here, yeah.
I'm so happy that it's old-fashioned technology because there's in too many situations with
buttons that they just don't work. I gave a whole class for 200 students where the
buttons on the blackboard didn't work, it was terrible. Okay,
okay. So, yeah, okay, there's also a second invariant that you can extract.
So, so if you have a least, invertible least SL sheaf on S,
then you can get a rank one ZL, least ZL sheaf on S.
By, okay, because you can, you can pass from this to invertible least ZL sheaves
on SA tall just by base change, so by taking homology. And then this lives in some
comological degree, which was this dimension that we defined, but then you can shift it down
so it lives in degree zero and you get one of these objects here, so shift by minus dimension.
So, that's the second invariant you get. And again, what is it in the various cases? So,
in case SV, this is just a Tate twist. So, ZL, the Tate twist again being determined by the
rank of V, now without the two. And in the case of SLL, so this is, so it's the top exterior power of
some, so if you choose a lattice inside L to make it as least ZL sheaf, then it has a top exterior
power which is rank one and that's what goes there. So, mu is equal to L and it's just the
trivial again if mu is different from L. So, this is after choice of lattice.
Okay, so these are kind of the very, these are this first invariant and the second
invariant you can extract from this object are kind of very normal things. I mean, they're kind
of, everything can be read off from the homology. So, we're not seeing anything there from the
fact that they're working over the sphere spectrum as opposed to working over the integers.
So, these are the very basic things. It turns out my conjecture will say something interesting
even on this level, but it only really starts to get interesting when you try to extract further
invariants from this situation. So, what else does a basically a bundle of spheres have besides a
dimension and an orientation character, so to speak? So, there's higher invariants.
So, let me maybe take a break from all this fancy stuff for a second and remind you of a simple
story in algebraic topology. So, I guess this was Tom. So, if S is now instead of a scheme if it's
just some say CW complex and then we have a P over S some sphere bundle and let's give a base point
two. Then there are characteristic classes that you can extract from this. I'll just give the most,
well, Stiefel-Whitney classes essentially. So, which live in the mod two co-homology
of the base and they have the property that if P is the fiber-wise one point compactification,
one point compactification of a vector bundle V over S, then this Stiefel-Whitney class of P
is the same thing as the usual Stiefel-Whitney classes of this real vector bundle V.
So, the point of, well, so basically Tom gave a formula for the Stiefel-Whitney classes of a
vector bundle which manifestly shows that these numbers only depend on the associated sphere
bundle that you get by taking one point compactifications. So, this is-
I asked about your, it's related to the previous question about the previous black ball
where you, in the case of a new equal to L this is, you are working in the in the Ladi co-homology
and this is the same. So, then you want to work with QL, at least QL shapes and do this construction
but it seems that this depends on the choice of a lattice over this wedge top.
It seems, it seems that it does but in fact it doesn't.
In other words, if you have two lattices then the wedge top of the lattices rise above it.
That's correct.
Canonically. And the reason is, yeah, so the reason is simple you take the wedge top of the QL thing
and then that on, if you look in the universal case so you have something acted on by GLN QL
then you're just getting a home the, from the top exterior power of the standard representation
you're just getting a homomorphism to QL cross and QL cross is like L to the Z times ZL cross
and you just project off the L to the Z component and that that's another way of describing the
same thing which, which doesn't involve any choice of lattice.
Okay, so this is, okay.
Now it's, it's more impressive in some sense that the whole,
this whole guy doesn't depend on the lattice and some, yeah but, but yeah this is very,
you can see it very concretely and at this level here.
Okay, right. Yes, so there's a, yeah, so you can extract from this that if V is a complex vector
bundle then, well, I'll just do the simplest case. So if you take the first churn class of V
and you take it mod 2 this only depends on the associated spherical vibration
because the first churn class mod 2 is just the second Stiefel-Whitney class of the underlying
real vector bundle and then you apply Tom's observation. So you can do the same story in
this more, oh no, okay, wait. I should never have gone to three boards.
Okay, I don't know if this is the correct way to do it but,
okay.
So, right, all right, so again, so if you have a,
an invertible least SL Schief on SA-Tall, then you get actually a class in,
ah, no, L equals 2 now. So I'll take S2, we want to pick up the two torsion information,
then we get a class in H2 of S with coefficients in F2. And for
the sphere on a vector bundle, this is, well, it's the mod 2 reduction of the first atall
churn class but this is just the gerb of square roots of the top exterior power of the vector bundle.
So V is a line bundle, it is the gerb of square roots of the line bundle
and for SL, well, it's non-trivial. So in the universal case,
what we get from such a cosmology class is a central extension
of gl and q new and this is a, this is a metaplectic type. So it's a non-trivial
central extension, if n is even and you restrict to the symplectic group, it exactly produces this
metaplectic double cover of the, of the symplectic group over your local field.
Okay, now I want to make a remark here, so note that this depends on more
than just the dimension of the vector bundle.
So in our first two invariants, it only, or the rank of the vector bundle,
well, the dimension was just twice the rank but also the orientation twist,
this thing was just a tate twist determined by the rank. And it's a kind of a familiar, familiar
from etallic homology that those are the, you know, the, yeah, these orientation sheaves that you
have, they only ever depend on the dimension of the vector bundle. But once you look in
with sphere spectrum coefficients, as opposed to working over the integers, then actually it's a
lot more, it picks up a lot more refined information about the vector bundle. In particular,
if it's a line bundle, it can tell whether that line bundle has a square root or not.
Okay, yeah, yeah, it's coming, it's coming, yeah.
So that's another, so I think I'll turn to that now. In fact, yeah, I should say there's many
more invariants you can extract all, yeah, but let me maybe get to stating the conjecture. So I, okay.
Ah, yes.
What do you mean with universal case? Oh, yeah, so, so this sphere that you can extract,
it's not just for an etall site that you can do it, you can do it in any
topos, any site. And the universal case for a least Q new sheaf is like the topos BGLN Q new.
And if you do it in that case, then such a co homology class gives you a, a central extension.
Okay. Uh, right.
So, um,
so now let's, okay, so now let me make a strange definition. So let's, again,
S, a Q scheme and M a motive in S. So, uh, so we define, I'm going to define something I'll call
the Lie algebra or the Lie, not Lie, it's just a vector bundle, but, um, well, it's actually a
virtual vector bundle. So it's going to be a class in K theory. I'll call it the Lie algebra of the
motive and you're going to get it from the hodge realization. Uh, you take the p-th piece,
you direct some over all p and z, but then you repeat the p-th piece minus p times. Okay.
So it's a virtual vector bundle because sometimes you're taking negatives,
and so on. Um, so this is a very funny expression. So I should maybe say a bit about where it comes
from. So what is the meaning? Well, one thing you can say is that in fact, this expression has appeared
before. So, um, so in the context of variations of hodge structures, so the, the, the top exterior
power of this thing, the determinant of this thing, or maybe, I think it's actually it's dual, uh, is,
is the canonical bundle of Griffiths, of Griffiths. Yeah.
So it's the, it's the line bundle you build when you have a variation of hodge structures,
which, you know, which he uses as his ample line bundle when he's proving that images of
period maps are actually, uh, algebraic. So it's this very vector bundle here that, uh,
the line bundle, the determinant of this thing up to some, up to some sign. Um, and also, uh, from
for, uh, s equals spec f, a number field f, uh, the same, uh, this same determinant of
the algebra with the dual, uh, is, uh, the ingredient in, uh, in Cato's, uh, heights of motives.
So he defines, so Cato, this is just a one-dimensional f vector space, but Cato puts
a norm on it at every place and then extracts a real number from that, a positive real number,
which he calls the height of the motive. Um, but it's the, it's the same guy that's,
um, coming into it here. Um, okay, so that's sort of where this bundle, or rather it's
top exterior power has appeared. Um, but what is the meaning, the true meaning of it? So,
uh, all right, so the true meaning, so it, it, it sort of comes from Hodge theory. So, so if you
look at the, in the, so in the, uh, modification of vector bundles, uh, on, well, Twister P1 in the
case of usual Hodge theory, or Fargue-Fontaine curve, uh, in the case of Piatic-Hodge theory,
um, uh, perspective on Hodge theory.
Uh, this, uh, this Lie algebra of M is the amount of modification.
So, for example, in the Twister P1 picture of, of reformulation of Hodge theory given by Simpson
explains that to, uh, a pure Hodge structure, you get two different vector bundles on P1,
and they are isomorphic away from the point infinity, which has residue field C. And, um,
so then at the completion at C, you get two different lattices in the same Laurent series field,
and you can measure the relative position of those two lattices by a virtual vector bundle
over the complex numbers, and it is that virtual vector bundle. And it's the exact same story in
Piatic-Hodge theory up to some Tate twists, which it turns out won't be relevant for us. Um, but
then this, this object which measures the amount of modification actually exists completely globally,
even when you don't have a, uh, any Hodge theory, so it's good to consider. Um, okay. So, ah, and let
me give an example. So, if you have an Abelian scheme, uh, then the Lie algebra of the, uh, I guess
the dual to the usual H1, uh, uh, is just the Lie algebra of the Abelian scheme. So, in that case,
an honest vector bundle. Okay. So, now let me state the conjecture. Um, so again, I'll,
for the moment, stick to the case of Q-schemes. Um, and then we take a motive.
Uh, so it's going to be an expression for, and then we take L, an arbitrary prime. Uh, so it's
going to be an expression for the sphere attached to the Lie algebra of this motive. Um, so that's
something that came from the Hodge realization, but it's going to be an infinite tensor product
over all primes new of the sphere attached to the, uh, elatic realizations. So this is, or new
attic realization. Um, the infinite tensor product has meaning, uh, because, uh, if you have a motive
with Q coefficients, it always comes from a motive with Z1 over N coefficients for some N. And then,
as I said, uh, these spheres are canonically trivial if L is different from new and you choose
a lattice. So, um, kind of, yeah. Um, but there's another way of saying this. You could also say
this is a, yeah, you can also define this in the same way as sphere attached to, you could collect
all of these new attic realizations into like a, um, an adelic realization. Um, and then this thing
would be, give a more precise meaning to this infinite tensor product here. Um, okay. So,
uh, now I want to say
what the evidence is for this conjecture and what the consequences are. And maybe somehow it's the
same thing. Um, so, uh, I should have, no, I should have done this one.
Oh, shoot. Oh, I forgot the most important hypothesis.
Oh no. And it's way up there. Okay.
Oops.
Oh no.
Oh, you can still do this.
A motive of weight minus one.
Okay. So, uh, so evidence.
So first of all, it's, um, true if, uh, m is, uh, yeah, this. So one way to get a motive of
rank one is to take one of these, uh, uh, R1, F, Lore, star, uh, Q for F, A to S, an abelian scheme.
So for the motives attached to abelian schemes, this is a, a theorem that I showed. Um,
yes, the dual, uh, H lower one. Yeah. Yeah. So H upper one is weight one. H lower one is weight
minus one. That thing is true for weight minus one, but not true for weight one. Um, yeah.
The second thing is that it's true, uh, if there exists a map, uh, from S to spec Q bar.
So if your scheme lives over an algebraically closed field, then the conjecture is true.
Um, and here the proof is by Hodg's theory, by real Hodg's theory or complex Hodg's theory.
So you can, by standard arguments, assume it's actually over the complex numbers,
and then you can apply Hodg's theory, um, in particular the Betty Comology.
And because of this, uh, the, the statement itself is some kind of a claim that there's some gao,
hidden gao, uh, equivalents, uh, in a purely transcendental construction. So you can make
an identification like that using Hodg's theory over the complex numbers, using the existence
of Betty Comology, but both sides make sense over Q. Uh, and then the claim is somehow that this
isomorphism you produce using Hodg's theory descends to, to Q, um, which is quite mysterious. Um,
and it's related to this Taniyama Shimura type reciprocity laws. Um, as I, maybe I will explain.
I'm a little confused. So MS, is it a conjectural category MS, or you're really taking some
concrete MS? So the category of motives here. No, you see, uh, the way you should read this,
for one way to read this, for example, is that if you have a smooth proper S scheme,
uh, and then, um, you take some HI of that thing, and let's say you take I to be odd,
and then you take twist, uh, down to get into weight minus one, then you know how to write down
all these realization functors, and then the statement makes precise sense.
If you have anything important, make an algebraic cycle.
Yes. Then you can go ahead and try to do that as well. Yeah.
But you don't know, like over Q bar?
Well, no, I mean, uh, no, no, no, no, sorry. We're really, the, the coefficients in our
motives are really Q here, not Q bar. Or is that?
So what is true over Q bar?
Uh, when S is over Q bar, this, yeah. Yeah. What's true is actually a statement about
variations of hodge structures. So anytime you can write down a variation of hodge structures
over the complex numbers, then you get, uh, a theorem like this.
So I want you to clarify. So if you have a over Q bar, so let's say you have something smooth
or finite, is S, uh, S is not necessarily smooth or, uh, okay. I'm not sure because in the usual
variation of hodge structures has to be, yeah, that's true. That's true. But, you know, uh,
but the claim, everything has a tall descent. So you can kind of use resolution of singularities.
So the question is, the real question is, so you ask, let's say, even smooth over Q bar and you
go to C, but there are seven other embeddings to C. So each time you have an embedding to C.
So you have some transcendental recipe and those are compatible or you just choose one of them.
You just choose one of them. Yeah, exactly. And then, yeah, so even here there's kind of a,
um, yeah, even there there's a claim. So the, I said exists, but to make it canonical over
Q bar also there's a, it's not clear. Yeah, that's a good point.
But is it that you do expect from looking at cases where one can, one is more theory like
a billion schemes, is it the case for a billion schemes, what you get from different embedding
to C and compatibility? Yes.
So therefore you say that it should be transcendental and is it enough to prove this compatibility
to the same from Q bar to Q or you need more information? Yeah, I mean, in principle to me,
you need more, but since I don't know how to do either, I don't really know how to answer the
question. Yeah, so well, third, maybe I won't write it down, but there's this analogy between
motives and these T motives in the function field context defined by Anderson. And I will say you
can formulate an analog of this conjecture in that context, the function field context,
and then you can actually prove it and it's not even difficult to prove. So I'll just say the
T mode of analog is true. So for me, that's a pretty compelling theoretical evidence.
So but what again, so now let me try to explain what this is saying concretely or what you can
concretely extract out of this conjecture. So so well, the first thing we can look at is just
dimensions and so take dimensions and we deduce for m of weight minus one that twice
the dimension of the Lie algebra of m is the same or I was using rank, I'm sorry,
is the same thing as the dimension of the new attic realization. So for all new. So to get this,
you choose L equal to new and the only sphere that's contributing on the right hand side is
the new attic one and it gives this and that gives that. So there's a this kind of implies
you could say note that this doesn't depend on you that a priori does depend on you. So this,
I guess you could say gives independence of Betty numbers.
So these things do not depend on you because they're equal to that thing. But also it gives you
that the Betty numbers are even in the case of weight minus one or more generally in the
case of odd weight because you can always take twist down to get to there. And these are known
facts. The usual way of seeing that the Betty numbers are even for odd weight is to use some kind
of polarization or some, yeah, there's some some Plectic form, but this is kind of a different
explanation. You could say you're actually finding the thing, the canonical half dimensional thing
there. And okay, this independence of Betty numbers in characteristic zero is not so impressive,
but I'll say there exists a form of this conjecture also over Fp and it likewise
implies this independence of Betty numbers and the evenness of the Betty numbers in odd weight.
And there it's a more, those are more serious results proved by Deline very much not obvious.
And of course I haven't proved it either because this is just a conjecture. I'm just trying to explain
what the conjecture predicts. Yeah. Right. Okay, likewise, if you take this second linear invariant,
this determinant thing, then you discover that the top exterior power of this thing has to just
be some tape twist for all new has to be the appropriate tape twist. So the only sort of
one dimensional motives of odd weight that you should ever see are just are just tape.
Oh boy. Wait, you know what? I'm just going to stick to two boards from now on.
Okay. So what about these more refined, these higher invariants? So I want to extract something
from these new two jerbs. So let's, let's take S to be the, I don't know, a modular stack of elliptic
curves over Q. Then the conjecture implies, and in this case, this is an honest argument because
the conjecture is true in the case of a billion varieties and in particular for elliptic curves.
So what you extract is that, well, yeah, first of all, the, let's say two addict sphere attached to
the Lie algebra of the universal elliptic curve, which is the so-called hodge bundle,
is the same thing as the two addict sphere attached to the finite a delicate tape module
of the universal elliptic curve. And now if you pass to the modular elliptic curves with full
level structure, then what happens over here is, well, this tape module by definition gets trivialized.
So then on that level, this is just the trivial sphere. And if you look over on the other side
of the equation here and recall this Stiefel-Whitney class living in degree two, which controls
square roots of line bundles when you plug in the sphere of a line bundle, what you deduce is that
so deduce is that on the modular stack of elliptic curves with full level structure,
there exists, in fact, canonical square root of omega.
And moreover, if you believe a functorial form of the conjecture, kind of functorial for
automorphisms, which is, again, true for a billion varieties, moreover,
this omega one-half is equivariant for this, so GL2 of the finite edels, this double cover of
GL2 of the finite edels acting on modular stack of elliptic curves with full level structure.
So on the modular stack of full elliptic curves with full level structure,
you have GL2 AF acting by changing the level structure. In particular, you have the central
extension acting, and omega is equivariant for the non-central extension one, which is why you
have heck operators on modular forms from an algebraic perspective. And what this is saying is
that, well, this explains, in some sense, why there is a theory, algebraic theory,
of weight one-half modular forms with heck action.
So there's a, yeah, so I, actually, this was the starting point for me,
for this whole thing, because I saw a talk of Delene's, which is online, on YouTube,
at the Mossdowfest, where he explained this formulation for the algebraic theory of
weight one-half modular forms, and then I realized it should be connected to these spheres.
So note that this one-half, essentially, it's coming from the fact that
the first stable homotopy group of spheres is a Zmod2. That's what's giving you this
second Stiefel-Whitney class and all these other things. And so it's the same two that's appearing
there, and so kind of maybe the reason why you don't have modular forms of fractional weight
having an algebraic meaning is connected to the fact that this is precisely Zmod2 and not Zmod6
or something like this. Right. Yes, well, not, right. Okay.
Let me check the time before I answer your question.
Okay, I'll get to it in a sec. So one more concrete consequence.
Yeah, no, maybe this takes a bit too long to explain. Well,
you can soup this up a bit because, well, you know what, maybe, I think I've, I think I've,
maybe, well, let me just say you can, yeah. So if you look at, for example, if you take F to be
imaginary quadratic and you look at the modular stack of elliptic curves with complex multiplication
by F and full level structure over Q, then this is actually just, I guess, spec of the
maximal abelian extension. And you can really prove this just from that conjecture, which is
very funny because this is just a bunch of torsion stuff, but here you have something quite
substantial. So there are various tricks for upgrading this to give more refined information
in the presence of complex multiplication. So what you can do is if you have a motive with
endomorphism ring F, then you can apply this conjecture not just to that motive, but to that
motive tensored with any finite dimensional F vector space. And so it upgrades to a statement
involving the k theory of F, algebraic k theory of F, and that contains a lot of information. And
if you play around a bit, you can actually deduce some, some cases of Taniyama-Shamurra
reciprocity laws just from this bear conjecture, which is sort of surprising.
Yeah, it's isomorphism of schemes. Yeah, yeah.
Right. Okay, so maybe I think there were a couple more things I was potentially planning
to talk about. One of them was what happens in over a finite field or in characteristic P.
I think I'll skip that, although it's quite interesting.
And instead, I want to talk about maybe why, why this weight minus one hypothesis is there and
how one might get rid of it. So, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Oh, yeah, well,
you can understand this by thinking about what the C points of this
is. And then you see that there aren't that many, in fact. It's just, and it, so if it wasn't full
level structure, but some finite level structure would just be a finite set of points. It's basically
only finitely many isomorphism classes and full level structure, it's profinite. And then it just
turns out that the descent data for writing it over Q instead, or well, it actually lives over F,
is the same as, so it's, yeah, if you look up, if you read, for example, Silverman's book,
Advanced Topics and Liptic Curves or something, then you find a nice explanation of this sort of
thing, maybe not precisely in this language, but it's a, no, well, yeah, I don't know.
Yes, yeah, so it's like you have the module of Liptic Curves, which is big, one-dimensional,
and then you have the CM, CM is just a finite set of points, really. And then with full level
structure, you take some inverse limit, it's a profinite set, and it turns out to be this one,
when you think about the descent data. It's a beautiful story, so yeah, but I really don't
have time to get too much into it, but it's a beautiful kind of classical story in number theory.
Okay, why weight minus one? So, well, you can look at the, so the basic fact,
so in terms of Twister P1,
so weights correspond to slopes, is that what they're called? Yeah, slopes of vector bundles on P1,
and the basic fact is that if V is a semi-stable of slope minus one,
then the total cohomology of V is equal to zero.
So,
what do you mean exactly by P1 are this twist of P1? If real, is it just,
because in symptom, I mean, you could be, if the usual P1 I would see with some extra structure,
what is it? Yeah, so for this statement, I'm just thinking of it as an R scheme,
so it's the non-trivial form of P1 over the real numbers. It's a very Broward variety of the Quaternions.
But yeah, you have to be a bit more careful when you're doing the story in families,
but I'm just trying to give the idea here.
Right, so what is the relevance of this? Well, actually, so there's something funny about this
statement, which is, this is part of a family of statements, which includes, for example,
Hilbert reciprocity. Some statement about product over all prime numbers of some local data is
trivial. But note that we're missing on, in the new is running only over finite places,
so we're missing the infinite places in the new. Now, you might be tempted to move that sphere of
the Lie algebra over to the other side and call that the infinite contribution. I was tempted
to do this and it blocked me for several years. That's absolutely not what's going on. So what's
going on is that that Lie algebra thing is some discrepancy that shows up that's not attached
to the infinite place. And the contribution from the infinite place is missing. And in fact,
it disappears. The contribution at the infinite place should, so this is this suggestion of
Schultz in his ICM address. So something, something, something sort of vague that the
twister P1 realization should exist over an arbitrary S. So it's a story that comes from
Hodge theory, but he says in some sense it should make sense over an arbitrary scheme.
And so we're missing a realization functor on the right. There should be a contribution from the
infinite place. And it just happens to be that the contribution vanishes in the case of weight minus
one, essentially due to this fact. And this is exactly what's happening in the proof of that
conjecture in the context of Hodge theory. You can, if you phrase it in Hodge theory in terms of
modifications of vector bundles, it is this fact, which means that some extra contribution is, is
vanishing when it comes to the conjecture. So yeah, I have some sort of, some sort of a,
I can make precise some sort of weak form of this to address your question. I can make precise some
sort of weak form of this conjecture. I think I won't do it in this talk, which would then allow
you to make a conjecture for all weights there. But it's a conjecture about it. Well, it's too,
yeah, this usual story with motives. There's two conjectures, but you can actually test it because,
in principle, because you could take the difference, like everything there is well-defined. If you
start with a motive, you know how to write down, then you could take the difference between those
two spheres and ask whether that sphere is associated to, say, a real vector bundle over the atol
site, or at least some homotopy shadow of a real vector bundle of the atol site. And the prediction
is that yes, it is. So this, the discrepancy of this being satisfied outside the weight minus one
k should be controlled by something like a, well, a real vector bundle. But I think I won't take
the time to make that precise. And in fact, I think I'll just stop here. Thank you for your
attention and your patience.
Okay, so we'll take a few questions from Tokyo, from the moment side, and maybe we start with
before coming back to your questions.
So if you can do it in a short time, can you say what multiplication is needed so as not over q
or in positive characteristics? So of course, there is a problem with the mixed characteristic case.
Yes, yes. You don't know which homology you will use. You need some mixed
thing with, so you need maybe to, the vector plus nothing seems quite, I mean, or maybe you
just restrict to s of q characteristics. What do you do? Yeah, good idea, because indeed in mixed
characteristic it is complicated, but in fp it's not too complicated to say. So there you don't have
the hodge realization because we're working with motives with q coefficients. So you simply don't
have the hodge realization. So you, you just leave out the term, or you make the term on the left
hand side trivial. And then, but as a compensation for nu equals to p, you have this more, you have
this crystalline theory which has a lot of extra stuff. It's more, more kind of, it's more meaty
than the ellatic realizations. And you can define exactly an ellatic sphere on the atall side of
your fp scheme for any l, including l equals p equals nu. And then the conjecture is that
if you do that there, then the conjecture, yeah, if you just make the trivial sphere on the left
hand side, that's the conjecture that holds. And what's secretly going on is that in the passage
from characteristic 0 to characteristic p, the spheres for the peatic realization and the sphere
for the Lie algebra, which exists in characteristic 0, kind of get combined or to form this sphere
attached to the isocrystal realization. So, yeah, and I can make precise like the manner in which
that's happening and so on. It has to do with, with Farg's kind of perspective of the modifications
of vector bundles on the Farg-Vinten curve. You can also see it quite explicitly at the level of
these low, low-degree concrete consequences. But yeah, that's, that's the basic story, is you
just leave out the thing that doesn't exist and you get a, I claim a true statement, although I can't
prove it. Okay, is it both, I understand it, it's both for l equal to p and l equal to p.
Yeah. Okay, so that's, that's, and in both cases you'll use the, on the,
okay. Yeah, the weird thing is that even in characteristic p, like, you know, I had these
least sl things, you really do just look at least sp things on the etol site. So it's, there's no
isocrystal anything on the, on the l part of the story, only on the new part of the story. On the
l part of the story, it is still just the etol site and usual least sheaves, well just with sphere
spectra instead. That's kind of the funny aspect. Okay, so we move now to Tokyo. So Shane, could you,
do you have questions?
No, I think it's a different story and the reason is that that's something very specific to
motives over a number field, whereas this is motives over any base. So I don't see the,
the precise connection, yeah. Thank you. Okay, and then the morning sun.
Thank you. So, and then at the usualist, do we have any question?
To me, I ask a silly question. I mean, it's very, I mean, I mean, in the previous picture, I mean,
you somehow start with, I mean, most proper schemes over this, but I mean, if I understand
correctly, I mean, Toren, they have some non-quietative, I mean, story of this, I mean,
what did you had with, do you have similar picture in that?
No, I don't, no, I mean, well, I, I don't know what, I don't know what the story with
weights is in the non-quietive context. Yeah, no, I, yeah.
Other questions? Yes, you mentioned a team motives. What would be the replacement for
the sphere spectrum in it? No, well, no, it's still the sphere spectrum.
Have you L completes for L money? No, no, no, no, no. Sorry. Yeah, no, it's,
it's still, you have to, again, you choose a prime. So there you have three primes as well.
Okay. The first prime is always P. The second prime new, that's now a place of your function field.
The third prime L is still just a prime L.
And actually in that case, L does have to be different from P. But anyway.
Stuff? Yeah, I don't have a precise question, but there is a theorem of the linear that any
hot cycle is absolute hot, does it play? On an abelian variety, yeah, yeah.
On an abelian variety, does it play any role in your story? No, not that I know. Yeah.
Okay. So, yes, please. So, you mentioned the Stifler-Wittnig answers. And so, if two appear.
Yes. So, Steno operation, the Steno square is appearing. Yes.
Oh, yes, right. That was Tom's definition, basically, is you, you take a, if you have a
spherical vibration, then, you know, it's always oriented with F2 coefficients.
And then, so then you have the, the so-called Tom isomorphism. But it, it, it, the, this
Steno action gets twisted. And if you look at how the, so you transfer via the Tom isomorphism
up to the sphere bundle, applies Steno operations, then transfer back. Those are the,
those are the Stifler-Wittnig classes. That was Tom's, Tom's theorem.
And did you appear in your story there? Well, I mean, there are also other ways of defining these,
only in so far as they contribute to one possible definition for these Stifler-Wittnig classes.
There are other possible definitions, some of which I prefer for my own personal reasons. But, um,
yeah, so. Can I have a question? Yeah, please. Sorry. So, for each realization,
you build like a speck, a few respective like this. Yeah. Do you really expect to see something
back in most of these, like in SH? Yeah.
I don't think so. Yeah. I, it's a, it's a bit of a puzzle for me. So certainly for the sphere
attached to a vector bundle, it exists as a motive in SH or whatever. But for the other ones,
a priori no. Um, but I'm not, yeah, I don't know. Yeah, the other, yeah.
Yeah. I mean, at the very least for the isocrystal story that the usual SH won't
be good because of A1 invariance being broken. But yeah, but maybe there are, maybe there are
replacements. I don't know.
Because you don't see the invariance in these stories. No, one characteristic zero. Wait,
what? Well, no, I mean, if you work with the,
in characteristic P, there's also a story with piatic least sheaves and that theory,
yeah. So there you wouldn't have any, I mean, that's not, that doesn't come from a realization
function on, on SH. Yeah.
Okay. One question. Yes. Did you set some point that this, this story includes the risks
to low in class three theory? I know.
You said risks plus the fact that the son of the invariance is zero or something global.
Yeah. So do you say that? No.
Well, it's, it's, it's reminiscent. So, but, but in fact, actually in some sense,
um, well, right. So, in fact, you can.
So the question, do you expect from your conjecture you would extract?
Not from, not from this one. So I was saying you can get, yeah, you can get this,
explicit class field theory for imaginary quadratic fields. But, uh, but no, but if you look at the,
you can also make a conjecture for motives of weight zero. And I mean, a very simple one. So,
like if you have a tall local system of q modules, a very simple example of a motive of weight zero,
then you can make a precise form of this conjecture, which includes the infinite prime and I proved
it. Um, and that case actually does, uh, is strong enough to give, uh, um, art and reciprocity. So
actually this, I actually did write a paper about, um, cleaning the conjecture. Well,
a form of that. Yeah. If you make the most, the strongest form of the conjecture, then it's,
it implies art and reciprocity. I mean, you have to, you have to, there's a big, uh, a big thing
you need to know to make that deduction, which is that a number field has homologic, virtual
homological dimension less than or equal to two. So it's non-trivial, but that's basically all. Um,
yeah. Okay.
Okay. If not, let's thank you.
