Thank you very much for the introduction.
Also thanks for organizing this conference.
I'm really having the time of my life here, it's really good.
And thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak here.
So I want to start with a question of Steven Gubkin, who posted on my overflow.
He said in the middle, it is convenient to reason about topos in their own internal logic.
Has there been much done about the internal logic of the gross risk topos, or would the
logic of the topos require too much cumulative algebra to feel like logic?
I think that Steven has a very good point here.
I mean, you see the basic objects of much of algebraic geometries are schemes.
And schemes are locally ringed spaces, which are locally isomorphic to the spectrum of
a commutative ring.
So it shouldn't come as any surprise that many notions in algebraic geometry are like
sheafy notions or globalized notions of ordinary notions in commutative algebra.
And also you know the business with the proofs in algebraic geometry.
Often they go like blah, blah, blah, therefore without loss of generality, we may assume
that the scheme is affine.
And then it's a simple consequence of the following theme of a commutative algebra.
Other proofs go like blah, blah, blah, therefore it surfaces to check the condition of stocks.
They are trivial because of commutative algebra.
Okay, and I think topos logic has a contribution to make there.
The starting point is to realize that any scheme has its structure sheaf OX and this
is of course a sheaf, a sheaf of rings.
But if you switch to the internal logic of the Piotr Zariski topos, the topos of sheafs
on X, this complicated sheaf of rings will look just like an ordinary plain old ring,
non-sheafy.
Okay?
So and if you have a sheaf of X modules on your scheme, then from the internal point
of view, this will simply look like an ordinary module on that ordinary ring, okay?
This is the starting point.
This was already noticed in the 70s when the internal language was developed by several
people.
And so I quite want to see how far we can push the theory.
So what we want to do is like build a dictionary between external notions and internal notions.
Build this dictionary once and then we can use it as often as we want.
So I just want to give you a few of those items.
For instance, a sheaf of finite type, okay?
So externally, a sheaf given on your space X, a sheaf of modules is a finite type if
and only if from the internal point of view, it simply looks like an ordinary, finitely
generated module.
Okay?
Okay, we can push it forward.
For instance, a sheaf which is externally finite locally free.
This is precisely the same thing as from the internal point of view, an ordinary module
which really is finitely free, not locally, but really globally from the internal point
of view.
Okay?
So the internal language is a device which allows you to pretend that the base scheme
you're working over is in fact a point, yeah, to reduce to the situational point on a single
point.
Okay?
Let's just do a few more examples.
So for instance, maybe when you're a beginner and then you're learning algebraic geometry,
then maybe you are scared of the definition of a tensor product of sheaves, tensor product
of sheaves of modules.
I mean, there's nothing scary about them in fact.
But when you're just learning it, then you might be scared.
The problem is like the naive definition only gives you a pre-sheaf, and then you have
to sheafify.
And maybe you're still in the face where you have anxious feelings about sheafification.
Okay?
Okay, anyway, from the internal point of view, the tensor product of sheaves of modules is
simply the ordinary tensor product which you have learned in your first semester in linear
algebra or something, yeah?
Okay.
A particular nice example is the sheaf of rational functions, Kx.
So this is a sheaf of rational functions.
And so if you know its definition, then you also know that it's a little bit delicate.
In fact, there's a short paper by Stephen Kleinman titled Misconceptions about Kx, where
he lists like three definitions about Kx, which are very commonly found in the literature
in which of wrong, which do not even define a pre-sheaf, for instance, yeah?
Okay, so the definition is a little bit delicate, but not from the internal point of view.
From the internal point of view, you obtain the sheaf of rational functions very simply,
namely take Ox.
Ox is just an ordinary ring from the internal point of view, yeah?
Okay.
And then take its total quotient ring.
But if you don't have elements, how do you take the quotient quotient ring?
Yeah.
You have to use the Topos magic, yeah?
So you use the internal Topos language, and there Ox is simply an ordinary ring, and it
has its sets of regular elements, and then you localize it then.
This is exactly the beauty that it becomes so easy in the internal language.
Actually, there are other kinds of quotient ring considered by algebraics, which are less
often used, but I saw in some references that they have some other ways to define it.
So it's not inverting the regular elements, but...
Yeah, I mean, you can localize at many sets, yeah?
In fact, at any subset, if you want to, yeah?
I mean, there will always be a quotient ring, but if you localize at the set of regular
elements, then you will obtain the thing commonly called Kx.
And with this, for instance, you can give a beautiful internal account, purely internal
account of the basics of the theory of Cartier divisors, okay?
Let me make one more remark.
So we had in a Booth lecture the situation that we had a theorem which holds it if and
only if the Topos was Boolean.
We have a similar situation here, namely, from the internal point of view, you can ask yourself,
what is the Krull dimension of the ring Ox?
Any ring has a Krull dimension, yeah?
I mean, you have to be a little bit, I mean, you have to use a constructively sensible
definition of the Krull dimension, but such a definition exists thanks to several people,
some of which are in the audience here, okay?
And then you can use this definition and ask yourself, what's the Krull dimension of Ox?
The answer is the Krull dimension of Ox is precisely the dimension of the scheme, of
the base scheme, okay?
And then you have the following observation, the Krull dimension of Ox is zero if and only
if the scheme is zero dimensional, if and only if the internal language is Boolean, okay?
So in some sense, the ring Ox, the structure sheath controls the logic of the Topos.
I want to take a minute to explain why, in some sense, this talk is like a praise for
Mike Schulman, you see?
So there have been several lectures on the internal languages of Topos this year, and
most of the time geometric logic was stressed, which is very fine, yeah?
But in fact, the Topos can interpret more, more fragments of logic.
They can interpret full first order logic.
They can interpret higher order logic.
They can also interpret dependent types, which some of you might not know about, but I promise
to you, you're using dependent types all the time, yeah?
And if you really want to import all of constructive mathematics into the Topos setting, you also
need dependent types.
Okay, but the thing why I want to praise Mike Schulman is because he made it possible to
use unbounded quantification in the internal language.
So unbounded quantification is when you say, for all rings, it should hold that.
For all modules, it should hold that, yeah?
This is unbounded quantification, and of course, you need it all the time because you want
to formulate universal properties, okay?
And Mike Schulman wrote this little paper, which you can totally understand even if you
don't know what a stack is, where he just gives a small addition to the usual Kripker's
real semantics of an often Topos to be able to speak about unbounded quantification and
locally internal categories in contrast to only internal categories, okay?
Okay, so with this small extension, we can really import all of constructive mathematics
into a Topos setting.
Okay, and I want to give examples for this.
Are there any questions up to this point?
Okay, then let's have a basic example.
So in your first semester in university, you'll learn that if you have a short exact sequence
of ordinary non-sheafy modules, and you know that the two outer ones are finally degenerated,
then solve the middle one.
This is a basic theorem, and this basic theorem has an obvious proof, and this obvious proof
is constructive.
Therefore, you can interpret this statement in the internal language of any Topos, and
then it will automatically give rise to a more advanced statement, a statement which
you see on the board about sheaves.
Okay, so this is a first example where the Topos magic allows you to like prove a theorem
once, and then interpret it in many, many contexts at once without further work.
One remark, so you might object that the ordinary proof of this statement is not difficult
at all.
You might remark that it's simply routine, and that it's very easy to do.
Okay, then you're right.
In fact, if you're familiar with the notation, then you will probably be able to prove the
statement at the bottom in like a minute, okay?
But I argue that this is not a minute where it's spent.
It's a minute spent with like saying, okay, we have this generator on these open subsets.
Well, the open subset is too big.
I have to shrink it if necessary.
I have to shrink it again, and mm-hmm, mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
It's routine, but it's like 60 seconds where you could have done something different, okay?
And with the Topos language, you have this 60 seconds for free, they're given to you,
yeah?
Because you simply look at the statement, realize because of the dictionary that it's
the interpretation of the well-known statement of linear algebra, and then you are done,
okay?
You're going from 60 seconds to one second, this is, I think, a great idea.
Also, you gain conceptual understanding because you now really know where this sheath theorem
comes from.
Before that, you only had like a feeling, but now you have like a formalized rigorous
proof.
A more advanced example is the following.
So take a Scheme X, assume that it's reduced, take a sheath of more than modules of finite
type over it, then the statement is that this sheath will always automatically be locally
free on a dense open subset, okay?
This is a statement in the sheath theory.
So for instance, Ravi Vakil in his excellent lecture notes on algebraic geometry says that
this is an important hard exercise.
It's an exercise with like a hint which goes over like half a page, yeah?
Okay, but in fact, this is not a hard exercise at all.
It's a trivial consequence of the constructor theorem of linear algebra at the top.
In constructor of algebra, you know that any finitely generated vector space is not not
free, does not not possess a basis, okay?
So conceptively, you cannot prove that any finitely generated vector space really is
free.
You can only prove the slightly weaker statement and the not translates to on a dense open
subset, okay?
I really like this example because otherwise you would have to like follow through this
hint which just goes over half a page and do Nakayama once and do Yakanama twice and
so on and so on.
And in fact, it's a trivial consequence.
And you can also prove, for example, the level of generic flatness in this, in this,
in this, I mean, it's true in this form.
Yeah.
And there you have to work a little bit more in the usual, in the usual, so if you're
an algebraic geometry, then anyway, you have to do the usual for me because.
Yeah, well, at some point in time, you will have to work, but the point is that you can
shift lots of this work into work which has already been done in constructively linear
algebra.
Yeah?
And you can, and can automatically import these kinds of things.
Any more questions at this point?
Okay.
Then let's continue the tour of the putesia-risky-topos of a scheme.
I want to show you a curious property which the internal universe of the putesia-risky-topos
of any scheme always has.
Namely.
So from the internal point of view, or X is a ring, yeah?
And this ring has the following curious property.
Any element which is not invertible is nilpotent.
Any element which is not invertible is nilpotent.
So or X is almost a field, yeah?
If you were to quotient by the nilpotent elements, you would have a field in this sense.
So this is a statement which holds in full generality on a scheme, even if your base
scheme is a base ring, for instance, is really a ring and not a field.
It always holds.
So this was already noticed in a special case by Mulvey in the 70s.
And here you see Tierney commenting on it.
He says, this is surely important for its precise significance is still somewhat obscure
as if the case was many such non-geometric formulas, non-geometric in the sense as explained
in Olivia's lectures, okay?
And one purpose of this talk is to convince you that there is actually a real meaning
behind this statement, that it's not at all obscure.
This will come in a moment.
First, let's have a purely Topos theoretical interlude.
It's a thing which I stumbled upon, I presume that it's well known, but I've never seen
a written reference to it, okay?
Say you have a Topos, E, and you have a Subtopos, given by a local operator, a modal operator,
topology on it, there are several like synonyms, yeah?
Okay.
So I have the Subtopos and you have the Supertopos, and now take a formula.
You might be questioning yourself, what's the relation between the formula holding on
the Subtopos and the formula holding on the Supertopos?
Is there any relationship?
Okay.
And the answer is yes, there is, namely the relationship is exactly given by this observation.
So a formula Phi holds in the Subtopos, if and only if its diamond translation holds
in the Supertopos.
The diamond translation is given recursively by these rules.
They are just the rules for the logic, well-known double negation translation, just with a diamond
instead of the not not.
Okay.
Good.
And this is the answer.
This is a very useful observation because it allows you to use the internal language
of the Supertopos to speak about the Subtopos, okay?
And we will see why this is very useful in algebraic geometry on the next slide.
The diamond translation, is it a geometric morphism?
No, I mean the diamond translation is a purely syntactical operation on formulas.
Given a formula, you obtain its diamond translation by like putting diamonds everywhere in front
of everything, and then in fact you can prove that it surfaces for you to put the diamond
in front of the exists and in front of the ore.
So the top left, this is the geometric morphism of the topos, and the diamond is an internal
reflection on the universe, on the suboptimism.
Maybe I should say that I'm a little bit envious of the philosophers.
You know, we mathematicians, we only study what's true, but the philosophers are already
to study like things, what should be true, what do I know, what does he know, what can
be true, what is necessary true and so on.
So the philosophers, they study more the logic.
And so a stopper theory, model logic is actually useful in like real world applications in
algebraic geometry as well, okay, we'll see it just in a second.
The thing is, depending on which model operator you choose, you can incorporate like a whole
host of statements in one.
I just want to concentrate on, for instance, the first one.
So if you choose for diamond, the double negation topology, then diamond phi will mean that
phi holds on a dense open subset.
Okay, you can check that with the cryptidual mathematics.
Okay, and then you can also wonder what phi to the omega means, the diamond translation
of phi.
And if you do the calculation, you will see that I'm assuming the scheme to be irreducible
for the moment.
That phi to the diamond means that this formula phi holds at the generic point, okay.
So in algebraic geometry, it's an important question when properties spread from the generic
point to some dense open subset.
This does not always occur, it's a good thing when it occurs, okay.
And you can analyze this question purely logically, because you can put it in this form.
When does phi to the diamond imply diamond phi?
When does phi holding at the generic point imply, implies that it holds on a dense open
subset?
Okay, and the good thing about it is that you then can import well-known theorems of
logic to tackle this.
For instance, the theorem that for any geometric formula phi, this always holds, okay.
And in that way, you have like one meter theorem which gives you a whole host of individual
statements about spreading from points to open neighborhoods.
And in fact, if you vary the model operator, you gain even more statements.
Yeah?
Should phi in this case have, includeably like one free variable which is a point of
the scheme x, or should it be have no free variables and when you say it holds on a dense
open subset, you mean?
Yeah.
It may have free variables, for instance, it may refer to given sheeps or something,
yeah.
So.
But not to points of the space x.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, not the points of the space x.
The confusion is, some of these feel like quantifiers, but quantifiers eliminate variables.
Yeah.
Or bind variables.
Yeah.
Maybe I have time for one very short example for this.
So you might know that it, the following does not hold.
If you have a sheaf of modules and you know that it's stock vanishes, then it does not
hold in general that it will vanish on a dense, on a, on a neighborhood of the point.
This is because the, sorry, you know again, a conceptual understanding for this non-theorem.
This is because the formulation for a module to be zero is non-geometric.
It's for all x in m, x should be zero because of the universal quantifier.
This is not a geometric formula.
Okay.
But now presume that the sheaf is known to be a finite type, yeah.
So internally, this means that the module is finitely generated.
So you have generators, x1, x2, xn.
And now you know that you can rewrite the condition that m is zero, simply as x1 is
zero, x2 is zero, and so on, xn is zero.
And this is manifestly a geometric formula, okay?
So now you have a conceptual understanding of why in general, spreading does not occur
for being zero, and why it does occur when the sheaf is a finite type.
Let's talk about quasi-coherence.
The condition for a sheaf of modules to be quasi-coherent is very important in algebraic
geometry.
In fact, there are arguments that sheaf of modules which are not quasi-coherent should
never be studied, because they're like not geometric, yeah?
Okay.
So of course you're wondering whether it's possible to characterize quasi-coherence in
the internal language, okay?
And it turns out that yes, you can, the condition is on the board.
And I quite like this condition because, so normally, you're always reduced to well-known
constructive algebra.
But in this case, you create new constructive algebra, because this is a condition which
is not normally seen in constructive algebra.
Okay, so the condition is that, finally, f of o, x, if you localize this module e away
from f, then this new module should be a sheaf with respect to a certain internally defined
model operator, which you can see on the board, okay?
So it's possible to give the whole of sheaf theory, separateness condition and so on and
so on in the internal language.
In fact, I'll do it for you.
This is the separateness condition, just the separateness condition.
And I quite like it, because it's of a curious logical form.
It says that if you are able to deduce that s is 0, given the assumption that f is invertible,
then you can unconditionally deduce that some power of f times n really is 0, okay?
So and we can return to Mulvey.
If you take for e, in a special case, simply o, or x, the structure sheaf, and if you take
for s1, then you're exactly reduced to Mulvey's curious formula.
And then now you know the deeper meaning of this formula.
This was just like a little shadow of the, of the, of a greater picture, namely the picture
of quasi-coherence-ness, okay?
The last few slides are for all fans of Munik Hakim and Peter Arndt, especially his really
great answer on math overflow on how to motivate schemes.
Okay, so an abstract motivation of how to motivate schemes is the following.
Take a ring a, you want to construct the free local ring of it, okay?
So this is the universal property.
It should hold that, like you have a morphism from a to a prime, then to be constructed
ring.
And it should hold that for any map into a local ring r, this map should uniquely factor
over a local map of rings from a, a, a prime to r, okay?
And then you do the calculation and are disappointed because this optimization problem has a solution
in set if and only if the ring a has exactly one prime idea.
Okay, this is about the situation.
Okay, and now we read this answer by Peter Arndt and I'm delighted to know that this
optimization problem does have always a solution.
You just have to allow yourself to change the toples.
The solution is the structure sheet O spec a in the scheme spec a, yeah?
Of course you have to define what it means for what a morphism of rings living in different
toposes is, but you can do it.
It's very easy.
And the side is the spectrum with the Zaris ketopology.
Yeah, right, yeah.
Okay, and then of course you want to go one step further because you're a fan of Munikaki.
Now you want to construct a free local ring over any ring, not necessarily a ring in set.
Okay, so what you do, you do, it's by the general theory of this toples magic, it surfaces
to give a constructive account of the theory of the usual spectrum inside the toples.
So a first attempt might be to define the spectrum as the topological space of the prime
ideals of a, but you know that prime ideals are elusive in constructive mathematics.
This will not have the right universal property, okay?
So a better attempt might be to consider this topological space of all the prime filters
of a.
A prime filter is classically the same as a complement of a prime ideal, only that it's
directly axiomaticized, yeah?
It fulfills exactly the dual notions.
Okay, this is much better, but also prime filters are elusive in constructive mathematics.
There's a count example by Zorial where he constructs a ring which is not trivial, but
doesn't have any prime filters, okay?
What you instead have to do is build the locale of the prime filters of a.
And in fact, this definition was already on the board.
Olivia's last lecture shared this long chain of equivalences.
Here was the shift topos of a spec a.
This had a non-constructive definition, it doesn't work.
And then there were three more topos, all of which you can constructively use, yeah?
And I just kind of randomly decided for the final one, which is a locale, okay?
Okay, and in this way, you obtain an internal characterization of Monique Harkim's very general
spectrum functor, which gives an adjoint to the forgetful functor from local ring toposes
to ring toposes.
If you check her fetus, she does this like explicit site construction, so
she has to build a site.
And we know by Olivia's lectures that sites are good, yeah?
But even better, it's to not have to construct them by hand, but
use a general meta-theorem about toposes over x and
toposes internal to x, which does this kind of construction for you, okay?
Okay, and if you're familiar with algebraic geometry, then you also know the relative spectrum.
Given quasi-Korean chief of algebras or x algebras on a scheme x,
there's the relative spectrum, which has a scheme of this into x, yeah?
Okay, and you might wonder how this can be described internally.
So the obvious choice, the obvious guess, would be to just take Monique Harkim's
spectrum functor, right?
It's very general, it applies to the situation.
But then you do make the calculations and
realize that Monique Harkim's spectrum functor gives a different result than
the relative spectrum considered in algebraic geometry.
In fact, you can check that Monique Harkim's spectrum gives the correct result.
If and only if the scheme, your base scheme you started with, is zero-dimensional.
Which of course, is not the general case, yeah?
So it's interesting to see how you have to change, fix the definitions.
And here's how you do it.
You again define the relative spectrum as a local, so you give it frames.
But you don't take as a frame the frame of all radical ideals, but
normally they're quasi-coherent ones, okay?
And you can do a few calculations to arrive at this short characterization of
when radical ideal of a quasi-coherent algebra is itself quasi-coherent.
Again, notice this like curious looking behavior, yeah?
So this ideal E, I has to satisfy the condition that if an element S is an
element of I under the assumption that F is invertible, then F times S really
should be an element of I without any assumptions.
Okay, and just want to end with a remark on the points.
So this local is not spatial from the internal point of view, but
you might still be interested in the points, just to have a better feeling for
it, yeah, to know the theory which this spectrum classifies.
And it turns out, it's not the theory of all prime filters, but
only of those which fulfill this additional condition.
Okay, and then you can, of course, generalize it.
X doesn't have to be a scheme, it can be an arbitrary topos, ring topos.
And then you can understand the limits and
the category of locally-ringed toposes much more conceptually.
Namely, they are simply given by the naïve limits in the category of ring
toposes, and then given by relocalizing using this construction, okay?
So, and in my last zero minutes, let me turn to Peter Ahn's answer.
You can also, like, give a very nice account of the relative spectrum of
the universal property of the relative spectrum, of the relative spectrum as
used in algebraic geometry.
And then you very clearly see the difference to the spectrum of monikakim.
Namely, the question in algebraic geometry is to construct the free
local ring over A, which is also free over the base, over B,
over all X in applications, yeah?
This is a small but important difference.
Okay, I hope I've convinced you that using topos magic, topos internal language,
in algebraic geometry is a very fruitful thing.
It allows you to simplify proofs and allows you to gain a better conceptual
understanding of the notions and of the statements in algebraic geometry.
Thank you very much for your attention.
Do you have any questions?
Yeah.
Yes, could you go back to the construction of the universal property of the relative spectrum?
Yes, this one.
How does the relative spectrum compare to the other one?
The monikakim spectrum, yeah.
Is this a subspace?
Yeah, yeah.
This is always a subspace, a sublocale of monikakim spectrum.
Okay, it's precisely the subspace where the morphism from B to A prime is local?
Yeah, yeah.
And in fact, you know this from Olivia's talk because the theory which the relative
spectrum classifies is a quotient theory of the theory which the monikakim spectrum
classifies because you have one extra axiom, yeah?
It's a subspace and if and only if the base scheme is zero-dimensional,
then these two notions coincide.
Yeah.
Community of algebra is very much non-constructive.
Yeah, several people here in the audience would disagree.
Would disagree vehemently, yeah?
So there's common notion that community of algebra is non-constructive, but in fact it's not.
So for instance, these two guys here have a great program where you can just take a
non-constructive proof of community of algebra.
For instance, you have an element.
You want to show that it's nile potent and you show it by showing that it's an element
of every prime idea.
Okay, you take this non-constructive proof, you put it in the machine developed by those
guys and several others, and out comes a perfectly fine constructively acceptable proof
which explicitly gives you bounds on the nile potent index.
It's a rumor that classical community of algebra is non-constructive.
What's the name of that program?
Cocor, Lombardi, and...
Oh, program doesn't mean program.
No, no, the research program of dynamical methods in algebra.
Yeah.
If I google that, do I find your...
Yeah.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
