So, I consider this series as preparatory for the lectures of Fargon Schultz on their
program and the story is going to begin with, well, maybe there will be some overlap with
G. Weiss talk on Stuckes. So, I just wanted to review the situation with function fields and
Stuckes before trying to carry it over to the case of a piatic field. So, let's return to
Drinfeld Stuckes. Well, why define such things at all? Because we're interested in the Langlin's
program. In this context, let's say x is going to be a curve over fq. So, I want this to be
projective and non-singular and geometrically connected and let's say k is its function field.
And our goal is to construct the Langlin's correspondence for k. Let's just consider
the group GLN over k for now. So, these will just be GLN Stuckes. So, the method here employed by
Drinfeld and then Lafour is to consider the cohomology of some space of Stuckes. So, whatever
Stuckes are, their modulized space might have some interesting action of a Galois group,
but then also an Adelic group. And then in cohomology, that might manifest the correspondence.
And then the inspiration, I suppose. An automorphic form for GLN over a function field would be
a function on some double coset space like this. So, I could take GLN, G is GLN, GLN of
the Adels, modulo G of k, but then also modulo G of all of the ring of integers. And unlike
in the number field case, this has a very concrete interpretation as the set of isomorphism
classes of vector bundles on the curve X. So, I might write that as saying, well, you
could say like, let bun N be the modulized stack of vector bundles of rank N on the curve
X. And if I evaluate this on FQ, I just get vector bundles on X, space changed to nothing.
And then if I just take the points of this stack, this is what this is. So, functions
on this are automorphic forms. So, it makes sense if I want to kind of geometrize the situation
and get something interesting, that vector bundles should be involved. So, what are stuccas?
All right. So, I'll just give you this review. So, let's let S over FQ be a scheme. And our
definition, an X stucca in the sense of Drinfeldt over S of rank N. So, these Drinfeldt stuccas
have two legs. So, that's going to be part of the data. So, I'm going to list some pieces
of data for you. So, I need two S points of X. So, these are going to be the legs. And
then I also need a vector bundle. All right. So, that stack classifies vector bundles on
X. So, it's S points are vector bundles on the product X cross S. In other words, families
of vector bundles on X parameterized by S. That's the other piece of data. And then finally,
the last piece is going to be, well, it'll be our rational function, I suppose, from
E to its Frobenius pullback. So, let's do it this way. Frobenius pullback of E. So,
I'm just going to write a dotted arrow to mean something which is like an isomorphism
everywhere, but on two divisors. And those divisors come from X1 and X2. So, I'll just
write F as an isomorphism away from two divisors gamma XI. And up here, I write what that means.
Gamma XI is going to be inside of X cross S. It's going to be the graph of XI. XI is
a map from S to X. X is a curve. So, then this thing, this graph is going to be a divisor
on that curve. And so, it makes sense for this function F to be well-defined everywhere
but there. And then I need to impose some conditions to make it a stucco in the sense
of Drindfeld, which is that it has a simple pole at one of the X's, maybe X2, and a simple
zero at X1. So, I'll just write it this way. Zero at X1 and a pole at X2. Okay. So, maybe
in the course last week, more details were given on this definition and also much more
of a generalization too. I suppose this isn't quite enough for a Drindfeld stucco, but if
the legs are disjoint, then it actually is enough. So, in this definition, what are we
looking at? Certainly, there are these legs involved. So, an S point of a space of stuccos
must map to two copies of X. So, let me just exchange these boards now. All right. Now,
is this visible? Okay. Is that all right? Then, if I were to consider the modular stack
of all of these stuccos. So, it's going to be the data consisting of X1, X2, and E and
F. And let's call this stuccos 2 for the group GLN. And then the other thing that would be
required here would be a mu. And the mu specifies, like, to what extent does the map F fail to
be an isomorphism at the two points? So, in this case, mu corresponds to mu1 and mu2.
And mu1 and mu2 are co-characters of GLN. But this is what specifies a simple pole and
simple zero. And this notation is meant to remind you of the notation for Chamorro varieties,
which also involve co-characters to write down. So, this modular stack is certainly
fibered over two copies of the curve X, because this map just sends you to the legs. I mean,
you have X1, X2, E, and then F. It's sent to X1 and X2. Okay. Great. We have this leg map.
We can add level structure to this situation as you do with Chamorro varieties. You add that
level structure by trivializing the vector bundle at a divisor in a way that avoids,
it has to avoid the leg. And it's got to be compatible with the map F. So, I won't write
down every detail there. I'll just say you add level structure. Yes. I'll even write them down.
Yeah. I mean, because this was just sort of a review, I didn't write it down exactly. But,
if I write down co-characters by non-increasing sequences of integers, then mu1 is this one,
and then mu2 is this one. Yeah. So, this is what's necessary to say simple zero and simple pull.
Okay. If we add level structure, well, the level structures would be parametrized by
Adelic groups. So, if I have a compact open subgroup of G of the Adels of K,
then I can define, I'll write it this way. Stuckas to GLM, mu, and then I'll write u,
indicating level u. But everywhere where this u is not maximal compact, we have to remove the
corresponding points from x. And so, I think I'll just do something simple and just say this is
defined over the generic fiber, sorry, the generic point, the generic point of x, x2. So,
x cross x has some generic point, and then residue field there would be the field that
this is fibered over. So, this is some stack. It's a Deline-Mumpford stack. It's not a finite type,
which is sort of a difficulty. Where am I writing next? I think I bring this up,
this down. So, one wants to study the cohomology of this tower of stacks of Stuckas.
A priori, this is a representation of the Galois group of eta2, this generic point,
but owing to the existence of these partial Frobenius maps, I don't know if they were
mentioned last week, because I wasn't here. They were fantastic. You actually got a representation
of two copies of the Galois group acting on the cohomology of this. And so, I'll just write down
the outcome due to Drinfeld and LeForg. This will be just in very impressionistic terms.
The cohomology of the space of Stuckas. Oh, yes. So, what I'd better do is say, here's eta2,
and let's take the geometric generic fiber over x squared, and then also take a limit.
But there's other things one must do as Waltz, because this fails to be a finite type. So,
one must have to pass to some kind of cuspital cohomology, but I'm going to just elide all
of those details right now, because I just want to give you the general impression. This
thing is going to have an action of some interesting groups. One of them is G of A, and then you
get two copies of the Galois group of K bar over K. And the way that this decomposes as
a representation for those groups is like so. Well, I better say something about what
I elided. So, I'm going to just say cuspital. The cuspital part of this cohomology. So,
this is going to be a sum of a cuspital automorphic representations of G over K. On the one hand,
we have pi. On the other hand, we've got the Langland's correspondent of pi. I was going
to call that phi pi, but then I don't know, is there like the culture at this conference?
How you call the thing which corresponds to pi? How about that one? All right. And then
I want the dual of it over here. Okay. Right. So, if I had chosen different values of mu
here, I would have gotten different results over here, but with these simple values, I
would have gotten these. All right. So, the idea of Stuckes is that we have some space
fibrous over copies of X. Of course, in last week, you saw examples where it's fibrous
over arbitrarily many copies. And then the outcome has something to do with the Langland's
correspondence. So, over here, I'll just write the dream is to define Stuckes over number fields.
I mean, even in a way which just replicates this picture, but the massive problem with this
is that we don't know what speck z cross beck z is. After all, a moduli space of Drinfeldt
Stuckes in a number field setting should be fibrous over X cross X somehow. But if X is speck z,
we don't know what this is. What we do in this series is just say, well, we take this
perspective of Schultz, which is to say, over a peatic field, we actually do know what to do.
So, over today and tomorrow, I address this issue.
Yeah, I will. Okay. Well, okay. It would be naively. Of course, this product exists as a
scheme. It's just speck z again, but that's not good enough. You're certainly not going to get a
representation of two copies of the Galois group of Q by considering something fibrous over speck z.
So, it has to be something else.
All right. Well, we're going to start vague and then zero in on something actually concrete,
but the idea is that at least in the local case, it is known what to do now.
Okay. All right. So, that's what I'll do just next. Any questions so far? Great. Okay. Fonten's
AF. So, AF is a stepping stone towards the way of answering the question, what is that product?
So, in response to the question that was just raised, of course, you can take this
product naively, but it just won't get you anything interesting.
All right. So, well, I'm just going to transport that
expression over there over here, but I want to do so in such a way that respects the fact that zp is a
topological ring. So, instead of saying speck, all right, spf. We're in the category of formal
schemes now. So, just remembering that zp has a topology. And of course, I have to put scare
quotes around everything. I mean, if this did exist, it would look something like this, where I
take like a completed tensor product of two copies of zp, but then naively, this is just zp again,
and that's the problem. If you think about why this is just zp, it's because, well, the thing
which generates the topology in this copy is the number p, and p tensor one in this ring is one
tensor p. There's just no way around this. I mean, philosophically, the problem is that p is a number.
It's not a variable. p is just some of copies of one. So, you'll never get around this just by working naively.
So, the way one gets around this is to think of p more of a, to somehow separate the two copies of p
coming from the two factors in the product. And this was a theme in piatic-Hoch theory for decades
now, is that you need to have multiple avatars of the number p in the same situation. And where this is
all going is vit-vectors. So, vit-vectors is just the key to doing everything. So, I'll just write here,
you need vit-vectors. So, a proposed definition of such a product will have to wait, but at least when
one of the factors is a perfect ring in characteristic p, we're going to proceed right now. So, I'll just say this,
if for r a perfect ring of characteristic p. So, now I'm making a formal definition, which is that,
in these quotes, r tensor zp will be defined as the ring of p typical vit-vectors for r. So, r is a perfect
ring of characteristic p, its p typical vit-vectors are formal sums, like so, where a n lives in r. And yeah, in a sense,
this is like a formal power series with p as the variable. And so, we're trying to address this issue here.
All right. So, why is this a reasonable thing to do? Well, a tensor product should at least contain the two rings. And in this
case, it contains one of the rings literally, and it almost contains the other. Of course, it does, it contains zp.
zp being the bit vectors of fp, maps into r, w, r. And then r also maps into w, r, but this is not a ring homomorphism. But it is
morphism of monoids, multiplicative monoids. So, that's what this is trying to capture with this definition. I want to study a case
where r is something very specific, which is to say I want r to be the ring of integers in the completion of an algebraic closure of qp. And
then we'll arrive at Fonten's ring, a, n. So, in essence, the goal today is for us to understand what a local shtuka is with coefficients in cp. And that's what we're going to try to do now. So, let's let c over qp be complete and
algebraically closed. So, for instance, it could simply be the completion of an algebraic closure of qp. So, this is going to have ring of integers, I'll call it oc. And I'll continue with the notation over
here. Let's let mc be its maximal ideal. And I want k to be its residue field, which will also be algebraically closed. What I want to do next is to give a
definition for oc tensor zp. You see, I mean r here was perfect ring in characteristic p. I ultimately want to define something like this, but neither of those rings are in characteristic p. They're all mixed. And I want to do something with this oc rather than something
characteristic p. So, to feed this into this definition of oc tensor zp, I need to convert oc into something in characteristic p. And this process is this famous process of tilting. So, I define the tilt of the ring oc as follows. So, there's two definitions, but they're equivalent. I'll give you the first.
All right. So, this is the oc flat or oc tilt is defined as a limit of oc mod p over where the transition maps are raising to the power of p. So, that ring oc modulo p now is in characteristic p. Raising to the power of p is an endomorphism of that ring. And so, it makes sense to consider all such, well, instead of all such
sequences, you know. All right. And this certainly is a ring. And furthermore, it's a perfect ring because you can undo raising to the power of p simply by taking such a sequence and shifting it over. So, this is going to be a perfect ring of characteristic
p. Slightly less obvious but easy is that this is simply the ring of integers of a different complete algebraically closed field which we call cp. So, sorry, c tilt. This will be its field of fractions.
So, like the field c, the field c tilt is an algebraically closed valued field. So, this construction goes back to fun 10.
Well, it's a complete
valued field. It will be helpful to write down at least one element of this field which I'll call p tilt. So, this is going to mean this sequence. I suppose this first element is actually zero in the sequence, but in any case, we have this element. And I can take the valuation on c tilt to be such that the absolute value of p tilt is the same as the absolute value of p.
I'll just write the same symbol to mean the valuation on either field. p is a pseudo-uniformizer for c, meaning that it's non-zero, but it has valuation less than one. And the same is true for this element.
The other thing I want to say about the tilt before moving on is that there is an alternate definition of it for c tilt. There exists a bijection, in fact, a homeomorphism, between c tilt and the limit of just c under x goes to x to the p.
So, I could just consider sequences like this, and I get the same thing. I mean, this would follow if you knew the same thing on the level of the rings of integers.
See, see here I modded out by p and got a system of rings where the transition map are ring homeomorphisms. This time, the transition maps are just multiplicative monoid maps, but it's still a bijection nonetheless, and the limit I suppose you would have to show is that the map to the way I defined it the first way, this is actually a bijection.
So, if you can convince yourself of this, then either definition will give you the same result.
Maybe I'll pause here. Are there any questions so far on what this ring is?
Okay, so I've got the ring OC. I've got the ring OC tilt, and I want to just define the tensor product between OC and zp in square in quotes.
So, this will be zp tensor OC.
Alright, so the way to do this is to first convert the ring OC into its characteristic p tilt, its OC tilt, and then take the vectors.
So, this is the vid vectors of the ring of integers of the tilt OC.
Alright, so this ring has a name. This is Fonten's ring a inf.
It carries a topology with it.
The topology is generated now by two elements.
Given by p and the Teichmuller representative of p tilt.
So, it's a two-dimensional local ring now.
Yes, of course.
Yeah, so I've been reminded I should just use all three boards.
So, there's that, and now I can start on this one because that's older. That's a good idea, thank you.
But if it's like this, can you still see it? Yeah, sure.
Alright.
What is the end of the sentence, sir?
What is the end of which sentence? A inf with its, oh my goodness, I didn't finish it.
I'll finish it on this board.
It says A inf with its p tilt addict topology.
Alright, so now it's a topological ring.
Very good.
One other thing I need to introduce about this is, well, there's two things.
One is that there is a, okay, so features of this ring.
One is that there's a Frobenius automorphism on it.
So, C does not have a Frobenius, but C tilt has one.
It just shifts everything over, and that automorphism of O C tilt extends to an automorphism of A inf.
So, there's a Frobenius automorphism on it.
Another is this theta map that I have to tell you about.
There's a map theta from A inf back to O C in characteristic zero,
and I'll tell you what this does.
So, I have to define it in stages.
Up here, I said, where did I say it?
C tilt, or even just O C tilt.
If I have an element of O C tilt represented by a sequence like so,
then I could project onto its first coordinate to get an element which I'll call X sharp.
So, there's a sharp map from the tilt back to what you started with.
Now, the sharp map is certainly not a ring homomorphism, although it is multiplicative.
So, given this, I actually do get a ring homomorphism when I pass to bit vectors.
So, I can tell you now what this theta map does.
If I have a series A and P to the n like so,
its image under theta will simply be sum of A and sharp P to the n.
And the magic here is that this actually is a ring homomorphism.
It's additive.
The bit vector operations turn this into something additive.
So, this theta map takes A inf and maps it to O C.
It's surjective, and we can describe its kernel.
The kernel is going to be a principal ideal with generator xi.
And I'll give you two possible values for xi.
One is sort of obvious.
I mean, xi could be, for instance, P minus P tilt.
So, if you think about what theta does, the element P tilt being just composed of P,
a P-th root of P, a P-square-th root of P, and so forth,
it just gets projected onto P under this sharp map.
In other words, if I take P tilt and then sharp it, I just get P again.
So, P tilt goes to P, and of course, P goes to P as well.
So, this lies in the kernel, and in fact, this element generates the kernel.
Fonten gave a description of how you know, how you can recognize an element of a kernel
of such a map as being a generator.
It's called a primitive of degree one.
But I just want to give you one more example of such an element.
I'll do a little calculation over here to derive it.
No, not here.
How about over here?
No kidding.
Oh, so I can do this.
Thank you.
So, I want to define an element epsilon in this ring O-C tilt.
So, theta P is going to be a primitive P-th root of unity, and same for P-square.
And this is going to be a compatible sequence of such primitive P-power roots of unity,
and epsilon is going to define an element of O-C tilt.
Epsilon sharp, of course, is one.
So, that means I could take a Teichmuller element like epsilon brackets and subtract one,
and then that, of course, would be in the kernel of theta.
This, however, is not a primitive element.
It does not generate the kernel.
And you can see this by noting that epsilon to the one over P,
well, epsilon one over P is just this sequence.
Everything shifted over to the left, and its sharp map would give me theta P.
So, if I were to divide this by epsilon one over P minus one.
So, this thing in the bottom does not get sent to zero by theta.
But it does divide this element in the ring A-N,
and then you do get an element of the kernel, and then this generates.
Hi.
So, what are the choices involved here?
So, do you choose some countables?
Yes.
What exactly is happening?
What is happening here?
So, I did make some choices.
So, theta P to the N is going to be a primitive P to the Nth root of one,
and it's going to be the case that raising to the power of P sends theta P to the N
to theta P to the N minus one.
So, certainly some choices have to be made to construct this epsilon.
This divides this.
So, it's just the sum of the first few powers of epsilon to the one over P,
and this element lies in this kernel because theta of this is zero,
and theta of this is not zero.
So, that quotient is another possible value of psi,
and that's actually going to be more useful for us going forward.
Okay.
No, no, sorry.
Generator psi, and here are two choices for psi.
They are certainly not the same, but one is a unit times the other.
I'll call this one.
I don't know.
That'll be exciting.
I don't know.
Okay, fine.
This will be psi, and this will be psi prime.
But then I may make some mistake in the future about this, if I forget.
I think this will be fine.
Yeah.
So, why do I need this?
So, I have an interpretation for what this theta map is.
I mean, in our definition of stuccas, you have a leg of the stucca,
and it's important to consider the graph of that leg as an element of the product.
So, the idea behind this theta map,
so now what do I do?
I'm going to put this all the way up the top.
And then I'm going to bring this ring down.
All right.
All right, some more quotes.
So, certainly there's a map from SPF OC to SPF ZP.
You should be thinking like, oh, a leg was a map from a test object into X.
If I want to define a stucca over X, an X stucca over S, I need a leg,
and then the graph of that leg lives inside of X cross S.
And so, now in this situation, the graph of this map should be something
which lives inside of this product.
Well, SPF of this product has now been defined as SPF of A n.
So, I need something inside of this to serve as this graph.
And the thing that it's going to be is going to be the kernel of this map theta.
So, let me call this XC.
I'm labeling it by its quotient field.
XC is going to be, well, the ideal, the prime ideal generated by XI,
or in other words, the kernel of this map theta.
So, that makes sense, right?
Because the A nth module of its kernel is just OC again,
and that's what happens in this situation, too.
Gamma X is just a copy of S embedded this way.
So, this is necessary to define a stucca with coefficients in OC.
It's going to somehow be an A nth module together with some Frobenius linear map,
which is an isomorphism everywhere except for this XC.
That's what our definition of stucca will be.
So, I just set it, but now I'm going to write it down.
Okay.
All right.
Well, it'll be a ZP stucca.
Over OC with a leg at SPF OC, mapping to SPF ZP.
Okay. All of this in quotations.
It would have to be a vector bundle on SPF A nth together with a Frobenius linear map,
which is an isomorphism everywhere except for XC.
We have now arrived at the next definition,
which is of a Bray, Kiss & Farg module, which is exactly everything I said.
Well, the Frobenius is the Frobenius on, yeah, so way up there under features.
V goes from A nth to A nth.
It's induced from a map on OC tilt, which is simply the Frobenius on OC tilt.
That is after all a perfect ring.
I didn't hear it.
Oh, it's back here.
Oh, so you're saying,
isn't this different from the equal characteristics setting where Frobenius comes from Frobenius on the curve?
Let's address that in this little box.
So the definition of Stuka involved a vector bundle which lived on X cross S.
So you had E living on this and it's exactly so.
So the part of the data, which was a rational map from the pullback of E to E.
So what was this anyway?
I didn't write it down, so let's review it.
So this Frobenius really does come from S and it's just shorthand for one cross the Frobenius on S
as an endomorphism of the scheme X cross S, I suppose.
So nothing happened on X.
And actually, I think that's a pretty good analogy for what happened here.
It fits because the Frobenius comes from the coefficients, which were O, C, not from Z, P.
And Z, P doesn't have a Frobenius anyway.
Okay.
Other questions?
Just a question, but here S is any scheme over F, Q.
Right.
But here now we're taking like this O, C, which is like far from the base.
Right.
Okay.
That's a very good question.
In Drinfeld's definition of stuccas, you need to define a modular space of stuccas, which
means you need to allow your S to vary.
You want to be able to define a family of stuccas.
Why am I just defining it over O, C, which is something very particular?
Well, it's a stepping stone.
We're going to start with this and then tomorrow we will revisit this question and allow, have
families of mixed characteristic stuccas.
There will be a conceptual leap we need to take to get there.
Others?
Yeah.
That's true.
Okay.
So the question was, you know, this is not so strict as it may seem.
Yes, I chose this very particular C, but actually I've now given you the tools to be able to
define a stucca with leg, really, whatever prime ideal you want.
And other prime ideals, well, it turns out they will define other untilts of the perfect
field, C tilt.
So it's true that this definition makes it seem like the leg is really fixed in one place,
but I've actually told you how to allow the leg to be something more general.
Okay.
All right.
Now I'll tell you.
Yeah.
All right.
All right.
So, yeah.
Okay.
Where did I say it?
Is it this stucco over?
Yeah, that's true.
All right.
So the objection was really it should be like this, but I think that'll be starting to be
confusing because then I have to say something like the leg is like here.
So I didn't know quite what to do.
Okay.
I'll leave the tilt here.
I mean, you have to convince yourself that somehow the map to ZP tilt, we'll get into
this tomorrow.
But if you have some object in characteristic P, morphism to something ZP should really
be an un-tilt of it to a ZP algebra.
And so such a map here really represents the un-tilt OC.
Okay.
Are you confused yet?
Okay.
Definition.
A Broi-Kissen-Farge module is, well, clearly, well, okay.
So there was a pre-existing definition of a Broi-Kissen module.
And that's a module over a power series ring
with a Frobenius linear map on it,
which is a nice morphism away from one point.
And the addition of FARG means that we're
living over AN rather than this imperfect ring.
So in this definition, I just want
it to be free of finite rank.
Other definitions may appear in the literature
where you don't need this free condition.
Well, it's going to be an m, and there's
going to be a phi m.
Together with an isomorphism, and so that
should be an isomorphism from the phi
pullback of m.
So remember that phi is the Frobenius on a nth.
So phi pullback m makes sense.
And I wanted to go to m, but it should be after inverting
some element.
And so the element I want to invert is, well,
I could have inverted just psi.
But in fact, the reasons I don't really want to get into,
although you can ask me, and I will do my best,
is that we're going to invert phi of psi rather than just psi.
A simple reason we might want to do this
is because if I were to write this in a way which is not linear,
but semi-linear, well, the linear isomorphism,
then it just looks like this, which is maybe more natural
looking.
But a better definition would involve
an interpretation of Broglie-Kissen-Farck modules
in terms of co-homology theories.
That is, you need this phi here to be compatible
with the kinds of co-homologies that it's meant to describe.
But so I mean, this is kind of we're reading off
the definition of stuka here, except this is not
a stuka with a legged xc, but rather it's
a stuka with a leg at phi of xc.
You think that now would be better without it?
Oh.
But what about the compatibility with prismatic homology?
And prismatic is without, but then you want it to be,
but the diram, yeah.
OK.
What is optimal to better with prismatic homology?
OK, OK, OK.
So depending on your preferred co-homology theory,
which I'm guessing is prismatic now,
then you would write this without the phi.
All right, well, I did.
OK.
In the interest of me not making mistakes
I'm not going to change this on the fly right now.
What?
Well, OK, I could have written without the phi is here,
in which case I would need to turn this to phi inverse, which
lives over here.
Yes?
So where's the group here?
So this is for GLN.
So we get 3 phi by rank.
Right.
Where is the group lurking?
Well, if m is rank n, then the group is GLN.
And then if your group is g, then what you want
is a g-torsor over the spectrum of the ring a-inf.
Yeah.
OK, now what?
Now I'm supposed to take this down.
Well, OK.
Right.
Given such a brooch is a farge module,
I can at least read off some invariance of it,
which are pretty natural.
Move.
All right.
And those invariants I'll call realizations.
So let's first recognize that a-inf admits morphisms
to various familiar rings.
We've already noted that it maps to OC.
And let me just call the kernel of this map.
It's going to be a prime ideal.
So that's the point of the spectrum I'll call it xc.
It also maps to the bit vectors of the residue field k.
And then I want to also invert k.
So I want to give a name to this field.
I'll call it k with apologies to the function field k
from before.
This is a new k.
And this homomorphism occurs because this is just w of OC.
And OC has residue field k.
Tilt.
So there's certainly a map from here to here.
Because OC tilt also has residue field k.
And this I'll call xk.
And then finally, there's a map to, well, I could just mod out
by p entirely.
And then I would get OC tilt.
And then I'll call this xc tilt.
And now I'm looking at this, and I'm thinking
I have a field here.
So why don't I just put the fields here?
I'm just labeling these points by their residue fields.
All right, great.
Great.
So the first realization is called the crystalline
realization.
And this occurs at xk.
So if I were to take w of OC tilt,
it emits a homomorphism to k.
So if I have a broy-kinson-Farg module,
I can tensor it with k and get a k vector space together
with a Frobenius linear map on it.
So such a thing is called an isocrystal.
So if I let n, well, here, I'll do the following thing.
What if I took the pair m comma phi m,
and I simply tensored it over an with k with the field k?
And OK, so does this make sense?
After all, I inverted this element xi.
But you know what?
Under this homomorphism, xi maps to a unit.
So you just get an automorphism, a Frobenius linear
automorphism of a vector space n.
So this is a k vector space, and this
is going to be a map from its Frobenius pullback to itself.
And then for some reason on k, we refer to the Frobenius
with a different letter.
That's just traditional.
I call it sigma.
And that's what happens to, so Frobenius on k
is called sigma now.
And so we have a k vector space together
with such an automorphism.
And so this is called an isocrystal.
It's something like the rational version of a durene module.
And these are classified by their slopes.
There's a durene manin classification of isocrystals,
where the parameters are just rational numbers.
So the category of isocrystals is extremely well understood.
The other realization comes at the other end
with this xc.
So this is called the xc tilt.
So this is called the etolar realization.
And this is, so I'll call it t.
And this is what happens when you take the Bracus
and Farg module m, and you tensor it with the ring of bit
vectors not of oc tilt, but of c tilt.
In other words, invert the element p tilt
to get a perfect field c tilt.
And now this is bit vectors in a perfect field.
And then I can simply take Frobenius invariance of this.
So I take invariance under the map phi m.
The result of this will actually be a zp module
of the same rank as the a in frank of m.
There are enough invariance after you
pass to this larger ring.
And I think I want to, I was going to justify why this is so,
but I think I'd better move on from this.
The key word would be art and try or vit theory.
That is, if I have a perfect ring,
I can classify modules over its vict vectors together
with a Frobenius map.
And that category is equivalent to the category
of etal covers of that ring.
But in this case, the ring is just
a algebraically closed field.
So all of those etal covers are split.
And so that's why you get this t, which captures
what's going on here.
All right, so I've called these realizations crystalline
and etal.
So this maybe should remind you of motives.
And indeed, a Breukis and Fark module
is something like a motive over zp, in a sense.
Sorry, over oc has these realizations.
All right, so far so good.
All right, 1205.
All right, I think I'd better move on to part three
if I am to finish on time.
So did you say what structure does the etal cover?
None.
Oh, yeah, well, I should say something.
It's simply a free zp module of the same rank
as what you started with.
And I think that makes sense.
If I have a formal scheme over oc,
it's etal co-homology is just a zp module.
It doesn't have any interesting Galois action.
But this might change if I try to replace oc with something
else, then that would change.
OK, I'm doing it this way.
So far, we've defined, we have a pretty good definition
of what a Stuka should be in mixed characteristic.
But in order to, well, we have various goals in mind.
We want to make contact with the world of Rappaport zinx
spaces and formal groups.
And then also this new object, bun g,
which will be introduced by Farg and Schultz.
And for that, we actually need to descend this whole story
to something like a inf modulo Frobenius.
So this is what we tried to do.
Yeah, it's a great time for this to fall asleep.
Where's the button that wakes up?
There it is.
So our goal is to, I want to recast the definition of a zp
Stuka.
In terms of, OK, some more scare quotes.
All right, so a Stuka, really in any context,
is a vector bundle together with a Frobenius linear map
from it to itself, maybe with some zeros and poles.
And that's something like an object which lives on the quotient.
It should be a vector bundle on this quotient together
with some data.
And the reason you might want to pass to this quotient
is because, well, one reason is that you
want to make contact with the world of geometric languins,
which is objects living on a curve,
like vector bundles on a curve, there
is no Frobenius in that story.
If I want to remove Frobenius from the story,
I should consider what this quotient is.
So this quotient does not make sense as a written.
I mean, you might think like, oh, it's Frobenius.
It's both a Frobenius invariance of a if,
but that ring is not very interesting.
It's just a zp again.
So I have to do something more, less trivial.
So I can phrase this in terms of some problems, which is that.
The action of phi on the spectrum of that ring
has some fixed points.
So xc-tilt and xk are both fixed.
So one solution might simply be to remove those two points,
which would correspond to, remember, what xk and xc-tilt
are.
So for xk, I should be inverting p-tilt.
And then xk no longer belongs to the spectrum.
And then for c-tilt, I should invert p.
And then that just gets rid of both of those points.
So that's fine.
And so phi still acts on this ring.
So maybe I should consider the quotient by phi to the z.
But unfortunately, that's not good enough either.
And I'll try to tell you why.
So I mean, if I'm trying to quotient the spectrum
of this ring by phi, then I would hope that the orbits,
well, the problem is like orbits are dense.
And so you wouldn't want to take the quotient
if the orbit of phi to the z is dense in here.
So I'm going to just issue this as another problem.
If I look at this point xc, and I certainly
do not want to remove the point xc, that should stay.
But the phi orbit of this point is
dense in the spectrum of this ring.
And that's definitely going to be a problem if I want to just
take the quotient by it.
And so let me just emphasize in the Zariski topology.
And all of this is just to motivate the fact
that we should not be using the Zariski topology
for the spectrum of this ring.
In fact, we're going to use the attic topology.
The sp attic of this ring will solve this problem.
But first, let me just say, well,
by means of an example, like what's going on with this
statement, why is the phi orbit dense?
So if you translate this, density in the Zariski topology
would mean that there's no element other than 0
such that f has a 0 at phi to the n of xc for all n in z.
So it's a question of constructing elements
with prescribed 0s.
It's almost like complex analysis or something.
We can come close, though.
Where does this thing want to rest?
So as an example, let's consider the element epsilon minus 1.
So theta of this was 0.
So this has a 0 at xc because theta of epsilon is 1.
But you know what, theta of epsilon to the p is also 1
and to the p squared and all that.
All of the Frobenius translates give you 0 under theta as well.
So that means that this element has a 0 at xc and also phi
of xc and phi squared of xc and so forth.
So it has half of the 0s you want, but not these other ones.
So the inverse is squared and so forth.
And so the issue is that theta of epsilon to the 1 over pn,
well, it's just theta pn.
It's not equal to 1.
So that's fine.
If I were to try to remedy the situation,
I mean, it reminds me so much of complex analysis.
This is like a gamma function.
It's maybe the inverse gamma function.
It's got 0s that have the integers.
But I want something like the sine function, which
has a 0 at all of the integers.
All right, how do I remedy the situation?
Well, I've got theta of epsilon as 1.
How do I turn roots of unity in periodic analysis?
How do I turn roots of unity, p power roots of unity into 1?
Is there a power series that converts all p power
roots of unity to 1?
It is.
It's the periodic logarithm.
So I should just take the periodic logarithm of epsilon.
And that's going to be such an element.
And this is Fontaine's element, t.
It's like the analog of 2 pi i in Piata-Codge theory.
What's next?
Oh, yeah.
Well, since this is part of this example,
maybe I'll just do this.
I'm going to give you like a, I mean, from calculus.
This is true.
I mean, you also wanted something like this,
because this has a 0 at the negative powers,
the negative translates of xc out to n.
And you really wanted something which
had a 0 at every translate.
So some limit like this would make sense.
But this limit doesn't exist in a n.
I mean, inverting p, you need to invert p
to even write the series down.
But it still doesn't converge it here.
You need to take some kind of completion of this ring
to get convergence.
That completion is a certain fresh a completion
with respect to a family of norms.
And this is how Farag and Fontaine first wrote it down.
Well, Fontaine's element, t, lives in various rings
in Piata-Codge theory, all of which
are derived from a inf.
But this whole motivation was to get you
to think in terms of the attic space associated to a inf
and not its Zariski spectrum.
So the way we proceed is to consider instead.
Oh, yes?
Were there any other points to fix in Piata-Codge theory?
In here?
I don't think so.
Yeah, I don't think so.
All right, so the lesson of this previous example
is that we need to use a different topology than the Zariski
topology to address this issue.
And so a good topology is the attic topology.
So this has many more points.
So this is a set of all continuous valuations on a inf.
And you can ask me more about this in the Q&A session.
But I want to just write down some points of this.
Of this attic spectrum.
And they're going to be labeled by their residue fields.
So for instance, xk, there is a map from a inf to just k.
And you can pull back the trivial valuation on k
to this to get this xk.
And there's something unique about this.
This is the unique non-analytic point.
And again, Q&A session for the definition of this.
But basically, throwing away this point
makes this seem less like straight algebraic geometry
and more like analysis.
We already know about these three points, xc tilt, xc, and xk.
And then five is that I actually can define
a continuum of points inside of an.
So for all real numbers, positive real numbers,
I want to define a point a to r in this attic spectrum.
So this is going to be something like a Gauss
point for a disk of radius r, so to speak.
And I'll define it this way.
If I have a sum a np to the n, then
I can define its norm under the Gauss norm, a to r,
to be z supremum.
This part I have to get right.
Sup over all n of x sub n to the power r divided by p to the n.
Right.
What?
Oh, thanks.
Right.
So I mean, you're kind of deciding
how big elements of oc tilt are relative to p
with this definition.
And given this definition, you could actually
retrospectively define what happens when r equals to 0.
And then this doesn't matter at all.
And it's just however many times p divides it.
But then that just gives you xk back.
So this would be like a to 0.
Or you could make this r equal to infinity,
and then only an matters, and p doesn't matter anymore.
And that's going to be this x.
Nope, this is wrong.
It should be x plus.
Maybe it looks so.
All right.
So now some picture is emerging where
you have this continuum of points living in spy a n.
So I can begin to draw a picture here.
OK.
All right.
After throwing away this non-analytic point,
the result is an analytic attic space.
And it's some kind of picture where everything is really
arrayed.
Well, OK.
Just label everything correctly.
So here is xc tilt on one end.
Here is xk on the other end.
xc should be in the middle.
And I want to make things somewhat fuzzy around both
points.
Now xc is not exactly in the middle.
It's over here.
There we go.
The a to r's are going to live here.
So as r goes from 0 to infinity,
you have points arrayed along a line.
xc is not equal to one of these points, however.
So I'm ridden it off the line.
And there is a continuous map just to the interval
from 0 to infinity.
All right, so this map is called kappa.
All right, so whatever this topological space is,
it admits a continuous map surjective
onto the interval between 0 and infinity.
It simply takes a to r to r.
And xc is going to go to 1.
And I can even tell you what kappa is.
If I have some continuous valuation on a nth,
as long as it is real valued, I can
make the following definition.
So it's going to be the quotient between log
of what it does on p tilt and log of what it does on p.
There.
They say what the rest of the things are.
The residue fields.
They're harder to describe of the a to r in particular.
They're really big.
I mean, you would have to complete with respect to a to r
and then take.
Yeah, it's just too big to have a tidy description.
Does anyone have a guess on what that would look like?
It's just too big.
It's not like xc, where the residue field is much smaller.
All right, so we have this topological space.
It admits a continuous homomorphism
to the interval between 0 and infinity.
And we have some special points within it.
We also have this Frobenius map.
And the effect of Frobenius is to take stuff up here.
It raises it to the power of p, so it multiplies by p.
So Frobenius multiplies by p here.
So if I were to write phi of xc, that lives here.
Phi inverse of xc, that lives here.
Great.
We now have a topological space with an action of phi.
And the action is properly discontinuous
because you can surround each point with a neighborhood which
doesn't meet any of its phi translates.
So that means you could actually take the quotient by phi
as long as you delete these fixed points
at the beginning and the end.
So that leads to the following definition.
I think I have to end very soon.
But that's OK.
We'll finish with the definition of the farmed front end
curve and then just continue next time.
All right, the curve denoted y is what
happens when you delete all points where the absolute value
of p or of p tilt is equal to 0.
So that's just the same as deleting the points xk and xc
tilt and x capital K. And then, since phi acts properly
discontinuously on this, I can form the quotient
by the action of Frobenius.
So this is this xff.
All right, I will take this next time.
I will try to relate Burekus and Farg modules
to vector bundles on this xff, this quotient.
All right, thanks so much.
So again, we are going to have a Q&A session.
So any questions that you will not raise the board, right?
So any quick questions?
Did you see this p tilt at 0 is equal to this set of 3 points?
Right.
Oh, right.
That's what I meant by this line.
Remove it.
Yeah, the locus where this is true
consists of exactly these three points.
OK, so let's take a five-minute break
and then we start with Q&A.
All right, great.
OK, thanks.
Thanks, guys.
