DIFFERENCY
So my general point, which partly motivated by your mathematical issues, partly by application,
is that probability theory, probability is not a number assigned to something. But rather,
I say what function, though it's not exactly a function, from category, which is not quite
a category of complicated object to something relatively simple. And we have events in the
world and we assign to them numbers and numbers make a category of positive numbers. And that's
with certain properties, and that is probability theory. But in many instances, application I
won't discuss, like in biology or in linguistics, this first set of events is structured and
rather take away very differently from physics. It's highly non-homogeneity. So it's organized in
a less elegant way, but still quite powerfully. And the range where probability takes place,
neither it is a number, not a number. It's something which is not quite clear what. And the
parallel which you may draw from your mathematics is homological theory. When you start with
category of topological spaces, you're complicated things. But what you assign to them are a billion
groups or even better vector spaces of a field. And this is something you have feel much more
comfortable with. They measure in a way. They serve for measuring your objects. And one of the
ways to create such theories out of what you know is linearization. Okay, so, and one of these
standard ways to generalize theories is linearizing them. And just one of them, just the point I
was making, entropy and some aspects of the entropy are linearizable. And the simplest instance of
that is what I was stating was the Lumisouitian theorem. Isoperemetric inequality is quite
respectable because it has lots of consequences. Sets in a form which we want to generalize as
follows. We have a product of sets, of finite sets, which may be infinite, but...
And we have a subset there, which is y. And we project it to different products. We project,
you can see the y. So we write this y sub j will be a projection of y. And this is the product of all
i and j. Right? So this is the projection from x. I'm sorry. Ah, yeah. That's correct, yeah. So x
projects to all this x sub i, x sub j. This is... And y projects. And then the cardinality of this
set related by some inequality, namely the cardinality. And so now, for the case of Lumisouitian
theorem, we only project... So we drop only one index at a time. So we project here, we project here,
and so there are projections of the coordinates hyperplane on the top dimensional, so to speak. So
there are... And with them, and so you can call them maybe x i drop, meaning this index being
dropped, and accordingly we have this y projection i being dropped. And their cardinality, their product,
product of those cardinalities, and it's better to normalize them to the power one over n,
greater or equal than the cardinality of y. If my normalization is correct,
if my coordination is not correct, I guess.
I think this is the correct power.
Yes, that's correct. So you're taking these powers, these projections, so each of them projects
on all products but one, so one is missing. So a total number of them will be equal to say n is
cardinality of i. So I'll put here n minus one. Total number of them is n, but for example,
dimension three, the first example to have in mind, you take powers one half. So we have
subset in Euclidean space, you project it on three coordinate planes, then product of areas
in power is one half, bounds the volume of the set, which is a discreet and continuous one goes
to another cabinet in a trivial way. And then this has kind of, I'm using generalization,
so this is a luminescent inequality, which is actually become more
transparent if you generalize it, and this generalization is called
Scherlema,
and it is as follows. So we can see the function alpha on j's. So this is a function which takes
value in real numbers, positive real numbers, for all j and i. So we consider the following
function, which is called a partition of unity, if
not mistaken, and now because I have no my tag, is alpha and take it here,
chi of j equals one. So you replace e j by character, indicate a function of this set,
a function zero one, and you take this sum. So when you, in other words, when you consider this set
j, and here how many times a couple particular point, and take them with this, this way it's a
alpha, sum must be one. So it's called partition of unity. In particular, our choice here,
these all exponents were equal, and that's exactly makes partition of unity. So in dimension
three, we have three points, so we have three sets, and each of them covered twice,
so we have to take one half to have partition of unity. And then the corresponding inequality says
that if you take product of cardinality of y sub j to the power alpha of j,
this will be greater or equal than cardinality of y.
And this is a share. Let me again, I don't know exactly the history, when, how, and when.
It was exactly stated in which context, and it's kind of, people love it in information theory,
in a form, in comprehensible for mathematicians, but it is a formal consequence of strong
sub-supri-unditivity, sub-supri-unditivity of entropy. So first you can strengthen this,
instead of taking this projection, you take push forward measures, which are entropies.
So you replace them by smaller entities, each of them, and still inequality holds stroke,
because here, of course, because subsets are the same as on entropy,
putting a projected, and it still remains true, and then for these entropies,
so if you just apply the strong super-inditivity to all kind of covering by pairs of sets,
each of them, to each of this block you apply and use, as it's called, inclusion-exclusion
principle. You start counting, and you get this inequality. It's still kind of nice consequence
of that, but still kind of completely formal. It's just linear, you know, A plus B mathematics.
However, it's nice, nice statement. But, and what I'm using, it has linearization,
in which I want to formulate topologically, which is kind of easier to formulate,
because it becomes much more close to what we have. Namely, now let X, I, be topological spaces,
that kind of simple space, maybe Euclidean space, but just, they complicate yourself,
but still they have topology, like circles, or whatever, and you consider that product,
as before, and do everything we were doing before. Now we have this subset, say, open,
or closed, yeah, subset Y in X, and you project it to all this product,
call them XJ, product only by I from J. And then the same inequality holds, if this understood,
as a rank of, as a rank of homologous, of a homologous of these spaces with coefficient
of some few. And in case, of course, of a discrete set, it will be the same.
But in general, something significantly more general, like much more, much more possibilities,
of course. So, and this has nothing to do at this stage, has little to do with topology,
it's purely in algebra, and the only thing which is relevant is that homology of such a product
with coefficient of the field is just tensor product, tensor product of corresponding vector spaces
of each representing homology of each of them. And then that's all we should use.
And you see that it's, you see, but it's a kind of ugly thing to do, right? You have a space,
and you project set, and projecting image of a set is a bad thing, of course, and topology,
it's definitely something wrong. So you would say, hi, I would prefer to speak about rank of
corresponding homomorphism, and then it's become not true. Because may cancelation,
yeah, even in zero-dimensional case, homology and the projection may go to zero. However,
it doesn't go to zero if there is some positivity. And so in algebraic geometry, for example, it's
still being preserved in a, if you work with a, not with homology, but with a, with a child group,
with a ring of cycles, when there is built-in positivity. So positivity is kind of crucial,
but they don't know if you can make an entropic version of that. You see, this algebraic geometric
version is not, it has no entropic counterpart. It is no apparent entropic. There is no strong
sub-editivity in this language. It just fails to be true. There are counting examples,
but there are so special counting examples that there might be still probably right theorem.
But, but this theorem is true, and this is a starting point, what we want to understand.
So what we want to understand, what we want to say, the homology in some respects,
when you have a space x, and you have open subsets, then homology of this with some
coefficients of co-homology, with fixed coefficient field, if I'm speaking with co-homology of u,
in many respects behaves as measure. There is some kind of addition. And of course,
the homology of theory has built-in entitivity, which is like exact sequences, or we thought
it's formulas, which are made looking like a measure, which in fact, I don't know how to fully use.
So I will be using very little part of that, right? And, but the point is that if you have
all this property in homology, you can say, well, we know everything, there are spectral sequences
that at the time we know everything. But from a certain point we know zero, because this is like
in measure theory, we know everything about real numbers, but we know it doesn't mean you
know anything about measures, right? Only starting point from which you can make
formulating problem, but not proving anything, right? And so let me explain, so whatever you have in
mind. The point essential in probability theory when you do interesting problem, you always have
infinite processes. And this infinity is organized in a certain way, right? It's not just infinity,
right? Infinity structured in a certain way, very often by action of a group. If an infinite group
and something happens homogeneously, statistically along the group, and you want to understand what
happens. And here it is kind of similar situation. You want to consider similar situation and just
look at very simple examples. So don't just to see that something, this I gave one example this
where topology was not quite simple, but it is continuing with this example. Look at
very simple. So we want to consider kind of homogenous situation when you have infinite
families of topological spaces. And sometimes maybe even infinite dimensional spaces. And we
want to understand this asymptotic behavior of that topology when dimension goes to infinity.
And so the simplest example would be have a space x, and you take a clutch power n and n goes to
infinity. Let's look already at this very simple example. And we want to understand how homology
behaves. And again, my homology or homology always is a fixed coefficient field. You take this,
and you know that this will be tensorial power of this, and particularly upon correct polynomial
of this space, meaning polynomial which coefficients are better numbers.
That bi meaning cranks of homology in certain dimension become power polynomial.
And the question is what is asymptotic behavior of coefficients. And of course,
even for binomial, it is these numbers. The asymptotic is exactly what is given by
Boltzmann rate formula. So I would think that this formula is asymptotic behavior in terms of
entropy. So in fact, there's some specific formula saying how they go. Of course, traditional proof
you just apply sterling formula, which is absurd because the sterling formula about n factorial,
there are two terms. It's n to the n, and then there is an exponential term, something like e to the n.
And but this cancels. This major term for asymptotic cancels in there.
And so only this remains. So it's clearly that sterling formula is a completely wrong way to do
that, which is, on the other hand, of course, you know the formula inclined to do that. But
this is exactly what I'm saying. It should be prohibited of doing it because it's completely
distorts the picture. And on the other hand, this is, if you think about that in terms of
entropy, it's clearly is the number of states of certain system. And if you think about this
little bit, you see it's actually entropy as defined by Boltzmann in terms of his
alternative definition. And this is how Boltzmann proved it. But again, you could think it was
known too early. But they look at that on the Internet. There are some articles by earlier
about that, but he doesn't prove that. He writes specific formulas for different binomial coefficients
for general, for certain kind of polynomials. But it doesn't seem he was concerned with these
asymptotics. So I'm curious who first found the asymptotics of binomial coefficients.
Because this is, of course, the core of large deviation theory. All large deviation theory
is a liberation of that. He just, in a way, wants to know that, the rest you have to know what to
do. So this is the key in most fundamental issue in probability, asymptotics of binomial
coefficients. And for general, polynomials slightly tricky, but still it's not hard. It's
polynomial one variable. So you know how they are formed. You can write these formulas. And so
even asymptotics of these coefficients are completely trivial, slightly probabilistic in
its nature. However, the issue, which appear usually in probability, when they have discrete sets
and their powers and everything refer to kind of zero-dimensional homology,
he automatically have the kind of the pleasure dealing with all dimensions. So the thing becomes
graded. And there are all dimensions. The picture becomes much more interesting.
And so let's see what we can say about it.
So our object is x to the n, n very large, going to infinity. But I prefer to think about that.
It's not infinite now, but infinite to large, but still integer. And we want to measure sets by
their topology. And so what would be the good measure? Their own topology is not quite right,
yeah, because kind of physically, you think, for the basic example for us, at least one,
will be n torus. Or I better to say we torus to the power set, because we can imagine we have set.
On each, you have a molecule where the state of, set of states of this molecule is a circle.
Altogether, you have the kind of very large piece of a crystal. And each of this,
imagining this being non-interaction, which is, of course, very rare in physics,
so feasts would never consider that. It's kind of trivial if they don't interact. We're still,
given that, indistinct. And interaction is kind of another matter. And topology,
instead of saying it's a measure of probability, we want to know how many motions a particular
state may have, right? So we constrain, we constrain our picture by some way we observe.
And for us, it may be some open set inside of this torus to the power n, or rather power i.
This is, and it's how much motion we will see, how particles can move. Here, of course, motion
rather simple. They don't interact. The motion don't interact. It's kind of a trivial case.
Yet, as we see, there are many open questions here. And there are some results.
And so, what is the correct way of measuring? And the way of measuring seems to me the best,
because there are two competing kind of way of measurements, which says, a large and which
a small. So if you have just in the Euclidean space, such space, and you take tiny little holes,
of course, we have lots of topology. But they kind of fake. Yeah, of course, if you erase them,
they're not monotone. Yeah, we erase these points, which we removed. So add them back,
set become larger, homology becomes smaller. So this you cannot use. You need some monotonicity.
And of course, so what you do, you can see that instead of that, first definition, it is a rank
of homomorphism, homology homomorphism, of the whole x to y. So rank of this homomorphism.
Now, of course, it's better, because it's monotone for sets. So you have positive function,
which has this monotonicity. But it also has some, this is a, well, you're not so bad,
and we shall, it may be used, but the better measurement, in fact, is somewhere different.
And which has more kind of measure, measure kind of behavior.
Okay. And t is what we do. We take, I will set u, and we take a rank,
oh, I'm sorry, say, say, say, say, say, yeah, yeah, it's a rank of the kernel of the homomorphism
from x, it was y, I was calling them u now, yeah, the kind of kind of open sets. So from x to complement
to u on the homology level. So in another way to say it, you look, so we have this subset
in the big space, and you ask which homology of the big space is presentable by core chains
with support in this set, right? And which corresponds, again, by elementary typology,
to the kernel of the map, the kernel of the map on the complement. So it's a rank of
homology of the ambient space, representable by core chains, which vanish outside of this set.
And since this behaves in many respects like, like measure, and it has some nice
additivity property with respect to cup products. Now, co-homology, what is nice,
it's not only kind of something you can add. So the object, so you assign now the true kind of way
to say it, you don't assign to set a number, but you assign to each set exactly this kernel,
kernel itself. So it's ideal, great idea in co-homology algebra. You take homomorphism
from ambient space X to co-homology of the complement.
So your measure takes values, not the numbers, but an ideal and graded ideals of this caramel
algebra. And with respect to them, it has, you know, you can add ideals, you can multiply
ideals, and it has this. And the basic formula, which is systematically used, is that if you take,
so this you call measure, call this, I put somewhere some stars, so it's not usually a measure of you.
Right? And this measure of, I hope I'm not confusing it, it has some,
you see, yes, what I'm saying is a reinterpretation of the Lüstechnik-Schnellmann theorem, that if I have,
so one vanishes here, and another vanishes here, then the car product vanishes on the,
on the union, right? So we have two co-homology classes, one vanishes somewhere, another vanishes
somewhere else, we multiply them, then vanishes in the product, of course. This kind of, but this is
kind of the Lüstechnik-Schnellmann theorem, which has, which has lots of applications, kind of,
kind of obvious ones being said in these terms, but it's not at all the consequence of this and
obvious. And this for measure, always forgetting, so I have to look at, to put any quality in the
right direction, because otherwise I make it wrong. This is so good, what? I have no ability to
remember formulas, even, so simple ones. Always put the sign wrong.
So it is said that mu 1 and mu 2 is contained.
So, we're taking the section of two sets, this is contained, or contains here, which is exactly,
unable to remember, to put the right sign. It contains, yeah.
So this, remember, these are ideals, this car product, it's not union, it's car product.
There are the, these are my DT, which also we have just joined sets, this thing's additive,
by the way, which is kind of trivial, I mean, easy, but it's not that significant. But this,
no way that you don't have for usual measures. We have some extra, extra formula.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, it's, it's up, it's for cosmology. Just remember, it's
called homomorphism. Absolutely. That, there is actually more to that, just in a, I may,
I may not explain it, that this not only, this kind of ideal, it's graded algebra,
it's not only ideal, but it's also invariant and the action, if you work mod 2 or mod zp,
it's invariant and the action of corresponding stainless, stainless algebra. So it's more
structured and that is, again, a significant, a significant role, especially in the work
by Lydie Good. Now, so what is, what we know about that in the simplest example?
So this again, this is just background, but I'm using formula in the following. If you,
if you look, and this of course, you can do it, restricting this, you put here, instead of that,
you can put some number, which means you only, it only refers to corresponding homomorphism.
But of course, for product, you know what it will be, yeah? So you can replace star by specific
index and so we need the following theorem for the end torus. So if you have two sets,
u1 and u2, and then,
so we can, you have to write it down because otherwise I do it wrong.
There's some inequality for that,
which is also in a way similar to isoparametric inequality and how. And
so you take, this means the ranks and this less or equal to, what is the product
of the numbers, of the batch numbers times, these are batch numbers of the torus themselves.
So they are binomial coefficients and here there is a coefficient C
by which you multiply and this C equals to something. So it's not that essential,
yeah, but I write it, but then I have to explain it. And this constant C equals,
I have one times I2, how much there?
So n is our torus, these are these numbers, this is a constant C, but this inequality holds
if the sets are disjoint. So we have two disjoint sets,
then they cannot contain both too much homology.
And of course, you say, you know, everything about homology, you have this, you know,
all the sequences, still you have to prove it. And the point is the way you prove it.
So how I was proving that? So I just reduced this to something combinatorial and then I was trying
to find it in the literature, some combinatorial statement and I was imagining all possible
words. But of course, I could never guess that this was called the corresponding combinatorial
theorem was called Matsumoto Togishugi theorem. I mean, this is a horrible way how people call
their theorem after the names. Who knows these names, yeah. And I actually, I spoke to somebody
in combatorics and they directed me to the right domain of mathematics, it's called the
extremal set theory. And you look at textbooks and then you find lots of inequalities. And so this
particular inequality, if your subsets are just union of tori, which are coordinate tori, which
are product of circles. So then you can express it in terms of sets. And then you're using this
property of homology, you reduce it to some property of the exterior algebra and then going
from exterior algebra to sets, well that's again a little simple argument, yeah. But the point is
again, this is very much like in the case of the Lumi-Sweeten inequality or Scherer Lemma. Again,
I'm using these names, which is, of course, just to say something, yeah. And otherwise,
you have to invent, for any purpose, I try to invent actually some names for the theorem,
so they will have some meaning. And then you'll be remembered, right, because that's a name being
attached except for, no, Pythagorean theorem is okay, yeah, we can remember the name. But if it's
come to somebody, you've proven yesterday, if it's really good theorem, only exceptionally name is,
okay, yeah. So that you start with something combinatorial, then kind of linearizes,
and then become topological. And topological, say, in terms of linear algebra, in terms of exterior
algebra, I just don't remember how to formulate it, yeah. It's, you know, because you, and this
certainly, I'm pretty certain theorem is true not only for torus, but for all kind of spaces.
But I'm not certain because the corresponding, I think the rest combinatorial theorem
have been proven. You need something more elaborate combinatorial theorem.
But in general, it's unclear what are kind of full set of such inequalities.
So we have configuration of sets, so this is a problem, yeah. I can formulate as follows.
So we can see that n goes to infinity. And you can see the configuration of sets
in this X sub n.
They're indexed by the same, all with the same number. Two. My i, of course,
not the same as it was before, yeah. Just here we have two subsets. Now some configuration of
subsets. And what you know of them, you know who intersect whom, and all data which you have.
All which are more important, who is disjoint from whom. And then the question is, what are possible
measures in my sense of these sets? So how much topology of the ambient space they can absorb?
Asymptotically, when n goes to infinity, approximately. And this is not so clear. I mean,
it reduces to some question in polylineal algebra. And sometimes you can reduce
at the combinatorial question. Sometimes not. Sometimes the corresponding reduction
questionable. And then you arrive at some combinatorial problem in this extremus set theory,
which usually are unsolved, right? In this generality, I don't think it has been done.
But that tells you something about the kind of problems we face here. Okay, now,
so what, what we can do next? So this kind of a, kind of warming up, but this warming up where
I can prove something, from some moment on you can prove much less.
And then you, but you, but you, so you, yes, only can make some definition of formulaic questions.
So one, of course, immediate issue which arises as you, as a statistical mechanics,
one way you say, aha, you're a big system, a limit of finance systems. You want to describe
everything for finance systems and then go to the limit. And alternatively, you want to work
with infinite system to start with. And in a statistical mechanic, if you just abstractly
infinitely many objects, you cannot say anything. But if it's something like a lattice,
namely, you have some group gamma acting on there, then everything must be done
equivariantly with respect to gamma. For example, topologically, you have this infinite dimensional
space. So it will be not just torus to power infinity, which is unclear what it is, what
kind of, what meaning it has, but maybe torus to the power of this group. So it will be a set
of function from group to the torus, which is acted upon by gamma. And you want to make this
equivariant topology there. And the essential part of this topology is co-homology. It's
multiplicative structure. And it's not that interesting, but multiplicatively, it's kind of
the whole kind of essence of that. Everything what I said depends on multiplicative structure.
Of course, this is relatively simple space. And, well, you can kind of, much of them derived from
finite product, but still there is a kind of issue, which is not completely obvious here.
However, on the next level, if you want to imitate what happens in physics,
particles, when your factors interact, you have to introduce interactions. And then
you follow the patterns of what is done in
anthropological dynamics, or symbolic dynamics. So in symbolic dynamics,
in anthropological dynamics, you start with there. It will be not a torus, but a finite set.
You take it to the power of gamma, and here gamma x, so it's infinite power, this finite set,
and this power at gamma x. And that out of this, you can produce more interesting dynamical systems,
namely what may be called Markov hyperbolic systems, which includes kind of classical
hyperbolic system like Anosov systems. This is done in two steps, and these steps can be
imitated in this more geometric, anthropological setting. The sets as follows. First, we consider,
these are called sometimes shifts, they are used between those of shifts. This is a kind of Bernoulli
shift, right? We have, in particular, when gamma is integers, you have this finely many symbols,
these infinite words, the symbols you move, the basis in these words, infinite words move, yeah.
First, we consider subsystem, which is called subsystem of finite type.
This defined as follows. For any group, any countable group gamma, they define as follows.
You take some subset in gamma, finite subset. So what you have in this context is a function
with values in a set. Here it is finite set. Here is something like circle, something more
interesting. And you say, looking at this one particular subset, which configuration you are
being allowed. So you take only subset of this configuration. So you can say, you add finitely
many equations. If they are discrete, of course, equation makes no sense. If they are continuous,
you can say, these are variables, finitely many variables, which come there, and this
satisfies some equation. So this is a finite dimensional description, or in the finite here.
And then you say, now we can see that only those function on the big, on the whole group, which
satisfies this equation. Whenever you put this domain, you can shift it around the group,
and it requires the same condition being satisfied everywhere, right? For example, if we have
here, you may say that everywhere this equal average of these two. And this will be called
harmonic condition, like harmonic functions appear this way. The same condition everywhere,
whichever. And these are called finite type subsets. That's a much of the symbolic dynamics is about
that. Here you can do the same. Of course, for the torus, I don't know what it may be, but nature
are good candidates. When you expect something regularly happening, of course, algebraic varieties.
So replace the torus by projective space, or
projective space over complex numbers. And when you restrict it here, so you have this
projective space, so it's here, it's product of projective spaces, and there you take some
algebraic subvariety. And this will be allowable, and then you move it around. And then you have
this infinite, infinite dimensional algebraic variety. And the simplest instance of that,
when you run over integers, and then, of course, you can truncate it at every moment,
and you have this finite dimensional variety, or you can do it periodically in other approximation.
And you have this, again, finite dimensional variety. So given one single equation, you have
this sequence of varieties, and the question is, actually, what are their topologies?
What are their homologies? What are their better numbers asymptotically? And this is unclear. I mean,
I was asking many people in the algebraic geometry, they say, oh, well, we have all the theorems, of
course, all theorems, just on the beginning, the theorems only to scan like A plus B equals C.
You have to make some hard work to understand how they behave. You know, in algebraic geometry,
topology is very stable. You move a little bit with the question, in some sense, topology doesn't
change. So it's a really combinatorial kind of problem. There must be canonical answer,
depending only on degrees of your varieties. However, I mean, they may behave in a rather
complicated way. And if it comes from a more complicated group, gamma, it may be enormously
complicated. But for a cyclic group, probably, it's solvable. But if you start thinking about that,
you see you're running to rather kind of add into a complicated mess. You know everything, you kind
of go for every finite stage, you have full picture, but the picture become more and more and more
elaborate very fast. So, but this, I think, interesting question. However, maybe you will never
get sharp answer, but and by the way, yeah, and another point, the way you can approach it, of
course, if you work on a finite field, then if you reduce a prime p, you can see the prime p,
then you look at the points of a finite field, you come back to the Markovian chain. So you come
to the classical dynamics. So it has kind of interesting interaction with dynamics and homology.
And so, so these ranks of homologists in this space are closely related to entropy in the
usual sense, in a kind of very precise way. However, the picture is far from being clear.
However, it is not, yeah, and then maybe just to continue to finish, to explain that this is not
the end of the story, especially here, because here is very nice next step, because you can
can see the quotient of this. So this is a kind of traditional, this is a less traditional.
You can see the quotient of this fine type systems and quotient, it must be understood
and again in this category, namely. So the quotient space of any space obtained by,
it can be introduced by, by means of an equivalence relation. An equivalence relation
is a subset in the product of that by itself, right? So this equivalence relation, you take
two of them, you take subset here, and you say whom you have to identify. And you only work
in the category of system of finite types, the way I describe them, so describable,
describable finite terms. So this subset, this equivalence relation, are in there,
must be also a finite type. On the other hand, it must be equivalence relation, right? It must
have the quotient. And these are two properties which fights each other. It's very hard to have
both of them. If you want to construct, and this of course must be, everything automatically
will be, of course, equivalent of the action of the group, right? The way this I described.
So, so you want to produce equivalence relation of finite type, and that's very difficult to have,
right? It's very hard to verify. It's like a metric. If you have a function and two variables,
it's very difficult to say it's a metric or not. Kind of, it's really the most impossible.
It must be defined. And here it's quite difficult. And much of difficulty, of dynamics problem,
of dynamics come from that problem. So what are these systems? They're kind of,
they're kind of hyperbolic system in this generalized sense. And, but here it's unclear what happens
if you do it on this level of algebraic varieties, and it's unclear if it's significant. But with
them, it may still remain in the same category, which may be useful. But that's not the main
issue, what I want to explain, because there is much more interesting for class systems where you
can apply this approach, and they can be physically quite attractive.
So these are all close to kind of non-interacting particles. So everything, what you can do there,
even if they don't interact or interact in a kind of not very significant way.
Hyperbolic system corresponds to that. But, so what you want to consider,
what I call is parametric packing problem, which has much more juice to it.
Note that it's more, the previous one, not difficult enough. But there you have really
difficulty just when you start doing here, there is more possibilities. So it's more difficult,
probably easier branch to that. And that starts with the classical packing. So I have a bunch of
balls in the euclidean space, and you want to know how much you can put them with a given density.
And it's unknown what kind of solution you should have,
where it's solved in a way only in dimension two and three. For two it's classical,
I've forgotten going back to the genre of Lagrange, that the optimal packing is hexagonal one.
So it has pretty additional, you know exactly what it is, and you know what it is. In high
dimensions, you do this, you can put one layer over another, this can was conjectured by
attribute to Kaplan, it was instantly solved, I forgot the name of the guy,
Hales, who solved it. And it's computer-aided proof, I'm not certain how much it accepted,
and what computer-aided proofs say. In a way, I don't quite understand objection against
computer-aided proofs, or rather any proof obtained by computation, you should cannot do it in your
head, it is like that. Somebody make computation, the paper, I mean, how you trust the paper.
Why should you trust the paper? I mean, it's a paper, it's physical mean, not your brain.
So, and so I don't see the big difference, yeah. And preferably to have argument which don't
require something you cannot have in your head, right, and long linearized things,
arguments are not good for your head. Well, of course, you may or may not accept it, but anyway,
this is his solution, and solution is not that simple, yeah, it's not periodic, yeah, they don't
have to be periodic, they kind of, they're describable, all of them. And when we go to next
dimension, you don't know what happens, right, we don't know if they're periodic, but yeah,
most likely the extremal thing are non-perioric, and what they are, and how they look, and whether
they're entropy, they're tides, lots of interesting questions arise. Okay, but they're not what we
want, we want to look at the course equation, but which has more, more substance to it, in my view,
is when density is far from being maximum, you can see that both spread with some density,
which far from being maximum, so yes, you have, you know the density, so both are distributed
such that in a bigger ball, they're proportion given to you, and you want to know the topology
of this space. You can see the all possible positions, and you want to know the topology,
in a sense, just I was speaking about that, what is asymptotic behavior of homology.
But even formulating it is not so obvious, on one hand, but on the other hand, there are non-trivial
kind of, something non-trivial can say already now about that, and the point is that topology here is
by far more elaborate than already background topology, language in which you want to have an
answer, will be much more elaborate than we had before, it's not just infinite,
tensorial power of some vector space, it seems more complicated, so let's make a little break,
and we come to this after the break. Okay, so that's an issue, so we want to understand this,
and as I said, even formulating it is not totally obvious, and it has
kind of, always kind of physical interpretation, they have it's moving both, and you want to
know how much, how complicated the motion can be, and they can go around, you know,
go like that, and these go like that, and these orbits in that one, and you want to have a picture
of all this complexity, and of course this homological setting is a possibility to express it,
but not the only one, there are several ways how we can formulate it, and here I emphasize this
homological formulation, which is not the only one possible. So what is a
generally speaking for this, so,
and in physics, you know, people love energy, and so let's look from the point of view of energy,
just try to make everything about energy also formulated in an appropriate language,
and then we come back to the problem, just to formulate it in the more general terms.
So typically what you want to understand something, the only way to understand it
is not, you know, there are two ways of understanding things, one you focus on this,
and just, and on the other hand to just go away, and experience shows, if you focus on something,
you can never understand it, you know, but for those who think what is, you know, substance,
so what is that, that, that, that, that, that is just nowhere, but if you go away, I mean,
you come back and you understand it, or you understand it, you're really great, you're
stupid to start with, so you have to go away, and we look at energy, and so it is energy,
my notation may be not consistent, it will be x, and you have a space,
and you have functions with real values, and this is for us energy.
So how, this is treated in statistical mechanics in very simplistic terms, this x is a probability
space, a measured space, something like, they're all more or less the same, something like square,
and you have a function, two real numbers, and this has this density distribution, usually
spaces depend upon parameters, they're bigger and bigger chunks of matter, so you have a sequence
of these distributions, but there are measures, after all, measures on the line, and you won't
understand these measures, and for measures on the line, or if you have several observables,
not one energy, several observables, you have measures on the opinion space, the first what
you do, you look at this entropy, this Boltzmann kind of entropy, what is a asymptotic decay of
this one, n goes to infinity, usually they concentrate one point and then spread, become
kind of very small, otherwise, and then, yes, you do all this formalism of mechanics,
and of course the point is, in my understanding, yes, all this mathematics is kind of trivial,
but remarkably, it's very non-trivial for practical physicists or chemists, oh, yeah,
you just, from that, you know what to measure, how to relate these kind of mathematics to,
because quantities of subjects physically can measure, et cetera, and if you throw this away
from mathematical stage mechanics, you become complete, complete boy, in my view, you're completely
kind of pointless, kind of exercises and computations, the essence is that you, it's related,
it's related in non-trivial and non-digorous way to experiments, but we do mathematics, however,
unfortunately, and so, but what we do now, and typically, if you have this space, this x of the
n, very often, is a power of fixed space, identical particles, many of them, it's not,
will be, not this thing, it will be, thing divided by symmetry group,
and mathematically, it's inevitable, you have to divide by this group, because you cannot
work, make asymptotic with factorials, but you have binomial coefficients, as I said, factorial
can solve, you have exponential functions, and exponentials are just where you can make all
these kind of formalisms, of large deviations, which is now called, or which used to be, or
just Gibbs, Gibbs kind of, Gibbs formalism of statistical mechanics, and now, but if you,
but now we do topology, so now x is not measure space, not probability space, but topological space,
and we are concerned with topology of this space, and also, if even it's a product, we have, for
example, the case of balls, everything determined by these points, so it will just power space,
if there are n points, and now there is symmetry, you have a symmetry group acting, but division
division is quite different thing, yeah, when we divide topology, we put two lines,
and because we concerned with homology and homotopy, you don't take set theoretic question,
which is a stupid thing to do, we take homotopy theoretic question, so in a way that you remember
what this symmetry do to your space, right, if you divide it by, like that, topologically,
become rather boring, and not always boring, but relatively, at least it's not what we want,
because here in particular, when we have these balls, these points are just joined,
so you're concerned maybe not so much with the space itself, but this minus all is diagonal,
this meaning all diagonal, and here division by the symmetry, by, by permutation group is the
same, no matter what you do, but you put this second line or not, because the action of the
group has no fixed point there, and this is enormously complicated space topologically,
because this group is topologically very complicated, so group, in again classical
physics, its power of the group come via quantum mechanics, because x linearly, it has representations,
representation, which offers you representation, more interesting groups in this response to,
sometimes I don't want to say which I don't understand, but homologically, there's also
the homology of this group, in particular when it acts on a space, on a relatively simple space,
like that, this group acts, the question space is quite complicated, quite elaborate homology,
so I can say what they are, and they're kind of known, but there are textbooks about that,
but they must admit I never quite read it, yeah, so I just couldn't extract from that information
which I would like to know, for example, what's the asymptotics of these Bayesian numbers,
when n goes to infinity in different range, that is elaborate theorem saying what they are,
but they kind of don't, at least in the books not written, what they are in simple terms,
and you have to work on this, but so I'm not certain, say they go exponentially or
non-exponentially, say Bayesian numbers, however, there are parts of homology which
just can be, you can understand, but anyway, it's unclear what to do with this, how to
to use the full information in that, but now coming back to Morse theory,
so what is the setting of the Morse theory, I prefer it to be energy, and what,
again, we just imitate what people do in physics, what will be spectrum of energy,
and the basic example of, because this what eventually will come up
in also in this packing problem, it will be question about the spectrum, but understood
in topological terms, and so what is the spectrum, so the basic example which everybody
knows, we have Laplace operator and we know its spectrum, so from, and this spectrum can be seen
in terms of the quadratic form associated Laplace operator, and this is energy, right, it is
square of the differential, and this quadratic form, so I always prefer to work with quadratic
form rather than with operators, because there topology becomes more visible, and so what you have,
you have this, so this energy is integral of this, over some meaningful x,
and the spectrum, you restrict this function, so it's a function on, on f's,
you restrict this to the sphere in the Hilbert space, even sphere,
so you have a function on the sphere, again sphere has little topology, I mean topology
for means algebraic topology, meaning homology is none in the infinite dimensional space,
but this function being quadratic is symmetric, therefore it descends to the projective space,
and this is apologically more interesting, because topology is just generated, it's
poncare polynomial, just it's infinite power series, one term in each dimension, right,
so it's polynomial ring and one generator, so it's polynomial ring, multiplicatively
cross significance, so there is one generator in every dimension, and so what is the spectrum in
these terms, and the spectrum is quite simple to understand, it's more much easier than algebraic
spectrum, because it uses much less input, so you have a space, you have a function,
and you look at the level, imagine there's a bottom, and then it moves, and then space
becomes bigger and bigger, but you now measure it in homological term, instead of taking mass
of that, which is you don't do anyway, you take this, what I call this mu star,
of the level f minus one of say minus infinity,
so there is this function, and you take it, the simplicity is cartoff,
cartoff means I replace it, I mean say cartoff, replace it by number, because this was ideal,
but you take a number, rank of this, and so it changes, and the moment it changes are the
moments with the spectral points, right, so it is a classical variational principle for relay,
I guess, that spectral points with Laplace are exactly critical points of this, of this function,
and it's a function restricted to this sphere, because symmetric is projective space,
and it's this critical point, not just something vanishes, it's not local phenomenon, it's global,
so you absorb new cycles at every moment, right, so in projective space it is
circled, and there is projective planes, so there are cycles of high in high dimension,
and when you, as your level grows, you engulf one by one, all of them, and the moment,
the first moment you engulf the cycle corresponding to this homology or cohomology,
it is ice eigenvalue, so the eigenvalue enumerated by these elements of your cohomology, and most
specifically there are this ideal, the kernel of homomorphism actually to the complement,
right, because our measure associated with this actual ideal, so your spectrum index in this case
are indexed by a homogeneous ideal in this polynomial ring, which happens to be the same
as integers, and then come this very beautiful point, which is partly motivation for what
I want to say, is that there are cases when this algebra is more complicated,
and one of them for this packing problem, but there is much easier case when this algebra is
still complicated, which has been studied by Lighty-Guth, and where spectrum, where this algebra
is a polynomial algebra with infinitely many variables, and moreover it's acted upon by,
it's generated by a single element, but not as an algebra, but as a module of a standard algebra,
so cohomology mode 2 acted also by standard algebra, and there is a,
simply a kind of algebra there, the one which is free is generated by a single element,
but it's as an algebra, it is as elaborate, it has infinitely many generators as an algebra,
an example of that's quite simple, the first example what happens, it is if you consider
say three-ball, three-dimensional ball, and you can see the space of curves in this ball,
and this space properly understood in the second I say how it's understood,
the space of curves in this ball, the polish of the space is exactly what I said,
it's cohomology, it has one generator in dimension, keep forgetting, two of the i thing minus one,
one generator of this ring, they are polynomial, but all of these are powers, standard powers of a
basic, basic generator, two-dimensional generator there,
two-dimensional, I'm not mistaken, but what is, how you understand curves? Well, first curves
under through the cycle, so either closed curve or some sequence may have ends on the boundary,
and they're just simple curves, but you allow the kind of deformation you allow,
you allow this picture, you go from this to this, so they merge and they diverge,
and you can see that this is continuous deformation, and that's essentially the rule,
you have to say it slightly more carefully, but you allow a little bit more deformations,
and this is a, in technical terms, the space of z two cycles, it's coefficient of this group,
they're relative cycles, they're boundary on the boundary, and this space
is, has co-homology, is a free module of a student algebra, and this kind of behavior,
and the function which is of the interest here is the length of this curve, and so in the spectrum
of this energy, you know, to understand it, you have to enumerate this eigenvalues by this kind of
rather tricky thing, it's ideals and this algebra and nothing you can do, I mean, whether you like it
or not, this is a, what's proven, but very good, all the structure is there, naively you can say,
ah, all this is relevant, it's only something, if you use something simple, it does not, so it's
the whole structure of this algebra inside of this geometry, a spectral behavior of this functional,
and this, one of the easiest kind of geometrically thing you can imagine, right,
the first kind of non-linear, first non-linear case, and it's become the elaborate. Now,
and this, of course, our general setting, this is our general setting, is now,
we have this space, we have this function, and we want to understand how spectrum, how these levels
change when you change them, and what happens, what happens in the case of the packing problem,
that the functional can consider, your space will be, well, first let
reduce, consider the case of finite systems, so everything happens on the ball,
which is, by the way, not, you know, not the same, you cannot say high, then you go to the limit,
it's tricky, I mean, but it's a simplification just to not to go to the next level of difficulties,
so your space is just configuration, space of points, so what you work with, you have,
say, a ball, so it will compact manifold to the power ii, the final set, minus the diagonal,
and the basic structure there, so already this has rather complicated topology,
if x is, even x is rather simple, even x like a ball, this has quite a bit topology,
but moreover, it's acted upon by permutation group,
oh, what is this way, it's an automorphism of indices, if I throw it away, it acts freely,
so it's a very elaborate object, it has very elaborate topology, but it is there,
and the energy which you use, and which you want to understand is, it will be just one minus
minimal distance between points, so in this way you can encode, in fact the points are far away,
so being balls being disjoint, encoded by the size of this function, so the closer they come,
the higher the energy, so they don't want to come together, so, and in this way you can describe,
so the space of, of this moving balls is just sub-level of this function, and so you want to know,
so what are spectral moments, how the spectrum behave, for given, for this or that, and then,
so let me, and the point is, it was very, very good, and it was, in simple case, was known earlier,
that there is a non-trivial, non-trivial interaction between these two problems,
so one, you have balls moving here, in this ball, on the other hand, you have these curves in there,
in the space of curves, and between the two spaces there is kind of a coupling,
yeah, this kind of duality between these two spaces, in fact, this is much easier space,
we, this is a, all these cylindricals, whatever, it's peanuts compared to complexity of this space,
however, some part of the space is reflected here, and this part, which more or less, possibly this
picture is adequate for that part of that, right, and so let me explain, let me explain this, and I
want to give kind of a, the spirit of that is as follows, yeah, how we can think about what I'm
going to say, and about the space of balls, instead of thinking of this original packing problem,
like you've given a space, like you've given a space, you want to understand how these
balls live there, and how they move, and what are the packing, you can say, huh, can you think of
the whole manifold, it's just container for packing, and forget all other structures, so,
so even a many, say, Riemannian manifold, and then for every size of ball, every number of balls,
you have the space, and they move, and then the spaces, they kind of not separate, they organize
in a variety of ways, because you move size of the balls, then if you think, if you know a little
bit some of this jargon, if one of them is a ball, the background space, they're called an
operator, you can, there is an operation, they were simple mining, yeah, because if you put little
balls here, inside, they, in each of them, they become balls in the whole space, this kind of,
has fancy, fancy, I mean, all these amazing operators, so you see, quite all these packing spaces
well organized, and they're purely topological, they depend on some real parameters, but they're
topological, homotopy types of the spaces, and they organize in some way, so it's a elaborate
collection of homotopy classes of space, an error between them, what they tell you about the manifold,
so what is information they tell you about manifold, and so just to demonstrate this
particular instance of what is here, consider the case, whether it is especially simple,
when you have a manifold, I say this example just because it's most transparent, of compact,
this being compact manifold of, of negative curvature, and then the point is that you can
essentially construct a geometry from, essential geometry, probably all, but it's essential from
knowing these spaces, namely, you can determine the length of all closed geodesics, and this is
exactly in speed, the speed, what I said, this kind of curves, there's a coupling between the two,
and so this is what I want to explain, how the things are coupled, and it's simply an example,
but in general it's somewhat more elaborate, and this will be the end of the story.
So we can see the manifold looking like that, if you do not say it may be surface,
and here is a closed geodesic, and it opens up, so it's negative curvature, it has this narrow neck,
and then opens up, and we want to understand what is the length of this geodesic in terms of
disks moving inside, and the point is follows, if you have k disks disjoint disks,
and now symmetry will be not involved, yes it's very primitive kind of description, but already
not so bad, so they can go from this side to this side, and quite, quite, quite, quite freely,
but then they can go kind of back and forth, and so of course topology here must be understood,
kind of relative to infinity, but if total sum of diameter of these disks, less than this length,
they can go back and forth independently, so if you close it up somewhere, then inside we have
this product, if there are k of them, then this homologous class, which is, I'm sorry,
torus, this homologous class of the fundamental class is in the space of this, in the space of
these moving balls, because when they meet together here, they don't prevent this kind of one from
another, but if the sum of diameters become greater, so that too many of them, this cycle is not there,
so we precisely know the length of this geodesic, knowing homotopes, homologous even,
this relative homologous of the space of disks moving in there, and that's true for all dimensions,
so what is essential, the space outside of this narrow neck become wide, so and so this is a kind
of the spirit of this interaction, that in general there will be not this narrow pack,
but this kind of virtual kind of inside some entities, which when corresponding to the,
corresponding to eigenvalues of this space, so here all closed geodesic surface will continue,
will be part of the spectrum of this energy function, so it's very elaborate, very elaborate
space, which actually somewhat in the spirit, in the spirit of this trace formula, which is
very different from it, of course, yes, kind of topological, so it's kind of topological version
here of the Selbic trace formula, when the spectrum of Laplace's operator on one hand
and distribution of periodic orbits, length of periodic orbits are related in this way,
so this is the formula, and so this is quite a general principle, so there are two sides to that,
when you want to use it, on one hand, and this was done by Ladi Gussi, he constructed this most
major part of his work, quite elaborate movements of balls, of small balls, how they move inside
of another, representing interesting cycles inside of the ball, because here it's topology
coming, non-symmetric topology, but the interest on symmetric topology, though not for the whole
symmetric group, but only for the kind of maximum seal of two subgroups, only concerning convolutions,
how much they are determined by this seal of subgroup there, and on one hand, on that hand,
this can be used, so this, on the sides, on this part says there are complicated motion of balls
representing, you can put relatively many balls into the container, and they still can move
with sufficient degree of freedom, and then there is opposite type of estimates, you can say,
how if you have too many, you cannot move too much, some class is not representable, and for that,
again, you can use this kind of duality, exactly as in this example, right, so they cannot move
with full freedom if the reader's obstruction, the reader's narrow cycle inside, narrow circle,
but in general, it will be not individual circle, it may be moving circle, which has the same effect,
so here it was fixed circle moving balls, but in full generality, you have moving
curves and moving balls, they interact, so in a way that
this curves intersect ball and move within balls, and it gives you inequality between
two spectra, so one functional, one spectrum they describe is the length on curves, on one hand,
and distance between, inverse distance between these points in the space on the other hand,
and so there is this coupling between the related two spaces, which is probably non-faceful,
I mean, it's still far from, it's faceful probably for cycles, it give you asymptotic
to correct information about cycles, but hardly give you the full information about the balls,
which is by far more, by far more elaborate space, but then of course it's only beginning,
because even if you know all that, you have to now to go to infinite systems, and then it's also
clear how to even formulate it, yeah, what is the density, how many balls, etc, etc, etc,
there are many typologists, and something you can say but not much, so I want to stop here because,
yeah, I want to maybe to answer questions, that was my last lecture,
and I can elaborate this at that point, but well, from this moment even little I can say
become rather technical, it's not, it cannot be exposed in a short space.
But you start by burning the name of Larry.
And his father is famous because he's an author of inflation, this inflation of the universe,
G-U-T-H, good, no, this is a famous name, he, you know, this inflation, his inflation of
the universe, his creation, and also just on the internet I found he won price, the
worst possible, the worst possible office, have the largest mess in his office,
and it's indeed, it's impressive, yeah, we're all good at that, but he's,
M-H-E, yeah, and this is really impressive, I must say, yeah, it was like that in the level of books
in the book, everything in the room, yeah. Before I saw Milner, Milner was pretty good at that
also, but nothing compared to G-U-T-H. And Larry easily can find his articles and I give references
probably in my text to his papers, yeah. Larry's paper is something
two, seven, I guess.
Oh, he done, Larry made papers on many different pills, yeah, he's quite a young man, but he's
quite broad, and his first work was, I think, on shipyard geometry, and then he was doing that.
It's also, it's a mini-mark, something, it's in his powers, but if you look at his name, you easily
find his papers on the net, and I'm saying, I'm referring to his paper, I'm sure.
And, but he's not concerned with packing, he's concerned with cycles,
and packing, in my view, have more, much more juice to them.
And, of course, there are other comparable problems, so my subject, which I didn't touch here,
basically because my understanding, what I can say is, will be kind of extremely vague,
is what is probability 30 for less. So here's huge symmetry, and this is just, you have more
symmetry than in classical probabilities. The apology has more symmetries than the results,
you extend them, they become more powerful and more general due to the symmetry.
On the other hand, in the application, the major application will be languages,
and he is, so what is probability in languages? What is probability of a sentence?
And that's, I don't know, the answer, I was thinking about that, and I have
response, but it's also elaborate, what is probability of a sentence?
And you can't give an answer, but it will be not a number. You have to create both, create two
kind of category type of objects, one related to languages and one related to domain, where this
ranges is probability to take, and then to say something, and it's quite interesting.
So I can give an example, which I like very much,
so because you can make some experiments on Google, you take a sentence and you see
how plausible it is, and of course you cannot say exactly what probability is, but if one appears
10 times or 20 times more often, well, it tells you something, and this is a kind of very typical,
so one is some cats eat mice, many cats eat grass.
So what is, it will be more common,
this one, it's by far more common, and these are most existing, non-existent,
this is about, you cannot trust mathematics. Mathematicians say, well, the first is true,
the second is questionable, and it's not at all. First is so trivial, you don't say it,
and the second is non-typical, therefore you say it often. Actually most cats eat grass, I guess,
or even most probably, I forgot each one of them, and this will be 10 times more frequent,
and this will be close to zero. Of course with Google, but be careful with the number it gives,
yeah, it's unclear what you mean, and then, so the range is very tricky, even on the day when
it comes to numbers. Of course numbers are underlight in a very rough way, numbers are there, like
ranks of groups, homology groups, tell you something about groups, and this is a more elementary example.
If you look at these two, peaks fly or bats fly,
and this is quite much more, because at least on the internet it will be more common.
You have more flying peaks, but in bats. If you're naïve, you look at the test, but then
exactly they say the counting is wrong. You cannot count by numbers, because if you count correctly,
this will be infinitely more. Peaks don't fly. You can deduce it from what they say,
the internet peaks don't fly, because on one hand it's said very many times,
but if you look at the correctly understood probability, yeah, it will be roughly speaking,
here this will become combinatorics like that for bats, and for pigs it will be like that,
to one point. It will be a thick point, but it will be just a point, because they usually
appear in the same sentences, always the same, very few constructions, the number of grammatical
constructions you never saw. Yesterday I saw a pig flying near my window, I don't say it,
but for bats you have. The number of variations of construction, the number of construction
will be, for pigs will be negligible, for bats will be as many as for birds. They have frequency,
how much they use in material. It's what construction, what combinatorics they're being
convolved into, and this was a kind of, now people kind of realize that, but relatively recently
when the first corpora of leg views were made, the word though, if I write correctly, or thou,
right, or thou, how would you write this one? It was kind of the most common word in English,
because in a certain sense, yeah, I mean if you take it from the Bible, yeah, that would be very
common. I mean, but again, it will be always the same construction. It's not, yeah, the number of,
you see there, how many, particularly book was published doesn't make, it's the word there more
common, right, in English. And this applies to many things related to learning also, when you
looked, so-called bias and approach to statistics, people say all these words, but they kind of
still try to express in the language of usual probability. It's not true, right, when you look,
say learning mechanism, of course it's bias and statistic, meaning your probability is moving,
but it's not moving in numbers, and moving in a much more elaborate structure, and for each
particular instance, you have to, particular class of problems, you have to guess, formalize
the structure, and I thought a little bit for languages, but it's not, not, I see examples,
in examples I can't explain it, but I don't see how to formalize it properly. It's very,
it resists formalization. When you formalize it, there's some problem with that, and it should
be treated differently. But this, unfortunately, I don't know much to say. I can't talk about
this infinite amount of time without saying anything, right, you know. That's, it's unclear to me how to
properly express it. But when it comes to peculiar mathematics, there are many avenues
of, of, of very changing probability in a, in a kind of diverting from this standard,
standard, standard way of doing it, which is, makes it kind of quite, quite interesting.
So, but again, I'm, I'm, keep talking, and I expect your questions. You have a question?
You know, there's a small part at the end of large deviations.
So this small part?
About large deviations? Okay, so large deviations, very general terms.
Classical large deviation is when you have a family of probability distributions
on, given space x. So, for example, we'll be aligned and you have probability given by some
densities. And, and then you want to know how, what the limit is. And typically, they, for example,
may be associated to the sum of independent random variables. So they become kind of concentrated
sharper and sharper in the exponentially decay. And the question is how to determine this rate of
decay. And the first result of that was due to, well, it's usually, people refer to Boltzmann,
but I'm not sure, some refer to Varadana and I don't know. I would think it coming to earlier,
it's essentially a asymptotic or binomial coefficients, right? When you have independent
random variable. And so, in fact, the, for general, if you have just measure, so it convolves
measure with itself and you properly, properly scale it and, and take log and divide by n and,
and what happens, then you know that, you have this, then you know that this limit,
that, so, so, so what, what, what, what, what, what, I keep confusing it to be, either, I
determine, it's Ligand transform can be determined by Laplace asymptotic of Laplace transform of
the sequence, right? So if you can see Laplace transform of the sequence properly normalized,
then, not surprisingly, you guys can understand the thing, you get Ligand transform of this limit,
right? This is one of the basic formulas probably known to Gibbs. I, I know, I, I learned in,
in text with the second mechanic, but certainly written by, actually, by Landford. So this one
with the main results. And there's lots of elaboration of that, and I don't quite understand
kind of what is the, in, in, in what sense is different from that, yeah. On the one, on, on
hand. On the other hand, in, in geometry, what you face, when space also is variable,
and when space also variable, it's much more subtle, so what you look at. So here, as I said,
you may consider not independent variable, but weakly dependent variable on the statistical
mechanics, they have such, such sequences for which you want to know what, what, what behavior is,
what the general principle is. And essentially, much of a mathematical statistical mechanics
is about large deviation, because this is centripet after all, right?
And there is a pretty good book by Ellis, I think.
Only, which I look at, browse through, only superficially, but this kind of a major source.
He's, I say, the clearest right or whatever, sorry about that. I think Ellis, no, no, maybe
I'm confused, not, maybe not Ellis. No, I think I'm giving the wrong, probably the wrong name,
maybe Ellis. I'm not certain.
Here are some books called large deviation statistical mechanics. And if you look at
large deviation on the internet, you come across his article and, and his book.
And, but in, in geometry, so, which is, we have, for example, even kind of very simple
case, because it's simplest, and you can see the dimension of simplest dimension going,
and this, the uniform measure, and you want to understand how measure distributes, the total
measure is one, and so you, you concentrate it somewhere, but somewhere at exponentially decay.
But the, the full picture is not that clear, so where measure is sitting, yeah? How, it depends,
how you look at it, right? Here, you already have a function, so the function is a observable,
which you have. And here, this observable must be introduced. And the observable has
natural function you have here, like, like distance to the center, distance to the face.
Now, also symmetry group acting. And all, all that, you have, I don't know, but I believe
there is a good language saying what the limit is. And mathematical, this language is, will be,
of course, this tropical geometry. You come from, well, it's the last one, because you see it
exponents the rate of growing on decay of something well algebraically organized. So,
they're well algebraically organized, it will be tropical. If not, it will be something more,
more, less elegant, and maybe, not so pretty. And, but there are lots of instances, besides
this sequence, if you look, sequence of compact symmetric spaces, yeah, of a particular type,
and you see how also they're geometry distributed. So, your basic function coming from distances,
all coming from eigenfunctions. How they distributed. What are the asymptotics? And this is a,
has been hardly, hardly touched, the right. This has been studied, of course, quite a bit,
of simplices in biology, because this is a kind of space of distribution of different
phenotypes, genotypes. The sphere, we understand pretty well sphere, in many respects, because
essential for local Banach space geometry. So, general symmetric space, I don't think they
had been studied in a proper way, except what follows trivially from what we know about sphere,
or something similar. There was a recent, very beautiful result of that kind concerning this
polyhedron of bistochastic matrices.
You can see the space of bistochastic matrices, how this may be distributed, and there was a,
I think, there was a talk by Tallagrand on spin glasses, because there was some conjecture by
fees, if I got exactly what it says. But, exactly with this nature, how measure is distributed
on this polyhedron, in terms of particular observables. And there was explicit formula
conjecture by them, and it was proven, I'm not certain, by Tallagrand and somebody,
by some of them, addition. So, it's another very, very interesting space, which is not at all clear.
The situation is not at all clear. But, of course, I'm kind of quite ignorant of that.
Yeah, I know a little bit about these geometric examples, but I don't know the field of the whole
field. And because at the beginning, what they do, it's elaborating this Boyceman formula.
And the emphasis, in my view, what is kind of the formulas for these people are usually obvious.
And there's some analysis, they're kind of foundational. They can see the most subtle,
for me, the opposite. This, what they call subtle, for me, is obvious,
and their formula is looking very complicated. So, it would be hard to appreciate what they do.
At the beginning, and then they become, go, go, go, and I never followed it. So, I cannot tell much.
But, there is a, now, good book, which was strongly, I guess, on algebraic statistics,
when he systematically exploits some of these, aspect of that related to,
topical geometry, statistical thing, right? Because many classical functions, like better
function, gamma function, they all have this origin, they exactly, distribution of particular
shapes. And these are, this kind of polyhedron, but then there are these quantum,
object like, well, quantum meaning. Cones, like cones in the, cones in the space.
I give some references, I think, there is a book by,
Barabisco Barab, he forgetting his name, who wrote a pretty good article about this information
geometry and the classical domain. It's related also to the geometry of this
fissur metric, in some instances. So, but again, my knowledge is quite superficial.
Yeah, I know a little bit, but I don't really know this, yeah. So, it seems,
there is a kind of big emerging field, yeah, going in different directions.
And then, which is, has a long prehistory end, and moves.
