So, I want to thank the organizers for inviting me to give these talks.
It's a great honor to speak here and so I want to talk about something that I call
perfectoid spaces.
And let me first give a sort of some general introduction to what perfectoid spaces are.
The general aim is somehow to get a comparison between objects.
A mixed characteristic zero p with objects in equal characteristic p.
And somehow the basic theorem somehow is, so the idea is to get somehow a geometric and nice version of the theorem of Fontaine and
Winter-Berger, which says that the absolute Galra groups, the absolute Galra groups of qp to which you, for example, there are many other choices, you can join all p per roots of p.
So a mixed characteristic field and of the long series field over fp are isomorphic and in some sense even canonically isomorphic.
And so one sees somehow that after joining lots of p power roots to a mixed characteristic thing, you get something that in some ways looks like an equal characteristic thing.
And so we generalize this to the following.
So we want to have some kind of geometric objects over this mixed characteristic field and some kind of geometric objects over this equal characteristic field and compare them.
And so let me just as notation put k this field and k flat this field while some slight variations of this or some other.
And then it becomes true that certain category of so-called perfectoid spaces over k is canonically equivalent to the category of the same kind of spaces over this equal characteristic field.
I denote the function by x maps to x flat.
And so let me state some general properties of this equivalence to give you some idea of what's going on.
So first of all perfectoid spaces are locally ring topological spaces.
And so in particular one can talk about the underlying topological space and in fact that's just the same on both sides.
Even better, not only the topological spaces are the same but even the etal topoi are canonically equivalent.
So somehow if you just take x to be the point, it's back k or something, then this will exactly re-prove somehow the theorem of Fontaine-Wintern-Berger.
I don't need this as an ingredient but somehow this serves as a generalization somehow to the relative setting of the theorem of Fontaine-Wintern-Berger.
Another property is that this isomorphism there between the categories is somehow of a deeply analytic nature.
So in some sense there are some limit procedures involved in this isomorphism and so we have to leave the world of algebraic geometry.
And instead we have to use some language of rigid analytic geometry.
And there's a reason that they are called perfectoid namely the objects are perfect in a certain sense.
Meaning that if we are in characteristics p and you could characteristic p then all the rings that occur are perfect and mixed characteristic we have a similar condition.
So that means that there are a lot of p power roots.
So one thing that we see from this is already that the rings that we will deal with are highly non-Esserian.
So perfect rings are basically non-Esserian.
And so it's maybe technically not so easy but okay.
And I want to add some words about how perfectoid spaces are related to varieties.
So for example in characteristic p we have a function from varieties over k to perfectoid spaces over k.
So okay flat then.
And so that's the notice by X maps to X perv.
And in fact it's clear that this function factors over the category of rigid analytic varieties.
So varieties over k flat.
So X mapping to X rig which then maps to X perv.
So first you associate the identification to X and then you make the structure shift perfect basically.
And so these two are sufficiently close to another.
For example it's true that the etal topos of this associated perfectoid space is just the same as the etal topos of the associated rigid analytic variety.
And in particular the etal homology of the two objects will agree.
But there's no such function characteristic zero.
So someone characteristic zero there's no canonical way to adjoint p power roots in general.
Yes there are some favorable situations where one can still give nice constructions of perfectoid spaces also in characteristic zero.
So let me give some examples of perfectoid spaces in characteristic zero.
Which also somewhat gives a flavor of what such a space looks like.
So one thing one could do is one takes the a1 over k and say takes the associated rigid analytic variety.
I will take some slightly different thing but think of it as the rigid analytic variety.
And then it takes the inverse limit over the p power map where t is the coordinate on a1.
So of course for a1 there's somewhat canonical way to adjoint lots of p power roots and that's what we do.
So more generally for any toric variety we can do the same.
We can take the inverse limit over the map phi which is on monoids given by multiplication by p of the rigid analytic variety associated to k.
And then in this first example one can even describe the tilt.
So I didn't say this.
So this isomorphism between the equal and mixed characteristic series is what I call tilting.
In this case the tilt of this inverse limit is just the same thing constructed in characteristic p.
But there are some other cases where one more or less has a canonical way to adjoint something like p power roots and say a over k is a b in variety.
Then you can look at the inverse limit over multiplication by p of the associated rigid analytic variety.
Again this is a perfectoid space.
And at least if a has ordinary reduction one can describe tilt.
And then there's the inverse limit over multiplication by p over some other variety a prime over this other field where a prime over p flat.
Describe it via certain canonical parameters.
And there are even more examples so you can take over the ring of integers and k you can take some p over the group.
Somehow from here on it's all in progress and I haven't checked in which generality exactly I can say which things.
For ordinary reduction somehow it's the easiest.
For good ordinary reduction yes.
Yeah sorry.
So if x is a p-divisible group then one can again take its generic fiber where I say it's a formative p-divisible group.
This is supposed to be something like the open unit for and then again you can take the inverse limit over multiplication by p.
And this is also related to some so-called Banach-Koll-Mess spaces.
Necarion-Pedicoch theory.
And also the modular spaces some of the bm varieties of p-divisible groups have this nice property.
A shimura variety depending on a level.
Then you can take the inverse limit over all levels at p of the corresponding rigid analytic variety.
Or you can take xk, k running through compact open subgroups of some group, g of kp, a Rappaport thing space.
And you can look at the inverse limit over k of xk.
So this means that in this, I mean it's been a problem for a long time if you have say the blue-mintate tower.
That you would like to look at it at the infinite level.
And now it turns out that at the infinite level this clearly becomes a space namely a perfectoid space.
And so for example one sees that one can take the inverse limit of the Greenfeld tower.
And this really now is canonically isomorphic as a perfectoid space to the inverse limit of the lumen-tate tower.
So there's also Jared Weinstein working on this now.
So as perfectoid spaces.
That's some of the general introduction.
So these perfectoid spaces are really some rigid analytic spaces but of an infinite type.
So they're not necessarily not anything.
And in particular for example I don't think that one can describe perfectoid spaces as a category of certain form of models.
So I thought you'll do some sort of admissible blow-ups because these flattening techniques seem to require the neserian this hypothesis.
So we have to look for some other approach to rigid analytic geometry.
And the one that I choose is the Huber theory of attic spaces.
In this first lecture I will basically now explain what an attic space is and compare the theory to other existing series in rigid analytic geometry.
So throughout let me fix the definitions of following.
A non-archimedian field K is a topological field.
And whose topology is induced by a non-trivial valuation of rank 1.
So throughout let me fix a non-archimedian field K.
And there's essentially a unique norm map from K to the positive wheels.
And let us fix one which is not really necessary for Huber theory but for comparing them with other series it may be helpful.
OK, so some basic idea of rigid analytic geometry is somehow it should be an analog of the series of complex analytic spaces over C.
And so there should be a function from the varieties over this field K to now the category of attic spaces over K sending X to XR.
And somehow on this attic space it should now make sense to talk about the subspace where function is somehow bounded by one or something.
And sort of the following should make sense somehow for all functions on your space something like this should make sense.
So in particular one basically sees that any point has to give rise to some sort of valuation map.
So there are now three approaches which have this requirement.
So some of this approach of rigid analytic geometry take X rig which is a set of closed points of X.
So somehow if X in X is a closed point
and somehow there is a and say this is just affine then we get
so this corresponds to some X corresponds to some M so the maximum ideal.
And we get a map to R mod M which is some finite field extension of K.
And the norm on K extends to any finite extension so we get a natural map to the positive fields and this gives evaluation corresponding to this closed point.
Yes I wanted to say this but I forgot.
I assume throughout that all my rings are complete.
Some of the whole theory will not change when one replaces a ring by its completion.
I take the freedom to assume that they are complete.
Okay.
Then there is Berkowitz theory where one considers certain norm maps from during R to the positive fields.
So extending the valuation which you already have on K.
So this gives you more points and I will later in an example describe these points but there is something still more general that one can do.
One allows basically all possibly higher rank valuations.
Right I will explain the comparison to other theories later.
But again in the situation that I will perfect your spaces I don't know whether these comparisons still work.
So let me start by defining what Huber calls a valuation.
So let R be some ring.
Then a valuation on R is a map which I mean Huber writes.
It should usually be called a norm but I stick with Huber's terminology of calling it a valuation.
So it's a map from R to gamma union zero where gamma is some totally ordered billion group.
So for example it could be the positive fields and satisfying the following requirements.
So the value of zero, zero, the value of one is one.
The value of X plus Y is at most the maximum of the values of X and Y.
So somehow I think he calls it valuation because one is used to talking about higher rank valuations but one is not used to talk about higher rank norms.
Now if R is the topological ring as it will be in the cases that we are interested in then this map is called continuous.
For all gamma and gamma the set of all X and R such that the absolute value is less than gamma.
This is open.
Gamma is not necessarily the value group but I will now define a notion of equivalence which somehow does not see the value group.
In this context let me make several definitions.
Let gamma absolute value subset of gamma be the subgroup generated by all absolute value of X, X and R such that they are not zero.
And what else do I need?
An absolute value has its support which is the set of all X and R which have absolute value zero.
This is a prime ideal and the last thing I need is that somehow any valuation factors as you first project to the quotient by the support
and then you can even take as this now integrals the quotient field of this and then there is a norm now to gamma zero from there.
And let me call this K.
Then the norm gives some rise to this whether you field K but it additionally gives rise to a valuation sub-ring of K which is a set of all X and K such that the absolute value is at most one.
So this subset of K is a valuation sub-ring.
Okay.
And now we say that two valuations norm and norm prime are equivalent if the equivalent conditions are satisfied.
So one way to say it is that there is an isomorphism between these subgroups such that
the obvious diagram commutes so we have R mapping to this is ending.
But there are other ways of saying the same thing.
So it's also equivalent to saying that the support is the same and the valuation rings that they define are the same which then of course live in the same quotient field.
And third condition is that the absolute value for A and B and R, the absolute value of A is bigger than B
if and only if the same is true for the other valuation.
Okay. So and some of the topological spaces that will underlie these locally-ringed topological spaces are now certain equivalence classes of continuous valuations on these rings.
And nobody finds such spaces in very great generality but we will not need this utmost generality and I will specialize them into the case that is of interest to us now.
So that's what he calls the Tate k-algebra.
This is a topological k-algebra R and one has to put some assumption on how this topology looks like.
And the following assumption is put by Huber.
So he assumes that there exists in subring R0 and R such that A times R0 was a invertible element of k such that this forms a basis of open neighborhoods of zero.
So for example you can take R, the ring of convergent power series and several variables.
So meaning the set of those sums, A, I1 up to I, so A, G to the I, I bigger than zero, using multi-index notation such that the coefficients go to zero.
And then you can take R0 inside it just as the subring of those power series with integral coefficients and I forgot to introduce it, k0 is a set of all elements which have absolute may or most one.
No, it's, no.
And second is that an infinite k-algebra is a pair, so somehow spaces in Huber's setup are not associated to a single ring but to a pair of rings.
And so this is a pair R, R plus where R state and R plus in subset of R upper nodes which is defined to be a set of power-bounded elements.
And R is an open and integrally closed subring.
But in fact in all cases of relevance in rigid analytic geometry, it will be just the ring of power-bounded elements, so it's not of great importance.
And the last part is that such a thing is called, this is of topologically finite type.
So I just write t, f, t.
If R is a quotient of such a thing for some n, so that's just a kind of algebra that appear in classical rigid analytic geometry and also R plus is really just not.
Okay.
And again one need not put the assumption that R is complete but it does not change the theory of undust, so we assume from now on that R plus is complete.
Okay.
And now we can define the topological space associated to such a thing.
Okay.
The finite k-algebra.
This implies that R plus is equal to R naught?
It does not imply it's a condition.
I've put this condition.
So some of there is a general definition of what a topologically finite type algebra is and in this case some of it boils down to this condition.
The finite k-algebra.
Okay.
So then we define a space called the attic spectrum of R R plus and it's defined to be a set of all continuous variations.
There's a property that on these integral elements they are at most one.
And you take these up to equivalence.
Okay.
So this is some set.
And we want to end out with the topology.
The topology can be defined in the following way.
So first for any x and x we write f to the absolute value of f at x for the corresponding valuation.
And so the topology is spaces of open neighborhoods given by the rational subsets.
And they are defined as an open subset depending on certain functions f1, fn and g.
And it's a set of all those x and x such that for all i the absolute value of f i of x is at most the absolute value of g of x where the f's are certain elements of R that generate R and g is just any element of R.
So if one is used to Berkowitz's series and one might wonder that one puts a non-strict inequality here and this is supposed to define an open subset.
But I will give a justification for using a non-strict inequality here later.
So, okay.
And in fact, it turns out that the topological space is somehow very scheme like in a sense.
That's not ideal, yes.
Sorry.
Well, you can just always add the g to the f's because this condition for g is always satisfied.
Okay, so this is a somewhat scheme like topological space.
So it really feels like doing algebraic geometry if one is working with them.
And for this, let me recall the following definition.
A topological space x is called spectral.
The following equivalent conditions are satisfied.
The first is that x is topologically isomorphic to the spec term of some ring.
Okay, so it is very scheme like.
The second condition is something which does not somehow use this strange definition.
It can be written as an inverse limit of finite not spaces.
It's still maybe not very concrete.
And there's another way of saying it is that x is quasi-compact.
I will just write qc and has a basis of quasi-compact open subsets.
Basis for topology of quasi-compact open subsets which is stable under intersections.
And every irreducible subset has a unique generic point.
Every irreducible closed subset has a unique generic point.
So, and for example, one can take the rational subsets in definition three.
Okay.
Well, somehow there is a paper where this equivalent is proved and this paper proceeds in the following way.
First of all, for any finite not space, it constructs some example and it does so in a functorial way.
And then you can just pass to the inverse limit.
I just don't think there is any relevance of this ring.
Well, there's no ring now.
But somehow this implies that x is in particular quasi-compact, quasi-separated.
Meaning that the intersection of two quasi-compact opens is again quasi-compact open.
It's again quasi-compact.
And it's t0, so it has some nice properties.
Some of which will be used later.
And in particular, there's also a good theory of constructible subsets, some of the topological space.
So, moreover, somehow this space is somehow not empty.
It could be that there are no variations at all and then it would be very interesting.
But so, it is large in some ways.
So, for example, if x is zero, then r is already the zero ring.
And certainly if f is an element such that the absolute value of f of x is nonzero for all x and x,
then f is invertible.
And certainly if f is an r such that its absolute value is at most one everywhere,
then f is in the suffering of positive elements.
And now we have associated to some such a finite k-algebra or some topological space.
And now we want to endow it with some structure sheave.
And so, now we want to define the structure sheave.
And the definition is as follows.
So, it's somewhat enough to define the structure sheave on rational subsets.
So, let us choose r not in r as above.
So, somehow such that it somehow defines the topology on r.
And then we consider the following algebra.
So, both of these are some sub-algebras of r where you invert g.
You invert with a topology making basis of neighborhoods of zero.
And then we let x of u or x plus of u be the completion.
And one might wonder about the notation as the definition obviously involves some choices.
But we have the following.
Proposition is that first of this is a s defined.
It's an affine k-algebra again.
And secondly, it has the following universal property for any complete.
I mean, I always assume complete, but here it really becomes important.
For any complete, affine k-algebra ss plus with map from r plus to ss plus
such that the corresponding map on spaces factors over u.
Then there exists a unique map from o x of u or x plus of u to ss plus.
Some are making the obvious diagram commute.
And hence it really does only depend on u.
No, I don't yet, but it is true.
If you say hence, then you still need something.
I mean, otherwise this property will be too weak to uniquely characterize.
Because you consider those things factors for you, so you can just have a bigger one.
I mean, this universal property in its statement only involves the subset u and nothing else.
No, but it doesn't characterize uniquely.
It seems to be something missing to say that this universal property is really complex uniquely.
Because you did not say that this is an example of something where this factorizes to u.
Yeah, you're probably right.
And sorry.
Okay, and so enough for any u and x open, you find o x of u to be the inverse limit of all w contained in u,
which are rational of o x of w.
And same for o x plus.
And then there is a basic problem that it's not in general known.
That this o x is actually a sheaf, so this is only a pre-sheaf here.
But there is a foreign theorem of Foube.
I mean, it probably should not be true in general.
But there is a following theorem saying that if any such ring of convergent power series on a ball somewhere over your r is in a series for all n, then o x is a sheaf.
So some of the basic problem is satisfied with r's of topologically finite type.
The basic problem is somehow that completion is not so well behaved when you are in a non-Syrian situation.
And later we will somehow be trying to associate spaces to such so-called perfectoid algebras which do not satisfy this theorem,
but we will still be able to prove that this o x is a sheaf.
Topologically ring value achieved.
So somehow the maps are strict also some of it up here.
Which rings?
I'm not sure.
If it's topologically finite type, then it's of course just a usual case, so our deals are close.
So in Italian that means algebras.
Yes.
Okay, let me say a few words before making a short break.
About these pre-sheafs o x and o x plus in general.
Even if o x is not a sheaf, the following stay true for any x and x.
The valuation extends to o x x, the local ring.
And o x x plus is a set of those f's and o x x was absolute value at most one.
So it's a valuation sub ring.
Then you have the residue field k of x of this local ring.
And you have the image of o x x plus plus.
And then this is a valuation sub ring, of course.
So somehow at each point of this attic space you get a residue field and in this residue field you also get a corresponding valuation sub ring.
And in fact it's true that for all u and x open this sheaf o x plus can be reconstructed from o x somehow by saying that it's those functions such that for all x and u the absolute value is at most one.
And so in particular for any x we get some more x, a certain pre-sheaf o x and certain maps the absolute value at x for any x and x.
So certain triple.
And then the definition is that if o x is a sheaf then this is called an affine rate attic space.
And let me make a break here for say 15 minutes.
Let me continue. So what we have done up till now is we have started with some kind of topological algebras and we have associated some kind of local ring spaces to them and now we want to glue them.
And for this we consider the category of triples as above.
So we have some topological space x, some o x and some valuations for any x and x.
So where x o x is a local ring topological space but in fact o x is a sheaf of topological algebras.
And f maps the absolute value of f at x is a valuation on the local ring and it's even continuous valuation.
And they form a category in a natural way and then we define an attic space is such a triple that is locally on x affine rate.
Affine rate is such a triple.
So finally we have defined what an attic space is and somehow one has a category of such complete.
Let me stress this affine rate k algebras and in there one has the ones where o x is a sheaf.
These are now equivalent to the affine rate attic spaces over k and of course they are then a subcategory of the category of attic spaces over k.
And now let me draw a picture in a simple example.
So we take the ring r to be just convergent power series on the disk in one variable and as the integral is suffering really just the power series with integral coefficients.
And then the picture looks as follows.
We have some points then we have some point here then we have lots of arcs as in the Birkwich picture summer.
Then it can also end somewhere in the middle and around this point let me zoom in.
So we have this point and we have some arcs going out and additionally we have one point here for each arc going out of this thing.
The same thing happens somewhere at each other branching point.
Let me enumerate all of these points.
So I take the same enumeration as Birkwich uses except that there will be some additional ones at the end.
So first of all, so I assume that k is complete and algebraic enclosed for simplicity.
First we can take a point of absolute value at most one.
Then we have some maps that sense the power series to the evaluation at x which is then some element in k bar and then you can compose with the norm.
So these are some of the points which I draw on the outside here.
So then there are the points of type two which is some for example such a branching point or anything else which lies on this ray.
So let me do both of them together.
So again you fix some point in k bar of absolute value at most one but additionally you choose some real number between zero and one.
And then you can produce what is often called the Gauss norm.
So you send a power series which now you rewrite centered around x and you send this to the supremum of the absolute value of an times r to the n.
So and it turns out that this can also be written as a supremum overall y such that the absolute value to distance to x is at most r of the absolute value of f at y.
So somehow here f gets mapped to the absolute value of f at x.
In particular this depends only on the disc around x of radius r.
So this means that for any disc inside this picture we get a new point and somehow any point x is connected with the ray which is the interval of length one to one point which is some of the same for all points because this disc of radius one will always be the same.
And somehow for any point you get such a branch which goes from this point to there but they start to merge at some points depending on the distance.
Then there are some rather strange points.
If you have a decreasing sequence of discs such that the intersection of all the i is empty such things can exist for example for Cp.
Then we get a point f maps to the infirmum over all i of the supremum over all x and di of the absolute value of f at x.
So somehow going the other way somewhere from the interior now to the outside it may happen that somehow you get stuck in the middle here somewhere.
But the most interesting points now are those which they have type 5 which are the ones that are around this point there for example.
We get them in the following way.
We take the following totally order to be in group.
We take the positive fields but we introduce the second factor which I call gamma to the z.
So as a group it's just a copy of the integers and we require that this new variable gamma lies strictly between any real number less than one and one.
Then we can send such a power series to the maximum of absolute value of an times gamma to the n.
And again this defines a point and somehow this is sort of of the same sort as in two or three but except that we are now taking this parameter r infinitismally close to one.
So this means that somehow on this line here it lies infinitismally close to this point here.
So that's what I wanted to draw here and so we have a similar picture around any point of type 2.
I should say what type 2 means.
Two corresponds to the case that r is in the value group of k and case 3 corresponds to the case that is not the case.
And then one easily checks that somehow a branching occurs at some point on such a ray if and only if it's of type 2.
And at such branching points one gets for any ray going out one gets an additional point of type 5.
So it seems that there are lots of points and maybe one is no clue of what they are good for but I will give now several other ways in which this topological space naturally appears.
Somehow in nature.
So first let me give the theorem that compares widget analytic varieties to edict spaces and that's the following.
So there is a fully faithful function in the category of widget analytic varieties over k to the category of edict spaces over k.
So x maps to x add and it maps the widget analytic variety associated to some usual tate algebra to this edict thing.
So for any r not of topologically finite type.
And one may wonder what the image is and of course one has to put a final assumption on those edict spaces.
One would expect that the image of this should be exactly in the edict spaces locally of finite type over k.
So meaning that it's locally spar r or not where r or not is topologically finite type.
That this should be some of the image.
And obviously the image is contained in it but in general there are some strange ways to glue edict spaces which are not present in the widget analytic world.
But as soon as you assume that your space is quasi separated you get an equivalence.
But basically everything is quasi separated so it's not such a huge restriction.
So now let x be a quasi separated widget analytic variety.
Then the following nice statements are true.
So widget analytic varieties carry a natural growth and deep topology of so called admissible covers and admissible open subsets.
And the nice thing about edict spaces is that you get a very convenient reinterpretation of what an admissible open is.
It turns out that the set of quasi admissible opens in x is just the same as the set of all quasi compact opens in the associated edict space.
Sending any u somewhere to the intersection of u is x.
And the converse function I denote by u maps to u tilde.
So recall that any classical point gives you an edict point so in this way you can consider the classical points as a subset of the edict space.
And so this intersection makes sense.
The problem better is that certain ui and x cover from admissible cover if and only if certain the associated subsets of the edict space cover x at just in the usual sense.
So in other words this language of admissible opens and admissible coverings is just reinterpreted just as opens and covers in the edict world.
Very nice.
And so it follows that sheaves over the growth in the topos of x are just the same as sheaves over the underlying topological space of the edict space.
And in fact this already determines x at uniquely if you make a slight technical assumption that it should be sober.
So there is some out of the theory of admissible subsets it's even possible to directly cook up this edict space.
And let me also give an example of how you see this non-admissible in the example above.
The typical example of a non-admissible cover would be to cover some of this disk which we consider so basically the subset of all x which have absolute value at most one.
You can cover this by the set of all x which have absolute value one or plus a union over all reals less than one of the set where the absolute values at most are.
But this should not form an admissible cover because left hand side should be connected.
And so what happens in this picture here is that somehow the subset where the absolute value is equal to one is somehow this thing.
And then the other thing gives you increasing balls here.
And if you look at this now at this point then you will get larger and larger subsets here.
You will get this subset but this one point is not in there.
Precisely because somehow the absolute value of x which is this gamma is strictly between one and zero for all less than one.
Okay.
Oh, sorry.
Sorry, but is the topology in the case of the disk?
Did you say so?
It's a tree or it's more complicated?
The total what?
What is the topology finally on the?
Well, somehow.
Well, I mean it's generated by these rational subsets but for example if you look at this subset here then this is topologically the same as the spectrum.
Of the a1 over the residue field kappa.
So kappa is the residue field.
Okay.
So meaning that this is somehow a generic point and it specializes to all the other points which are somehow from the close points of an fn line.
And so for example if you just take out this one point this will somehow be open at that part.
Okay.
And there is a second way to construct this underlying topological space of an attic space which is to use the following theorem of Renault.
That if you are only interested in quasi-compact and quasi-separated rigid analytic varieties.
Okay.
Then each of them admits a formal model saying a quasi-compact admissible form of scheme.
Over some of the ring of integers which is k0.
But of course such a formal model is not unique and any tool somehow you have to localize by the category of admissible blow-ups.
Meaning blow-ups that only change the special fiber in a sense.
So let me denote this function by x maps to x rig.
And using the equivalence for rigid analytic varieties that's all the same as a quasi-compact attic space locally of a finite type over k.
So it gives you also an attic space.
And then there exists a continuous specialization map.
From the underlying topological space of the attic space to x.
And so it's continuous, not anti-continuous as in Berger-Witz's setting.
And if you take x any given quasi-compact quasi-separated attic space locally of a finite type.
Then it admits formal models and so the following does make sense.
You can look at the inverse limit over all formal models.
Of the underlying space of x.
So the specialization maps give you a map to this inverse limit and it turns out it is just in homeomorphism.
So how does this look like in the example?
So you can, one formal model would be just to take the spiff of this thing and then the special fiber is just the a1 over the residue field.
And how does the specialization map look like?
So you have this generic point and then this strange point around and then some other bunch of stuff.
And this just maps to the a1 over k which is again this point by contracting all rays.
And hence you see that such a subset for example should be closed.
And if you think about it and this precisely tells you that you should put non-strict inequalities to define open subsets and strict inequalities to define closed subsets.
And also what happens in this procedure?
Some of you have one formal model which is the a1 and then you're allowed to do some blow-ups and so this introduces some p1 here and then some additional p1 and so on.
And so this builds up the tree somehow.
And they introduce many more p1s and some of the strict transform of any such p1 somehow survives up to the inverse limit
and it gives you precisely some of these p1s which you have around any such point of type 2.
So some of the points of type 2 are precisely the ones that specialize to a generic point and some form a model and then somehow get always mapped to this generic point.
And yes, okay.
Can you just see that this is the dual graph of what appears here?
Why the dual graph? There's no dual thing.
Yeah, but I mean you can really topologically say what happens without sort of talking about dual stuff and so on.
And somehow, yeah, somehow the attic language is compatible with the formal models in a very nice way.
For example, this specialization map is continuous, but even more Huber defines attic spaces in a much more general setup which also includes formal models for rigid spaces.
And so and then passing to the generic fiber as in the sense of Renault really is passing to the generic fiber somehow.
Okay.
And so finally I want to say a few words about the comparison with Berkowitz spaces and for this I need the following definition.
An attic space.
X is called out T-H-U-T, T-A-U-T.
It's quasi-separated and for any quasi-compact open UNX also the closure is quasi-compact.
So that's some technical condition, but it turned out that I mean most spaces that you will encounter in nature are towed, but there are now some examples which occur in nature where you have really non-towed attic spaces.
And then we have the following theorem.
Yes, there is an equivalence of categories between the category of Halstorff, strictly K-analytic Berkowitz spaces.
With the category of towed, rigid analytic towed here, rigid analytic varieties for example, over K or then what is some of the same as towed attic spaces locally of finite type.
So sending some of our Berkowitz space, let me denote it by X, to the attic space.
Okay, and then there is the topological map from the underlying topological space of the Berkowitz space to the attic space, but this is not continuous.
So somehow the image is just the subset of rank one variations.
But there is a better map, so there is a retraction from the attic space to the Berkowitz space, which identifies the Berkowitz space with the maximal Halstorff quotient of X.
So continuous, no, identifying maximal Halstorff quotient of XR.
And so how does this look like in the example?
Okay, so let me draw it again.
So in the attic world you have some of these and then the whole tree and again some strange points here.
And the Berkowitz looks basically the same except that it doesn't have these strange points.
So you just have some of this tree, nice that it is.
So this contracts any point of type two with all points of type five around.
So I mean, and then it has to somehow because this Berkowitz space is Halstorff and some of these points of type five lines in topological closure of these points, any map to Halstorff topological space has to contract them.
And that's precisely what it does.
So in a sense one can somehow reconstruct this Berkowitz space from the attic space.
Okay, and so the last thing for today is to explain somehow the fibers of this map to the Berkowitz space, more or less.
Or in other words, giving a different interpretation to the points of an attic space.
And for this, let me assume that X is a phenoid.
And in fact, we can go back to the complete generality, not even assuming that X is a chiffon.
Okay, so for any point X and X, we have associated somehow a pair consisting of the residue field of X and a valuation subring.
And this gives rise to the following definition, that an affinuate field, some unclassical algebraic geometry points are more or less maps to fields.
And so in the attic geometry, the point will more or less be a map to an affinuate field.
So an affinuate field is a pair k, k plus, where k is a non-archimedean field.
And k plus and k is an open valuation subring.
And again, we will often only work in the complete case, but these are not in general complete, so somehow.
No, I mean, yeah, I should say the pobont elements.
Okay, so then we have the following proposition.
Let R R plus be an affinuate k algebra.
And then the points of this attic space.
I'm bijection with maps R R plus to k, k plus.
Where
k, k plus is an affinuate field, complete affinuate field.
And I mean, you can always make some of the fields larger and to exclude this case, we sort of assume that the quotient field of the image of R and k stands.
And so somehow in Berkowitz's theory, a point is simply given by a map to a complete non-archimedean field.
And here we sort of additionally have to remember this valuation subring in there.
And so somehow the fibers of this map to the Berkowitz space are precisely somehow parameterized by the valuation subrings inside of this corresponding non-archimedean field.
And using this description of points is also easy to say when one point specializes to another point in this attic space.
So let me recall the definition of specialization of points.
Say x specializes to y, which is written x somewhat greater than y.
If y is in the topological closure of x.
And then we have the following proposition that if x, y are in the attic spectrum of r, r plus, then corresponding somehow to maps k, k plus or k prime, k prime plus.
Then x specializes to y if and only if first of all they give rise to the same non-archimedean field.
So somehow if you have such an isomorphism here, commuting with the maps from r.
In some of the valuations we are suppressing corresponding to x is more general in the sense, which means that it's larger.
So this way and so we see that in particular any non-archimedean field admits the set of power-bounded elements in k as valuation suppressing.
And this is the one that corresponds to the unique rank one valuation.
And one sees that for any k there is a unique generic point which specializes to any other point for the same x, for the same field k.
And for any x and x corresponding to rank n.
Valuation, the set of all y such that y specializes to x, it's the wrong way.
So this forms a chain of lengths precisely n.
So in the example somewhere there was this generic point and the special points around it.
This one was the rank one valuation and there's only one point above it in itself.
So the chain is of lengths one and for the other point somewhere there's precisely this one point which specializes to it and you get a chain of lengths two which is also the rank of this valuation.
So that's a more general picture about attic spaces and that's it for today.
Thank you for watching.
