Hi, everyone. Thanks for inviting me here. It's great to see all of you. So yeah, so the title of the talk is self-similar solutions to extension and approximation problems.
But the real trick behind the talk is that you wouldn't look for self-similar solutions. You wouldn't look for non-smooth solutions unless you couldn't find smooth solutions to whatever problem you're looking for.
And so really the trick of the talk is that we want to look at problems where there aren't smooth solutions and show that sometimes there are still non-smooth solutions to those problems.
So it's about finding wild maps, wild solutions to extension and approximation problems that have structure at a lot of different scales.
And so this is sort of originates in a construction of Kaufman from the 70s of rank one maps from the cube to the square.
And then I want to apply it to a couple other contexts. I want to apply it to topologically non-trivial low rank maps. And I want to apply it to construct maps that have no signed area.
And so let me start just by describing Kaufman's construction. So Kaufman constructed an example of a Lipschitz map f from the cube to the square, which is surjective and where the rank of the derivative is at most one almost everywhere.
So this is impossible for smooth maps, because if you have a smooth map you have Sard Serum. Sard Serum tells you that if you have a smooth map where the rank of the derivative is at most one, then the measure of the image is zero.
And so the map can't be surjective.
But regardless, there is a self similar map.
And so let me show you that construction.
The idea of the construction, we want to construct a map from cube.
So here's our cube.
Move that down a little bit. We want to construct a map from the cube to the square.
Let's call our cube cube. Let's call our square D.
We want to construct a map which is surjective and where the derivative has ranked one almost everywhere.
And so here's what we're going to do. We're going to take the cube, and we're going to decompose it into a grid. We're going to decompose the cube into a four by four by four grid.
We're going to take the square, and we're going to decompose it into an eight by eight grid.
And the key property of these numbers is that if you have a cube, if you have a four by four grid, four by four by four grid of cubes, it has 64 cubes if you have an eight by eight grid of squares it has 64 squares.
And so what we can do is we can define subcubes q1 up to q64.
These are going to be cubes of side one eighth centered in each of the 64 cubes of the grid.
And because this is a four by four by four grid, the cubes in the grid have side length one quarter. And so if I stick a one eighth by one eighth by one eighth cube in the middle, then it just fits in the middle with a little bit of room around it like so.
And so I have 64 of these cubes of side length one eighth.
Likewise, I have 64 squares in this grid. Let's call them D one up to D 64 also side one eighth.
Inside of each of the inside of each of these squares I'm going to define I'm going to name the center points I'm going to call those say P one through P 64 are the grid centers.
And then I'm going to define a map. I want to define a rank one map from the complement of the cubes of eyes to the one the one skeleton of the grid.
So I'm going to let F the map from the complement of the cubes to the one skeleton of the grid.
Actually, sorry, not the one scale in the grid. I'm just going to map this to the grid.
So that the boundary of the big cube maps to the center. Let's call that center P maps to the center of the square.
And the boundaries of each of the little cubes.
To the center of the grid cells, the center of the corresponding grid cell.
I have the same number of cubes as I have squares and so I can like I so so that so that's easy to do. And then what I'm going to do with everything else is I just, all I need is for this to be a Lipschitz map, which is rank one on the, the cube with all these
drilled in it. And so all I do is I just draw a line segment from the center of the square to the centers of each of the little squares.
And I send the complement of the little cubes to that graph. And so that's rank one that's Lipschitz.
It's it's it's it's it's so far so good.
Now, that leaves the question of how to define the map on the, the little, the, the, the, the Q sub i's on these little cubes.
And so what we do we what we do is we define F on Q sub i by rescaling
the, remember, our original map sent sent sent the boundary of the big cube to the center of the big square and the boundaries of the little cubes to the centers of the little squares.
So we can we can let F on Q i be a rescaling
which is to say we're going to take we're going to define a map on these little cubes by dividing each of the little cubes into a four by four by four grid,
dividing each of the little squares into an eight by eight by into an eight by eight grid.
And then we're going to do the same thing on the little cube that we did on the big cube, we're going to send the boundary of the little cube to the center of the little square.
And we're going to have little tiny cubes in each grid cell of the little cube.
And we're going to send the boundaries of those to the centers of the tiny squares here.
And then everything between the little cube and the tiny cubes is going to go to a graph, connecting the center of the little square to the center of the tiny squares.
And so, once we do that, that defines the map on each of the Q sub i's.
That defines, you know, this is so so so now we have a map which is with the which is which is which is Lipchitz, and has a rank one derivative, and it's defined on the big cube minus 64 squared tiny cubes.
Is this okay so far.
Okay.
So so so so so so so we can do this again and again.
Repeat on tiny cubes.
And so on and so forth to define to define a map on this big cube minus a collection of smaller and smaller cubes.
So this defines F on
if it's defined outside a cantor set
at the end of this concept construction.
And furthermore, because of the way that we chose our cubes because of the sizes of our cubes, our cubes all had side one eighth, our squares all had side one eighth.
So if we do this rescaling or rescaling the domain by a factor of eight, we're rescaling the target by a factor of eight. And so the Lipchitz constant stays the same.
The Lipchitz constant
constant stays the same
at each scale.
So F is defined outside a cantor set, and it's Lipchitz outside that cantor set. So we extend F by continuity.
And then what's the result.
We have a map, which is rank one outside which is which is to get a Lipchitz map
which is rank one
outside the cantor set
but the cantor set has measure zero so this is a map which is rank one almost everywhere.
And the image of this map. Well, as we go down to smaller and smaller grid sizes.
The image contains the grid centers of smaller and smaller grids. So the image is dense.
And so the math is subjective.
So this is Kaufman's construction it's a subjective Lipchitz map from the cube to the square, which has derivative which is rank one almost everywhere.
But yeah but but but but it's subjective.
Is this okay so far is this construction okay.
Okay, so now
it reminds one a little bit of the devil staircase construction.
Is that like the cantor Lebesgue function. Yes, or is this completely unrelated I mean there also you have.
You do something in an iterative fashion.
Yeah, yeah. So you say so so so so you aim with the cantor Lebesgue function.
You don't get a Lipchitz function at the end of it because, because the scale and the domain and the target is different.
But yeah, you you you you you you you define a map outside some regions, and then you define it in those regions and outside some smaller regions and so on and so forth so forth you define your map and eventually you define your map on the
a cantor Joseph.
Um, so yeah so so this is this is Kaufman's construction.
And there are a lot of flexibility here, the, I mean, you can use you can use you can use different domains different targets, and the key fact here that makes this work is really that the dimension of the the domain is bigger than the
So that you can do this so that you can have 64 cubes on one side and 64 squares on the other side, all of the same size.
But yeah, so there's a lot of flexibility here, but there's also a limit to the amount of flexibility you can have here because you can't really get very interesting topology out of this it always it's always going to factor through a tree.
And you can prove this, you can prove that rank maps that are that are that are lipchits and where the derivative is ranked one almost everywhere, have to factors ruin our tree if M is simply connected and F is a rank one lipchits map.
And then there is an R tree T, so that F is a composition of a map from M to T, and a map from T to amp. So, you can't do you so you can't have very interesting topology here because it all has to factor through something contractible.
But then you can ask, okay. Oh, sorry, I should say so so so so so so why is this why why why does why does the map have to factors through a tree.
Roughly the reason is that, well, lipchits maps don't have to satisfy Sarge's theorem while you can get the while while the image doesn't have to measure zero lipchits maps kind of do have to satisfy Stokes's theorem.
The image of every closed curve has to have areas zero because you know, if you have a simply if you have a closed curve and simply connected manifold and bounds of disk.
And then if you look at the image of that disk under a map with where where the derivative has ranked rank one Jacobian is zero and so it has to collapse to something with areas zero.
The boundary of that curve the boundary of that disk has to collapse to a curve that bounds region with area zero, which means that you either that curve has to have backtracking I mean if that curve goes out along some path, then has to come back along
that same path in order to in order to guarantee the measures in order to guarantee that's filled by something with measure zero.
And so, the boundary of a disk has to collapse on to a tree.
And you can do it since since that works for every disk, really the whole map has to collapse down.
This quality for measure one.
There may be exceptional is not really.
Yeah okay so so so so so you have to be careful about, you know, if you if you if you put some metric on your manifold, where you're simply connected but you're not lipchits simply connected.
And then then then then yeah there might there there there there might be there might be other maps. Yeah.
Is that okay.
More or less yeah I guess I'm still worried at this point but I think you're right.
So, so, so, so, so I guess in the statement I should really say that if you have simply connected manifold with a with a Riemannian metric.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
So yeah so rank one maps are our topic topologically trivial, but remarkably.
The same is not true for higher rank maps. So, what I want to say, so let's define if we have elliptic map to an N manifold where the rank of the derivative is at most n minus one, almost everywhere.
Let's call that co rank one the rank is at least one less than the dimension of the target.
Then stuff of anger and I constructed co rank one maps that are that are that are not normal topic co rank one maps that are topologically non trivial in dimensions above four so the smallest dimension this works in is that you can construct a map from s five s four, which
is co rank one, but not no homotopic.
And again, this is something you can't do. Again, this is something you can't do with a smooth map.
Again because of start start serum if you have a smooth map from s five s four, where the rank of the derivative is three.
And the image has measure zero, which means it misses a point on this on the sphere, and if you map that misses a point on the sphere, then it's homotopically trivial that is contractable.
How does this work. Well, it follows from the following lemma that if alpha from SM to SN is a map with m greater than n, then the suspension of alpha extends to a cool rank one map on the ball.
The original map is rank and is full rank.
You suspend it that has ranked and plus one, and that extends to a map on the ball, which still has ranked and plus one.
And so, let me just first establish a little bit of notation.
You know, if you have a top logical space, the suspension is the double cone over that space, we can write it as X cross an interval where, and then modulo and equivalence relation where we identify all the points in X cross zero, and we identify all the points in X cross one.
In particular, the suspension of the M sphere is the M plus one sphere.
And we can apply this same construction to a map if we have a map from M from SM to SN, then the suspension of that map is the map from SM plus one to SN plus one.
And we can add a point X comma T in this product structure to alpha of X comma T. And the way that I though the way that I want the way that the way that I want to draw this is I want to think about this in terms of cylindrical coordinates.
So the idea is that we have, here's our fear SM.
The suspension, so we add two points, one on top one on bottom, and we cone the sphere off to those two points to get SM plus one.
This is kind of cylindrically symmetric. So if we want to put coordinates on it a natural way to put coordinates on it is to write points on this.
And then the suspension as basically radius and angle and a Z coordinate, where the radius is in our, and the, and the, the angle is the direction out on the equator, while the equator is SM, so that's SM, and the Z coordinate is in our.
And then the suspension of this map, if we have a map from SM to SN.
Then the suspension of that map is going to be the map that sends this point in polar coordinates to
the point in polar coordinates that you get by applying your original map to that equator factor. So, so, so, so, so, so I'm going to use suspensions as sort of maps that can be written in polar coordinates in this way but in polar coordinates.
As a map that sends row theta Z to row alpha theta Z.
And so, the thing I want to show is that if I have a map like this, then I can extend it to, and then I can extend it to the ball.
In a way that doesn't increase the rank.
Okay.
So how do we do that. Well, again, we're going to do something very similar to what we did in Calhomans in Calhomans example.
So,
I'm going to take.
I'm going to take my, my domain, remember my domain is going to be a ball of dimension and plus one. So let's call this q.
I'm going to have my range. And again, my range is going to be a ball of dimension and plus one. So this is m plus one, this is n plus one.
And I'm going to try to do the same sort of thing that I did before.
So, since m is greater than n, there exists K and L such that to K is strictly less than L, and such that K to the power of m plus one is bigger than L to the power of n plus one.
And I'm going to let capital N be L to the n plus one.
And then what I'm going to do is I'm going to divide the domain into a K by K by K grid.
I'm going to divide the target into an L by L by L grid.
Then by, by my choice of K and L, the number of cells in this grid is bigger than the number of cells in this grid.
But also, K is smaller than L.
So what I can do is I can do the same thing that I did before. We can choose n cubes of side one over L.
Let's call them q one up to q n centered in the grid cells.
Those are the same sort of cubes that we saw before, or they are smaller than the grid cells.
And I have likewise n one over L cubes d one up to d n, which are the grid cells.
Now, what I'm going to define is I'm going to define again a map from the complement of these holes, this cube with all these holes in it to the to the disk.
And
I'm going to do that so that
I'm going to define data
from
q minus the union of the qi to the
I guess the co the co dimension one skeleton of the target. So that's going to be this end skeleton here.
Which is
Lipschitz
because the target is n dimensional, it's going to be rank one rank n.
And what we're going to ask this to do on the boundary is that we're going to ask to sense the boundary of the big cube should be homotopic to the suspension of alpha.
And
on each little cube
should be a rescaling
of what it does on the big cube.
So you don't have to send boundary to boundary right you have to avoid this issue right.
We do we want to send so so so so we're so remember alpha so so so I'm thinking of alpha is a map from the boundary of q to the sorry I guess the extension of alpha is a map from the boundary of q to the boundary of the disk.
So you need boundary to go to the boundary or not.
Yes, the, the, the outer boundary of the cube goes to the outer boundary of the, which is an impossible in dimension in the previous example of Kaufman.
Yeah, in the previous example of Calcman it doesn't work because there's no map from the sphere to the circle.
Okay.
But here we're starting with a with a map with an element of a higher homotopy group of spheres. And so we can send the boundary of the cube to the boundary.
Okay. Yeah.
Okay.
And so, so yeah so we're sending the boundary of the big cube to the boundary of the square we're sending that sending the boundary of each of the little cubes to the boundary of one of the little squares, and the only the now there's an obstruction here because of there because
there's some topology, because we want to we want this to be defined on the cube minus all these little cubes the complement of all these little cubes.
There's a topological obstruction.
And you can, you can, you can either you can either do some calculations, you can, you can show that because this is a suspension, this topological obstruction vanishes.
Or you can actually, you can you can give a very nice. There's so this so this is a construction due to Goldstein.
Hi Washington Panka.
To show how to construct this.
This map.
The basic idea is that, well, so you have this cube.
With a bunch of holes in it.
This is this is homeomorphic to a ball of the same dimension, where we just line up the holes along the, the, the, the north south axis of the ball.
And that ball is now cylindrically symmetric. That ball is now cylindrically symmetric so so we can be so so if we have points if we have a point in this ball.
We can identify that point we can write that point with coordinates, row theta z. And then we can define a map, which does the suspension, which sends throw theta z to row alpha theta z.
So one app is going to send the boundary of the sphere to the boundary of a lower dimensional sphere by the suspension of alpha by sigma alpha.
It's going to send each of these little holes here to a bunch of little holes in the lower dimensional ball.
Again, it's going to send the boundary of each of these holes to the boundary of each of these holes by the by sigma alpha.
And then this is homeomorphic to a lower dimensional cube with a bunch of square holes in a grid shape.
And then there's a natural retraction from the cube minus a bunch of holes to just a square grid that we're interested in.
So if you use composition, or you take the q the domain with a bunch of holes, you arrange those holes along a line, you use cylindrical coordinates to map from here to here.
And then you rearrange the holes again and retract to the grid.
That does exactly what we want on the complement of the holes on the on on the cube minus all these little holes, that's going to be, or at least that's going to be homotopic to our map beta.
Okay.
And so, once we have that, well, now we've defined a map on the big cube minus a bunch of little cubes.
And furthermore, we've defined this map so that the, the definition of the map on the boundary of the big cube is a scaling of the definition of the map on the boundary of each of the little cubes.
So we can rescale and repeat
exactly the same thing that we did for Kaufman.
We define the map on
we define beta on Q sub i as a scaling
of beta on Q.
That's going to define a map on
on Q sub i, except for some tiny holes except for some even smaller holes.
It's going to define a map which sends the small cube minus the tiny cube to the n minus one skeleton the co dimension one skeleton of some grid in the target.
And then we can repeat on the precipite by we can repeat we can send these tiny cubes to these tiny squares, and so on and so forth.
And so, finally, we can extend by continuity.
And again, we have to be worried about what happens to the Lipschitz constant here because we're defining this math by by doing these infinitely many rescalings.
So our choice of K, because of our choice of cubes here, we're rescaling the cubes in the domain by a factor of L we're rescaling the cubes in the target by a factor of L.
And so the Lipschitz constant
the Lipschitz constant stays bounded.
So the final result
is Lipschitz and rank N.
Is this okay so far.
Are there any questions about anything so far.
Okay, so.
So, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so what does that give us it tells us that oops.
Okay, so what does that give us.
So,
so that if n is greater than equal to four, then there's a co rank one map from SN plus one SN, which is not no homotopic.
And we do that by suspending the hop vibration hop vibration sends S3 to S2, and its suspensions are homotopically non trivial.
So the extension lemma tells us that if we take the suspension of the hop of the hop vibration.
Then you get a co rank one map from the four plus K to D three plus K, so that the boundary is what is homotopic to the case suspension of the hop vibration.
If you take two of those and you glue them together along the equator, then you get a map from S four plus K to S three plus K, which has co rank one, and the, and this homotopic to the K plus first suspension of the hop vibration.
So, this is a, and I've stated this here for the hop vibration because because I think it's like if you the map of the smallest dimension that gives you a map from S five to S four with rank three.
But really, this works for any map.
If you have a element of pi M of SN or M is greater than and then this really tells you that the double suspension of that map is a map from SM to SM plus two test and plus two, which is homotopic to a map of rank and plus one is homotopic to a co rank one map.
You can ask, whether this generalizes to higher dimensions and higher co ranks, and we believe it does. We believe that if K is greater than one, then the two K plus the two K suspension of alpha is homotopic to a co rank K map.
The construction is more difficult.
Because, well, basically, you, you, you, you, you, you, you, you, you want to do something very similar to what we did here where where where you remove a bunch of holes, and then you map it to the, the, you map it to some to some skeleton of the target.
But the thing you remove the object that you have to remove from your domain is more complicated instead of being a bunch of cubes it ends up being that you want to remove a neighborhood of a, of a, of a K dimensional complex.
And things are there there's more topology to keep track of.
So, we believe this is true.
We're working on writing it up but it's, it's a complicated construction.
And this should be sharp by the methods of Larry do show that if you take the two K plus first, the two K suspension of the hop vibration, then it's not homotopic to a map with co rank K plus one.
If you take the two K minus first suspension, then it's not homotopic to a map with K.
Okay.
Is this okay so far.
So, you have to run on the seminar right.
Yeah, yeah, so I'm going to continue but yeah, thanks for coming.
Yeah.
After that you'll meet David because you want to go to another seminar.
Okay, okay.
How long you will be probably have another 10 minutes here.
Yeah, about that.
Yeah, well probably.
Yeah.
It's actually about 20 minutes.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay.
Okay.
So, yeah, so, so, so the kind of the philosophy, the philosophy of this is kind of that.
Well, so you.
The way that I think about these maps is that you start out with a, you start out with the question.
You want to you want to construct a map from you have you have a map from the boundary of the domain to the boundary of the target.
And you want to extend that to the interior of the domain.
And you don't necessarily know how to do that you don't necessarily know how to how to construct a co rank one map that that that that extends that boundary.
But what you can do the idea behind this these constructions is that, well, you can't say you can't necessarily figure out how to can how to extend the big map all at once.
But what you can do is you can take that big map that map of the big cube, and replace it with a map of a bunch of little cubes a bunch of little cubes at a smaller scale.
And so you haven't solved your problem you but you've taken your original problem and you've broken up into a bunch of little problems at a much smaller scale.
And the little problems are rescaling says the big problem and so you can apply the same technique to take those many little problems and replace them with even more tiny problems and then you replace those very many tiny problems with even more, even smaller
problems. And so, you never actually end up solving your problem you you you just break it down and and and and and and you just break it down to problems that smaller and smaller and smaller scales.
But if you do it indefinitely you don't have to solve your problem in the end you can just extend by continuity. So so so so so so so you end up with these maps, where we are based on taking this this this this problem at scale one, and
by many many problems that smaller and smaller scales. So that's the so so so so so that's kind of my my my my my my philosophy behind these constructions is that we're just breaking up problems into smaller and smaller problems.
And so I have one more application I wanted to show you or one more one more version of this I wanted to show you, which is maps that have signed area zero.
So before I do this. Are there any questions about anything so far.
Well it's very clear actually. Okay.
Um, so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so one more version is I want to show you which is the map with signed area zero.
So, we're close curve gamma I'm going to find sigma of gamma to be the signed area of gamma, which is say the integral the winding number of gamma.
So, if you have a map from the disk to the disk, which sends every lipchitz closed curve to a curve of signed area zero.
Then what can you say about that map. Well, if you if that map is lipchitz, then it has to collapse.
If that map is it's lipchitz and it had that it turns out it has to factor through a tree, because if you have a map from the disk to a disk, which is which is lipchitz, then it's differentiable almost everywhere.
And so if you pick a point where it has a derivative, then a small neighborhood of that point is going to map to an ellipsoid in the target.
But then the the boundary of that small neighborhood the small circle around that point, that's going to map to an ellipse to an ellipse.
And the ellipse has signed area non zero, unless the derivative has ranked one.
But if the derivative has ranked one almost everywhere, then we're in the same situation as the Kaufman construction, where a lipchitz map with rank one derivative has to factor through a tree.
Okay, lipchitz maps with signed area zero have to be topologically trivial.
What about, can we can we relax the lipchitz condition. Well, we can't relax it too much because if we relax it too much that if we just look at continuous maps, then you can't define the can be the signed area of a continuous curve because curves like Brownian motion don't
have a well defined signed area, but you can define the the signed area of holder curves, if alpha between zero and one.
A math is alpha holder.
If there's some L greater than zero, such that for all points x one and x two in the domain.
The distance between f of x one and f of x two is at most L times the distance between x one x two raised the power of alpha.
When alpha is one, this is exactly the lipchitz condition. When alpha is less than one. This is a this is a this is a weaker condition.
One one holder is equivalent to lipchitz epsilon holder is a little bit better than uniform continuity but not that much better than uniform continuity.
And so, the bigger this exponent, or the closer this exponent is to one, the nicer than that.
In particular, if you have an alpha holder curve with alpha bigger than one half, then it has a well defined signed area.
And so you can define this notion of a map with signed area zero map that sends every lipchitz closed curve to a holder curve with signed area zero.
And the donor insist show that when alpha is bigger than two thirds, then an alpha holder map with signed area zero has to factor through a tree.
And this uses Gromov's work on alpha holder maps to the Heisenberg group, because these maps with signed area zero really correspond to maps to the Heisenberg group but I just don't want to talk about the Heisenberg group, or I don't
have time to talk about the Heisenberg group too much.
So, you can ask so that leaves a gap between alpha one half and alpha two thirds, where, where, where, where, where, where this is open.
It turns out that in that gap, you can define maps with signed area zero, it makes sense to talk about maps with signed area zero, but the signed area zero condition doesn't really restrict the topology at all.
When alpha is between one half and two thirds, then any lipchitz curve with signed area zero can be extended to an alpha holder map with signed area zero.
So basically, a curve with signed area zero, you know, is basically a figure eight.
This is saying that we can extend that figure eight to the disk, so that any closed curve in the disk maps to a closed curve with signed area zero.
So again, so let me show you, so let me show you how to do this.
So, again, it's going to be very, it's going to be, it's going to have a very similar flavor where we have, we have a problem that we don't know how to solve which is how to extend this figure eight to the disk.
And so what we're going to do is we're going to break it down into a bunch of smaller problems that we still can't solve, but then we can break those into smaller problems and smaller problems and so on.
So here we're constructing a map from the disk to the plane, where the boundary of the disk is going to map to a curve of signed area zero, let's say the figure eight here.
So let's call this map, Yema, let's call our disk D.
And so what we're going to do is the following.
The first step we need to do is we need to subdivide gamma.
We need to break this one big one one big figure eight into a bunch of little curves.
And so this I think I'm going to need a little bit more space. So let me take this picture here.
We want to subdivide this curve gamma into a bunch of smaller curves that all also have signed area zero. And so we're going to let K be large.
And then we're going to fill this, we're going to subdivide this big figure eight into a bunch of little figure eights and the way we're going to do that is we're going to take this picture we're going to cone it off to a point.
Like so. So slices of this cone look like figure eights like so.
And then we're going to divide this cone into K squared strips.
So we're going to draw K squared scaling of the original figure eight.
And so one of our strips is going to look like that and we have K squared of those strips.
We're going to then take each of those K squared strips are strips. So, so maybe this is a this is a piece of a piece of one of these strips.
So the distance from one side for from one side to the other is about one over K squared.
We're going to take each of these and we're going to divide them into K segments. So the distance from here to here is going to be about one over K.
Now, what can we say about these strips. So each of these strips has signed area zero, because it's based on a curve with it's based on a curve with signed area zero.
And also, because we started with the curve of length approximately one, and we're making these strips where the length of the strip is about one, the width of the strip is about about one over K squared, the total area of each strip is about one over K squared.
The problem here is that if we if we subdivide the strips exactly like this.
These are rectangles that are one over K by one over K squared, but these are rectangles these have signed area about one over K cubed.
So these are not valid subdivisions because they're they're they're signed areas too big.
We can correct that instead of connecting instead of cutting the strip up just by straight lines like that. We can cut this we can we can cut the strip by basically draw a path from here to here.
That has a big loop in the middle.
But if I make this loop the right size, then this piece is going to have signed area zero. And that loop is going to be pretty small, because the area that I had to cancel out was pretty small.
The problem is that I haven't really gotten rid of that area. I haven't really gotten rid of that signed area. All that's happened is that now that signed area is part of the next segment of the strip.
So now I have now I have a region bounded by a curve like this, which has even bigger signed area. And so I'm going to need to add an even bigger loop on the side to cancel that out, and so on and so forth.
But this strip is so narrow the total area of this strip is so small that the the area of the loops that I never that I add never gets bigger than one over k squared, the length of the curves that I need to add the length of the loops I need to add never gets bigger than one over
And so the end result of this is that I take my original curve with signed area zero, and I subdivided into k squared strips, and then I subdivide each strip into k regions with signed area zero.
The final result is that I can stop by gamma into
k cubed smaller curves.
So I have gamma one up to gamma k cubed with sigma gamma i equals zero, and the length of gamma i is at most, say, C over k.
And then, well,
that subdivides the target curve, I need to do a subdivision of the domain. So let's subdivide the domain into a grid.
How many squares do I need in the grid well I'm going to need about k cubed squares in the grid so let's let n square equal k cubed.
Let D one up to D k cubed the squares of side length, one over two and in the domain. So that's going to be little squares like that.
And then we do exactly the same thing that we've been doing the same rescaling construction.
We let F
define we define F on the on the big square minus the union of little squares.
It's going to send the boundary of the big square
to gamma. It's going to send the boundary of the little squares to these little curves gamma i
and what happens in between.
Well, basically we have some mesh we have some we have some graph that we've drawn in in the plane made up of all these little subdivisions gamma i, and we're just going to send everything between the big the big square and the little squares we're just going to send it to that
space. So everything between the big square and the little squares has ranked one, everything between the big squares and little squares has signed area zero.
And so, so far, we've constructed a map where the image of any elliptic closed curve that avoids the little squares has signed area zero. The only thing left to do is to extend to the little squares.
And we use the same construction that we've been doing, we rescale and repeat on the little squares.
Now, this is slightly different than what we've done before because we're no longer scaling by the same size in the domain and the range.
We go from a curve of like one to little curves of length C over K, we go from a square of side length one to squares of side length one over two, one over two n.
So, the domain scales by two n, the range by C over K or K over C.
So this is Alpha Holder for an exponent which is the log of the scale in the target, divided by the log of the scale in the domain.
So this converges to two thirds as K goes to infinity.
So, as we increase the, as we increase K, as we increase the number, the squares in the grid and the subdivisions for the curve, the Holder exponent that arises from this gets closer and closer to two thirds.
And so, I have a question, is the limit map, is it still absolutely continuous?
Yeah, yeah, so this is, so this is going to be so, so, so, because what's what's happening is, well, basically, the on each on the region between the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the original square and the little squares it slips with some constant.
And on the region between the little squares and tiny squares, it slips with a larger constant, and so on and so forth. So if you have two points to get that are close together, then either they're, you know, either they're in the gap between two of these regions, in which
case it's bounded by that which is constant, or, you know, you can't skip from over here to over here, because their points are too close together.
So you have uniform continuity because, you know, points that are very close together, almost have to be in the same square.
Okay.
So yeah, so, so, so, so, so, so, so, so you get you see you have uniform continuity. In fact, you have you better than that you have you've alpha Holder with where the where alpha is getting closer and closer to two thirds.
Okay.
And so yes, so, so, so, so, so this gives us maps with with with signed area zero.
These are related to questions about the Heisenberg group I don't want to go to I don't want to go I don't have time to get at the Heisenberg group but I can show you a couple of pictures so this is this is the Heisenberg group, these are some curves in the Heisenberg group.
And the Heisenberg group is a is a is a is a is a sub Riemannian manifold where the horizontal distribution looks like this.
And so Dromov asked a question about what are the alpha-hoder maps from the disk or from the ball to the Heisenberg group and gave a lower bound on the, or gave one bound on what happens, which is that any surface in the Heisenberg group has health
dimension at least three. And so when alpha is bigger than two thirds, there's no alpha-hoder embedding from the disk to the Heisenberg group, because the image of the disk would have to be a surface. The image would have to have health
dimension at least three, and the health dimension of the image of a disk under a holder map is bounded in terms of the holder exponent. So if you have an embedding of the disk into the Heisenberg group, it has to increase a two-dimensional object to a three-dimensional
object, which means that the holder exponent has to be less than two thirds. And a lot of the theorems I stated for signed area zero maps really apply to holder maps to the Heisenberg group or were originally proved in the context of holder maps to the Heisenberg
group. So this theorem of Obermann and Zist was really a theorem that says that if you have an alpha-hoder map to the Heisenberg group with alpha bigger than one half, then it's the lift of a signed area zero map from the disk to R2.
This theorem that when alpha is greater than two thirds and an alpha-hoder map factors through a treat, that's really a theorem about holder maps to the Heisenberg group.
And so this, so High-Wash, Mira, and Shikara found numerical results that suggested that there could be holder maps with alpha bigger than one half, and in fact this construction tells you that there are.
This construction tells you that when alpha is between one half and two thirds, then any elliptic closed curve in the Heisenberg group can be extended to an alpha-hoder map from the disk to the Heisenberg group.
And in fact, it gives you a density result when alpha is between one half and two thirds, the set of alpha-hoder maps is dense in the continuous maps from the disk to the Heisenberg group.
In fact, I've given a two-dimensional construction here. In fact, you can extend that to higher-dimensional constructions. You can construct holder maps from balls into the Heisenberg group, which have the same sort of flexibility properties with a variation of this construction.
So, so yeah, so that's pretty much all I want to say. So, a couple of questions remain.
One, Gromov's original question, or one of Gromov's original questions was about holder embeddings from the disk to the Heisenberg group.
This map doesn't produce embeddings because, well, you have this whole region between the big square and the little squares, which maps to this graph, which maps to all these subdivisions of curves, which has rank one.
And so this map collapses a lot of points. It's not really an embedding.
Can you find an embedding? And really, this talk is kind of just about this technique of taking a problem and breaking it down into a bunch of smaller problems and then breaking the smaller problems into smaller problems and so on and so forth.
I've given you a couple of examples of what I've used this for, but I'd be really curious to see what other things can be done this way. So, thank you.
