Yes, thank you very much indeed. Thanks for the invitation and thanks in particular for
being a workshop where much of the notions that I want to use have actually been introduced.
This is rare for my experience. So I'll just jump right away into saying a bit what I want
to mean by pre-quantum geometry. And you'll see in a moment, it refers to the well established
term that was introduced by Soryo in the 70s. It's not used that much but I do want to use
it here because it does make a point. So what did it mean in the 20th century? Let me start
with this. So differential geometry starts with the concept of smooth manifolds and I'm gonna,
as you can see from my title, I'm gonna make some connections with physics even though this
talk will be just about the math. But I do want to, in this motivation part, which is the first
board, I say a few things about how it connects to physics. So in physics, as you know, this is
how it became a big thing. Smooth manifolds represent spacetime but they also represent
phase spaces. If you wish, spaces of states, of classical and with some extra belts and whistles,
quantum systems, phase spaces. Now this also introduced in the 20s was the concept of carton
geometry, which is a generalization of Riemannian geometry. It also contains conformal geometry and
stuff. So let me put here Riemannian geometry, Riemannian conformal complex, blah blah blah. All
kinds of extra structure that you can put on a smooth manifold. And famously, this is now,
I guess, the 100th anniversary of this insight. This in physics describes the field of gravity.
And another important ingredient in this differential geometry story in the 20th century was fiber
bundles. And in particular, fiber bundles with connection. In physics, they represent two
different things. So on one hand, these are the mathematical interconnection of gauge force
charges. The famous Dirac charge quantization argument says that if you have a magnetic charge
somewhere, then the electromagnetic field is actually one principle bundled with connection
in the complement of the charge. Gauge force charges is kind of at the level of space time
on phase spaces. And that's where the word pre-quantum comes in. If you have a certain line
bundled with connection on your phase space that lifts the symplectic form, then this is what
so called a pre-quantum phase space. So you need a pre-quantization of a phase space. They have
a non-perturbative quantization of it as opposed to, say, just a deformation quantization in
form and power series of h bar. So this is where this word pre-quantum comes in. I'm not going
to today talk about quantum physics, but just about I'll be careful about speaking sort of
ordinary differential geometry, but with this pre-quantum aspect taking into account. So this
is fiber bundles with connection. And then there is an addition maybe to Cartan theory. There's
Chen-Vail theory, which is about finding characteristics of these fiber bundles with
connection in the physics of the 20th century. This describes for physicists called instantons.
And more generally, this is what they call Chen-Simons terms, Chen-Simons theory. I'm just
saying these words for those who know it. For those who don't, I will not explain it today. It's
just kind of as a motivation and related to this with Sumino-Witton terms. So the point is just
these are important aspects of particle physics. And they're kind of the physics incarnation
of this mathematics. Now, something happened. It started in the 80s of the 20th century,
but it's sort of happening now as we speak. So this is really particle physics here.
And people thought it would be good to have something that should be called brain physics.
Right? So if the brain is a one brain, that's called string theory, but there are these
higher versions of this and we're concerned a bit about some of these things. So first of all,
so something happens here. It could also have happened already here, but it just became noticed
maybe fully in this context that spacetime is generalized to higher super orbifolds.
So super geometry starts to play a role. And there's some group portal aspects that
can start coming in. It's very important in this brain physics that we take spacetime to be an
orbifold. What's an orbifold? An orbifold is a special case of a smooth group or of a
lee group. So there's a mathematical incarnation of this. And this is what I will be concerned
about, axiomatizing these things that go in the right column here in this talk today. So the
mathematical incarnation of what these things are, they are super etal infinity stacks. And I
hope to, on the third board, I'll give you a complete axiomatization of how to do these things
and how to work with them. Right? We've seen infinity stacks. These are space valued, if you
wish, sheaves on some manifold and we'll put etal structure on them and make them super. So this
is what you need to describe these things. Yes, as you know, super is a technical term. So what
happened to gravity? This is really the key. So this you could have already done here maybe with a
bit of imagination. But here's something important that happens. Gravity becomes higher dimensional
supergravity. So what does it mean? The nice thing about, you know, the point of saying
carton geometry here is that it gives us an immediate way to say what this is. Carton
geometry is the geometry that is induced from a group like the Poincare group with a subgroup
like the spin group. And you build spaces that are locally modeled on the infinitesimal coset
spaces of these. High dimensional supergravity just comes from using the super Poincare group instead
and looking at super manifolds that are locally modeled on these. But the point is due to the
super aspect of this, it so turns out that these have these supergravity theories intrinsically
of higher form fields with them. And these high degree form fields, they are really, if you
consider them globally, they are higher jerbs which do live in a higher kind of differential
geometry which goes in this right corner here. So there is this something that should be called
higher super carton geometry. I want to say a bit about what that is. The mathematical
extremization of what physicists do in high dimensional supergravity is flux fields.
Then fiber bonds with connections, they go to, so here we have charges like the magnetic charge
of particles. So now that we have particles replaced by brains, these are things called
brain charges. And one of the big insights of the 90s was that they no longer just take
values in just ordinary bundles with connection, they take values in what is called
in generalized commodity theories. So they are represented by certain spectra,
and there are lots of belts and bristles. These are twisted and accurate in generalized
commodity theories. And the presence of the connections on the bundles translates into the
fact that these are differential commodity theories. And for this too, I will give you
a quick extremization for what that is. There's a differential Brown representability theorem
that will tell us that these are just those sheaves of spectra in the way we've already seen in
various talks by Andres Rial and by Mathieu Anel. We'll be using perma-tri-spectra in the tangent
topos to get the twists which are cohesive. So this is where this word cohesive comes in. So
there's a certain axiom you can put on your infinity category or spectra which ensures that
all of them represent precisely these twisted generalized differential commodity theories.
So lastly, Ternveil theory, I have lots of things that maybe I can't really say all this. So
these Ternsimus theories, so they are higher in Ternsimus theories here, Ternsimus type theories
that play a huge role. So one of them, and I'm happy to say this here, one of them is the
very famous, the akz models where the k is of course referring to to Maxim. We can integrate
them. They were originally defined on L infinity algebra. One can integrate them to things that
actually live on higher stacks than they contain the, I'm just mentioning these words, will not
mean much to anything that contain the Poisson sigma model, the Courant sigma model, the A model,
the B model strings. So lots of stuff that first is scary about this. Also, so these all come from
quadratic shifted forms, whatever this means, but there's also 70 Ternsimus theory, which is important
in the ongoing discussion of the 60 super going from a field theory that's an 11 Ternsimus theory.
All these come from higher analogs of the Ternveil homomorphism. And last but not least,
there's actually a string field theory which is built by the same means. So I will not say
anything about this now, just for those who have ever heard these terms, just as a motivation that
this is what the technology that I'm trying to present on the right now is going to be about.
So here we can then build something that I called infinity Ternsimus functionals,
which you should really think as being the higher, the higher differential geometry version
of the original Ternveil homomorphism and similarly for WZW. So what is all this? This is
clearly something, you know, if you believe that there's motivation for this, and I'm not going
to argue for this, but I think there is, then we do need the mathematics that does handle this.
The 20th century mathematics does not handle this anymore, which is the cause of much of
the difficulties that people see here, because it's like using matrix calculus for advanced
linear algebra back then. Anyway, so this is kind of an inside joke, right? Let me put
21st century here. This will have to be understood and developed to understand this stuff. So this is
what I'm going to talk about. Why would I talk about this? You might just to maybe say, well,
usually people are already doing this. Let me highlight something that is
somehow maybe not as vivid in the brains of mathematicians in these days, the 90s were
somewhat different. There are big mathematical problems here that physicists ran into, which
do deserve mathematical attention. One of them goes by this name. Let me just say this for those
who know these words. So it's known that what is called F1 DP brain charges. So this is the
big insight written in the 90s and other people freed brain charges are in twisted
equivariant differential K theory. So there's some chief of spectra that represents twisted
differential equivariant K theory. And it's important to use this to model the charges of
these brains in direct analogy with the magnetic charges here. And it's known from kind of the
physics law that this has to be lifted to, but this open what this should be. This has to be
lifted for something what's called M2 M5 brain charges in blah, blah, blah some generalized
homology theory. I'm not going to talk about this today. I'm just saying this is an open problem.
There's a kind of a well defined question here that finds something here that under a certain
transgression to a circle reproduces this. I'm not going to speak about this today. Actually,
it so happens that I will speak about this next two weeks in a lecture course at
ASE in Vienna. So if you do have interest in time come to Vienna next two weeks
at the average trading institute in Vienna. I'm just saying this to highlight that
there's concrete open problems here. This is actually what got me involved. Some people
got the impression that I'm somehow just interested in abstract formulations of geometry,
but that is not actually the case. So what I wanted to talk about today is the following.
We saw prequantum geometry was the left column on the right. We have something like higher
prequantum geometry and here's the issue that I want to highlight and solve. So doing this is
hopefully kind of evident already from these keywords. It's not feasible if you do it in
components. Not feasible, not tractable, just not human possible in components.
So I started my PhD thesis doing this up to degree three for you know what's now called
maybe two jerks with connection in components and all the definitions and all components just
explode. They just exponentially increase. Before you even write down any theorem,
you have definitions that span pages of pages. It's just not possible. What is needed
need a faithful, a good synthetic language, synthetic theory.
So some abstract theory that doesn't excite these things by their atoms, what they build
off, but which does faithfully excite what these things should behave like such that you can prove
the theorem instead have to be proven without getting bogged down in just choices of basis.
So the solution of this which I want to briefly survey is it turns out this is possible use
infinity top bosses that are equipped with a progression if you wish. There's a sequence
I'm going to write on the next board, a progression of a joint model operators. I'll say what this
is in just a second. So first of all yeah and this is what gives to them. So this
progression that will appear on the next board needs a name. So there was something I was suggested
by LaVier kind of in one top of theory called it cohesive infinity. So I call it not cohesive
infinity top bosses but it's a we do it. Yeah cohesive thanks syntax error.
And so we make we make yeah I don't know you know you have to choose somewhere. I guess in my book
I call it differential cohesive but also at this super aspect so it will be super. Anyway you know
it's just words. The point is there will be a very simple set of axioms and what was kind of
surprising and this is something I you know I didn't look for this. We learned this we were
trying to solve this problem and at some point I noticed oh look I can just do all these things
that were really difficult but just using a certain adjoint and then you know once I had this I
started saying oh well let's just check if maybe I can do more with more of them. So here's that
here's the deal. So let's move this up this is my motivation for today. Find synthetic language
that allows us to do a higher differential homology and differential geometry. So there's
an absolute weight of saying this but I'll do it sort of very concretely. Here's the site
in the sense that was introduced for Andres Zoyal or recalled by Andres Zoyal at the lectures at
the beginning. The site for you know super differential geometry. If we do a differential
geometry and maybe with the super aspect what is the grotto they were working on? Well it's
very easy. Everything is modeled on if you think about it. Smooth manifolds are modeled on
smooth Cartesian spaces. So this is what we take here. This board is not very wide. Here's the
a red card space for the full top carrier of smooth manifolds on those that are rn's.
It's the carrier whose objects are rn's for various n and the maps are smooth maps between them.
This is the simple model space. These are the affines if you wish.
No we can't just take rn itself because it's diffeomorphic to a ball.
It's a manner of simplification right? You could take just open site.
I could take open site. People like to take all manifolds. I'm just giving one side. There are
many different versions of giving this site. So I want to define now something that is called
or that Anders Koch called formal smooth manifolds so we can do formal Cartesian spaces. What is
meant by this? Well here's a quick way of seeing it. It turns out that the functor that takes a
smooth manifold to its ring of smooth functions regardless of an ordinary
algebra commutative algebra over r. This is actually fully faithful. So you can kind of characterize
manifolds by you have this kind of shadow of algebraic geometry here. It's what we can just do.
We can just say as Grotendig did back then for the formal schemes we can just say well then let's
just take commutative algebras that do have infinitesimals. I think of these infinitesimals as
being functions on a piece of our test space that is so small that some finite power of these functions
would actually vanish. So I'll write this object as the object in formal Cart space. I'll write this
rn times d. d is my generic symbol for in formal disk an infinitesimal thing something
that is a point with a formal thickening and it's defined by the following that I say
we regard its algebra functions. So I'll define it this way. Define it to be the tensor product of
the ring of smooth functions as an ordinary r-algebra tensor over r with something of the form
with an algebra which is an underlying vector space of this form where v is finite dimensional
and nilpotent. nilpotent for what we can do this you can filter this and look at a whole tower
variance of this but I'm going to take the case where there's some n some natural number such that
no for every element there's some n such that its nth power is zero. You could call this a local
artyn algebra over r. It's real yeah in the as we discussed Vale introduced this and it was called
them. So the like Anders Kauke and Bieleville they call this a Vale algebra but the algebraic
geometries know this as a local artyn algebra. So this you should think of these these things as
being functions on the point kind of with their first orders of some Taylor expansion and then
the space that they are functions on this z is so small that some that the physics the way I was
taught calculus in my physics courses becomes actually true at some finite power these things
actually become zero right. It's a finite dimensional coefficient of the power series.
Yes yeah that's another way to say yeah so so this is how to find these former Cartesian spaces
and then there's of course this embedding here which just regards the Cartesian space
that's having no infinitesimal thickening and it will be kind of important for us as you can easily
check if this is co-reflective. So my joints will always go this way left the joints are on top of
right the joints and just for the sake of it since it's causing so much happiness from the audience
I'll also consider the super case super formal Cartesian spaces where we do just the same thing
I just add I just allow these algebras to be super super commutative so there's z2 graded
and commutative in the z2 graded sense and I simply continue this let this still be ordinary
ring of smooth functions on Rn but now this is a this is allowed to be a super ring so that's an
obvious thing and something that will be kind of important here is that there's of course the
also embedding here which simply embeds everything into the even graded piece and this is actually
two reflections and we'll speak about this one takes takes a bosonic body the other takes the
the even formal piece yeah so we'll come to this and if you wish of course there's a point
which is reflectively embedded here so this is the site we're going to use and now I'll apply the
c-finfinity function that was discussed in the lectures at the beginning of the series
to define the infinity top losses
of super differential geometry the grow ones differential geometry
so let's start on the very left so what is infinity sheaves on the point maybe guy
in pretty much this notation I hope this was on the board a few times so this is
the same thing as what I will throughout call infinity group points I know there's a
and it seems to be very popular here there's the habit of saying spaces for this so some of
the speakers before me wrote spaces for this I I do want to caution about this and you know these
questions came up came up it's really important to think of this as a purely combinatorial thing
because there will be lots of other spaces appearing here extra geometric manifold so
calling this space this is really applying a trick which one should be fully fully aware of when
it's really looking at topological spaces and their simplest localization at the we comma to
be equivalences so it's kind of a trick that allows you to speak about infinity group points
is being a localization of topological spaces but but it's really important that at this point
as far as geometry is concerned there's no geometry here these are disc so these in particular
contain the discrete group points the discrete sets there's no geometry here these are not topological
group points anything so infinity group points are combinatorial in some sense yeah so you can
maybe I should also write so this is also the same as you can also take simplification sets or
if you wish you can reduce restrict to current complexes I mean this is really category theory
you know current complexes localized at the at the homotopy at the you know you can actually
localize these at the homotopy equivalences okay so this is kind of our base topics and now we
we want to equip this with geometric structure and the way we do is that we simply consider
now infinity groups that are parametrized of these smooth guys by the functor of points
perspective which I guess in this context in this conference I don't need to
to say much about so let's see how much space do I have one two three four let's leave a bit of
space sheaves infinity on card space this is what I called it which and which I'll ask you and
invite you to think about as being the smooth infinity group points in particular league
group points they are a full sub 2.1 category of this year SR for instance you know simplicity
group points and simplicity group sorry it's not yet super not yet super so we get to this so you
know we we will now do the same thing keep going so we can do the same thing on formal Cartesian
spaces these are now smooth these are now infinity groups that are equipped with a geometric structure
that is seen by testing functor of points wise with formal Cartesian spaces so they will look like
formal smooth infinity group points this the one topos truncation of this is what is
famous in the literature is the Cayet topos was one of the first topos that were faithful models for
Lavier's synthetic differential geometry so this is kind of infinity the stunner model for
infinity synthetic geometry and then we can do one one more which also has a vague precursor
in the literature but yeah anyway it's not not a big deal to write down these things a big deal
will be to see that the joints between them are actually all we need to know about them super
formal Cartesian spaces so this is now you know I just keep adding these adjectives you should think
of this as being super formal smooth infinity group points so then these adjunctions induce
on the pre-shift categories they use adjoint quadruples or even adjoint quintuples by a left
and right carn extension of functors between these these shift categories and the thing one
one needs to check the the slightly non-trivial statement is here which of these do pass to the
sheeps and it turns out for the first case all of them actually do which is which is a strong
statement about these topos of Cartesian spaces so there's the let me let me go down a little bit
here so there's a global section functor here is for every infinity topos since this has a terminal
object this is just a variation on the point a variation point on the point means that we forget
kind of the smooth structure we forget how to test our smooth infinity group points
by mapping open balls into them we just know how to map points into them so this is just
forgetting the smooth structure and we get an ordinary underlying infinity group yes just to
understand why you call that a smooth infinity group point if I have a league group with yeah
is that yeah can you how do you embed it there simply by the functor of points so the league
group point which uh which uh let's call it g bullet say it's a system of two smooth manifolds
you you take it to be the the the sheaf that of group points that to each test manifold u to each
rn assigns the group point which is c infinity u comma g1 you embed using more or less unit
yeah okay in particular if you instead of having the league group point if you had the
kind of uh can complex of manifolds yes exactly like guess what guess what I was looking at
conceptual manifolds of the geometric objects in here the geometric infinity group was this was
essentially proven by that special case yes important special case inside here but I don't
want to get into this but I have in the notes you see a big diagram that filters this all the
stuff that sits in there lots of classical stuff you find as fully faithful as full subcategories
in here yeah particularly the the concentration manifolds that many people are are into there
in here but I'm following Grotonik's perspective perspective here that before we focus on one
of these that we do may want to concentrate in the end but which do not have as nice which do
not form a nice category a focus on this very nice category I set my theory in here I I then
know how to do everything in here and then in each particular case in the end I'll check if any
given construction actually lands in one of these subcategories I think that's the way to go because
otherwise you if you restrict yourself too early you lose the nice theory there was I think one of
Grotonik's point of introducing anyway now so this is in there and so this functor has is every
I hope this might have been mentioned at some lecture maybe I forget so this has this left
exact left adjoint which often goes by the name delta let me call it however disk because what
does it do it takes an infinity group out and regarded as an infinity stack that is actually
locally constant on the site but by our interpretation so it will assign the same value
to each Cartesian space but that thing of the Cartesian space is being you know the points that
we map into our group but it just means every map from a Cartesian space into our group but
where has to be constant so this this equips infinity groups with discrete smooth structure
structure the only smooth maps into them are the constant ones and now turns out due to the
fact that we do have this adjunction here this does so this is what you have for every topos
there's a further left adjoint here which happens to preserve products so this is legs here and
this is something very special and let me be this my first example I'm going to call this pi infinity
and I put the examples here maybe so let's let's start seeing what some of these things do
so there will be lots of examples here so if x is a smooth manifold
for instance regarded as sitting in smooth infinity group points
under the sort of extended unit I'm betting no I can't unfortunately ah but I can do this yeah
then so pi infinity this is a theorem I need to prove actually it works also this was proven
by dev kakili it works also for fresh a infinite dimensional manifolds and uh and a few more things
but anyway so this will always produce the homotopy type this produces the fundamental
infinity group point of x so if you wish this is the this is the singular simplification complex of
the unaligned topological space of x regarded as representing kan complex in hansen infinity group
this is why it's called pi infinity this is the etal homotopy type frontier it sends a scheme
which in our case are manifolds to its homotopy type there's something one one needs to prove
and um and the fact that these these are adjoint if you think about it gives us already a synthetic
version of galois theory because it says it relates it relates locally constant stacks to
to the homotopy type maybe I'll have time to talk about this at the end um
there's one more uh one more adjoint here so it turns out also this is turns out to be fully
faithful there's one more adjoint here which you should think of as being equipping stuff with a
codiscrete structure um so so what does that mean in order to analyze these things and this is where
these modal operators come in now see what I really want to be working in is is all the way in here
this is the the big infinity toposet I'm going to talk about so I always call this h because this
this is the home for my generalized commodity theory so the big h is a reminder of that we're
doing commodity in there so I do want to I would do want to replace all these adjunctions that go
between different categories it's just anomorphisms of my my one big category so let's let's try to
transform it this way um I'll write so we can go down if we are here in smooth infinity group
points since since this reflects into them these ways I'm gonna I'm gonna consider taking first
the global sections and then re-embedding discretely so this is just the the underlying
discrete infinity group point but thought of as sitting in here under this canonical embedding
and this needs a name and yeah it just so happened I'll call this flat for why is this called flat
well here's another example take there will be lots of box examples here so so g a lee group
or a simplicial lee group if you wish
then then you can then you it turns out you have the following then maps to
there's the internal delooping of the lee group
so the the delooping of a group object internal to the topos this is the classifying stack for g
principle bundle so this is a a principle bundle this classifies a principle bundle
and then you have this flat operation here you can form flat bg and since it's there's now a
comon that has this canonical forgetful map to bg and you find that lifts here their equivalent
to flat connections on that g principle bundle flat connection that's why it's called flat it
sends modular stacks of principle bundles to modular stacks of local systems of flat connections
these are little things one can observe so so this is the beginning where one sees that these
these adjoints actually encode interesting information so then I'll give a name to the
other one so the other one as we we take global sections but then re-embed code discreetly
this seems to be an exotic operation I'll call this sharp just because that rhymes on flat musically
and um sharp happens to to have a nice interpretation too suppose suppose x is a is a
zero truncated sheaf a set internal to our smooth infinity group but so suppose it's in
just plain sheaves on card space regarded as fully faithfully sitting in the infinity
sheaves on card space then you have this factorization you have the the unit of sharp
so this sharp x is something weird but here's the thing consider it's I mean from a classical
perspective consider its image factorization we factor this through an epi followed by a mono
it turns out so I'll call this sharp one because the first postnico stage in this image here
sharp one of x this is precisely the defiological space completion
space underlying x so defiological spaces um we're also introduced by sorio actually
there's patrick iglesias semur has written this big book on defiology they they generalize smooth
manifolds and they are what this is saying here defiological spaces are precisely the
concrete sheaves in here those that are separated pre-sheeps for the la viettini operator sharp
so just to mention this that we see how how these junctions begin to see actual manifold
geometry here and now we have of course one more so we can also go down we can also go down with
pi infinity and then re-embed discreetly and this after a long discussion with mike schulman
we ended up calling shape why is it called shape because as you already saw here it sends it sends
an object to its shape in the sense of shape theory to its homotopy type so for instance
back to this example if you have the internally looping of a lee group the modernistic of g
principal bundles then shape of it it's an ordinary infinity group but an ordinary homotopy type
constantly re-embedded this turns out to be bg so without the bolt phase my bolt phase b is to
indicate that there's extra structure this is the smooth version and this is the ordinary
classifying space of g as a topological space up to weak homotopy equivalent whereas flat bg just
to emphasize flat bg is what in standard textbooks you would call k g1 so all these things you see
are now seen by these adjoins and uh yeah so you saw that you want g is considered as discreet
discreet yeah maybe yeah but but this is the yeah so maybe let me
down this is the this thing just this this makes everything discreet that's how this comes about
whereas this really takes the geometric realisation so generally if you have a
simplicial manifold shape of it will be the fat nerve of it the fat simplicial realisation
as a homotopy type so the fact that there's flat structure appearing here shows us that this
starts to know something about differential uh homology and this will be one of the main theorems
that i hope to put on the next board but let's um let's maybe complete this and yeah so i don't know
we can complete this to these squares if one wishes and um
and without you know continuing to give names to all this let me just indicate that
from these further adjoins you have we get no further functors here so we get the embedding
of uh it's just smooth infinity groups into those that also have formal thickening
and there's there's a reflection to this and what does it do well let's let's look at it
so so again in terms of there's four functors here that are mutually joined induced from
this adjoint pair and i'll give them names so in the in the same way the leftmost one that
appears i call re re this will be the reduction operation yeah let's let me write it down so
this is the one that comes from the top what does it do so if you have a formally thickened
a formal manifold then this is its reduced part
in the sense of algebraic geometry you you get they get the object whose ring of functions is
the same ring of functions but without the nilpotence and it has an adjoint which comes from
these two adjoint functors here which you know to use the kind of dual notation i call im and
im also has a classical name if if your mx and algebraic geometry is called the diram stack of x
another way of saying is this is the the quotient of the two um projections out of the
formal neighborhood of the diagonal of x that's what it comes down to so all this is kind of a
i'm making statements there's not supposed to be entirely obvious i don't know so in particular
what we will use i'll i'll say more about this on the next board it kind of it follows from this
well i mean this needs a bit of expert but if you slice over mx then this will be the category
of pds over x for infinity stacks so the object in there will be bundles over x
equipped with a sub bundle of their jet bundle that defines a partial differential equation so
this is at the end of the talk whether the field theory comes in we'll be able to do
variational calculus just just using non-linear pds yeah so if you just look at you in algebraic
geometry people like to consider just the quasi coherent sheaves on the ram stacks
they have the d modules on the original scheme they're kind of the linear pds but we'll actually
if you want to do some serious of variational calculus you need non-linear ones
so so this has a further further adjoint which i call it but i'm not gonna gonna talk about it
it exists it's important for yeah some anyway so let me just give these names and and then here
is the same thing so we get um so we get these two ways so first of all formal manifolds now
embedded into super manifolds is the bosonic piece and there are these two ways to projecting back
take the bosonic body and take the the fermionic piece so i'm i don't know looking for some
notation here maybe this will cause some excitement now again so i called i called them i decided to
call this guy that takes the bosonic body like so because it produces the symbol for bosons
and Feynman diagrams right so if you have extra super stack super super manifold then then this
thing will be the underlying bosonic body what's called the bosonic body
whereas and if i made this choice then the left one it produces even number of fermions so
so if you denote by double arrow this is the formal space formal space
you know of even degree
so you don't you don't throw away the the the odd graded guys but you keep just their
even pair so that they that they're even graded and then it has one further adjoint which for
reasons that i won't talk about i call reonomy this appears in supergravity literature is some
doesn't matter so we have we have this and if you wonder why i count it to 12 in my in my abstract so
so what we're really doing is you know we're starting but i don't want to talk much about this
there's an initial adjunction sort of in every infinity topos you take the monad that is constant
on the initial object and the co monad constant or the other way around constant on the point
they're adjoint this guy is flat this guy is sharp meaning it's in the these are idempotent
since these are faithful this is important right these things are all faithful here so we get
these monads and co monads are idempotent so we can ask is sharp of the point again the point
that it is and it turns out actually sharp of empty is also empty so so these are included these
are included these are included and these are included if you just want to kind of you know
end this properly graceful exit you notice there's also this trivial adjunction and that's how you
come to 12 anyway so this just some notation and it's it's not super hard to prove this i mean
this is maybe the the thing where one has to work the rest
the rest is just making the right observations but the point now is that i don't want to emphasize this
which is not obvious at least it was surprising to me you can now ask well you know let's put it
this way if you if you take a random topos infinity topos you will notice it does not have many more
adjoints this way beyond the first two here so these are strong conditions on infinity topos to
have this long sequence of adjoints you know it's like having an adjoint quadruple this way shifted
it up and then it doesn't quite continue to a quintuple but after you resolve a bit there's
an x one you resolve a bit more there's yet an x one so this is a strong structure and and you
could say well if if the context we're working in has this strong axiomatic structure that means
this axiomatic structure must know at least a whole lot about what we actually do in components
in this thing so there's a hope that using just the adjoints you can actually do differential
geometry and the the running claim that i want to make is you can actually do a whole lot of
just traditional differential geometry and lift it all to the infinity context so i do want to
close now by or you know in the last part i want to say how this i want to give you some
theorems how this works so in this boxy i'll do we'll do synthetic
differential commodity
using just these adjoints in this box i'll do synthetic
well i would call it synthetic differential geometry but of course this already
is is used much by laverine coq and what i'm doing here will subsume this but
uh let me maybe let me maybe emphasize that so we'll actually do this
carton geometry here synthetically so we'll find we find italian infinity stacks as internal
manifolds and we will be able to equip them with conformal riemannian blah blah blah structure
super conform anyway and if time permits but probably it won't then yeah i should you know to
come back to the the first words of my abstract on this board if time permits i'll speak about doing
synthetic i'll give you just some main facts about synthetic variational calculus on jet bundles
but we kind of do it in this pre-quandized way so it will actually be
so ordinary variational calculus is kind of the mathematical home of classical field theory
but since i will not work with forms but with their differential cos cycles right away so this
will be this will be this pre-quantum field theory that you see in the abstract
so i'll just highlight the the first of course the board won't contain the whole thing but
just the first key statements and in the unlikely event that i'll still have time after that
just for entertainment purposes since i'm since in this context here it might
uh find some friends there's also there's some nice yeah let me just so i could if you insist
say something about synthetic Galois theory
just some simple facts so that i kind of neatly come out so let's let's start here
yeah i was a you know i started playing with this in my habilitation thesis and then
this main statement the way i'm saying now unfortunately i didn't i didn't quite have
myself this was found by book and nicolas and focal so this is one of the i was very fond
of this statement so let me call this the differential differential brown represent
sorry brown representability let's see theorem
so the brown representability theorem says that every homology theory generalized homology
theory in the sense of ironberg's stay note is is given by maps into some spectrum and
the question is is there a generalization of this for differential homology if you know
differential homology this is an open question if you don't know differential homology you can
take what i'm saying now is the quickest easy definition and then just go from there so this
was proven last year by bunker uli bunker thomas nicolas and michael fölke in regensburg at that
time so it says the following yeah you know i'll just yeah there's limited space here but let me
try to get get the gist so we consider now that that's all right th for the tangent
topos in your sense um tangent infinity topos is that okay for right i forget which notation you
use maybe some different notation and so so a first a first yeah so this is parametric
spectrum objects in our topos so first simple observation is this is again cohesive if if
if we start with any of these toposes in a plate ply th of it then the result will have the same
structure you simply observe that you know it's yeah so i'm calling this here cohesive sorry this
structure if i do have these extra these extra things with this fully faithfulness so this structure
i call cohesion a topo a topos with this structure this is fully faithful and then it's equivalent
to this being fully faithful they're both so i call it infinity topos cohesive if the terminal
geometric morphism has the properties that the inverse image is fully faithful has a further
left to john's that preserves products and the direct image has a further right to join
and on one topos this is what levier had called this so i first wrote this down and then there was
some peter johnson alerted me that this has been considered by levier and he called it cohesive
that's why i picked up the name and then if i have this extra structure i call this i call this
differential cohesion one way to motivate this is so this cohesion here comes from the fact
that you think of this topos as knowing what it's how it's pointing together how in an open ball
the pointing smoothly together this is exhibited by this shape which contracts them away one can
show that this the ramsec functor is like the infinitesimal shape it contracts away infinitesimal
close points in this sense this is differential cohesion and then this i don't know you know
super differential cohesion okay yeah sorry it's just terminology it doesn't really matter choose
another terminology if you want so look at permittory spectra and consider for the beginning
just a spectrum over the point so just a sheaf of spectra over cartesian spaces let's call this e
so the theorem effectively says that any such so these are these cohesive spectra are the differential
comology theories what it means is the following one shows that if you take any such guy and then
look at um what its projections are under um this this pair of or this triple of
adjoins that we have then these projections fit into a big diagram and you observe that this
diagram is precisely the diagram the hexagonal diagram that people used to write down to
extrematize differential comology so here's here's two aspects of this big hexagon so first of all
i e let me here's how it works so if you do the shape consider the shape of e you get an ordinary
spectrum a spectrum kind of is a sheaf over the point constantly embedded as a constant
sheaf of spectra a locally constant sheaf of spectra and this is the underlying is the underlying
comology theory generalized comology theory
no more differential so for instance i don't want to you know because it will use up all my time we
can do for instance deline the deline complex deline comology regardless of sheaf of spectra the
deline complex and then if you do shape of it you get hz right you find that it's a ordinary
integral comology in this sense deline comology is a differential refinement of you can take
you can take the sheaf of vector bundles the stack of vector bundles with connection do its
infinity group completion this is part of what they show it gives you a sheaf of spectra
its its shape will be k u the ordinary k theory spectrum so in this sense you know infinity group
completion under direct sum of of the stack the smooth sort of infinity group out of vector
bundles with connection is the differential refinement of k u and so forth and so here's
what is nice so one one can one can see one can also form the co-fiber of flat let me call
let me call this flat bar so so this is my notation for simply the co-fiber of from flat e
from the co-unit of this monad goes to e this turns out to be the home of the curvature forms
differential forms with coefficients kind of in your differential commodity theory so if we if
we take ordinary deline differential commodity this comes out as being the sheaf of closed forms
in the given degree the ordinary sheaf of smooth closed forms if you put in k theory you get the
sheaf of forms are all even degrees created by the bot generator if you take elliptic
commodity you get something wilder and so forth so there's another thing if we took the co-fiber
of flat we should look at the fiber of shape so let me let me call this shape bar of e the fiber
the homotopy fiber of course of of e goes to shape e well these are the things these are the
differential core cycles this underlying bundle if you wish is trivial these turn out to be the
these are the globally defined globally defined connections
in your differential commodity theory again if you do it for ordinary differential commodity this
comes out to be the same complex differential forms you know in lower degree in one degree lower
than your curvatures are and then you get the canonical map here this comes out to be the
deram differential again on ordinary commodity is the deram differential in general it gives
some map that behaves like the deram differential in the following sense so here's another theorem
they prove so this d so abstractly from using using nothing about what e is choosing just
just adjoins the fundamental theorem of calculus holds
yeah so you know for for generalized valued forms in the sense that there exists a map
there exists a map integration from zero to one from the mapping stack from r
or real line which into into these curvature forms these closed forms
back to the coefficients of the the connection forms in one degree lower
so this behaves like so one can construct this abstractly the map exists this is the statement
exists canonically and it satisfies the condition that if you pre-compose it with d
so if you go this way and then integrate then the result is
the difference between evaluating at zero and one the difference taken with respect to the
abelian structure on spectral and again i'm not writing into the board again part of the
theorem is if you do put in ordinary deline differential commodity then this comes out as
being the ordinary integration of differential forms and the ordinary fundamental calculus
a fundamental theorem of calculus but you can put in you know differential
cobertism and then you know now what the the fundamental theorem of calculus is there
yeah that's what what fits on this board for synthetic differential
commodity this actually one can also if we now take our spectrum not in the point
but over over say peak of k u or peak of some some e then we get twisted differential
commodity just just for free but it doesn't fit in there so this actually solved an old
they solved the problem that's why they why they did they solved a problem that was there was
raised by simons and sullivan in 2008 and so this increases again this was not this was not
so these authors did not introduce this because they wanted to play with axioms they wanted to
solve for concrete problems that was open in differential commodity theory and it turns out
you formalize it axiomatically and then it drops out and so let's say something about
synthetic differential geometry if i have time so fix fix a sigma in in our so so now i'm i'm
working yeah h is my ambient context and then consider consider the base change depends on
dependent product context extension base base change if you wish slice over sigma slice over
it's the ram stack so then from from the unit of the im monad we get um there's a joint triple here
the unit i should call eta im for sigma yeah it's a bit cumbersome mutation pullback it has
a right a joint eta im sigma push forward so the point is just we have this god given structure
now we have we have our monads they all come with their unit and coordinate maps and as you can see
here we're just playing with the structure of fine form co fibers now i'm pulling back and forth
along these units and co units and there's of course the left a joint here which should be called
eta im sigma shriek and so this induces again i always transfer back to monads adjunctions to
monads so this induces in a joint pair of monads and co monads on the slice over sigma
and i'll call this t infinity sigma and j infinity sigma for reasons that will become
clear in just a second this will be just this will be formal tangents so this now goes from
the slice over sigma to itself
right so so this goes first down with the left a joint and then back and the other one goes
first down with the right a joint and then back so the jets we need for the variational calculus
here's the here's the statement that we will need for the differential geometry of manifolds
you observe the little fact that t infinity sigma of sigma itself is uh yeah already almost mentioned
is the formal disc bundle
so it can only come to map down to sigma it's a bundle over sigma and its fiber is the formal
it's fiber over a given point is the formal neighborhood at that point
and um and using this we can do something what can we do so so i'll say this
and then also observe actually the following statement is something that i learned from
a paper by Maxime Konsevich and Alexander Rosenberg on non-commutative stacks in very
different language you have this characterization of formal italian maps if one unwinds what's
happening in this paper this is just what this is just three of the joints that i'm using here
so in that very nice paper it was observed it's about non-commutative geometry and then suddenly
there's a side remark saying saying if you have a map in such a context between two spaces then
you know consider it's the naturality square of of the m unit of this deram stack functor unit
and you can ask you can now ask that this is a pullback so if this is a pullback
this being a pullback means that this map is formally etal
this you can take this as being an extremization of formally etalness in the sense of i guess what
Andrei Geryal did way back with somebody with Ike actually so that's one can one can check
one can set up formal axioms for what open maps should be and then one can check this
this satisfies this but so this is a good extremization but part of the statement is
if you actually put into smooth manifolds here are two etal stacks which i haven't defined yet
then then these match actually come out as the local differ morphisms these are the correct
formally etal maps now if we have this um so i think i'm lacking one thing i wanted to say
oh no it's okay so so using this we have now we have now a good definition of
of etal stacks so given v a group object a group object so an infinity group in h
a super formal smooth infinity group so it could just be a lee group for instance it i'm writing v
you're really supposed to think of it as being for instance just a vector space because it's
additive group structure and we want to model manifolds on this vector space but it could be
any group then then i say then a v manifold this is this is now sort of the internal definition
this comes out externally as being a v etal infinity stack but sort of in this internal logic
we just think of everything as being sets a group of structures so a v manifold is
so it's an it's an x equipped with an atlas so within a one epi an effective epi morphism and
the infinite toposense out of some u such that this is etal formally etal so this extremization
is the fact that you have a cover by open maps but then we want to say this is all locally
equivalent to our fixed v so we just say that u looks locally like v so there's a formally etal
map from u back to v it's a correspondence if you wish that transfers the structure on v the
local tension structure on v to the local tangents of x so let me take this as my definition and
then the statement is sorry it's in the spirit of captain we'll get we'll see cotton geometry in
this little square up here now in just a second so what i do need to extract to get cotton geometry
i didn't do need to prove that this is sufficient to get me frame bundles of which i can then reduce
the structure group and this is it's not entirely trivial but it's a it's a simple so i mean part of
the thing is these proofs come out it's kind of they flow they so using my v torus arguments and
stuff you you can prove the following you know i mean call it proposition it's a little exercise
probably for people like andrea or something uh so you you check that um that if you have a group
object then it's it's frame bundle for the group object is canonically nically trivialized by left
translation by left translation which is you know if this is a 17 group stack this can be this will
be tricky in components but you can just synthetically deduce this now uh who's fiber and so the fiber the
typical fiber of this trivialized uh formal disk bundle whose fiber is of what i will call d ve it's
just the formal neighborhood of the neutral the neutral element the point in v so this is the
first statement and then b it you know this is not sufficient to transfer this to x x won't have um
a trivial formal disk bundle but it will it will not have a locally over u trivial formal disk one
then there's another theorem that tells you that in infinity almost every fiber bundle is actually
associated so so it follows that uh for every for every v manifold v et al super infinity stack
then then it's formal disk bundle x then it's formal disk bundle is is a d ve fiber bundle
infinity fiber bundle if you wish associated so there's a theory of principle bundles infinity
bundles and an infinity was associated once into force so it's associated to a what i want to call a
glv principle bundle where glv i take to be it's the internal automorphism group of d ve the linear
automorphisms right so this will work it's the jet version if you take all formal things
principle bundle principle infinity bundle and and this of course i call the frame bundle frame of x
and then from there we get cotton geometry i mean from there it's it's easy now you have the frame
bundle you can now ask for any group of morphism from any group infinity group g to glv and can
lift the groups the the non-trivial statement is maybe to really do cotton geometry you want to
do torsion free g structures so you need to do one more thing you need to reduce the structure
groups and then say that again formal neighborhood wise they're torsion free so that formal neighborhood
they're trivialized but trivialized with respect to this trivialization this turns out to be this
turns out to give everything that was ever done in high-dimensional supergravity for instance it
turns out that the equation of motion of what's called 11-dimensional supergravity is equivalent to
taking the right v here we're certain super infinity group that is canonically defined
and then just looking at just the torsion free 11-dimensional cotton geometry of this this
turns out to be to give 11-dimensional super manifolds that solve the equations of motion of
supergravity so you find this and point us to it in these notes that i distributed
okay so i guess i'm out of time is it right but i'll just keep going until you stop me
so yeah let so just quickly here how do we do jet geometry and and yeah let me just it takes two
minutes to fill this board so let's let's figure fix a bundle now over some sigma and think of this
as the field bundle so what what will happen is like this so i'm i will now we'll now put ourselves
entirely into the slice for this board we work over space time sigma or wealth volume sigma
and i'm i'm asking you to think of like follows here's f regard as the guy in the slice and here's
sigma regarded by the identity map in the slice so this is a terminal object in the slice so
a map here will now be a section simply a section of this bundle f
and if we axiomatize physics if you open the first book on any mathematical physics textbooks
so sections of a given bundle this is how you axiomatize field configuration in physics so
we think of this now as being a field configuration i take f to be the bundle of you know rank two
tensors or something then this will be this will be a field configuration of gravity and so forth
so this is a standard stuff this is what what you're supposed to think of this f
but now we can do the following so so in age we have differential homology here in h over so h over
sigma won't be cohesive anymore um but we can kind of compare so what we can do is now we have the
the canonical map that shifts everything up to differential equations so so we can you know
take any guy in age and regard it as forming the fiber of the trivial bundle over sigma
and then we can further go to regard this as the trivial partial differential equation
over sigma by this is really so this comes here from from the back theorem for this this is really
defined as being the the the embank more category of this jet core monad then by back theorem you'll
you notice it's just a slice so what we do is we we push forward along this thing this is the same
thing as producing three differential equations we just regard the bundle as being the differential
equation which is trivial such that all sections of the bundle are solutions so this is a way to
canonically embed our cohesive context now into pds and now up there we have we have a splitting
yeah there is horizontal splitting i one can define this i i'm not i don't have time not to
say this so you can take our differential homology theory down there let me call this map sigma
we shift it up in this pde context we regard it now over sigma and there is a canonical projection
to its horizontal piece i call it e h the horizontal piece is roughly that which is actually seen by
sections so this will give us a structure up here in pde theory but if we pull back along sections
then part of the structure will disappear because the sections will only see a horizontal structure
that's the stunner terminology of jet bundles so we project out that piece that will be seen
when evaluated on sections and then it follows that yeah so this is projection here which one
can define and then it turns out and this is explained a bit at the in the first six sections
i think of the nodes then you can extremitize field theory just like so so here's our field bundle
and now we have a map but we're in this eindberg moore category we say we have a map to e h but
this map being in the eindberg moore category between two free guys will actually be a map a
clisly map so it will be a map out of the jet bundle of this you know it will be a map in h out of
the jet bundle of this into our differential coefficients and these are precisely the Lagrangian
densities the Lagrangian densities and stunner literature are differential forms on jet bundles
and here we get now differential reforms pre quantized to differential cosugers in some so this
will be a Lagrangian density which which defines which physicists think of defining as the physical
theory and then we have the curvature map this was this one here remember this they send a
a generalized bundle with connection to its curvature and now we have kind of the horizontal
part of this curvature map gets us gets us to the horizontal part of these differential forms
so this is the the coefficients for differential forms now made horizontal in the jet bundle
and it turns out this is the this will be the this is the Euler variational derivative
it comes out as being the variational derivative of this Lagrangian
one uses the fact the the the bi-complex structure on jet bundles to prove this it's kind of it gives
kind of a prankery lemma adapted to jet bundles and anyway so this composite we can then this is
like the the variation of l in the physics literature this is called el is the Euler Lagrange form
i mean if you feed an e to be ordinary differential homology in some degree this comes out as the
ordinary Euler Lagrange form is in the standard textbooks and then it turns out forming fibers
here of this thing the kernel of el is usually called e this is the shell this is the see this
is now an object in pde so it's defined some partial differential equation on sigma and this
turns out to be the Euler Lagrange pde of motion that that physicists associate to a given Lagrangian
density so once you have this you can then say well then these sections here so if you have a pde
then the maps out of the sigma into it these will be the solutions so these are the classical solutions
so all this can just be you know i'm just using the jet coordinate and i'm using that i know what
differential homology is and that they are compatible and again the statement is if you put an ordinary
delinq homology this comes out as the ordinary story prequantist if you put in differential
k theory something more interesting will come out yeah and so forth and one can do the prequantist
phase space yeah and now i guess i have to ask you do you one minute did you say one minute or
did you say stop now so here's something internal sheeps is that there's a nice definition of
internal etal topos take take an x in in a cohesive in a form in differentially cohesive
topos then you can make the following definition right sheeps internal sheeps i mean yeah here's
what i mean i define this to be the slice over x but on the on the formally etal maps this the
the full subcategory of the slice on those maps that are formally etal so this is like in the in
the standard algebraic context discussion of the of the etal topos and that we're just using
there's no finiteness condition of my fibers it turns out to be reflective and core reflective
by etalification this turns out to be so one can prove using the x and this is a topo this is
actually where this extra rider joined up here to prove that this is a topos one needs
so we can think of the guys in here as being sheeps over x and now you can do the following
suppose let me let me do the quick nice notation so suppose we have a map now from x
let me do it like this to to the discrete image of say small infinity group points smaller
multiple depths with some small just to make it an object in our topos then you know over here
there's there's the univalent universe you can i mean that's just this is really start right
univalent this is stash f he he observes the universal vibration for the connected components
of here back in the 60s i think right so this is the let me put a hat on here this is the the direct
sum of b odds of f's for homotopy types f's and this is the direct sum of homotopy protons f
mod odd f this is really was known in the 60s so we can pull this back form this pullback here
and i'm claiming this this will in this from this perspective this will realize
x headers being a locally constant infinity stack on x is being so i need to show that
that it will be in here but you just factor it like this so here's yeah i shouldn't do this now
i don't have time i have minus minutes right so so this will be actually one one can show from
just fact factorizing and using the pasting law that this will be a stack over x and then you
see now here's the beauty or one of the beauties now use the junction between disk and pi and you
notice that locally constant infinity six on x the left to join to disk is pi infinity the italian
multiple type functor x by the way is anything it doesn't have to be a manifold it can be
any stack any high stack so so we learned that we learned with one line that locally constant
infinity stacks on x are you know give us the homotopy type of x in in that the kind of infinity
permutation representations if you wish of the italian multiple type of x classifies
locally constant stacks all right thank you for your attention and your patience
yes
thanks for the question so the way i set it up this is this guy this just gives the brst part right
the le algebra to get to get bv there's there's footnotes in the notes on this you would have to
replace your replace the cartesian spaces by derived cartesian spaces which is rather straightforward
and one has to be make it be a little careful to have them still be cohesive but then it just goes
through and then yes then then the infinitesimal version there's also formalization of lead
differentiation and taking these guys and lead differentiating will give bv brst compresses
you know in the symmetry protected phases and topological phases yes so so in particular
i mean this is where this this i mean freed and more consider k theory but i think what seems
to be most interesting to me is that uh when the the reason the researcher to who sees idea
goes back um i forget the first name he um he he claims he claims in his original article that
higher wzw models for a given legal g that they actually classify the symmetry protected
phases of metam what's kind of curious for me is so i was interested i was i'm using these as you
can see in the notes to describe super p brands screen 4 super p brands and he's kind of claiming
that the precisely the same mathematics should or same broad mathematics actually controls the
symmetry protected phases of metals but i have to say when i look at his articles i see that he
claims this i don't really see that he proves this but anyway it would be interesting
so you alluded to the fact that also phase space yes you can model do you have a hamid
yes so yes so there's a the point of setting this up for us was that we wanted to to have a
classical field theory or pregame field theory kind of detranscrest to all code dimensions
so this is what happens sort of in code dimension zero your values on all of sigma
but but it it keeps going down next to choose a Cauchy surface
or a boundary of sigma inside sigma and then just put that boundary here
and then you need to adapt your notion of horizontality then a bit more will become horizontal
since you're testing with fewer sections and then you you get other jerbs here which are called
le pastures well and then you can do the same diagram and now you get um then you get the
symplectic you get the multi-symplectic forms on the covariant phase space which which which
was so common called the pre-symplectic currents and then if you transgress back to
code dimension zero these will become the the symplectic the canonical piled
bracket symplectic structure on phase space you can see this in the notes if you've got a copy of
the notes the notes are circulating are they have maybe they're all used up your colleagues have notes
yeah so this was a big motivation for us you see there's this gap in the or this
you know there was this big breakthrough with luri's proof of the cobert as my hypothesis that
quantized topological field theories are no known it not we know what it means to do them
n categorically but there this is gap that it wasn't known you know the way physicists produce
field theories is always by quantization from a Lagrangian but there was no formalism that would
give you these extended quantum field theories from a Lagrangian you know there was a gap the
the quantization step just happened in code dimension zero but we we learned that the output
actually happens in in full code dimension n categories so this is the motivation here we
this this sets up a formalism of classical and pre quantum physics that goes all all the way down
to full code dimension and i have a link to an article where i this is a bit work in progress
where i sketch how it seems to be possible to quantize these by pool portion generalized
homology to extended field theories but but this is i think this is one of the big question
you know there are some people thinking about this i think Dan Fried is thinking about this and
and maybe maybe if i wanted to one thing is i wanted to alert maybe to a group of high
power topos theorists that there is this this is a big open mathematical problem actually which
which topos theory has something to say about and if one could make progress there there would be
this i think huge impact on people who don't actually care about topos theory as such but about
physics
you
