Lecture 11 – An Epic Trial – Milton's Paradise Lost
In this lecture we turn to one of the great epics of English literature, Milton's depiction
of the Genesis story of Adam and Eve.
We return to this story in its 17th century version to understand the nature of the English
Puritan state and the complicated web of connections between the theological, the legal and the
political that gave rise eventually to the death of a king, Charles I, and the establishment
of a commonwealth that drew its moral and political strength from a specific understanding of
the Bible and God's providence.
This attempt at theocracy was supported by the legal theories of men like Sir Edward
Cook who argued, as I mentioned in the previous lecture, that the king is subject not to men
but to God and the law.
Milton spent the English Civil Wars as a prominent politician and right-hand man to
Oliver Cromwell, arguing for liberty, the power of the citizens over the power of the
state, and divorce in cases of incompatibility.
Its great epic, Paradise Lost, published in 1667, seven years after the re-establishment
of the monarchy, is both a celebration of the religious principles that caused the revolution
and a lament for the loss of that glorious state.
Paradise Lost is one of two great English legal and literary texts of the early modern
period that is securely based upon religious principles.
The other text is John Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, published in 1678.
By the time Milton published his epic poem, however, the vision of a state securely grounded
on divine law that had inspired his work was, like Milton's own sight, gone forever.
Born in 1608, Milton was at first trained for the ministry, but after several years studying
at Cambridge University and then travelling abroad to France and Italy, he committed himself
to poetry and politics.
During the Civil War, from 1642 to 1651, and the following interregnum, 1652 to 1659,
Milton was Cromwell's Latin secretary.
All diplomacy was still conducted in Latin at that time.
And the war silenced all poetic projects.
His pen was not idle, however, and he wrote a series of pamphlets against Episcopacy in
1642, on divorce in 1643, and in defense of the liberty of the press in 1644.
In the doctrine and discipline of divorce, written soon after his young wife had deserted
him, Milton argued that the true marriage is one of the mind as well as the body, and
that to be chained unnaturally with a spouse who was intellectually or physically incompatible
should be grounds for divorce.
Despite his adherence to many Puritan beliefs, Milton was not a strict conformist, and many
of his ideas were in conflict with official doctrine.
In 1644, Milton published a plea for the liberty of the press, titled Areopagittiga,
subtitled A Speech for the Liberty of Unlicensed Printing to the Parliament of England.
It begins with an epigraph from Euripides.
This is true liberty, when free-born men having to advise the public may speak free.
Milton fully supported those parliamentarians who tried Charles I and sentenced him to death
for treason against his people, and after the king's death, Milton wrote a pamphlet
The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates, 1649, arguing that the people had the right to
depose and punish tyrants.
Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660, and Milton was briefly arrested and imprisoned
for his role in the revolution, but escaped punishment by paying a very large pine that
left him relatively poor for the rest of his life.
It was then after the revolution had failed, after the establishment of a godly kingdom
in England had proved to be merely another chapter in the struggle between parliament
and the monarchy, but one that as I have suggested earlier parliament was destined to win, that
Milton returned to poetry and his great task to justify the ways of God to man.
The first edition of Paradise Lost was published, as I said, in 1667 and was ten books in length,
and Milton expanded that to twelve books in the second edition, published in 1674.
The poem is a compendium of Milton's enormous knowledge, the product of years of studying
languages, philosophy, theology, political systems and science.
Although every line reflects this encyclopedic grasp of ancient and contemporary affairs,
the poem is finally a dramatic retelling of one of the great stories of the Western tradition,
the Genesis story of Adam and Eve and their fall from grace.
In his narrative of this originary moment in the story of mankind, Milton weaves together
images and narratives from biblical and classical traditions, constructing a huge canvas that
represents a divine plan against which the figures of Adam and Eve are placed in all
their human frailty and nobility.
To understand the magnitude of Milton's creative genus, it is necessary to compare the Genesis
account of the creation and the fall of Adam and Eve with Milton's version in Paradise Lost.
You will recall from Lecture 2 on the Hebrew Bible that there are two versions of the creation
of man.
In the first, God creates both male and female in his image.
In the second version, God forms Adam out of the dust of the earth, and only later forms
Eve out of Adam's rib to be a companion to him.
Adam is responsible for Eden, which God has created for him, and must demonstrate his obedience
to God by observing God's single commandment, not to eat from the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil.
The biblical version of the fall assigns primary guilt to the serpent who tempts Eve.
Milton situates this crime against God within the context of other acts of disobedience,
primarily that of Satan's rebellion against God.
Milton relies on centuries of biblical commentary to explicate the nature of man's condition
before and after the fall, as well as to explore the nature of God's justice and his relationship
to his creation.
But the particular rendering of the multiple crimes against God is Milton's alone.
The only plausible poetic form that could contain such a narrative scope and philosophical
range was the epic, and Milton certainly conceived of himself as belonging to that tradition
of epic poets, like Homer and Virgil, who articulated a nationalist vision through the
narratives of their heroes.
Milton's poem was, like the traditional epic, a poem about a nation, as well as a poem about
a hero, and Milton specifically identifies his verse form as English.
And for Milton, the fall from grace experienced by Adam and Eve resembles the collapse of
God's kingdom once thought to have been permanently established by Cromwell and the Puritans.
The Puritan Revolution was both a theological and a political event, the two inseparably
linked in the cultural imagination.
Paradise Lost is as much a poem about the proper form of government and civic responsibility,
and therefore about law, as it is about the proper form of Christian doctrine.
The epic invocation that opens Book One of the poem announces Milton's theme.
Of man's first disobedience and the fruit of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
brought death into the world and all our woe with loss of Eden, till one greater man restore
us and regain the blissful seat, sing, heavenly muse.
We will not witness this act of disobedience by man until Book Nine of the poem.
All that, Milton traces the prehistory of man's creation and prepares us for the fall
by recounting the fall of one closer to God, that is Lucifer, that means bringer of light,
who is renamed Satan, that is, enemy of God, after his rebellion against God.
That Milton, who rebelled against the authority of the king and sanctioned his death, should,
after the restoration of that king's son, publish a poem in which the rebellious figure
is condemned to eternal damnation, is not without its irony.
But Milton would have distinguished between the necessary uprising against an impious
and tyrannical king and the egocentric rebellion led by Satan against God.
Lesser mortals might well wonder how one makes that distinction with certainty, but for Milton
the religious impulse that drove him and many others to rise up against Charles I was sufficient
authority to endorse their cause.
After the invocation that details the scope of the narrative, from the fall of man to
Christ's redemption and the last judgment, Milton begins his account of these crimes
against God in medias rays, in the middle of things, in accordance with epic conventions.
Book One offers us the image not of the hero, but of the antihero, of Satan among his cohort
on the burning lake of hell.
Satan might be antiheroic in terms of his relationship to God, but his demeanor, language
and appearance simulate the traditional hero of the epic.
He is larger than life and boasts of his strength as he summons his fallen compatriots to risk
despair and prepare for battle.
Satan says, what though the field be lost, all is not lost, the unconquerable will and
study of revenge, immortal hate and courage never to submit or yield.
We have seen in the Orestia what happens in a world where revenge rather than justice
determines outcomes, and yet it is tempting to approve at some level of Satan's response
to hell, and indeed one suspects that Milton recognized that the inevitable human response
would be to sympathize for Satan, for after all are we not also in Milton's theology
also fallen creatures.
Satan's audacity distracts us from his situation.
He is at the furthest point from God, both spatially and spiritually, and his rebellion
is not merely another version of disobedience.
He simply does not recognize God's authority.
His rebellion then is a denial of God's essential nature, as all powerful, and has been fueled
by a rivalry with God.
In its destructiveness, it is a parody of the divine act of creation.
Satan briefly expresses regret at the loss of his seat in heaven.
He says, is this the region, this the soil, the climb, said then the lost archangel, this
the seat that we must change for heaven, this the mournful gloom for that celestial light.
But that regret does not last, and in his acceptance of his fate, Satan reveals that
his logic, his reason, has also suffered a fall.
And that he now argues as one who no longer sees the light of reason.
Be it so, says he, since he who now is sovereign can dispose and bid what shall be right.
Fathers from him his best, whom reason hath equalled, force hath made supreme above his
equals, farewell happy fields where joy forever dwells, hail horrors, hail infernal world,
and thou profoundest hell receive thy new processor, one who brings a mind not to be
changed by place or time.
The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.
What matter where, if I be still the same, and what I should be, all but less than he
whom thunder hath made greater, here at least we shall be free.
The Almighty hath not built here for his envy, will not drive us hence.
Here we may reign secure, and in my choice to reign is worth ambition, though in hell,
better to reign in hell than serve in heaven.
Note how Satan misperceives the nature of God's power, ascribing God's success in
the battle merely to his superior strength.
Likewise, he fails to understand that there is no place outside God's provenance.
Even hell is not outside God's order, and that being free to reign in hell is entirely
dependent upon God's will, not his own desire.
Satan's failure to comprehend his situation is rooted in his failure to grasp a central
paradox, that God has granted the individual free will to act even though God knows in
advance how that individual will choose.
This tension between free will and its corollary choice and God's omniscience cannot be resolved
through philosophical reasoning, only by faith.
In Book 3, God, who as many critics have noted is a much less interesting character than
Satan, explains to Christ who bears the responsibility for this transgression.
For man will hearken to his glosing lies, and the his here is Satan, for man will hearken
to his glosing lies, and easily transgress the sole command, sole pledge of his obedience.
So will fall he and his faithless progeny, whose fault, whose but his own, ingrate he
had of me all he could have, I made him just and right, sufficient to have stood though
free to fall.
That God knew how man would choose does not lessen man's responsibility for his crimes.
To have created a less sufficient creature would be, according to God's logic, neither
right nor just.
Satan's perverse logic is also evident when he fails to understand the implications of
his claim that his mind can make a hell out of heaven, a heaven out of hell, that is that
his mind is not to be changed by place and time.
As he will discover after he leaves hell and journeys to earth to tempt man, a mind that
cannot be changed is a mind that remains a hell.
Me miserable, which way shall I fly, infinite wrath and infinite despair, which way I fly
is hell, myself am hell.
A similarly perverse logic will overtake both Eve and Adam after they succumb to temptation.
We see then, as we did in the Orestya among other texts, how rhetoric, the discourse of
persuasion, functions both to promote and pervert law and justice.
The embodiment of rhetoric as dissembling appears in the fallen angel, Belial, who argues
in favor of appeasing God and whose argument is described as making the worst appear the
better.
Such a description prefigures exactly the kind of logic that Satan will employ in persuading
Eve to eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
In book three, God explains to Christ that man must fall precisely because he is free
to do so.
In his explanation, God distinguishes quite clearly between his version of freedom and
Satan's.
For Satan, freedom means that he is equal to God, or at the very least, not subordinate
to God.
For God, freedom is an act of willing submission.
When man breaks his covenant with God and disobeys the single commandment God has ordained,
then his destruction is inevitable.
To elevate the demands of the senses over the will and reason is to make the flesh paramount,
thereby to convert what had previously been immortal into something mortal.
God says, but to destruction, sacred and devote, he with his whole posterity must die.
Why he or justice must, and lest for him some other able and as willing pay the rigid satisfaction
death for death.
That of course is Christ.
If God is to remain true to his nature as one who does not change his mind, whose decrees
are absolute, then justice demands man's death.
Only the sacrifice of another, Christ for man, can redeem this punishment.
Justice Satan has volunteered to seek out man and corrupt him, then so Christ volunteers
to sacrifice his life to redeem man.
One can see then that justice is always inseparably linked to mercy for Milton.
Just as evil is always inseparably linked to a failure of reason.
In Milton's ontological hierarchy, reason, also called right reason and choice, stands
supreme, governing will, which in turn governs the appetite or the demands of the senses.
When Eve listens to Satan's lies, she willingly relinquishes her reason and follows the demands
of the flesh.
Such a voluntary rejection of the right reason with which God has endowed her is problematic,
however, because Eve seems to be described as less able to reason than Adam.
Moreover, when Raphael visits Adam and Eve in Book 5 to warm them of Satan's plan, he
only speaks to Adam, although Eve hides herself and overhears much of what he says.
The question of how fair it is to blame Eve for not being able to resist what she is not
directly informed of is a reasonable one, but Milton answers it, even if the answer
does not accord with our modern sense of gender equity.
It is precisely because she has to lean on Adam and follow his advice that she should
not presume to know the enemy when she sees him, nor to be able to resist his temptations.
The description of Adam and Eve in Book 4 has made clear that although both are equally
formed in God's image and therefore both owe equal obedience to God, there is an inequality
in their relationship to God.
The description begins, to a far nobler shape erect and tall, God-like erect, with native
honor clad in naked majesty seemed lords of all, and worthy seemed, for in their looks
divine the image of their glorious maker, Sean, truth, wisdom, sanctitude, severe and
pure, severe but in true filial freedom placed, whence true authority in men.
So both not equal, as their sex not equal seemed, for contemplation he and valor formed,
for softness she and sweet attractive grace, he for God only, she for God in him.
Once again the key term is freedom.
Both Adam and Eve are described as being in filial freedom placed in relationship to
God.
Both are the children of their creator.
In this they are equal, and from this covenant, one that comes with duties and rights on both
sides, comes their authority, their power over the rest of the created world.
There is then a natural law that operates to keep the created world in order, and both
Adam and Eve are inherently sanctioned to exercise their authority in this world, an authority
that relies upon the exercise of reason understood as choice.
The difference between the two comes in their relationship to God, which is either direct
as in the case of Adam, or indirect as in the case of Eve.
And because Eve must exercise her reason in compliance with Adam's understanding of his
relationship with God, her unwillingness to heed his warnings about the enemy, who might
harm her, is not excusable on the grounds that she is not directly informed about the
danger.
Some critics argue that Eve has already fallen when she allows the snake to persuade her
to eat the apple.
In other words, that the fall occurs earlier when, in book four, for example, Satan disguised
as a toad, whispers into Eve's ear and she dreams of her temptation and fall.
All that the fall occurs when she suggests to Adam that they would achieve more labor
if they separated while tending the garden, because now their work is interrupted with
looks and smiles and caresses, or that she falls when she refuses to follow Adam's advice
and stay with him.
Eve's argument that their state cannot be one of perfection if they are capable of
being tempted, either singly or alone, reveals the limitations of her reason, both in its
intellectual and in its larger spiritual sense.
She makes this argument to Adam.
And what is faith, love, virtue, unassayed, alone without exterior help sustained?
Let us not then suspect our happy state, left so imperfect by the maker wise, as not secure
to single or combined.
Frail is our happiness if this be so, and Eden were no Eden thus.
Eve's conclusion that Eden cannot be Eden if they are vulnerable to temptation reveals
the poverty of her intellectual and moral reasoning and indicates precisely why she
should remain with Adam.
The phrase Eden were no Eden also recalls God's explanation in book three as to why
he cannot change Adam and Eve's punishment, because to do so would be to change his essential
nature and it points forward to Satan's argument to Eve that God cannot be God if he punishes
them for seeking knowledge.
As is the case so frequently in Paradise Lost, Milton links the protagonists and antagonists,
God and his son against Satan, Adam and Eve against Satan, Adam and Eve against God,
through a series of rhetorical arguments that are similarly patent and that seem to reach
valid conclusions, but which as we have seen with both Satan and Eve, rely upon knowingly
or ignorantly perverting the logic of intellectual and moral discourse to corrupt truth.
Adam's response to Eve specifically corrects her imperfect logic and reinforces the hierarchy
that makes him superior in reason.
Oh woman, he says to Eve, best are all the things as the will of God ordained them.
His creating hand, nothing imperfect or deficient left of all that he created, much less man
or ought that might his happy state secure, secure from outward force.
Within himself the danger lies, yet lies within his power.
With his will he can receive no harm, but God left free the will, for what obeys reason
is free, and reason he made right, and bid her well beware and still erect, lest by some
fair appearing good surprise she dictate false, and misinform the will to do what God expressly
has forbid.
Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoins that I should mind the oft and mind thou me.
Just as Adam insists reason is superior to the will, so he is superior to Eve.
Although as he notes reason can dictate false and misinform the will to disobey God, a clear
foreshadowing of his own fate.
Put the pun on the word mind in the final line, that I should mind the oft and mind
thou me, indicating the importance once again of reason in the exercise of one's faith
in God.
Adam must exercise mindfulness over Eve, and she must mind him, that is, obey through
the use of her reason, and not merely because he is her superior.
Thus, the relationship between Adam and Eve parallels in its human form the relationship
between God and mankind.
Can it be argued then that Eve is in a sense already fallen?
I think the answer is no.
From a strictly theological point of view, Milton would have argued that there can be
no sin before the single act of disobedience.
There can be error, but error is blameless.
And indeed, if one sees the epic unfolding with the same relentless irony as Sophocles'
Oedipus Tyrannus, one can see the distinction that Milton wishes to maintain between thinking
about sin and committing it.
Just as Sophocles does no harm until he kills his father at the crossroads, however much
he is contesting some divine order by leaving Conrinth and those he believes to be his parents,
so Eve does no harm until she actually bites the apple.
This distinction between intent and action is one we have already examined in the context
of measure for measure, and as we have seen, it is not simply a legalistic distinction.
It is acting with guilty intent that makes the criminal.
Only then can he be said to be fully responsible for his crime.
When Eve leaves Adam to work alone, she does so without any intent to disobey either him
or God.
Indeed at every stage of her seduction by Satan, whose form as a snake now literalizes
his debased position, she appears to be acting without guile.
Satan's corruption of Eve follows the same rhetorical pattern that Satan has himself articulated
in his complaint against God.
Just as Satan has redefined God as a tyrant and thus rationalized his own disobedience
as justified resistance, so Satan is able to persuade Eve that a God who would punish
his creatures because they wished to know the nature of goodness cannot be just.
If not just says Satan, not God.
Eve's fear of death, whatever that might be, Satan says, is likewise dismissed as nothing
more than the attempt by a jealous God to keep them in ignorance.
Milton is not a feminist.
Eve does not fall because she is heroically searching for knowledge.
She falls because she cannot outwit Satan, and that is precisely what Adam has warned
her about.
His reaction to her sin is quite different.
She does not have to persuade him to eat the apple.
According to Milton's representation, Adam is fully aware of the sin and its consequences.
The story does not, however, end with their loss of innocence and mutual accusation of
fault.
In the last two books of the epic, Adam is shown by Raphael, the future of mankind,
with all its horrors and misery, but he is also shown mankind's redemption.
In this Christian telelology, the hero is not cast out to suffer blindness and exile
as Oedipus is, but rather leaves Eden to walk into human history.
Milton announced at the beginning of his epic that he wished to justify the ways of God
to man, and his best readers might indeed see in his justification precisely the just
God that Milton believed was necessary to enable human beings to act and to choose freely.
Milton's version of divine justice, then, produces the fully responsible human being.
By the end of this epic trial of man's virtue, only God's verdict from the Latin verba dictum
word spoken can be trusted.
