Lecture 6 Chaucer's Lawyers and Priests
In this lecture we will turn to one of the most famous examples of medieval literary narrative,
Chaucer's Canterbury Tales,
and focus on three tales that illustrate once again the profound importance of biblical narrative
and exemplum to the construction of cultural values in the Middle Ages.
Those three tales, The Man of Laws, The Partners and The Parsons,
might each be said to be a confession of sorts,
suggesting to the audience the values that each teller holds most dear.
These tales and the prologues by their tellers also reveal the contemporary criticism
levelled at the Roman Catholic Church,
criticism that eventually led to the Reformation,
with its insistence upon the primacy of the individual's relationship to God,
unmediated by the priest or other church officials.
In this lecture I want to illustrate the way in which legal concepts and terms
are pervasive in the text of the medieval period,
and that this pervasiveness is an indication of how the culture experienced
the inextricability of moral, religious and legal concepts.
Before I turn to the three specific stories from Canterbury Tales,
let me briefly discuss Chaucer's life and place his collection of tales in context.
Chaucer was a public servant,
and so we are fortunate to have considerable knowledge of his life
through the public records in which his name appears.
Moreover, his involvement in the affairs of the court, of parliament and the legal system
is clearly reflected in the complex interweaving of the public and the private in his poetry.
He was a soldier captured by the French,
a diplomat travelling to France, Spain and Italy,
a customs officer, a justice of the peace,
a member of parliament,
the supervisor of works and repairs at ten royal residences and a royal forester.
Such exposure to a variety of public offices,
as well as constant dealings with a variety of people and classes,
obviously contributed to the richness of his literary work.
We also have records that suggest that when Chaucer was in the surface of Edward III,
he was studying law at the inner temple, one of the ins of court,
training that would have been necessary for him in his later positions
as controller of the customs and clerk of the king's works.
One intriguing legal record that continues to puzzle Chaucer scholars
is the one in which a young woman, Cecilia Chopin,
releases Chaucer from all further legal actions in a case of raptus
upon the payment of a sum of money.
It is the definition of raptus that causes confusion.
It could mean physical rape or abduction
and scholars of medieval law disagree as to the interpretation of this record,
but what is clear is that somehow Chaucer was involved with this young woman
and that his release from legal prosecution involved the payment of money to her and her family.
Let us turn now to the Canterbury Tales,
a collection of stories varying from moral tales to bawdy folk narratives
held together by the fiction that they are stories told by pilgrims
on their way to worship at the shrine of St. Thomas Beckett in Canterbury Cathedral.
A pilgrimage was one of the few occasions when people from different classes might have met
and for the duration of the journey would have assumed a kind of social equality.
Although Chaucer's representation of his pilgrims is realistic and full of concrete details about medieval life,
he is not interested in presenting a real pilgrimage,
but rather using the metaphor of the pilgrimage as a way of speaking about the world
and about the soul's journey through life.
Moreover, the selection of Canterbury Cathedral and the shrine of St. Thomas
would confirm this metaphoric sense of the pilgrimage
because it will recall for the audience the ongoing conflict between earthly matters
and spiritual matters between the concerns of this world and the demands of the next,
which was a conflict specifically played out between crown and church
that had resulted in the martyrdom of Thomas Beckett.
During the reign of Henry II from 1154 to 1189,
the ecclesiastical courts had developed a large body of canon law and claimed wide jurisdiction.
Henry II was determined to resist the imposition of church law on secular affairs
and had appointed his former close ally, Thomas Beckett, to the Archbishopric of Canterbury,
hoping thereby to maintain control of the church courts.
Thomas Beckett's loyalty to Rome and canon law drove the two men apart
and this particular struggle between church and crown,
which would continue for several hundred years to come,
was finally resolved with the murder of Thomas in Canterbury Cathedral in 1170,
a murder ordered by Henry II.
Beckett was canonized in 1173.
By the end of Henry's reign, the crown had effectively centralized the exercise of justice and law
through the appointment of legal officials who reported directly to the crown.
Canon law remained important, of course, within church institutions,
but gradually the area under its control outside of the specifically ecclesiastical
was narrowed down to moral infractions,
which makes the immorality of the church figures on the pilgrimage even more ironic.
Each of the 29 pilgrims on the journey from London to Canterbury Cathedral
and back again has agreed to tell a story to pass the time
and the one that tells tales of best significance and most so loss will be rewarded with a prize.
There is considerable scholarly disagreement about the order in which the tellers would have told their stories,
with the exception of the parson, who is designated as the last storyteller.
Thus one sees in the large arc of this frame narrative
that Chaucer intended that the representative of divine law should provide closure to the whole story,
which stands metaphorically as the story of the soul's journey to God.
One can consider each individual tell, as I said, as a kind of confession,
each storyteller telling the story that reveals his concerns and values,
although that relationship is not always straightforward and certainly not unironic.
As we will see when we examine the pardonist tale, it is not always clear
whether the storyteller is confessing what he is, what he would like to be,
or what he would like the others to think he is.
There are many stories in the Canterbury tales that incorporate or reflect upon religious or secular law,
the rape of the maiden in the wife of Bath's tale,
or the contract between the squire and the lady in the Franklin's tale,
or the issue of justice and political tyranny in the night's tale, just to name a few.
But in this lecture I will concentrate on three tales in order to illustrate
the inextricable nature of secular and religious law,
a connection made more explicit by the professions of the storytellers,
a lawyer, a partner, and a parson.
We will begin with the man of law, the most obvious example of secular law.
The host of the tavern where the pilgrims have assembled to begin their pilgrimage,
Harry Bailey, invites the man of law to tell a story.
Behest is debt, a promise is a debt, responds the lawyer, speaking the language of his profession.
The man of law is a sergeant of law, and thus one of the most important lawyers of Chaucer's time.
In rank they were equal to knights.
They had to undergo extensive training, at least 16 years studying and practicing law,
and they were few in number.
They had exclusive access to plead cases in the court of common pleas,
and cases involving property with their special province.
All judges were chosen from this group,
and their wealth frequently made them the subject of attack for their greed.
Chaucer's description of the man of law in the general prologue is mildly satiric,
commenting on his rather officious nature, but making no direct charge of greed against him.
He says the man of law always seems to be busy, but he's not so busy as he seems.
He is, however, a walking encyclopedia,
having memorized all the cases and judgments since the days of William the Conqueror,
all of which would reflect English common laws concerned with property, commercial transactions,
land, tenure, and inheritance.
So one might see in the Sargent of Law the embodiment of medieval legal ideology and practice,
specifically as the law structured and controlled the fundamental unit of society, the family,
and within the family, the distribution of property and therefore of value.
It is interesting, moreover, given how much the man of law has invested economically and professionally
in the proper order of the family and its structures of inheritance,
to note that in his introduction to his tale, he praises Chaucer for the thrifty stories that he has already written.
Tales says the man of law that specifically do not speak of things like incest.
Incest is, of course, a radical threat to the structure of patriarchy,
disrupting the proper order of succession and undermining the law of the father.
The story the man of law tells is a tale which he says a merchant goon many a year,
gone many a year, taught him.
And thus we are reminded of the relationship between the law and commercial exchange
and the way in which, despite appearing to be outside of the commercial arena,
the family nevertheless participates in exchanges of property, of affection, of contracts.
The story bears the marks of one passed on from one narrator to another.
Its structure, a central act of conversion and exile repeated three times,
has the formulaic quality of an oral narrative.
Indeed, the formulaic quality of his story with its repeated trope of exile,
false accusation and punishment is oral in nature,
reminding us of the importance of memory in constructing the social in this world before the printing press.
Despite belonging apparently to the tradition of folk narrative, however,
the tale betrays its teller.
It is saturated with legal concepts which are drawn both from customary and common law.
It invokes treason, perjury, debt, contract, laws of evidence and of accusation
as well as degrees of punishment.
The story he tells also has echoes both of ancient Greek tragedies and the Hebrew Bible
with its forced exiles and intra-familial tensions.
One thinks, for example, of Oedipus exposed to the elements and his murder of his father
and Moses set adrift on the river.
Constance, the beautiful Christian daughter of the Emperor of Rome,
is given in marriage to the Muslim sultan of Syria,
who is so besotted with Constance that he promises to convert his entire kingdom to Christianity rather than lose her.
The sultan's mother, outraged at his betrayal, kills her son
and casts Constance adrift in a boat bidding her sail back to her father.
Aimlessly drifting for years, Constance finally lands in Northumbria
where she is once again the instrument of conversion to Christianity
at this time of the king of Northumbria, Ala, whom she marries.
Once again, however, Constance is the victim of the wicked mother-in-law
who tricks her son into casting Constance and their child Morris out of the kingdom
and adrift on the ocean.
Finally, Constance returns by chance to Rome where she is united with her father
and where her husband has come on a pilgrimage to atone for his treatment of Constance.
Constance is finally restored to both husband and son
and her son Morris thereafter becomes the Emperor of Rome.
If one were to imagine this narrative as a Greek drama,
one would speak of the incestuous desires of mothers for their sons
which drive them to murder and of fathers for their daughters
which requires the daughter to seek to return forever to the father's side.
But this is a story of Christian martyrdom and conversion.
In its repetitious structure and its focus upon the subjection of the obedient female,
the Man of Law's Tale is a parable that teaches, as Constance herself says,
that women are born to thralldom and penance and to be under man as governance.
Women are born to servitude and penance and to be under men's governance.
Moreover, given the repeated conversions of the heathen
and the ascension of Constance's son to the imperial throne,
it also teaches us that the other, the Muslim, is destined to be under Christian governance.
At the heart of this parable is the pale body of the Christian woman
traded to the dark body of the non-believer, the Muslim.
It is through the person of Constance forever travelling
between the Christian and the non-Christian, between the father and the husband,
that the diversity between here both their lours,
is reconciled, even though she herself plays no active part in that reconciliation.
While Constance, the faithful and law-abiding daughter and wife, may be unable to act,
she simply drifts on the ocean.
Her mother's in law, the infidels, the unconstant, are not similarly constrained
and plot to undermine Christian patriarchal governance.
Their deceit, says the man of law, is simply the supreme example of all women's feigning
and is traced by him to the first instrument, to Eve, the first instrument of Satan's guile.
Thus, in this narrative, even the pure and guiltless Constance is implicated.
The man of law employs literature, a parable of a martyred Christian woman,
to reinforce the patriarchal nature of both law and religion.
His parable functions in the social world of the pilgrimage with the same kind of authority
that the statutes, cases and judgments that he has memorised possess in the world of the common law.
Moreover, just as the man of law relies upon precedent to establish authority in law,
so here he calls up an earlier sentence.
The sentence or judgment of God against Eve and from the Christian perspective,
the judgment against the heathen.
In effect, he suggests that man's social law and God's divine law ought to be synonymous
and therefore his authority, as a man of law, is in some ways equivalent to the authority
of a man of church, hinting at the ongoing struggle between secular and religious
authorities that will continue for at least the next 300 years.
The man of law's claim is not so outrageous that it might first appear,
given the kind of churchmen on the pilgrimage.
There's a monk who enjoys hunting more than praying, a friar who seduces women,
a summoner who brings those charged with sexual offences before the ecclesiastical court
and whose appearance suggests that he, like those accused, overindulges his fleshly desires,
and his companion and singing partner, a partner who seems more concerned with wealth and display
than with increasing the flock as faithful churchgoers.
This partner, we are told, has yellow hair that hangs like string over his shoulders in small bunches.
In other words, he rides bare-headed rather than respectfully covered,
and he sings secular songs of love rather than hymns of praise.
Just as the man of law is possessed of all the opinions and decisions from secular law,
so the partner has a wallet full of pardons from Rome,
the ecclesiastical equivalent of court costs for dismissing the sinner's case.
But the partner is not a fitting representative of church law,
as the man of law is of secular law.
Moreover, despite his fashionable appearance and lecherous look,
the partner's real being seems to be very different from his exterior.
We are told that he has eyes that stare like hairs and a voice as small as a goat,
that he had no beard nor never would, I believe, says the narrator,
and that he was either a gelding or a mare.
The images of hair, goat, and horse are all symbols of lettery,
and yet he is described as a eunuch.
What should we make of this description?
Are we being told that the partner is actually a eunuch, a gelding,
or perhaps homosexual, a mare,
or is Chaucer implying something about his spiritual nature?
That he is spiritually a eunuch, a man who behaves like a woman,
rather than actively choosing chastity as a sign of his commitment to God
and performing manly deeds to realize that commitment,
he willfully turns away from God and produces no good works,
and thus he is infertile in the spiritual gifts he should offer to the faithful.
Like all medieval authors, Chaucer would have relied on his audience's awareness
of the relationship between external reality and an inner spiritual reality,
a form of scriptural interpretation identified with Saint Augustine.
From signs, evidence in the Book of Nature and the Bible, that is the Old and New Testament,
the interpreters sought to understand the will and the law of God.
Thus we should see the partner both as an individual unique to his age,
but also as a type that reaches back to the Old Testament.
And indeed there we find in Deuteronomy a reference to the eunuch who is forbidden to enter the temple.
Apparently the partner's suspect sexual and spiritual identity makes him a master of his profession,
conning the poor, the faithful, and the foolish into buying pig's bones that he passes off as Saint's relics.
So good is he at his business that he even begows the poor parson into buying.
The invocation of the parson emphasizes the corruption of the partner,
for the pilgrim who is the most spiritually wealthy is this poor parson whose homily closes the narrative.
He is a parson rich in holy thought and deeds while the partner is rich only in things of this world.
The prologue to the partner's tale is in the form of an apologia or literary confession
in which a character explains his or her way of life.
The partner gives an extensive list of the tricks of his trade,
relishing the skill with which he exploits the naive believers by convincing them to buy false relics
and the papal bulls that will exonerate them from penance for their sins.
And it was precisely these forms of exploitation and the consequent corruption
that provoked Luther's call for reformation within the Catholic Church.
The partner makes no effort to hide his sinful avarice.
On the contrary, he is proud of his skills.
He acts out of the knowledge rather than the ignorance of sin and makes his impenitence his greatest asset.
He says, but I will shortly tell of my intent.
I only preach for covetous.
Therefore my theme is and ever was, Radix malorum es cupiditas.
Cupidity is the root of all evil.
Thus can I preach against the same vice I employ and that is avarice.
The theme of a sermon is ironically the most appropriate.
His covetous is beyond bounds and he boasts that he would take the last penny from a poor widow.
The proper duty of a man of the church such as the parson will be to distribute charity,
that is, caritas, which is the very opposite of cupiditas, cupidity.
Despite this bragging self-presentation, the partner proceeds to tell a moral tale.
Given the way in which he has described his capacity to trick his listeners
into believing whatever he wants them to believe, however,
we should not be surprised that he can preach a moral tale,
for this is precisely how he makes money.
The pilgrims are better keep their hands on their wallets.
The tale the partner delivers is a sermon in the form of an exemplum,
a brief story told to illustrate a moral point.
Exemplar were a very popular form of literature and were widely disseminated
both through oral tradition and in manuscript collections.
Such tales will be well suited to the kind of audience the partner often sought out,
the poor, the ill-educated, the gullible.
But what makes him think that the pilgrims would be willing to pay money for his trash?
Before he begins the exemplum, the partner delivers a long exhortation
condemning gluttony and other vices of which, of course, he is the prime example.
Gluttony was a vice that was especially linked to blasphemy and heresy in the Middle Ages.
And thus the partner links the social disruptions caused by his behavior
and the disorderly young men in the story that he's about to tell
to the spiritual chaos that ensues when God's word is contested and abused by the unbeliever.
The partner links the vice of gluttony to original sin as the first cause of our ruin
and origin of our damnation, arguing that Adam's eating of the apple was provoked by cupiditus,
that is, by bodily desire.
The partner then tells the tale of three riotous young men,
glutton's and drunkard's, who seek after death, as the partner seeks after the false treasures of this world,
swearing that they can kill him.
This was a well-known folk narrative, found in sources ancient and modern,
and all the narratives involve a central act of mutual betrayal.
Perhaps the most recent example of this, actually, is in the novelist Ian McEwen's novel,
Amsterdam, published in 1998, where two men unwittingly conspire to bring about the other's death.
These young men, the rioters, are described as worshiping the devil through their gluttony,
and thus are aligned with the partner in their worship of cupidity and their spiritual emptiness.
Moreover, we see in this depiction of irreligious behavior how closely aligned for the medieval audience was
that sense of spiritual order based upon obedience to God's laws
and the sense of social order based upon obedience to man's law, which was but a shadow of divine law.
Into this temple of devil worship, the tavern, burst the reminder of man's original sin,
that is, physical death in the form of the plague.
And in response to a young boy's advice that one should always be ready to meet death,
the rioters set off to challenge and defeat death, perversely literalizing the innocent child's spiritual wisdom.
Meeting an old man who points the way to death along a crooked path, the rioters discover a horde of gold beneath a tree,
that's once again literalizing what should be a spiritual insight.
This time, the partner's maxim, that cupidity, is the root of all evil.
The tree that shelters the gold is the tree of evil, the tree of death,
at whose root is the desire that destroyed the innocence of Adam and Eve and introduced death into the world.
Indeed, the result of the old man's directions is not the defeat of death, but rather its triumph over all three,
perversely brought about by their own behavior.
As is the spiritual death, of course, of the partner.
The three men decide to keep the discovery of the gold secret,
hoarding it for themselves rather than distributing the wealth to the community,
just as the partner hoards the spiritual wealth of the church rather than giving it back to his parishioners.
One man goes into town to bring back wine to sustain them until dark, and in his absence, the other two plot to kill him.
Upon his return, he is stabbed to death, and the two remaining rioters toast their success over the dead body,
drinking the wine which, unknown to them, the dead man has poisoned.
Thus, in a perverse re-enactment of the sacrament of mass, they are not born into eternal life,
but die the physical death that literalizes their spiritual death.
The partner concludes his tale by returning to the purpose of his exemplum,
to persuade his audience to buy his pardons and relics so that they may be absolved of their sins.
In particular, he invites the host to be the first to kiss the relics,
to which the host replies with an obscenity about kissing something else that renders the partner speechless,
and they appear to be on the verge of fighting until the night steps in to calm the situation.
Thus, the kind of chaos that the partner's corruption causes within the church
and within the individual who turns to the church for guidance is here made manifest in the social world.
This order in the secular world is the direct result of the perversity and corruption
spread by the partner in his deceptive practices.
The knight who represents the force and authority behind secular law
can only temporarily bring order and harmony to this world.
The partner seems unredeemable, a soul who will never find salvation,
unable to fill up the emptiness that is his being with the pardons,
bowls, relics and other objects he carries on his person.
In direct contrast to this man of many parts, but no centre,
is the parson whose tale ends the Canterbury Tales.
The parson, poor in material wealth but rich in the things of the spirit,
pays no attention to the host's demand for a fable
and insists that he will tell a tale in prose that will lead the pilgrims to their real destination,
the celestial city.
His tale is not a story, not even a sermon,
but a direct exposition of the seven deadly sins.
The parson returns us to the world of the morality play,
but even that would seem too fanciful for this simple village parson.
His sermon seems to reproach the other pilgrims for their fanciful evasion of the inevitable,
which is that they must repent their sins before they can be saved,
and time is short.
The many versions of the seven deadly sins recounted in the tract
remind us of the many ways in which the pilgrims' narratives have embodied these sins,
and thus retroactively condemns all their efforts at narrating away their moral errors.
Even those who have endeavoured to tell a story that is morally sound,
thrifty, as the man of law would say, are suspect.
Recall how his story hints at unseemly relationships between mothers and sons.
Only by relying on the direct language of the church,
not its corrupted version as with the partner,
can the moral man hope to bring about a similar moral conversion in others.
The parson specifically addresses the need to cast off their old ways and former sentences,
that is, judgments, and find a good way in which to walk.
Invoking then the physical journey that they have undertaken as a metaphor
for their spiritual journey towards God,
the parson reminds them that old ways, like the ways of the old Adam,
must be cast aside and replaced by the grace of the New Testament.
The form of this dissertation on sin, one that employs none of the conventions of literature,
it is not a fable, a fiction, it's not an exemplum, or a drama, or a myth,
suggests that, like the discourse of the law,
religious discourse strives to distinguish itself from the literary narrative
as much as it tries to separate itself from ordinary language.
Both kinds of law, the secular and the divine,
would insist that their words are inherently truthful,
and thus their words mean what they say.
Setting this version of language as something transparent and embodying truth values,
in juxtaposition with the language of literature,
we see the implications of falsity, of untruth, that shadow all literary productions.
Literary texts by this measure are perilously akin to heresy.
Literature might lead the sinner away from God,
down the crooked path of invention, and conceals its falsehood,
even as it deceives its audience.
It is such an understanding of the nature of the Canterbury tales
that produces the author's own retraction of a lifetime of writing.
What follows the Parsons tale is Chaucer's own acknowledgement
that salvation is more important than literature,
and he revokes almost all his writings, including the Canterbury tales,
because they tend towards sin.
But how much can we rely on Chaucer's retraction
as the representation of what Chaucer himself felt?
After all, Chaucer is both a character within the Canterbury tales,
as well as the author of the Canterbury tales.
We cannot finally know with certainty what the retraction means,
and so in the infinitely regressive act of evaluating the truth of a statement
made by a character in a fictional text written by an author of the same name,
we find ourselves caught in an interpretive dilemma,
not knowing what counts as the truth.
A dilemma that Chaucer's medieval audience would have identified
as the sign of moral and spiritual insufficiency.
