Lecture 50. Law as Fog. Dickens, Bleak House
Charles Dickens, like fellow novelist Henry Fielding, was a member of the Middle Temple, and witnessed firsthand the corrupting power of law,
when it worked merely to enforce the status quo rather than using its considerable power to effect change.
England's Court of Chancery and its lawyers are the specific target of Dickens' criticism,
but his novel Bleak House addresses not only the flaws in the British legal system,
but employs that system as a metaphor for the corruption in humanity and gridlock in the entire social world.
Such conditions are like a disease, infecting all institutions and communities with whom they come into contact.
In his vision of the City of London and its inhabitants, caught in a bureaucratic, legalistic nightmare,
Dickens prefigures the work of Franz Kafka to whom we will turn in a later lecture.
When one thinks of 19th century English literature that speaks about the law, one author immediately comes to mind, Charles Dickens.
The fascination with the law and its pervasive effect on the social and personal lives of individuals was not peculiar to Dickens, however.
Many 19th century novelists crafted stories out of the often mysterious, frequently frustrating and yet sometimes reassuring relationship
between the legal face of society and its individual members.
Think of the sensational novels of Wilkie Collins, like The Woman in White, published in 1860,
whose preface states that the document that follows is the consequence of the law's inability to solve the mystery.
Or another work that suggested that the official guardians of society, the police, needed help, that is The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes by Arthur Conan Doyle.
Perhaps more than any other writer, though, Dickens was able to tell a story that kept, both kept the reader turning the page to find out what happened next,
and at the same time to reflect on the relationship between legal and social systems, and sometimes the fatal effects of those systems on the lives of individuals.
Dickens' Victorian readers were exposed to multiple sources for their understanding of the law, as indeed we are today.
From the quickly produced and published accounts of spectacular crimes, to the more considered approaches of respectable newspapers,
to the even more sustained treatment afforded by the novel.
Like contemporary readers, Victorian readers expected their novels to represent a world that was the way it was for them,
however modified by the bizarre event or character. It needed to be essentially realistic.
Moreover, in line with their expectations that crime would be punished and the offenders safely incarcerated behind bars,
these novels also ended with society restored to proper order and the criminals properly identified and separated from the innocent.
Also in line with Victorian sentiments was the idea that both the self and society should be improved,
and what better way to promote this self-improvement than through the telling of a story,
one that could both reform society and improve the individual.
The literature of moral outrage, as it was called, was widespread, appearing in both the cheap, popular press,
and in the more respectable newspapers and weekly or monthly serials. It was in this form that Dickens found his audience.
Such moral outrage and interest in how the law might help reform society was not merely the material of novels, however.
Dickens' own life had intersected with the punitive side of the law in his youth when his father was imprisoned for debt,
and the Inns of Court were familiar to Dickens from boyhood, and there are numerous references to them in his novels.
On leaving school, Dickens was employed as a clerk by the solicitor who had an office in the Middle Temple,
and he worked for a period of time as a court reporter for the newspaper The Morning Chronicle.
Moreover, even after he was a successful and wealthy man, he continued to involve himself in situations where he came into direct contact with the criminal element,
most noticeably perhaps in his sponsorship, and sometimes day-to-day involvement with Urania Cottage,
which was set up to reform prostitutes and wayward girls, and make them serviceable as wives of those who were spreading the British Empire halfway across the world,
in Australia, for example. When each girl was admitted to the home, she was required to confess the story of her life,
and that was written down so that there was a permanent record of her change from the wayward girl to the good girl.
Interestingly, Dickens himself frequently interviewed these girls and wrote down their narratives.
Besides the rather prurient interests such stories might have provided him with, they also served as material for his own fictions.
Perhaps the novel most directly and obsessively concerned with the law in its Byzantine and often deliberately obscure methods is Bleak House,
the first part of which was published in Dickens' own journal, Household Words, in 1852.
At the centre of the novel is the Court of Chancery, and at the centre of the Court of Chancery, so to speak, is the case that epitomises the workings of that court,
John Dice v. John Dice. The Court of Chancery, founded during the reign of Richard II, 1377 to 1399,
was a court that developed from the Lord Chancellor's jurisdiction and was a court of equity.
That is, unlike the common law courts, which were rigidly based on precedent, the Lord Chancellor had jurisdiction to determine cases on behalf of the monarch,
according to equity or fairness, rather than according to the strict letter of the law.
By Dickens' time, the court was a model of inefficiency, and indeed it was merged with the common law courts in 1873,
and common law judges given the power to administer equity.
Like all legal disputes, the wrangling over wills and inheritance in the Chancery court tied up the property,
and disputants had to hire a solicitor to prepare their cases which would then be pled before the Lord Chancellor by barristers,
that is, those who had had legal training in the Inns of Court.
In his preface to Bleak House, Dickens satirises the Chancery judge who claimed that the court was almost immaculate,
thus suggesting the prevarication that was endemic in the court.
Being almost immaculate is like being almost pregnant.
It's an equivocation, and that is, it seems, what the Court of Chancery did best, equivocate.
Briefly, the story of Bleak House revolves around the case of John Dyson John Dyson,
which has been immured within the walls of the High Court of Chancery for a very long time.
The current John Dyson, John, owner of Bleak House, has little hope of gaining anything from it.
On her aunt's death, Esther Somerson is adopted by John Dyson,
becomes companion to his wards, Ada Claire and Richard Carstone.
Carstone has hopes that the Chancery case will make his fortune.
In the course of the novel, Esther, who is like so many other heroines of 18th and 19th century novels,
apparently without father or mother, she discovers her parentage, contracts and recovers from smallpox and marries happily.
Richard Carstone dies of despair, bred from pursuing the case in Chancery, leaving his wife Ada and their child.
The case is finally closed, having engrossed all the money on the estate,
and the world is introduced to a new character type, the detective, in the shape of Inspector Bucket.
That summary, of course, has not done justice to the very intricate narrative structure of this long novel,
by which each character is connected in various degrees of separation to all the other characters.
This interconnected narrative structure also suggests the pervasive effect of the law embodied in the court.
It is as if the court were a living, though moribund thing, like the megalosaurus Dickens imagines
waddling like an elephantine lizard through the streets of London,
a monster whose body is connected to all other living things and whose every breath is felt by its all dependence.
Like the fog that obscures the city of London, the effects of the court are everywhere.
Fog everywhere. Fog up the river where it flows among green aides, those are islands, and meadows.
Fog down the river where it flows defiled among the tears of shipping and the waterside pollutions of a great and dirty city.
Fog on the Essex Marshes. Fog on the Kentish Heights.
The raw afternoon is rawest and the densed fog is densest, and the muddy streets are the muddiest,
near that leaden-headed old obstruction, appropriate ornamentation for the threshold of that leaden-headed old corporation, Temple Bar.
And hard by Temple Bar in Lincoln's Inn Hall at the very heart of the fog sits the Lord High Chancellor in his High Court of Chancery.
We see the impossibility of pinning down the representative of the law and therefore the impossibility of locating justice in this account of the fog and the court.
The court, it appears, is at the heart of the fog, and yet the fog is everywhere.
Likewise, the effects of the court's action, or rather one should say inaction, are felt everywhere, as in the particular case that concerns us in the novel, Jandice and Jandice.
How many people out of the suit, Jandice and Jandice, has stretched forth its unwholesome hand to spoil and corrupt would be a very wide question.
And we know the answer to this question because everyone we meet in the novel seems to have something to do with the case.
Even those, like the heroine Esther, who seem totally unrelated to the issue.
And yet we do not know about the case.
Exactly like the court at the heart of the fog, so the case is everywhere and nowhere, means everything and means nothing.
We do not get any details about why the case is being litigated or what the proper, that is, just outcome, might be.
Does this mean then that the case itself is as encumbered by the legal machinery and bureaucracy as the court?
Or was there once a real issue that had to be adjudicated?
We never know the answer to this question.
The court of Chancery, which should advance justice and rectify past wrongs, is represented as an illness, as a cancer in the heart of the social body.
It's failure to cure itself of the disease which paradoxically also keeps it alive.
It feeds off the lawyers who come to do business before its bar.
This failure to cure itself also indicates that it is failing in its duty to cure the social malaise that swirls around it.
The connection between the disease that is the court and the social disease that is the consequence of its inaction,
that is, injustice and inequality, is made clear in the literalizing of the disease as the smallpox that's the street sweeper Joe,
who is moved on by the law repeatedly, spreads to Esther's maid and then Esther herself.
The court itself is surrounded by numerous premises which survive only because it, the court, exists.
Lodginghouse is led to legal copywriters, the bailiff's headquarters, the law stationer's shop with its epileptic maid, Gusta,
whose upbringing was such that she takes the meanness of her present surroundings to be a kind of paradise.
The alternative to the court of Chancery and its unhealthy aura is the other bleak house, that is the real one, home of John Jandies.
And not as bleak as its name suggests, unlike the court of Chancery, which is far more insidiously bleak.
Bleak house is located outside the city, and its owner, John Jandies, is a model of compassion,
and his interest in his wards, Ada and Richard, contrasts powerfully with the interest of the court in those two young people.
For the court they represent an endless source of money, through the lawyers employed to plead their case,
and an endless source of respect and validation for its own self-importance, as long, that is, as they are willing to pursue their suit.
John Jandies' concern, however, is entirely without self-interest, a judgment that is also true of his affection for Esther,
his proposal of marriage to her, and then his willingness to give her up to the man she loves.
What Dickens seems to be offering in this portrait of the uniformly generous and loving man is an alternative to the structures of relationship
that are figured in a world left unattended, the ward of Joe, the street sweeper, for example, and the law left to its own devices.
In the other bleak house, there is a type of justice unimaginable to the law courts and the metropolitan enforcers of that law,
the police, who can only push poor Joe from one miserable sleeping place to another.
Thus Dickens seems to be arguing for a reliance on the individual and his or her small acts of compassion,
like Esther's willingness to help Joe, though he is dying from smallpox, rather than the official machinery of the social system.
His view seems to argue for a conservative belief in the individual as the most significant producer of social change,
rather than a radical belief in the possibility of social reform.
One support for this argument is to look at the way Dickens treats the question of Christianity as a reforming impulse in Victorian society.
The appeal for social justice and for assistance for the poor and destitute frequently relies on an appeal to Christian principles, to charity.
In Bleak House, the evidence of Christianity at work is found in the household of Mrs. Jellaby,
who, as we are told, devoted herself to an extensive variety of public subjects at various times,
and is at present, until something else attracts her, devoted to the subject of Africa,
with a view to the general cultivation of the coffeeberry and the natives and the happy settlements on the banks of the African rivers of our superabundant home population.
In other words, Mrs. Jellaby's Christian charity is exercised as part business practice and part social engineering,
that superabundant home population, no doubt being the poor, the destitute and the criminal class.
While Mrs. Jellaby extends considerable time, effort and presumably household income in these very important projects,
her own house is in a state of disarray.
Both it and the many children are dirty and unkempt, and she is oblivious to the emotional distress of her children.
Charity obviously does not begin at home in this household, and neither suggests Dickens does it in any of the households
and places of power that might bring about changes that would rectify the misery of the underclass.
Subject to harassment by the authorities and neglect by those who might act on their behalf,
the poor are chased from one place to another in the town and the country,
and become in their ubiquity the corollary of the fog and the court of chancery.
As the court in its influence is everywhere, but never sufficiently embodied to bring about the resolution of legal disputes,
so the poor are everywhere and never sufficiently unified or organized to change their condition.
They are merely moved on from one place in the city to another,
and finally to English colonies like Boreau Boulevard on the left bank of the Niger.
Without overtly raising the question of how a Christian nation can indulge in practices that enslave its own citizens both at home and abroad,
and recall that Britain had only banned slavery in its colonies twenty years before the publication of Blink House,
and think of the many thousands of five-year-olds in Dickens time dan the coal mines off in factories for twelve hours a day.
Without bringing that up overtly, Dickens does ask how Christianity could answer the moral needs of a 19th century society
pressing forward with economic expansion abroad and industrialization at home.
The abuse of Christianity in its proper form might also be found in the way in which the chancery court plays upon the vulnerability and gullibility of its suitors
by cloaking itself in the language and formalities of the church.
Adopting an elaborate appearance and formal rituals, the court must represent itself as dealing in transcendent concepts of truth and justice.
The consequence of such borrowing from the authority of the church is evident in the way in which Miss Flight, maddened by her case,
believes that the long-delayed judgment is the literal equivalent of the last judgment.
And given how long she's waited for a decision, we see that in her madness she understands how the court endures because it endlessly delays.
Just as John John Dice's house, Bleak House, represents an alternative to the bleakness at the heart of the chancery court.
That is, it's a domestic space that resists the apparently pervasive power and influence of the court.
So Bleak House also poses an alternative to the Christianity of Mrs. Jellaby and her circle.
The bleakness of the Christianity apparently practiced by the authorities on behalf of the citizens.
And the mockery of the church offered by the cruelty of the chancery court.
In a world in which the religion of law, with its priestly caste of lawyers, barristers and judges, has usurped the authority of the Christian religion,
only affective bonds nourished in that house, Bleak House, which becomes therefore a home, only those offer resistance to the disease and misery of the city.
Dickens enforces the power of those bonds of affection by weaving several romances, both successful and failed, throughout the narrative.
Once again, as in the novels of Daniel Defoe, Bernie, Edgeworth and Austin, we see how the romance narrative or the marriage plot is linked inseparably to the question of property.
One version of this connection appears in the romance and marriage of Ada and Richard, the two wards of chancery, who are the latest victims of the deadly Jandise v Jandise virus.
It is in part for Ada and Richard that Esther turns John Jandise's house into a home, but in the case of Richard, this counterforce is ineffective.
One could say that the title of the lawsuit in chancery, Jandise v Jandise, describes the relationship between Ada and Richard,
because Richard's desperate and deadly pursuit of his inheritance through the labyrinth's legal system eventually causes his death, leaving Ada a young widow with their child.
Even the evidence of others driven to madness like misflight and suicide by the unending delays and complexities of their cases cannot deter Richard.
Moreover, Richard's suspicions of his guardian's motives in trying to keep him apart from Ada also generates a hostile relationship, another Jandise against Jandise.
In these repetitions of the original lawsuit, we see not only the endless reach of the law, but also the way in which the law's description of legal issues as someone against someone seems to pervade all other relationships.
Not all those caught up in the chancery case are, however, adversely affected by the legal contest.
For example, Esther Somerson and John Jandise seem totally resistant to the fog of law and its accompanying miasmic diseases.
In this relationship, we also see another version of the romance property narrative.
Despite her impoverishment and illegitimacy, John Jandise recognizes the essentially disinterested compassion in Esther, which stands in stark contrast to the pervasive self-interest of the law.
So extensive is this compassion that Esther accepts John's proposal of marriage despite her love for another man.
Her parentage is murky and she has been scarred by smallpox and thus believes herself to be no longer attractive.
But perhaps what is more important is that she has no resources other than those provided by John Jandise with which to support herself.
The romance heroine dispossessed of property and paternity must accept whomever she can find.
However, in a third and successful version of the romance narrative, Esther is released from her commitment to John Jandise to marry the man she loves, which is coincidental with her discovery of her mother and father.
Thus, the romance narrative trumps the legal narrative as represented by the court, which never renders a verdict in the case of Jandise be Jandise.
I would like to address one final point in this lecture, and that is the way in which what starts out as a novel about a civil suit turns into a novel about an unsolved murder,
in the course of which Dickens introduces us to one of his most memorable characters and one of the first detectives in English literature, that is Inspector Bucket,
a character based on a real-life detective, Charles F. Field, a member of London's new police force, instituted only 10 years before the novel began to appear.
Inspector Bucket solves the murder of the lawyer, Tolkienhorn, tracks down Lady Deadlock, who turns out to be Esther's mother, and finds the will that finally resolves the chance-free case.
Inspector Bucket therefore does what the great court of chancellery is unable to do. He makes something happen.
In contrast to the story of the lawsuit, John Dies v. John Dies, which is unreadable, because there are so many tens of thousands of documents that have accumulated over the years,
the murder mystery, the murder of Tolkienhorn, can be solved, because there is a story with identifiable characters and events that have a cause and effect relationship, rather than the arbitrary disposition of events that occurs in the chance-free court.
Unlike the ubiquitous presence of the court in which there is no evidence of a responsible agent or agents against whom one can protest, or to whom one can appeal for relief, the murder mystery is the result of individuals acting out of motives that can finally be apprehended and understood.
As we follow Bucket and watch him piece together clues that are to us merely fragments of information in a story that we cannot understand, so that we become rather like the suitors in the chance-free court, we find comfort that he seems to believe that there is a story that can be understood.
For much of the novel with its huge array of characters and interconnecting narratives, we have felt as if we were in a fog, and now Detective Bucket has swept away the mist and shown us the path to knowledge.
Detective Bucket is thus the antidote to the poisonous atmosphere that surrounds the court and its workings. He offers hope that some sense can be made out of the endless delays, the vain promises of closure, the repeated requests for more information.
In arguing that the murder mystery and the precise work of Inspector Bucket presents a contrast to the amorphous and elusive power of the court, I am suggesting that the court of chance-free makes a detective Bucket necessary, that one legal system in effect produces the other.
Such a way of reading the murder plot and the presence of Bucket in the narrative implies then paradoxically that while the presence of Bucket gives a concrete form to the authority of the law, the figure of the detective is part of a larger narrative that subsumes both him and the court of chance-free.
Indeed, if we follow Bucket as he makes his way through the passages and dark alleys that surround the court and its premises, or watch him as he tracks Lady Deadlock through a snow-bound and dark winter's night, we must wonder if we aren't seeing another version of the court, one that provides us with the comfort of believing in a story that makes sense, but which may in effect be as endless and bizarre as John Dice v. John Dice.
Which brings me to the question of whether there is anything in this novel, in which a man spontaneously combusts, that can be relied upon. And that brings us back to Bleak House.
The fog that circulates through the city cannot penetrate the domestic space, one that has been recreated by Esther when she marries Alan Woodstock.
And the marriage of Esther, who has from time to time served as our narrator, and thus given meaning to the confusion of characters, events and twists in terms of the plot, reiterates the belief that domestic happiness is the antidote, not just to the court, but to the whole world that requires the police to manage events.
Esther's account of her domestic happiness closes the novel. As the angel in the house, she provides a defence against that world of sickness and poverty that her husband engages in every day.
We are not rich in the bank, but we have always prospered and we have quite enough. I never walk out with my husband, but I hear the people bless him. I never go into a house of any degree, but I hear his praises or see them in grateful eyes.
I never lie down at night, but I know that in the course of that day, he has alleviated pain and soothed some fellow creature in time of need.
I know that from the beds of those who were past recovery, thanks have often, often gone up in the last hour for his patient ministration. Is not this to be rich?
Thus Esther's emotional riches are offered as an alternative to the riches that Richard Carstone believed would be his when Jaundice v. Jaundice was finally settled.
In his vision of the city of London and its inhabitants caught up in a bureaucratic, legalistic nightmare, Dickens prefigures the work of Franz Kafka.
But Dickens can still rely on this myth of the domestic hearth, where the Esther Somersons of a world offer comfort in a heartless world. Such an alternative would no longer be available to Kafka.
