Lecture 24 Literature and Law, Past, Present, Future
In this final lecture, we will reflect on the journey we have taken from the ancient
texts of the Hebrews and the Greeks to contemporary representations of crime,
sin, justice and injustice. As I suggested in the first lecture of this series, it is possible
to trace an overall trajectory that begins with the deep interconnection between law and literature
in ancient texts and moves towards a gradual separation of these two ways of representing
the world after the early 18th century. The contemporary relationship between literature
and law is in some ways similar to the situation in ancient Greece, whereby law was not an abstract
system of rules but a live performance. But there are, I will suggest, considerable differences
between how the Greeks saw law and its performance and how we in contemporary culture imagine that
connection. From the enormous success of crime novels, both fictional and real, to the representation
of trials on TV, again both fictional and real, to the many versions of law and order shows ranging
from the gritty to the comic, we are inundated with law and legal issues in the media. The line
between what happens in the real courtroom and what happens on TV is erased when celebrity trials
are broadcast live and fictionalized docudramas appear before the trial is over, or when court
TV turns the case into a soap opera and the judge becomes a celebrity in her own right.
What does the saturation of our media with law and law related topics say about our culture?
And what force does law have when its representation is no longer confined to certain
authorized and sometimes sacred spaces and texts? Is this popularizing of law and its effects a
healthy demystification of what was once an elite and hermetic enterprise and therefore something we
should value as essentially American? Can law survive its popularity? I will begin this reflection
on the current state of the relationship between literature and law with a consideration of the
ways these two forms construct and critique the cultures of which they are a part. Recalling
as we discuss this issue some of the texts and topics I have raised in this series of lectures,
I will then turn to contemporary versions of this interaction between law and literature
in an effort to assess the value of these popular versions of both legal and literary texts.
First then the construction and criticism of culture produced by law and literature.
Both legal and literary texts have a powerful effect on the construction of certain kinds of
cultural identities. As I have argued repeatedly throughout this series, both forms of representation
are products of culture of a certain historical moment. Although certain authoritative texts
are described as if they were permanent and sacred repositories of human law and emotion,
for example the US Constitution or the Bible. One purpose of these central cultural texts,
whether they are literary or legal, is to produce a common identity among those who
acknowledge their significance. As one would expect, that common identity is usually defined
by the most powerful in the culture. For example, in ancient Greek society laws were made and
literature was written by those who belonged to the elite and likewise those who passed judgment
on the law breakers and who patronized the writers were also part of that elite. At first then
both ways of representing reality would be controlled by the same powerful figures and
inevitably their representations would reinforce their view of the proper way to sustain individual
and social relationships. This interconnectedness between on the one hand the laws that regulate
and produce a certain kind of behavior and on the other the literature that represents that behavior
depends as I suggested in my early lectures on a single basis and that is religion.
As long as commonly held religious beliefs unified the culture and thereby produced the
foundational philosophical assumptions that generated both legal and literary texts,
the culture acknowledged the inseparability of these two forms of imitation of mimesis.
Thus we can understand classical Greek drama as a way of investigating legal procedures and their
validity for the state. What was performed on the stage was a model of what the state recognized
as vital for the success of its new democracy. Theatrical performances can still enact models
of judgment. Recall that Susan Glasswell's short story A Jewry of Her Peers was originally a play
called Trifles. What is evident however in thinking about that early early 20th century play is that
its audience would not have had the same kind of shared religious beliefs as those who watched the
performance of Escalus's play The Aristaia. The challenge of performing justice or judgment on
the stage becomes increasingly difficult in a world where shared assumptions are rarer and rarer.
What has also become evident in this series of lectures is that once a single unifying set of
assumptions could no longer control a collectively held sense of what law and literature should
regulate and imitate then definitions of both communal and individual identities were no
longer determined by the elite. We saw the beginning of this gradual shift in control
away from the most powerful in the mystery and morality plays that spawned the secular drama
that flowered in the Renaissance. Once the church lost control both of the subject matter
and the actual production of these plays different versions of what might pass for justice,
selfhood and community interests began to appear. By the time we reached the late 17th
century the influence of scientific rather than religious assumptions on the construction of
the natural and human world radically undermined the traditional representation of the individual.
Now no longer a fundamentally religious being but a fundamentally political and economic one.
Indeed our modern that is post-18th century understanding of identity depends upon two
legal concepts that have come to seem synonymous with what it means to be an individual,
the possession of property and the possession of civil and legal rights. This course has
traced the formation of this modern sense of identity from the classical definition of the
heroic individual as conceived by Sophocles and Escalus through Defoe's thoroughly conventional
bourgeois property owning member of the middling class to the perverse and manifestly unconventional
Humbert Humbert. From the passively martyred or sexually aggressive women of Greek mythology
to the achingly ordinary woman isolated in her midwestern farmhouse depicted in Glassbell's
a jury of her peers to the contemporary reincarnation of the Mexican myth of La Llorona
in the case of Juana Leja. As this review of the transformation of classical concepts of
identity suggests one of the most significant aspects of the way legal and literary texts
construct and critique individual and social identities is of course in its consideration
of race and gender. As my lectures on Huck Finn and Beloved demonstrate what is possible in
terms of literary representation is to some extent conditioned by what the law can recognize
and vice versa. Laws do not simply regulate existing behavior they can also both suppress
and generate certain identities. For example if there were no laws regulating the conduct of
same sex couples then one can say that in the eyes of the law they do not exist. Even if they do not
exist under the law literature can bring them into being by representing their relationship in
novels plays or poetry. Once represented in literature their behavior might then become
the target of specific laws designed to make that behavior illegal. Conversely the law recognized
slaves only by virtue of what they were not that is unable to possess property unable to possess
themselves as free individuals. The absence of the slave in the law except as the property of
someone with with legal rights produced as one of its consequences their absence as subjects for
mainstream literary representations. One begins then to understand the importance of texts like
Harriet Jacobs incidents in the life of a slave girl or Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin
or Mark Twain's Huck Finn in introducing into the culture the figure of the slave or former slave
as a subject of representation. One could follow a similar trajectory in the case of gender
although clearly women have never been so completely obscured
as subjects worthy of imitation as were the slaves. As long as religious beliefs specifically
Christian ones determined the way morality was reflected in law and also regulated the
representation of women in literature women had limited personal and social agency.
One of the ways in which women felt this confluence of religion and law in terms of how they were
conventionally represented was in the subservience and frailty that it required of them and thus in
their consequent exclusion from those realms of activity where power was produced and exerted
that is the public sphere of law and politics. This does not mean of course that individual
women did not rise above these limitations and exercise considerable power and authority
in their own time but generally speaking it was their exceptional status that proved the rule.
Like Elizabeth Bennet in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, Francis Bernese Evelina and Maria
Edgeworth's Grace in The Absentee are powerless to act in a legal and political system that
manipulates the world of commerce, inheritance and property from which they are excluded.
In all three cases the women's futures depend not upon their own agency but upon the ability
of the right man to recognize their moral worth. In addition to the ways in which previously
obscured or ignored identities have been recognized as worthy of representation in both the legal
and literary sense, what this course has also suggested is that as a previously unified sense
of identity both individual and communal began to disintegrate so legal and literary texts were
no longer reliable as imitations of a stable and coherent worldview. I do not mean to suggest
by this that in the ancient and medieval world for example there were no differences of opinion
about what was in the best interests of the society or what were the best ways of achieving
justice or enforcing particular laws. Rather I am suggesting that before the advent of the modern age
say the early 18th century there was a general agreement about the nature of reality. After
that time the stability and coherence of a world that was specifically established on religious
principles was in question. For example one of the ways in which 18th century enlightenment
philosophers threatened the status quo was by criticizing the law's reliance on a particular
set of moral principles drawn from Christian theology rather than upon a consensus brought
by rational discussion. Certainly by the time we get to the 20th century we find that both legal
and literary texts can radically alter our sense of identity and cause us to rethink our relationship
to one another. For example the stories of Franz Kafka especially the trial fundamentally
disrupt our belief that we and others like us live in a coherent and reasonable world,
a world brought about by and reinforced by coherent laws. Thus the loss of shared religious
beliefs produces legal and literary texts that begin to assume different purposes in the culture.
They are still of course engaged in regulating and representing the various kinds of behavior
that make up our social world but they are no longer driven by the need to encode social laws
through stories of culturally significant figures. As I suggested in my lectures on the
medieval period we can see the beginnings of this new way of thinking about literature and law
in the introduction of secular moments in the interludes of mystery and morality plays.
Gradually the desire to entertain begins to exert a stronger and stronger influence over
the production of literature so much so that by the early 18th century neoclassical writers were
expressing tremendous anxiety that a new form of writing, the novel, would drive the serious
writer out of business. The works of Daniel Defoe and John Gay indicate that anything could become
the subject of entertainment especially the law which was now under the threat of losing its
privileged status in the culture. I would argue that this conversion of law into the stuff of
popular culture has continued relentlessly into the 21st century and shows no signs of abating.
I am not saying that it is only since the 18th century that popular culture has taken the law
as a subject for entertainment. That is clearly not the case. I am saying however that we have
arrived at the point where the law hardly seems to exist outside of its representation in popular
culture and that this condition is the result both of the gradual diminution in the status of the law
and the huge proliferation of the media outlets available for representation.
Let me turn now to the second half of this final lecture and examine contemporary representations
of the law and literature relationship. Obviously I should acknowledge at once that this course is
part of that proliferation of media representations that I have just referred to. Indeed the pervasive
connection between law and literature is evident not just in popular culture in movies, paperback
novels and TV but also in institutions of higher education where the study of law and literature
is now a recognized subfield within English department, cultural studies programs and in law schools.
The most accessible version of this study of the two disciplines is probably the characterization
of law as akin to literature in being an aesthetic enterprise. That is both ways of shaping reality
employ specific aesthetic techniques like narrative plots and rhetorical devices.
The consequence of this characterization of law as an aesthetic representation is the assumption
that it wishes to influence the reader or audience emotionally as well as rationally.
Such a goal is of course at odds with the off-sighted nature of legal texts as neutral or impersonal,
a nature that is promoted many legal academics argue in the conventional law school curriculum
which attempts as far as possible to erase personal experience and bias from legal education.
Other academic practitioners of law and literature scholarship argue as I have done in this course
that law is not simply a technique but a distinctive way of creating reality and therefore
like literature a creative enterprise. Perhaps the best known advocate of this position is James
Boyd-White whose numerous books have explored precisely this poetic aspect of law by which
law is open to the same interpretive techniques and the same moral and ethical inquiries as literature.
Under this rubric interpretations of specific laws as well as legal practices and the role of
law in constructing a just society are open to contention and subject to the same aesthetic
conditions as literary texts. As I argued in my first lecture the fact that both law and literature
are primarily linguistic constructs makes some of these claims inevitable but the more recent
insistence that law should be treated as a poetic enterprise rather than a scientific one pushes the
debate back into the areas of morality and ethics that remind us of ancient representations of the
connection between law and literature. Romantic poet Percy Bischelli asserted that quote poets are
the unacknowledged legislators of mankind but this recent insistence on characterizing law suggests
that perhaps legislators are also the unacknowledged poets of mankind. Some of this redefinition of
law or more accurately this return to laws poetic and rhetorical roots seems to be the result of a
cultural uncertainty about how to respond to its pervasive presence in American popular culture.
Everywhere we look we find some version of the law represented in TV dramas that emulate forensic
investigations or detective stories or courtroom dramas or docu-dramas that re-enact sensational
murders or unsolved mysteries. In novels that represent every side of legal practice from corporate
law firms to small-town individual detective agencies from supreme court intrigues to prison
narratives and in Hollywood blockbusters and independent movies that investigate moral and
ethical dilemmas like the appropriateness of the death penalty or the right punishment for crimes
that society is itself divided over like euthanasia. Does this diversity of representations reflect the
variety of our responses to law and therefore indicate that we no longer have a set of shared
assumptions about the role of law in our society or is this diversity simply the result of the
number of media outlets available today? Perhaps. It is not so much the sheer number of representations
that critics point to however but the way in which those representations are constantly in
contention one with another. I want to distinguish this argument about the contending nature of
legal representations from my earlier discussion about the way literary representations satirized
the law or legal practice in for example Dickens Bleak House. In 19th century England the power of
the law as a central authority in Victorian culture was assumed. Indeed it was precisely
its cultural centrality as an institution and a practice that provoked Dickens response. Moreover
it was not Dickens intent to undermine the role of law in his society. On the contrary his desire
in his novels and in his own social activism was to reform the law to make it a more powerful
institution so that it might bring about needed social reforms. This is not I think what is happening
in contemporary American culture. Some legal and cultural observers argue that the overwhelming
number of representations of law and the legal profession has insidiously weakened the power
of law and altered its function in our society. Unlike earlier cultures where law and aesthetic
representations such as drama and epic poetry united to present law as a symbol of transcendent
values our contemporary culture seems to represent law as an endless series of contending values
each representation displacing the meaning of the one that came before. Of course one could argue
that this variety in the representation of law in multiple media outlets is an expression of a
democratic sensibility and that the appeal to transcendent values in the past was nothing
more than a way of keeping the elite in power and excluding those such as women or African Americans
who might require a change in the way culture thought about law and its function. Recall how
Shylock finds that those so-called universal values of fairness and justice that the state of
Venice promotes and enforces turn out to be specifically designed for Christians and not
for men like himself. One might also recall how Joseph K tries to make meaning out of the nightmare
world in which he finds himself in the novel The Trial discovering too late that attributing
transcendent significance to the law has deprived his own life of meaning. In our contemporary
version of law significance some critics have suggested that we have lost sight of any meaning
that the law might have in our lives other than as a source of entertainment. The double purpose
that we examined in earlier texts like the morality plays and Shakespeare's drama where the need to
educate the reader into a set of shared social values joined with the need to entertain that
double purpose now seems to have been reduced to a single one to entertain. Some legal and literary
scholars critical of contemporary culture argue that the values that are now privileged are those
that most nearly fit the expectations of the uncritical reader or viewer. In other words,
those same values that make a TV show or a movie highly successful or a novel a bestseller,
sensationalism, spectacle, the reduction of complexity to formulaic response.
Nowhere perhaps is this valorizing of spectacle and sensationalism more likely to be found than in
the true crime genre of literature. This sense of the pervasiveness of disorder and mayhem rather
than the pervasiveness of law and order is exacerbated by the number of true crime novels that
have flooded the market. This genre has a long history. Recall its fictional counterpart in Daniel
Defoe's Moll Flanders or Henry Fielding's philosophical essay on Mary Blandy's murder of her
father. These two 18th century texts were part of a huge industry that flourished in the early part
of that century depicting the lives of highwaymen, prostitutes, pickpockets and murderers. Historians
have speculated that this interest in criminal behavior coincided with the growing commercial
interests of the culture and an increasing focus on the nature of the individual as a
collection of legal and civil rights, mercantile and middle class values that were precisely the
ones threatened by the criminal. Likewise, perhaps the contemporary true crime industry,
both print and image, suggests something about the relationship we now have as a culture to the
world of the criminal and the crime. The most recent wave of best-selling true crime novels can
probably be traced to Truman Capote's 1966 In Cold Blood, a novel whose subtitle is a true
account of a multiple murder and its consequences. The novel details the murders of a wealthy farmer
in Kansas, his wife and their two children, by two ex-convicts who were eventually executed for
their crimes. Capote claimed that he had created a new type of book, the non-fiction novel, by
employing traditional literary conventions in crime reporting. Of course, one recognizes that even
with the copious notes and first-hand accounts, Capote cannot simply report the story of the
murders but must instead reconstruct it and thus to some extent inevitably fictionalize the narrative.
Capote's account of the murders was to quote the voiceover of the enormously successful TV series
Law and Order, quote, plucked from the headlines he had read about it in The New York Times.
Like Nabokov's use of the story of Sally Horner in Lolita, Capote's reliance on real-life stories
for a narrative that hovers somewhere between real life and fiction suggests that as a culture
we crave both the shock of the sensational criminal act and the comfort that comes with knowing that
it might not really be true. This confusion of reality with fiction, exploited again and again
in the media's portrayal of crime, detective work, legal practice and punishment, seems quite
different from the merging of real characters and events with fictional circumstances that we saw
in 18th century writers. Our contemporary culture appears sometimes to be genuinely bewildered
by what constitutes reality and what constitutes the fictional universe generated by the media,
a bewilderment that has itself become the subject of literature and movies and TV shows.
This confusion is also apparent in another popular literary form, the contemporary detective story,
which reflects a deep anxiety about the relationship between the rational and the irrational,
between a world that makes sense and thus can be ordered and a world that is out of control.
The only forces that can be brought to bear on this new world apparently are the tools of technology
and science, DNA, fingerprints, computer databases, all the high-tech gadgets of modern criminology.
And so the old-fashioned detective has morphed into the forensic scientist like Dr. K. Scarpetta,
chief medical examiner of the state of Virginia and protagonist of Patricia Cornwell's crime novels.
One can even buy forensic labs for children so that they can imitate the TV shows that
resolve difficult cases through science. We seem to live in a culture of anxiety,
with a sense that both the random world of crime and the protective world of law and order are
outside of our control. Only those who can manipulate the tools of technology can keep
the predators at bay, and yet even here the fallibility of the human investigator reminds
us of the vulnerability of our condition. This sense of our vulnerability and the limitations of
a strictly human enterprise returns us to the ancient world of the Hebrew Bible and the lives
of Oedipus, Agamemnon, and Orestes. In those ancient texts, however, we glimpsed a belief
in some force beyond the human condition. That reliance on a metaphysic of transcendence can
no longer sustain us. Our desire, however, for ways of representing ourselves that can be
inspirational rather than merely entertaining persists. As the distinguished legal scholar
Robert Cove insists, a great civilization is to be judged by the quality of its law
no less than its literature or engineering or science. Desmond Manderson elaborates on this
argument. In particular, he says, Cove meant by law a nomos, which is to say a way of being in the
law experienced by members of that community, a way in which their law is seen to be related to
their literature and their engineering and their science as part of a continually relevant
cultural interaction. The measure of interaction is the measure of the connection between law and
its citizens is the measure of civilization itself. Nomos, a way of being in the law experienced
by members of that community, a way in which their law is seen to be related to their literature
and their engineering and their science as part of a continually relevant cultural interaction.
The question I would like to end this series with then is this. If the connection between
law and literature is one way of measuring civilization, what contemporary literature
reflects our ongoing struggle toward justice? What literary texts will demand that same kind of
active engagement with law that we witnessed most vigorously in the ancient texts? An engagement
that is defined both by its resistance to the failings of human law and its reverence for what
that same law might be? We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses
series. Our courses are available to order online. Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEH12. That's 1-800-TEH12. Thank you very much.
