Lecture 3. Revenge and Justice in Aeschylus or Aesthia
As I mentioned in my introductory lecture, one tradition of the relationship between
law and literature can be traced to the ancient world, specifically Greek drama and the mythic
origins of law as enacted in Aeschylus' Aresthia. In this play, Aeschylus specifically associates
the first trial for homicide with the intervention of the gods and portrays it as part of the
mythic narrative of the origins of Greek society. Aeschylus links the drama of the legal trial
with the ritual religious drama of social life and locates the origins for both in the
desire for justice. The only complete trilogy of tragedies of Aeschylus that have survived
the years is the Aresthia comprised of Agamemnon, the Libation Bearers, and the Furies, and
first presented at the city of Athens' Dionysia Festival in 458 BC.
Written after the Grecian success in the Persian wars and during the Golden Age of
Athenian democracy, the plays use a mythological situation to comment on contemporary political
conditions. Aeschylus, who lived between 526 and 456 BC, was the first Athenian Tragedian
to use the myth of Agamemnon, Clytemnesta, and Aresthes, and he employs it to justify
contemporary legal practice and the institution of democracy in Athens, identifying divine
intervention as the source of the Greek judicial system.
Aeschylus grew up in Athens when it was still ruled by an oligarchy, that is, a government
of a small group of elite rulers. He fought against the Persians at the Battle of Marathon
in 490 BC, where a much smaller Greek army defeated the Persians and freed Athens from
foreign control, and he saw the establishment of Athenian democracy when all free citizens
took part in government. The fact that Aeschylus' tombstone records his service to Athens in
the Battle of Marathon and not his dramatic successes suggests the importance that this
crucial battle had in the lives of the Greek nation. Athens was rapidly becoming a seapower
with an empire in the Mediterranean at the time of Aeschylus, reforming her constitution
and securing a system of liberty guaranteed by law.
The plot of the Aresthaia follows the story of Agamemnon and Clytemnesta, husband and wife
who are condemned by history to enact bloody deeds against their own family. The myth of
the cursed house of Atreus has many variants and appears in many ancient texts, like the
Odyssey and the Iliad, and Aeschylus employs a version of this story that focuses attention
on intra-familial betrayal. Agamemnon's father is Atreus, whose brother is Thiestes. Atreus
and Thiestes quarrel over Thiestes' affair with Atreus' wife, and Thiestes is banished
from Argus. However, he petitions to be allowed to return, and Atreus, seeming to welcome
a reconciliation, agreed to allow Thiestes to come back and prepared a huge banquet to
celebrate. At the banquet, however, Atreus served Thiestes the cooked flesh of Thiestes'
two slaughtered sons. Thiestes ate the food and then was informed of what he had done.
Overcome with horror, Thiestes cursed the family of Atreus and fled Argus with his only remaining
son, Agisthes. Atreus has two sons, Agamemnon and Menelaus, who married Clytemnesta and
Helen respectively. Agamemnon and Clytemnesta have three children, Ephigenia, Arestes and
Electra. When Helen, Menelaus' wife, ran off to Troy with Paris, Agamemnon and Menelaus
organized and led the Greek forces against the Trojans. The army assembled at Aulis,
but the fleet could not sail because of contrary winds sent by Artemis. Agamemnon sacrificed
his daughter, Ephigenia, in order to placate Artemis. It reminds us of the sacrifice attempted
sacrifice of Isaac by Abraham. Meanwhile, the son of Thiestes, Agisthes, has returned
to Argus and become the lover of Clytemnestra. Together they rule Argus and send Arestes
into exile and treat Electra as a servant. It is at this point, with no sign of Agamemnon's
return after ten years in the Trojan War, that the play begins. It is significant that
Escalus locates the play in the kingdom of Argus rather than the more traditional location
of Mycenae, because the Athenians had just contracted with an alliance with Argus for
mutual defense against the Spartans, and thus when Arestes asserts his loyalty to Argus
in the final scenes of the play, he is emphasizing the reliability and loyalty of the Athenian
state. An alternative to the chaos suggested specifically by the bloody feuds of the House
of Atreus, and more generally by the kind of justice associated with revenge killings.
I swear to you and your land and your people, that for the rest of time, no helmsman guiding
my country will ever raise a spear against you, or march in force to do battle against
this land. It is also appropriate that the actions that
propel the tragedy forward should start in the turmoil field and chaotic House of Atreus
in the kingdom of Argus, and end in Athens, a city defined by its order and justice. Escalus
thus suggests that the resolution of conflicts within the city of Athens, that is between
rival political groups in the city-state, should follow the model laid out in his play.
The central theme of the trilogy is the nature of justice, the Greek word for which is decay,
and the play moves from representations of individual vendetta justice or revenge to
an institutionalized form of justice, trial by jury.
The first play in the trilogy depicts the death of Agamemnon on his return from the Trojan
War at the hands of his wife, Clytemnestra, and her lover, Aegisthus. That Argus is ruled
by a woman, one as the watchman says, who has a man's heart, establishes a disorder
that the kingdom labors under. Agamemnon returns from a war begun by Helen's infidelity to
Agamemnon's brother Menelaus, to a kingdom ruled by his wife, sister to Helen, and like
her, guilty of betrayal. The proper form of government, the monarchy, has been corrupted
by the infidelity of Clytemnestra with Aegisthus, and their tyrannical rule has brought the
kingdom to a state of fear and foreboding that even the news of Agamemnon's return
cannot relieve. Indeed, the chorus is suspicious of Clytemnestra's willingness to believe that
the burning beacon signals Agamemnon's return. They say, trust a woman to praise a sign before
the sign is clear. Persuasion is all too quick to cross a woman's mind. Woman's gossip
flies fast and quickly dies. This distrust in a woman's ability to read, that is, interpret
signs properly, is connected by the chorus to the excessiveness of Clytemnestra's offerings
to the gods at Agamemnon's safe return. Like her excessive sexuality manifest in her infidelity,
she has governed with excess as a tyrant. Greek thought connected tyrannical government
with the figure of the woman because both figures connoted the unnatural limitations imposed
on the free man. Moreover, both the tyrant and the woman were thought to be unreliable
as speakers of the truth, manipulating and distorting language to seek their own ends
rather than employing rhetoric to seek the truth. We see how the corruption of language
and persuasive discourse is associated with women in the scene where Clytemnestra persuades
Agamemnon to walk upon the purple cloths sacred to the gods, despite his claim that
to do so would make him appear like some barbarian chieftain. She taunts him with fearing the
disapproval of his people, and he finally succumbs to her arguments, hoping that no
god's envious glare will strike him from afar. There is, of course, considerable dramatic
irony in Agamemnon's fear that the gods will strike him down when his entrance into his
house culminates in his death as he lies enmeshed in a net with his mistress Cassandra, daughter
of King Priam of Troy, prophetess of Apollo, and a prisoner of war. That there is some
breach between gods and men that engenders Agamemnon's death is signalled by the failure
of Cassandra to convince the chorus that Agamemnon is in danger and that she too will die. Although
a woman like Clytemnestra, Cassandra is sanctioned to speak the truth by her connection to the
gods as a priestess of Apollo. The chorus, however, struggles unsuccessfully to comprehend
a version of the truth, and therefore of justice, that is more than mortal. Their only way of
accommodating what appears to them as cruelty and injustice, as when, for example, Agamemnon
sacrificed his daughter Ephigenia at Islas so that the goddess Artemis will release his
fleet and he may sail towards Troy. The only way they can respond to this is with cliches
about the necessity of learning by suffering. Court as they are in history, in the spirit's
grip of a narrative of a death for a death, the narrative of revenge and vengeance, they
cannot see past the next blow that will strike the house of Atreus. Even Agamemnon is unable
to rise above his own history. As he says when he struggles to decide whether to sacrifice
his daughter or to abandon the war, how can I choose? Both ways are full of evil. Should
I desert the fleet and fail my allies? The sacrifice stops the storm. The blood of a
virgin must be spilled. Rage craves rage. What must be must be.
Escalus suggests then that it is the limitations of a human understanding of justice that will
prevent the transcendence of a blood feud. Such a limited and thoroughly human version
of justice is represented in the trial of Clytemnestra before the chorus. She triumphantly claims
the right now to speak openly whereas before she spoke so many words to serve my needs.
Her justification for murder is that it satisfies the ancient vendetta, thus hinting at more
than the sacrifice of Avigenia as the motive for her action. Clearly the sacrifice of her
daughter, my labor of love as she calls her, is aligned for Clytemnestra through her alliance
with Agisthus with his grudge against Agamemnon's father, Atreus, for the sacrifice of his
two brothers. That the woman was the one to act is a major source of outrage to the chorus
who threatened her with exile. But Clytemnestra turns their accusation back against them,
asking them where they were when Agamemnon slaughtered his own child. What charges did
you ever bring against him? She inquires and she has a point. Clytemnestra's refusal to
be treated as a mere woman culminates in her claim that she is not even Agamemnon's wife.
She says, I am the age old spirit of vengeance in the guise of this dead man's wife. I have
repaid the debt of Atreus, the giver of that obscene banquet. Agisthus boastful claim that
he planned the killing with justice at my side only produces scorn in the chorus who
taunt him with leaving the dirty work to a woman and invoke Orestes son of Agamemnon
and Clytemnestra as the Avenger. The invocation of the next generation prepares us for the
second play in the trilogy, The Libation Bearers, in which Orestes is prompted to commit
matricide by the command of Apollo. Just as his father sacrifices Orestes' sister
Ephigenia to placate the goddess Artemis, so Orestes will call his mother to fulfill
the commands of Apollo. The overriding narrative of these three plays is that the gods have
a sense of justice that cannot be fully understood by any individual at any specific point in
time. The gods' plans are revealed slowly over time and humans play only a small part
in that larger narrative. In the final play, The Furies, the narrative of retribution and
revenge is closed off by the intervention of Apollo and Athena. No human it appears is
capable of ending the blood feuds, driven as they are by a merely human sense of justice,
which is too local, too individual, to sustain the society at large. The concept of justice,
personified in the figure of Decay, daughter of Zeus and Themis, is finally a supra-human
concept and as such transcends mere human understanding, although it is capable of being
grasped by those with imagination. In The Libation Bearers, the vendetta continues,
haunted by Apollo who warns Orestes of the onslaught of the avenging furies, the progeny
of the father's spilled blood. How from the darkest depths the deathbolt would pierce
as the murdered kin beg for revenge? The cup of fellowship can never be shared and the
thank offering cannot be poured dragged from altars by a father's unseen wrath. None can
offer shelter, there can be no sanctuary, just a lonely death, disgraced and despised.
Orestes' vision of the furies' torment for an unrevenged murder emphasizes the isolation
and exile from the community that accompanies the act of murder, especially an act committed
against one's own kin. Orestes faces a terrible dilemma, just as his father did when he asked
to sacrifice his daughter. Both ways are full of evil. To leave his father's murder
unrevenged is to open himself to the torment of the furies and the hatred of his fellow
human beings. To murder his mother, on the other hand, is likewise to invoke the punishment
of both the non-human and human forces that monitor the community. Orestes has no hesitation
in killing Augustus in retaliation for his father's death, but faced with his mother's
pleas for her life and her reminders of how she bore and nursed Orestes, he hesitates.
The words of his companion, Pilates, remind him, however, of the higher authority to which
he owes allegiance.
Better to be hated by every man on earth, says Pilates, than hated by the gods. Orestes
discovers, however, that his fate is to be hated both by every man and by the gods in
the form of the furies, the forces of darkness and revenge. Even the purification that he
has received from Apollo cannot save him from the tainted victory of murdering his mother
in order to revenge his father, and such is the price of vendetta justice. Even though
Orestes claims that he killed his mother with justice at his side, a claim that of course
echoes a gistless justification for the murder of Agamemnon, he recognizes that no hearth
will shelter him, and that he is doomed to exile, pursued and tormented by women, the
hell hands of hate, the figments of the mother's curse. Orestes seems trapped within this ongoing
cycle of retribution.
The third play, the furies, opens at Delphi, the site of the sanctuary of Apollo, where
the Pythia, the priestess of Apollo, rehearses the ancient lineage of those who came before
Apollo, Uranus, Cronus and Zeus. Orestes seeks the protection of Apollo, who has lulled the
furies to sleep, and who directs Orestes to seek the city of Athena, that is Athens, where
he will find those who are able to judge his case, those who will be, says Apollo, charmed
by words, interfering Orestes from the ordeal. One notes that the transformation, that the
concept of language and persuasion has undergone through the play. In both the first and second
play, persuasion was linked directly to Clytemnester, and her efforts to lure Agamemnon to his death,
and then to talk Orestes out of killing her. Now, in the mouth of Apollo and Orestes, words
are charmed, and are the means to secure both an end to Orestes' specific torment, and to
the relentless cycle of killing and revenge.
Apollo clearly plays a crucial role in determining the value of persuasion in this culture. The
gender distinction is reinforced at the level of the supra-human, for Apollo's words are
more powerfully persuasive than the furies, with whom he will eventually debate. Apollo
drives the furies out of his sanctuary, identifying them with the barbaric practices of the Persians
and others from the east, those who cut off men's head and gouge out their eyes. In turn,
the furies blame Apollo for the crime that has brought them to haunt Orestes. Apollo
is a call upon to defend himself, and in so doing, he prefigures the trial of Orestes
before Athena, a trial that is a culmination of a series of debates throughout the trilogy
about what constitutes just action and what deserves punishment. The furies claim that
ancient authority allows them the right to drive mother killers into exile. Apollo responds
by asking them how they would punish a wife who kills her husband. This, they say the
furies is not the same, because it is not spilling kindred blood. Apollo rejects their
argument claiming that to leave the death of Agamemnon unrevenged is to dishonor the
most cherished of mortal bonds, a bond that is mightier than the oath and defended by
justice, and one that reflects the sacred marriage of Zeus and Hera. The furies are
unconvinced by Apollo's argument and chase Orestes to Athens. When they find Orestes clinging
to the statue of Athena in her temple, they demonstrate the malign version of those charming
words by chanting an incantation that sends him to sleep so that they may tear him apart.
Their incantation is the equivalent of the malicious or manipulative discourse that
Clytemnestra has employed to deceive Agamemnon. In questioning the furies, Athena immediately
establishes the complexity of the case, a complexity that precludes a clear cut response
of innocence or guilt. The furies complain that Orestes will not swear an oath of innocence
nor accept their oath of his guilt, a practice in line with Athenian legal customs that
required the defendant to swear innocence and the prosecutor to swear his belief in
the defendant's guilt. Under normal circumstances, Orestes' refusal to swear an oath would make
him guilty by default. Athena argues, however, that there are two sides to this, it is only
half heard, and insists that simply declaring Orestes guilty by default would be merely
to speak of justice rather than to act justly. An oath, she claims, must never triumph over
justice. Thus justice is represented as something that exists, exists beyond language. An oath,
the word spoken as vow or commitment indicates the promise of justice, but cannot be a substitute
for justice, for the just act. Acknowledging her wisdom, the furies grant Athena the right
to judge the case. For the first time then, in this long human history of murder and revenge,
of vendetta justice, another form of justice is given voice, one that has its origins in
divine wisdom. The furies embody the unthinking vengeance of the past. For them it is axiomatic
and automatic that the doer suffers, or in the words of the Old Testament, an eye for
an eye. A new version of justice, based on argument and discussion, talk and evidence
is the only possible way out. When Athena bids Orestes present his case, his response
is direct. He says, I killed the woman who bore me. I do not deny it. It was revenge for
the murder of my beloved father. Apollo was my accomplice. He shares the charge. He lashed
me with threats of heart-wrenching pains if I did not take action against the guilty ones.
You judge if I was just or not. I have made my case.
Athena is presented with yet another version of the impossible choice that has tormented
the protagonists of the plays. Should she let Orestes stay, Orestes is a suppliant and
therefore must receive her protection. But if she lets him stay, she risks the resentment
of the furies whose malignant poison would curse the earth with an insufferable perpetual
leg. Should she drive him away and therefore break the sacred code that binds men to gods,
either way, she says, will provoke divine wrath.
In an act that signals the mythic origins of the Athenian jury system, Athena decides
to place the responsibility for the decision in the hands of exemplary men of the city.
Magistrates over murder bound by a solemn oath for now and forever to serve the sacred
court. She says, I will select the finest of my citizens who will strive to return an
honest verdict, uphold their pledge, and deliberate with judicial minds.
In the choral interview that precedes the trial before this jury, the furies voiced
their case for traditional vendetta justice based as it is upon the fear of retribution.
The specter of lawlessness and chaos that would ensue without that retribution, which is embodied
in the furies, is specifically articulated as the threat of patricide and matricide.
This for the furies is the root of impiety and anarchy. They advocate a middle way between
the life of anarchy and the rule of tyranny, one that they argue they guard with their
presence. The furies thus express the deep and inseparable connection between representations
of justice and the form of social control. The fear of retribution from the furies promotes
a version of justice that informs the political realm. To remove that fear is to transform
the nature of justice and thereby, they argue, undermine the stability of the political system.
Athena's charge then is simultaneously to find a resolution to this specific dilemma
and to redefine justice in such a way as to ensure the stability of the people.
Athena announces the establishment of the first court to try homicide, a court convened
before her as a judge and before the ten Athenian elders who will serve as jury.
Apollo appears as a witness for arrestees and is positioned according to the stage directions
on the roof, thus making his separation from these phonic beings, that is, these ancient
underworld forces, spatially distinct. Athena directs the prosecution to make its case
and the furies cross-examine arrestees, bringing him to acknowledge the murder of his mother
for which he claims he has no regrets. Once again, the question is raised as to why Clytem
Nestor was not tormented by the furies after the murder of Agamemnon and once again the
answer is that she was not of his kin, that she did not share his blood.
The issue of shared blood is fundamental to the question of culpability. How can arrestees,
even with Apollo's support, deny that he shares his mother's blood?
Apollo tries to divert attention away from this question by arguing that the death of
Clytem Nestor at her son's hands was not the equivalent of the death of Agamemnon.
The rightful king struck down not in the heat of battle but ensnared in a net as he stepped
from his bath and savagely stabbed to death. The furies counter this narrative with a historical
precedent. If Apollo believed the father to be more important than the mother, why did
he overthrow his own father, Cronus, and place him in chains?
Refuted by his own history, Apollo returns to the question of kinship and argues the
case from biology.
When learned the truth, the one named mother is not the child's true parent, but the nurturer
of the newly sown seed. Man mounts to create life, whereas woman is a stranger, fostering
a stranger, nourishing the young, unless a god blights the birth. I have proof that there
can be a father without a mother, proof that what I say is true. There stands your witness,
the child of Zeus. Apollo's witness is, of course, Athena, born from the head of her
father, Zeus, after he swallowed her mother, Matis, because he feared that she would produce
a son who would usurp him.
Apollo's claim strikes us as preposterous, but it accords with one of the several Greek
theories of conception, and clearly male presidents was an established feature of Athenian civil
society.
With both prosecution and defense completed, Athena turns the case over to the jury for
a decision, establishing the formal and jurisprudential precedents that will govern this, the first
trial for murder, and all those that will follow.
You are the first, she says, to judge a case of bloodshed, and from this time on the race
of Egeus will forever uphold this judicial assembly. But the citizens must uphold the
law and there can be no deviation. There will be no iron key nor the rule of tyranny. Citizens
embrace the middle way, but never banish fear. For the mortal who has no fear can never
know justice. You must respect this court, and you must fear it. It is your best defense
for the stronger the bulwark, the safer the city.
The jury cast its vote, followed by Athena, who announces her decision in favor of Arestes,
because she says she will always defer to the male in all things, except marriage, because
she is a child of her father. Her vote breaks the deadlock between the jurors, and Arestes
is exonerated.
Although this specific issue has been resolved, the furies remain unsatisfied, claiming that
their ancient privileges have been ignored by these young gods. Once again, Athena must
use the enchanting power of language to persuade the furies to give up their desire for revenge,
and remain in Athens as the spirits of fertility and childbirth, replacing blood-crazed retribution
with marriage rights and great harvests.
The furies have now been transformed through the rhetoric of persuasion into the kindly
just as the lex talionis, that is the law of retribution, has been transformed into
nomus, that is the law that promotes rational, civic justice and order, and keeps chaos at bay.
The play signals the link between this mythic past and the present by having the furies form
a festal procession that leaves the world of the play and enters into the present space and time
of the audience.
The end of the play creates a new order for the community, one founded on the twin pillars
of the rule of law and democracy, the middle way between anarchy and autocracy, and one
that has been instituted by Athena.
Like the intervention that the gods must make into the human system of justice that encourages
endless retribution, so the gods must intervene in a human system of government that lurches
from chaos to tyranny.
The limitations of the merely man-made must be supplemented by the divine wisdom of the
gods, by a system of justice that promotes impartial deliberations and decisions, and
that relies for its effectiveness upon the respect and fear of the citizens.
As is evident from Escalus' reconstruction of the origin of his society's legal system
and its practice, Greek law acknowledges the place of drama and emotion in the resolution
of disputes and the restitution of justice.
In fact, the Aristaia embodies that mix of dramatic conflict, emotional energy, and intellectual
reasoning that characterized the ideal Greek trial.
The play recognizes, as did the Greek system of justice, that a trial always engages larger
issues than the specific actions and characters who are before the judge and jury, and that
the airing of those larger issues, social grievances and civil frictions, is the central
part of the curative function of the trial.
When one considers the very public nature of trials taking place in Athens in the Agora,
with juries of up to 200 men in important cases, one sees how the trial in its resolution
functioned as a place to release pent-up tensions and emotions before they became destructive.
One might say that televised trials could serve the same function, although there is
something fundamentally unreasonable about the way these trials are represented.
In the Aristaia, we see that law and justice are finally determined to be social principles
rather than the outcome of individual desires and private interests.
As important as the family is to the social unit, it must finally be subordinate to the
needs of the state.
Moreover, the well-being of the state demands the separation of public and private interests
with the subsequent gendering of those domains as male and female, respectively.
The private domestic world, while being feminized in relation to the public world, is not, however,
exempt from the laws that that public, masculine realm produces.
In this system, the female must be subordinate to the male, and any disruption in that order
will bring about a disruption in the systems of government and justice, just as Clytemnester's
rule has demonstrated.
This deep-seated bias against women, as either naturally or legally incapable of engaging
fully in political systems, remains just one of the traces of this ancient system of justice.
