In this lecture we will examine one of the most controversial books ever to be written
by an American author, Mark Twain's Huckleberry Finn.
The book was published 20 years after the end of the Civil War but is set in the 1830s
and employs the perspective of a white boy, Hucklefin, to articulate the contorted moral
philosophy that enabled those who believed themselves Christians to enslave other humans.
The philosophical contortions are reflected not only in the ways in which Huckle tries
to accommodate his sympathetic response to the runaway slave Jim to what he has been
taught he ought to feel but also in the endless games and tricks that Huck has to play to
keep himself and Jim alive.
I want to give some sense of why this novel still causes so much controversy and then
turn to the novel to examine two crucial scenes in the depiction of this relationship between
two human beings, both morally compassionate but intellectually naive, one white and one
black, one free and one enslaved.
In Hannibal, Missouri, Twain's hometown and the inspiration for Hucklefin, residents celebrate
National Tom Sawyer Days around every 4th of July, honoring the author by re-enacting
some of Twain's local activities.
What doesn't get mentioned in these celebrations is that during the time when the character
Tom Sawyer was goading his playmates into fantastic adventures, Hannibal was a slave
tan and Tom's creator Mark Twain grew up in a slave culture.
As a child Samuel Clemens, the name of Mark Twain, accepted without question as Huck did
the idea that slaves were property.
Being called a low-down abolitionist was a real insult and could cause you real physical
damage.
By 1885, however, when Hucklefin was published, Twain's views had changed and he certainly
did not share the perceptions of Huckle, the narrator of the book.
Twain married into an abolitionist family and was deeply influenced by his father-in-law
Jervis Langdon, an important merchant in Armira, New York.
Armira was the only regular railroad stop between Philadelphia and Canada and was a
crucial link in the underground railway that smuggled slaves to freedom.
The fugitives were often penniless when they arrived and Jervis Langdon responded to frequent
calls for contributions to assist the former slaves.
Twain also wrote openly about the persecution of minorities such as the Chinese in San Francisco
and in an 1869 editorial published in the Buffalo Express, Express Outrage at Lynching.
By the time he wrote Hucklefin, Twain had moved further than many of his age in believing
that white Americans owed black Americans some form of reparations for slavery.
In a letter written to Dean Weyland, Dean of the Yale Law School in 1885, the year Hucklefin
was published, he explained why he wanted to pay for Warner McGinn, one of the first
black law students at Yale.
We have ground the manhood out of them and the shame is ours, not theirs, and we should
pay for it.
Not everyone agreed with Twain in his condemnation of slavery and even those who might have done
were offended by Twain's representation of Huck's tendency to lie and steal.
Twain accused Twain of threatening public morality, childhood innocence, and the purity
of the English language, the latter complaint produced by his use of dialect in both the
portrayal of Huck and Jim.
The Concord, Massachusetts Public Library banned the book soon after it was published
calling it trash, to which Twain responded, those idiots in Concord are not a court of
last resort and I am not disturbed by their moral gymnastics.
Much of this was to be expected but what one would not expect was how many critics commented
on the novel without mentioning the issue of race, either positively or negatively,
and most never mentioned Jim by name.
For example, here is a representative negative review from a San Francisco paper in 1885.
There is very little of literary art in the story.
It is a string of incidents ingeniously fastened together.
The spice of juvenile wickedness and dare deviltry give a zest to the book.
Huckleberry Finn is, in a restricted sense, a typical character.
Yet the type is not altogether desirable, nor is it one that most parents who want a
future of promise for their young folks would select without some hesitation.
And here to contrast is a typical positive review from a Boston newspaper.
It is the story of a half illiterate, high-spirited boy whose adventures are related by himself.
The art with which this conception is dealt with is perfect in all its details.
The boy's point of view is never for a moment lost sight of and the moral of the whole is
that this half illiterate boy can be made to present with perfect consistency not only
the characters of the people whom he meets but an accurate picture of their social life.
From the artistic point of view, there is not a coarse nor vulgar suggestion from the
beginning of the book to the end.
Whatever is coarse and crude is in the life that is pictured and the picture is perfect.
It may be said that the humor is sometimes excessive but it is genuine humor and the
moral of the book, though it is not scrawled across every page, teaches the necessity of
manliness and self-sacrifice but not, apparently, the horror of slavery.
Perhaps the trauma of the Civil War was still so deeply felt that readers refused to open
that wound but it does seem surprising that very few of the contemporary reviewers responded
to the cultural significance of a white author creating a white narrator who comes to care
for a runaway slave and worry about the abuses of slavery.
Such was not the case with the earlier reviews of another controversial book about slavery
and that is Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin published in 1851.
From the moment the first episode appeared, it was published in the series, the book was
praised and vilified, a foregone conclusion given the heated feelings of those who were
both pro and anti-abolition.
But what interests me about Stowe's novel is its critical afterlife.
That is, while the original audience responded to its portrayal of the misery of slavery
based upon what they felt about the subject, later critics either condoned or condemned
it based upon its depiction of the slaves themselves.
Many readers consider the book to be racist, while others argue that it denounces the very
racism it is accused of.
These diametrically opposed responses are also characteristic of how readers have responded
to Twain's novel.
In Stowe's case she was attacked for her stereotypical and sentimental caricature of slaves which
some argued merely reinforced racial prejudice and deprived the individual slaves of their
identity.
On the other hand, other critics argued that those stereotypes were the product of racism
and that Stowe was representing how the enslavement of human beings was tolerated by those who
were slave owners, that is, by refusing to engage with the slaves as individuals, especially
the slave mothers whose children were sold away from them.
The same kind of dual response is typical of Twain's readers, some of whom claim that
the novel promotes racism by its use of derogatory language and stereotypes, and others who insist
that the pervasive irony of the book requires us to reject just such a reading.
What these contradictory responses suggest perhaps is the difficulty of trying to make
art out of the horror of slavery.
One might respond that the book does not depict the horrors of slavery, rather it whitewashes
the whole subject because we never see the beatings and the whippings of the mutilations
or the families sold away from one another, although we do know that the fear of being
sold down the river is why Jim left Miss Watson.
Putting aside the question of exactly how accurate Twain's depiction of slavery is,
we still have to deal with a dilemma that also surrounds other representations of horrific
events or appears to exploit the oppression of certain groups.
The question is, how do we balance aesthetic demands against moral demands?
Another way of saying this is, is it morally appropriate to exploit the horror of slavery
for entertainment?
When we think about judging a work of art, we have to consider whether it is possible
to separate our aesthetic response from our moral response.
Is it possible to recognize that a piece of literature might have artistic value despite
its representation of circumstances or characters that we find morally reprehensible?
This is a question that has been asked repeatedly about representations of the Holocaust, for
example, which remains for some people like slavery an impossible event to represent
in artistic terms.
Think for a minute about the mixed response to the Academy Award-winning movie A Beautiful
Life.
It is also certainly an issue that we implicitly recognize when we think about the merchant
of Venice.
Was Shakespeare anti-Semitic?
I think the answer is probably yes to the extent that his culture was.
Does that make his play anti-Semitic?
I think not.
Which means that I'm willing to acknowledge that an aesthetic object, the play, the novel,
the film, can override an artist's own prejudices and articulate a morally sound position.
This issue becomes most pointed when the judgment is not simply a personal decision about whether
to buy or read a book or see a play or a movie, but one that carries real consequences, as
when, for example, a community tries to censor the work of art because it does not accept
its moral values.
We shall see an example of this in the case of Nabokov's 1955 novel Lolita.
The law does not have the luxury of simply closing the book.
It must decide what counts as artistic merit and what doesn't.
But more of that later.
More recently, critics from both the left and the right have protested that Huck Finn
encourages anti-social attitudes, and it is still the target of groups insisting that
it be removed from library shelves or the school curriculum.
The fact that a book can offend people on both sides of the political spectrum, however,
probably means that it's doing something right as a work of art.
Most arguments about the book focus on two issues.
First, how to interpret the narrative point of view, and second, how to respond to language
that many find offensive.
First, the argument from irony.
To defend the novel by arguing that the story of Huck and Jim is filtered through an ironic
perspective.
That is, that the narrator is a young boy who does not realize that when he thinks he's
doing something wrong, he's actually doing something right, morally speaking, and that
when he treats Jim the way the adults in his world treat Jim, he's doing the wrong thing.
That argument will not convince those who think that it is a racist representation because
irony only functions if you can have some moral distance from the text.
And by definition, those who are outraged by what they see as racism do not want to
have that kind of detachment.
The ironic perspective that the narrative adopts is tied intimately to the tone and
flavor of the novel.
As many critics have argued, Huck Finn signals the arrival of a genuinely American voice,
and it is inspressed in the tone of the novel, its vernacular language, its colloquialisms,
its energetic pace, but perhaps particularly by the way in which Twain acknowledged his
European predecessors without adopting their style or imitating their content.
In Huck Finn, riverboats are called Sir Walter Scott, Jim is dressed up in Lear's costume,
and the romance narrative is transformed into a narrative that depicts a genuine affection
between a white boy and a black man.
To make this work, Twain had to incorporate the voice of the black man and his linguistic
rhythms.
No other voice would do, and thus in writing his fictional character Jim into being, one
could argue that Twain makes some kind of reparation for all those years of silencing.
And this is enough to compensate for the depiction of Jim's repeated humiliation.
The second problem is the use of language that is derogatory.
For many readers, the use of the word nigger in the book is so deeply offensive that it
makes any assessment of the strictly literary value of the book impossible, and one understands
why this is so.
Here is an article reporting on a recent attempt by an African American parents group to remove
the book from required reading lists in their local high schools.
The headline reads, Huck Finn's Fate to be Decided.
A school group in East San Jose is to decide tomorrow night whether the adventures of Huckleberry
Finn should be removed from required reading lists in 11 area high schools in response
to objections raised by African American parents.
The parents cite the classic Mark Twain novel's liberal use of racial stereotypes and racial
epithets.
It uses the n-word more than 200 times, which they say is damaging to their children.
In one four-page passage, the word appears 15 times, the parents say.
Although supporters of the novel have defended as an indictment of racism in the 19th century
United States, the African American parent coalition argues that their children already
are bombarded with racial slurs that erode their self-esteem and affect their performance
in school.
The word nigger has meaning for African American people that no one else can really get inside
of, said Chester Stevens, a founder of the coalition, noting the words association with
lynchings, segregation and slavery.
In effect, the parents were asking that the book be removed from the reading list because
its use of racial epithet encouraged hate speech, an argument about the use of such
epithets that has been made by the NAACP since its inception.
To reduce a very complicated issue to a brief statement, the central question about language
that appears to provoke a hateful attitude towards a specified group is whether that
speech is protected by the First Amendment.
A 1942 Supreme Court case, Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, established the category of face-to-face
epithets or fighting words that were outside the protection of the First Amendment.
Those words, by their very utterance inflict injury, and are no essential part of any exposition
of ideas.
The general direction of the court over the last ten years seems to be to question whether
fighting words fall outside the protection of the Constitution, and thus to limit the
occasions and circumstances when language or other actions designed to provoke hatred
can be regulated.
With these considerations in mind, I would like to turn now to two specific scenes in
the novel.
The first, when Huck falls Jim into believing he has dreamt Huck's overnight disappearance
from the raft, and the second, when the two con men, the Duke and the King, dress Jim
up in a Lear costume so that he can be left on the raft without being suspected as a
runaway slave.
The first scene occurs in Chapter 15 when Huck and Jim are almost at the bottom of Illinois
near the city of Cairo.
They want to stop there, sell the raft, and make their way up the Ohio River into the
free states.
This then is a critical moment in Jim's search for freedom.
As it turns out, the raft drifts past the intersection of the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers,
and Jim finds himself traveling ever deeper into the slave states.
Huck has spent the night drifting in a canoe separated from Jim by the current and the
fog, but then he's finally able to make his way back to the raft.
Jim is sleeping and Huck climbs on board and pretends that he's been there all night.
Jim's affectionate reception of Huck, it's too good for true honey, it's too good for
true, provokes Huck to ask him if he's been drinking, to which Jim replies and forgives
the accident.
We're lucky here boss, there's something wrong there, is I me or who is I?
Is I here or why is I?
Now that's what I want to know.
In his bewilderment, Jim articulates not just his confusion over the specific events of
last night, but his total anxiety about who and where he is, it's an ontological anxiety.
What Huck has done when he runs away from Miss Watson and civilization with Jim is to
provoke a crisis of identity for both of them.
Huck has some sense of who he is when he's not on the river, running away from his father
and others who might force his return, but Jim has none.
His condition as a slave did not mean that he was classified as a certain kind of man,
black of a certain age, etc.
But his condition as a slave meant that he had no identity, no legal, social, moral or
political identity.
I am making a distinction here between the way Jim was perceived by those who had enslaved
him and the way he would have perceived himself.
When Jim and Huck travel down the river together, they are in a liminal space, that is a space
between two spaces, between the white community and the slave community, between the slave
states and the free states, and in terms of their gradual understanding of one another
between ignorance and knowledge.
The knowledge they acquire of each other also teaches them something about themselves.
Thus Huck learns what kind of man Jim is, but so does Jim.
They both discover separately and together that Jim is a father, a husband, a loyal friend,
and that those conditions are not the exclusive property of one race.
To return to the scene on the raft, Huck convinces Jim that he must have dreamt the whole thing.
There was no fog, no lost canoe, no hollering back and forth, and finally Jim is forced
to admit that indeed that is what happened.
Treating Jim as one treats a slave, that is, as one who has neither the sense or desire
to have a separate existence, Huck controls the moment.
Jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes but set their studying over it.
But then Jim asserts ownership over the dream.
It is no longer Huck's fantasy.
Now it belongs to Jim.
Jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through, just as it happened, only he
painted it up considerable.
Then he said he must start in and interpret it because it was sent for a warning.
He said the first towhead stood for a man that would try to do us some good, but the
current was another man that would get us away from him.
The hoops was warning that we would come at us every now and then, and if we didn't
try hard to make sense out of them, then they'd just take us into bad luck instead of keeping
us out of it.
A lot of towheads was troubles we were going to get into with quarrelsome people and all
kinds of mean folks, but if we minded our business and didn't talk back and aggravate them,
we would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big clear river, which was the
free states and wouldn't have no more trouble.
To interpret is to have a sense that the world is filled with speaking things.
Towheads, whoops, and knowing how to read those things makes you master of them.
This huck intuitively understands, thus his admiration for Tom Sawyer, the master fabulous.
Determined to regain control of the moment and the power of interpreting dreams and reality,
huck points to the evidence of the night's events.
Jim, I says, what does that stand for?
It was the leaves and rubbish on the raft and the smashed door.
You could see them first right now.
Jim looked at the trash and then looked at me and back at the trash again.
He got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he couldn't seem to shake it loose and
get the facts back in its right place again.
But when he did get the things straightened around, he looked at me steady without ever
smiling and says, what do they stand for?
I was going to tell you.
When I got all wore out, would work and would call him for him, went to sleep, my heart
was broke because he was lost and I didn't care no more what became of me in the raft.
And when I woke up and found you back again all safe and sound, did tears come and I could
have got down on my knees and kissed your foot, he's so thankful.
And all you were thinking about was how you make a fool of old Jim with a lie.
That truck there is trash and trash is what people is to put dirt on the head of a friend
and makes them ashamed.
Then he got up slow and walked to the wigwam and went in there without saying anything
but that.
But that was enough.
It made me feel so mean I could almost kiss his foot to get him to take it back.
It was 15 minutes before I could work myself up to go and humble myself to a nigger but
I'd done it and I weren't ever sorry for it afterwards neither.
I didn't do him no more mean tricks and I wouldn't have done that one if I'd known
it would make him feel that way.
One was put this narrative in its historical context to realize the significance of Huck's
acknowledgement that Jim is a man, a human being whose foot he could almost kiss.
Jim's desire to kiss Huck's foot is part joy at his return, part the consequence of
his learned submission.
The Huck's is an unadulterated expression of respect and affection for the man Jim is
learning to claim as his own self.
The second scene I would like to address comes in Chapter 24 when the two con men, the Duke
and the King, plan to return to town in the hopes of making money out of the gullible
townsfolk when they perform their royal nonsuch for the second night.
The royal nonsuch is a scam.
It consists of no more than the King, a prancing out on all fours naked, and he was painted
all over, ringed, streaked and striped, all sorts of colors as splendid as a rainbow.
But never mind the rest of his outfit, it was just wild but it was awfully funny.
The people most killed themselves laughing and when the King got done capering and capered
off behind the scenes they roared and clapped and stormed and whore-hoared till he came
back and done it over again and after that they made him do it another time.
Jim is asked for some alternative to being tied up all day while they are gone and Huck
explains because if anybody happened on him all by himself and not tied up he wouldn't
look much like a runaway nigger you know.
Of course the reader who reads ironically understands the grim humor in having Jim perform
his role as a runaway slave to avoid being mistaken for something else, a free man perhaps.
The Duke ciphers out a plan.
He dresses Jim up in King Lear's outfit.
It was a long calico gown and white horse whiskers, wig and whiskers and then he took
his theatre paint and painted Jim's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead dull
solid blue like a man that's been drowned nine days.
Blamed if it weren't the arborist looking outrage I ever see.
Then the Duke took and wrote out a sign on a shingle so, sick Arab but harmless when not
out of his head.
The image of Jim as King Lear recalls the scene earlier when Jim told Huck about striking
his daughter because he thought she was disobeying him when in fact she was deaf and dumb.
What Huck does not know of course but what the educated reader is fully aware of is that
when Jim assumes the identity of King Lear he invokes the relationship between Lear and
Cordelia which is symbolized by Cordelia's refusal to speak when her father commands
her to do so.
Speak again says Lear nothing will come of nothing and of course in the material sense
in which Lear means it at this point in the play that's right but what does come eventually
though tragically is the reconciliation between Lear and his best beloved daughter that ennobles
them both.
Likewise I would argue that assuming the costume of Lear even one painted blue marks another
stage in the gradual ennoblement of Jim especially when you consider what the White King was
doing as he pranced around on a stage painted like a rainbow.
In creating a story about a white boy and a black man Twain has created a crisis of representation.
By this I mean that he is demanding that his readers take seriously the idea that a runaway
slave can be a major character in a paradigmatic American romance and I use the term romance
here in the way that Hawthorne defined it as the meeting of the actual and the imaginary.
It might have occurred to Twain that he was making the same kind of decision vis-à-vis
his literary reputation that Huck did when he decided to tear up the letter to Ms. Watson
telling her where her runaway slave was.
Alright then I'll go to hell.
