Lecture 20 – Kafka and 20th Century Anxiety about Law
In this lecture, we will examine the work of one of the most influential writers of
the 20th century, the Jewish-German-language writer Franz Kafka.
In his novels and short stories, specifically the Judgment, Before the Law, in the Penal
Colony and the Trial, Kafka portrays a world both real and dream-like, in which individuals
confront again and again a sense that they are guilty and deserve punishment, and yet
can find no reason for their suffering.
His protagonists live in a world of dehumanized and totalitarian bureaucracy, in a world
without the comfort of religious salvation, how does the individual find solace for his
inevitable transgressions, the small and not-so-small crimes against his fellow man?
And if all are guilty, who can render a sentence?
Kafka's work prefigures the dark night of the soul that is the Holocaust and Hiroshima,
and engages with the questions that have tormented the moralists and philosophers of the 20th
century.
What good is law if it cannot restrain the murderous impulses of a Hitler, but rather
sanctions them?
How can law claim a superior role in constituting our society if it can also be employed to
legislate genocide?
Is law, therefore, nothing more than force disguised as policy?
Franz Kafka was born into a middle-class German-speaking Jewish family in Prague, and despite identifying
early on his sense of connection to his ancestors who had been rabbis and intellectuals, he
remained overwhelmed his entire life by his domineering shopkeeper father, a man whose
devotion to material success and social status would seem to make him as unlikely an influence
over the studious Kafka as one could imagine.
That patriarch appears everywhere in his work, identifiable as specific fathers who torment
their sons, as well as the spectral figures that haunt the corridors, offices, and courtrooms
of his novels, like the Trial and the Castle.
In his autobiographical Letter to Father, written in 1919 but never sent, Kafka blamed
his failure to have a full and satisfying life, to break his ties with his family, to
marry and have children, to find joy in his work, to the impotence caused by yielding
in all things to his father's will.
A scenario articulated directly in Kafka's story The Judgment.
The same desperate struggle to assert the self and refuse the power of another is pervasive
throughout his works, from the portrayal of abject victimization in the trial to the
endless search for approval and validation represented in the castle.
Kafka's relationship with this father certainly offers some explanation for the nature of
his work, but one can also look to the culture into which he was born for further evidence
of the kind of radical alienation that one finds depicted in his writing.
Like so many citizens of the modern world, Kafka did not belong, either to the religion
of which he was nominally a member, his father wished to assimilate in order to increase
his social standing, and Kafka was too intellectual to be religious, nor to the country which
claimed him.
He was a member of a Czech-German speaking minority in what is now the Czech Republic,
and so his sympathies with Czech political and cultural ambitions found little outlet.
Nor could Kafka's intellectual energies find an outlet.
He studied civil and canon law at the University of Prague, which he described as like eating
sawdust.
And after practicing law in the provincial high court and the criminal court, went to
work for an insurance company, moving to another insurance company when he found the
hours prevented him from writing.
The routine of a daily office job and nights spent writing gradually wore down his health
and he eventually had to leave to seek medical treatment for tuberculosis, from which he
died at the age of 41.
Kafka's vision of a world in which the individual is powerless to resist the totalizing forces
of a bureaucracy is a nightmare version of Dickens' Bleak House, which Kafka knew very
well, citing Dickens as one of his major influences.
As I suggested in my lecture on Dickens, Kafka offers us no safe haven, no space to which
the individual might return after the daily struggle with officialdom.
Comparing Kafka to Dickens helps us to understand not just how prescient Dickens was in his
understanding of the growing complexity and reach of the law and the dire consequences
of such an insidious occupation of all the personal and social spaces in which we act
out our identity.
This comparison also indicates the ways in which Kafka's vision and technique are quite
different from Dickens.
Bleak House offers its readers what I would call, following the anthropologist Clifford
Gertz, thick reality.
By this, Gertz means that all human behavior has to be understood within the practices,
language, images, and symbol systems that constitute a society.
To understand what something means, it has to be placed within its context, and as the
context changes, so the meaning of an action or an event or a sign changes.
Gertz argues that one has to explain the phenomenon so as to make it meaningful to
an outsider, to someone who is not part of the network of meanings that makes up that
particular society.
One might think here of how the officer in charge of the harrow, the instrument of torture
in the penal colony, fails in his attempt to explain the philosophical function of punishment
to the explorer who is visiting, and must finally resort to placing himself in the machine
to demonstrate its brilliance as both punishment and revelation, thus symbolically convicting
himself of the crimes of which only others have seemed guilty.
To return to Bleak House, what we have in that novel is a thick description of the fictional
universe.
Even if events, characters, and connections are not at first clear to us, we retroactively
discover that they have all been placed within a context that helps us to read their meaning.
Moreover, we read that text as thick in the sense that it has depths.
It has a surface meaning, but it also has a layer of meaning or meanings that reach down
below the surface to generate further interpretations.
One way in which this works is in Dickens' constant use of metaphor to convey multiple
layers of sense.
Think of how the fog is described in the opening passage to describe a physical reality as
well as to infer other, less concrete, but nonetheless significant realities.
If we compare this way of representing reality with Kafka's, I think it becomes quite clear
that Kafka is doing something different.
To illustrate, let me use his novel The Trial, a text that most closely resembles in terms
of its representation of law and legalism, Dickens' Bleak House.
The trial opens with the following sentence, someone must have traduced Joseph K, for without
having done anything wrong, he was arrested one fine morning.
One expects as a reader to discover in the course of the story either what Joseph K has
done or how he was mistaken for someone who did do something.
This doesn't happen, but then you could say one doesn't find out about the origin or nature
of the case that is at the heart of Bleak House.
We know nothing more about the case at the end of the novel than we did at the beginning.
So far Dickens and Kafka don't seem so far apart, but it's how in terms of technique
these two novelists represent what doesn't happen, as well as the implications of those
differences that signals the shift from the world of 19th century England to 20th century
Eastern Europe.
As I have noted in Dickens' representation, one understands that below the surface of
the narrative there lies a deeper reality that gives significant to the events and relationships
being described.
There is a belief that even if everything can't be known or seen, that there is significance
in what happens and even the small moments are full of potential.
It is this sense of a deeper significance that is missing in the trial and I don't mean
to suggest that Kafka couldn't provide that significance because he was not as skilled
as Dickens, but in the world that Kafka represents and in the so-called real world upon which
he models his representations, the surface is all there is.
Things are what they seem to be and when Joseph K. seeks a reason for his arrest and a way
of rendering himself innocent in the eyes of those who have charged him with a crime about
which he and we know nothing, he relies on a way of understanding the world and his place
in it that no longer has meaning.
Although the suitors before the High Court of Chancery are driven to madness and suicide
by the court's failure to bring resolution to their cases, there is, as I have argued,
a world outside Chancery that brings both riches and happiness.
For Joseph K. there is no world outside the court.
The protagonist and the accused of the trial is told that the court is in session when
he comes before it and the court is out of session when he leaves it.
Under the normal rules of interpretation, that is, under the rules that assumes that
there is another world other than the world of the court, one would say that this means
that the court depends upon Joseph K.'s presence for its meaning.
No accused, no court.
But if there is no other world beside that of the court, then what this sentence, the
court is in session when he comes before it and the court is out of session when he
leaves it, what that sentence means is that Joseph K. is always in front of the court
and that the only way he can leave it is through death.
Or as Lenny, one of the other characters in the novel, advises him, all you can do is
confess.
Confess the first chance you get.
That's the only chance you have to escape, the only one.
Joseph K.'s nightmarish journey through the court bureaucracy is his effort to account
in some rational and logical way for the charge against him and therefore to return his life
to the way it was before he was arrested, before he had to confess to some crime.
In other words, to claim an identity that now appears to have been swallowed up by the
only identity that makes sense as one accused before the law.
This sense that he has no identity is confirmed by the way in which the narrator of the story
of Joseph K. speaks about himself.
He never says I, never inserts himself into the text to comment or to direct, but just
follows K.'s actions, conversations and those of the other characters, rather like a camera
that records without judgment on everything that passes across its lens.
And yet the sense of judgment is so pervasive in the novel that we have to believe that
the narrator knows something that we don't, that he's keeping something from us and that
if he told us what he knew we could sort everything out.
And of course, this is precisely how Joseph himself feels.
The final act of a narrative that conceals as much as it discloses is the death of Joseph
K., which comes on his birthday just a year after he has been arrested.
The executioners, appearing to K. more like actors hired to perform the execution than
the real thing, lead K. to an abandoned quarry, pass a long, thin, sharp butcher knife over
his body, and then stab him in the heart, turning it twice, just as K. and others have
turned and turned again in their search for answers.
K. describes his own end like a dog and the men drew near his face, leaning cheek to cheek
to witness the verdict.
Only in the moment of death and then not to the dying is the verdict the decision made
clear.
What was the crime, what was the occasion, the circumstances, the motive, and what were
the clues, and who identified them and put the story together?
In the case of the narrative of Joseph K., one has to answer, the only one who knows
is the circumspect narrator whose identity is never known.
In this metaphor of a reality in which meaning is endlessly deferred until it is too late,
until the moment of death, Kafka calls upon the memory of those Greek tragedies in which
the hero struggles to avoid his fate, only to bring himself by every step closer to that
which he would avoid.
What has changed, of course, in Kafka's rendering of this tragic narrative is the tragedy.
There is no larger, no greater, no more transcendent reality than the story of Joseph K. refers
us to, the law or God or the father, the exert their authority because that is what authority
does, not because they have some divine sanction to do so or because the exertion of that authority
presupposes a purpose.
This is a world of pure instrumentalism.
And the instrument of that instrumentalism is perfectly represented by the fantastic
apparatus in the penal colony.
In the story, an explorer visits the penal colony where an officer demonstrates to him
the harrow, a very elegant and complex machine used to inflict capital punishment.
The prisoner lies face down on the bed of the machine which then inscribes through a
complex series of needles the commandment he has broken, for example, honor thy superiors.
The needles press deeper and deeper until the man dies, but in the moment of death he
finally understands both the nature of justice and his punishment, a revelation that transfigures
the prisoner's face and instructs all those who come to watch.
In order to convince the explorer of the worth of this machine, the officer removes the prisoner
from the bed and takes his place.
He adjusts the machine to describe be just, the machine malfunctions however and goes
to pieces, but not before the officer dies.
The world of the penal colony is a nightmare version of the world we know, like the world
that Joseph K. inhabits.
And thus represents, as do nightmares, those things with which we are familiar, become
strange and by their strangeness we see them as they really are.
In the penal colony, the explorer, who is an outsider, encounters both the instrument
of punishment and the one who is responsible for its operation.
The officer is disconnected from the moral purpose of the punishment, except as the beauty
of the machine reveals that, but only because he cares and services the machine does it
function and deliver the kind of punishment that the state has ordered.
The officer knows that the explorer will report back to the new commandant of the colony
that the harrow is a barbaric instrument of torture and this is why he is so determined
that the explorer witness a death.
The officer is desperate to point out the contradictions in the new commandant's policy.
How can one argue for justice if there isn't a corresponding sense of punishment?
How can expect the laws to be obeyed if the cruelty that is inherently part of the punishment
for breaking those laws is stripped away?
On the other hand, one recognizes that the officer's fanatical devotion to duty to the
instrument of justice rather than to justice itself bespeaks a madness that would soon
overrun Kafka's Europe.
The unquestioning application of laws without the necessary moral restraints turns the whole
world into a penal colony.
The need for punishment is also connected in this story with the desire for truth.
We are told by the officer that in order to reach a level of unquestionable truth, knowledge
must be inscribed in the sense of incised on the body, only in this way could one make
sure that the word passed instantly into the blood.
In a world where the belief in a transcendent value, truth value is compromised, some system
of order, some system of laws, must secure society against fragmentation and chaos.
In the penal colony, that system must be felt along the bones and in the blood in order
to have its effect.
Such naturalized versions of law, like the Old Testament commandments, can exist only
when there is no contending version, no alternative that might give a vision of something that
is not consumed by the system.
Thus only in a penal colony can such a legal system operate efficiently.
But once that world is open to outsiders, like the explorer, the cracks in the machine
begin to appear and it soon falls apart.
We can also reflect on the way in which the nature of the punishment, the inscribing of
the law onto the body of the criminal, recalls the manner in which Hester Prynne is punished
in the scarlet letter.
That we desire to have the punishment either literally or figuratively inscribed on the
body of the offender indicates the importance of being able to separate the guilty from
the innocent, the offender from the offended, the prisoner from the judge.
When we turn to Toni Morrison's novel Beloved, we will see how the brand on the body of the
slave marked both her status as property, but also her status as always already a criminal
in the eyes of those who branded her.
Let me turn now to one of Kafka's best known parables, Before the Law, which was later
incorporated into the novel The Trial, and presents both the inaccessibility of law,
and thus meaning and justice, and yet man's tenacious longing for it.
A man from the country comes before the law, described as a door guarded by a doorkeeper.
The man asks if he can enter, but the doorkeeper says no, suggesting that entry might be possible
in the future.
The door to the law stands open, and the man is tempted to enter, but the doorkeeper warns
him that there are many more doors, and each one is guarded.
The man who had expected to be given admission has taken aback, and takes the seat offered.
There he sits, occasionally engaging in conversation with the doorkeeper, until he grows very old.
And just before his death he asks, everyone wants to attain the law, how is it that in
all these years no one but me has come, asking to be admitted?
The man is very deaf, so the doorkeeper bellows in his ear, no one but you could gain admission
through the door, since the door was intended just for you.
I am now going to shut it.
In accordance with the conventions of the parable, the characters have no personal identity,
their only function being to serve as concepts or states of being, or actions or events.
But since it is a parable, it demands interpretation, such being the point of employing that genre
of literature.
If it is a parable, it must mean something.
What then does it mean?
Let me remind you of the point I made when comparing Dickens with Kafka.
That to seek depths in the sense of metaphoric meanings that invite us to seek for the real
meaning below the surface of the text, to believe that the language conceals something
more important than its first meaning, this I would suggest is a fruitless task with Kafka.
Of course one can make meaning out of the parable.
Human desire for justice will always be thwarted.
The law cannot reveal itself, because then its power, which comes from being impossible
to achieve, would be undermined, and so on.
A parable demands interpretation, but the language of the parable gives no clue as to
its meaning.
Isn't this the essential paradox that we confront in Kafka all the time?
Isn't he constantly tormenting his readers with texts that demand interpretation?
That is, texts that seem as if they must have another meaning, because otherwise the story
seems meaningless?
This is, I would suggest, is precisely how we are intended to feel, wanting constantly
to make meaning, but constantly unable to do so.
And this is also what the parable tells us.
The man wants to believe that there is a reason why he can't go through the door, that his
waiting has meaning, and he spends his whole life engaged in such an activity, if it can
be called activity, only to discover that the only reason he was waiting was because
he decided to.
What is the analogy to the law?
That perhaps law is not a human thing.
That is, law does not have agency.
Only humans have agency.
The law doesn't keep the man from going through the door.
The man does.
Why do we assume that the law does not exist?
Because the man does not gain access to it?
Why would we understand the parable from his point of view?
After all, he doesn't seem to have been very curious or aggressive while he sat at the
door.
The problem seems to be that the man believes that the law is something other than what
we, than what he, makes of it.
This proposition always seems to be the one that Joseph K accepts.
One can see then how this parable fits into the overall pattern of the story of the trial.
When the priest recites the parable to K, K expects the priest also to provide its meaning.
Substituting the priest for the law that K believes is somewhere in the court, just
as the man in the parable believes that law is somewhere inside the door, K expects some
hint as to what the story is about, just as the reader does.
But K will be disappointed, just as he will be disappointed in his search for the meaning
of his arrest, because he insists on believing that the law will provide the answer.
But law does not make meaning.
Only humans make meaning.
The law is what we make meaning of.
And just as K tries to discover whether the man was deceived, in other words to decide
what the story means on the criteria of guilt and innocence, so he tries to decide what
his own story means on those terms.
Once again, however, he transfers the meaning-making activity to the law, or the court.
Law does not decide innocence or guilt.
Those who read and interpret the law do.
Humans judge in those terms, and if they wanted to, they could find another set of terms upon
which to make their judgment.
Think for a moment about Mrs. Peters and Mrs. Hale in a jury of her peers.
My refusal to see many write story as one either of innocence or guilt, the story their
husbands are trying to make meaning of, allows them to see another, perhaps truer, story.
Let me turn, finally, to the short story, The Judgment, which actually was the earliest
of the texts we have discussed today, written in 1913.
I am coming back to this story because it focuses the issues I have raised in this lecture.
That is, the nature of punishment and justice, the source of law, and the human capacity
to make meaning.
The judgment is the story of a young merchant named George Benderman, who has just been
recently engaged.
As the story opens, George has just finished writing a letter to his friend in St. Petersburg.
He is trying to decide if he should write to this friend of his recent engagement, as
well as his current success in business.
In the letter he has just finished and in previous letters he did not.
He is unsure of what to do and he goes to consult his father, who is bedridden.
His father reveals that he has been writing to his son's friend, telling him all the
things that George has withheld.
His father goes so far as to claim that the friend would make a better son than George.
The father charges George with writing false letters and pronounces the verdict.
Death by drowning, upon which George, ever obedient and submissive, leaps to his death
off a nearby bridge.
It is reported that when Kafka read this story to his friends, they laughed until the tears
ran down their faces.
One recognizes in this terrifying response to paternal authority and will the seeds of
many Kafka's later stories.
Again and again he will return to the question of where authority derives its power, especially
when that power is not manifest as force.
Again and again he will ask who has the power to judge and why, once given, is that power
so hard to reclaim?
And repeatedly he will inquire into the appropriate relationship between transgression and punishment.
The question asks, for example, in measure for measure.
He could, of course, look to Kafka's own life to see where many of these questions arose.
Here is his analysis of his relationship to his father in the unsent letter to my father
written six years after the story of the judgment.
The world was, for me, divided into three parts.
Into one in which I, the slave, lived under the laws that had been invented only for me,
and which I could, I did not know why, never completely comply with.
Then into a second world which was infinitely remote from mine in which you lived, concerned
with your government, with the issuing of orders and with annoyance about there not
being obeyed.
And finally into a third world where everybody else lived happily and free from orders and
from having to obey.
We can see, rehearsed in this letter, the story of Joseph K. in the trial, or the officer's
obsession with his duty in the penal colony.
But relying on Kafka's autobiography to explain the power of his stories does not allow for
the way in which he transformed that personal experience into an account of the pathology
of modern life.
Perhaps most brutally represented by the totalitarian regimes that Kafka never lived
to see, but which took the lives of his three sisters in Nazi concentration camps.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
