Lecture 9 Shakespeare's Measure for Measure
Measure for Measure reflects the deep interest of 17th century audiences in the nature of
moral and legal authority and the manner in which it was exercised.
The play was performed at the court of the recently crowned King James I and may have
been intended to suggest to James how he might best win over his English subjects, that is
with the proper exercise of regal and judicial authority and a recognition that purity of
body and soul is a rare thing, especially among those who most trumpet their own purity.
The play's title, Measure for Measure, suggests the nature of the moral problem at its heart.
How does one calculate the proper punishment for those who transgress even as they punish
others for the same sin?
Such a question is entirely appropriate for a play before a king, one who is both a man
and a figure of authority, both the sinner and yet the representative of the human law,
both the mortal man and yet the representative of divine judgment.
The play takes its title from Christ's Sermon on the Mount according to Matthew.
With what measure ye meet it shall be measured to you again.
In this sermon Christ insists upon expanding the definition of law from that understood
by the Pharisees.
The Mosaic law must be tempered with mercy and generosity and the mere adherence to the
letter of the law is insufficient to guarantee salvation.
As Christ argues for the essential difference between action and intentions, or what one
does as distinct from what one thinks.
The common law of England also made and makes this distinction between the act and the intent
termed men's rare, guilty mind, which is to be distinguished from motive.
One judges legally the presence of the guilty mind by the result of the action performed
by the individual.
Thus performing an action does not in and of itself make an individual guilty.
Bad things happen by accident.
The Latin phrase from which men's rare is taken makes this distinction clear.
Actus non facet reum nisi men sit rea translated an act does not make a man guilty unless
his mind be also guilty.
In this general concern for the spirit of the law and the purity of mind of the individual,
especially the one who is in the position to judge others, the sermon on the mount specifically
addresses sexual codes and prohibitions.
Invoking the Ten Commandments Christ argues that adultery, which is to be understood as
any sexual activity outside the sanctified bond of marriage, is not merely performed
in the act but has occurred whenever a man look us on a woman to lust after her.
That man has committed adultery with her already in his heart.
This insistence on the psychological as well as the material conditions of guilt is repeatedly
invoked in measure for measure, where the interrogation of the apparently guilty by
the apparently innocent generates constant tension and irony.
In addition to this concern with the nature of guilt and innocence, especially as it is
assessed and exploited by rulers, the play also articulates the tension between law as
a set of rules imposed upon a society by the ruler and morality, a consensus about appropriate
behavior generated by the political and theological ideology of particular a society.
That there might be a range of moral codes depending upon one's position in society as
well as a range of theological positions upon which to base these codes generates of course
a potentially fraught and constantly evolving system of behavior and constraint.
Finally, we should not forget the material conditions have an impact upon how one sees
the legislated morality of one's society, a fact that we witnessed in Shylock's resentment
that he was condemned for practicing the only trade allowed to him as a Jew in Venice.
The play opens not in Shylock's Venice but in Vienna and a city like Venice that would
have been seen as one of the hubs of culture and commerce in the Renaissance.
Indeed, it was the seat of the Holy Roman Empire.
It is however also a city seething with corruption, just as according to the Puritans the city
of London was, especially its suburbs and liberties where the play houses, bear pits, brothels
and taverns were primarily located.
These liberties were as I described in lecture number seven on Shakespeare's London rather
anomalous districts that were both part of and yet separate from the city.
The legal and political authorities of London could exercise almost no control over them.
Within these ambiguous metropolitan spaces, the play houses thus functioned as a singularly
apt representation of the liberty of the civic space itself.
Indeed, playwrights frequently incorporated into their plays jabs at the authorities for
their inability to control what went on in the theatre.
Side by side with those play houses were all the other pursuits driven by moral and political
outrage to the edge of the city, the brothels, the plague hospitals, sites of public execution,
all the horror and pain of suffering juxtaposed with the pleasures of the senses, death and
disease mired with sex.
When the play opens we discover that like the legal and political rulers of London in
their relationship to the liberties, the Duke of Vienna seems powerless to control
the gross corruption in his kingdom.
His failure to keep order, however, is not the result of some anomaly in the governing
structure of the city, but rather his own reluctance to apply the laws that would control
the excesses of his subjects, as well as, apparently, his reluctance to have much to
do with those subjects.
Rather than exert himself to actively engage in ruling, he temporarily abdicates his responsibility
and appoints Angelo, who seems to be an active version of the Duke, to clean up the city.
He says to Angelo, in our remove, be thou at our full self, mortality and mercy in Vienna,
live in thy tongue and heart.
The corruption that needs amending seems readily apparent in the scene that follows Angelo's
assumption of authority.
Right in Mistress Overdun's brothel with her gentlemen clients, we see how all sense
of propriety and morality gives way before the demands of the flesh and material greed.
The pimp and tapster, Pompey, consoles Mistress Overdun when she laments the proclamation
from Angelo to tear down all the brothels.
Come, fear not you, good cancelers, that is lawyers, lack no clients, though you change
your place, you need not change your trade.
Pompey emphasizes the widespread sexual corruption in Vienna and the consequences of unenforced
laws.
Indeed, the very ones who should help enforce those laws, the lawyers and judges, are the
ones he suggests to keep the corruption bubbling.
We understand that the kind of corruption that is visible, as in the brothel, might
be the reflection of that unseen corruption in those who cancel.
When confronted by the Duke's provost, Escalus, Pompey insists that his trade, that of pimp,
is an acceptable occupation, and one that will always prosper given the natural inclinations
of men.
Pompey asks Escalus whether he means the geld and splay all the youth of the city.
Though it is thus here represented as having no moral or religious authority, but is merely
the arbitrary imposition of authority by those who would curb men's natural inclinations.
To emphasize that all men of whatever class are subject to nature's demands, Claudio,
a young gentleman, passes on his way to prison, sentenced to death by Angelo for impregnating
his fiancé, Giulietta.
Let me postpone for now the question of marriage contracts and their place in the play.
Suffice it to say that Claudio and Giulietta believe themselves to be married, although
they have not formally exchanged their vows in church.
In his reflection on his crime and its punishment, Claudio reveals that he at least seems to
take his culpability to heart, that all men are sinners and that letchery is commonplace
does not argue Claudio justify his sin, although the circumstances might explain it.
And what becomes evident as the play proceeds is that the corruption in the city of Vienna
reaches all the way to the top, even to the precise and virtuous Angelo, who in his turn
will suffer from exactly the same lapses, will commit the same crimes as those he condemns
to death.
If the judge is a sinner like the criminal, how can he render judgment?
This fundamental moral conundrum complicates any simplistic or rudimentary definition of
law and justice.
The potential for abuse is always great given that laws are both the product of and the
restraint upon natural human impulses.
We are first made aware of that potential for abuse by Claudio's reflections on why
Angelo has adhered to the letter of the law so strictly.
He asks whether the new deputy now for the Duke, that is Angelo, whether it be the fault
and glimpse of newness or whether that the body pop public be a horse where on the governor
cloth ride, who newly in the seat, that it may know he can command, lets it straight
feel the spur, whether the tyranny be in his place or in his eminence that fills it up
by staggering.
The question that Claudio asks whether Angelo is naturally tyrannical or made so by his
position is one that the Duke also once answered as we discover in his conversation with the
friar who will teach him the necessary skills to pass as a monk so that he might return
and witness the condition of Vienna under Angelo's rule.
When asked why he has left Vienna, he tells the friar, we have strict statutes and most
biting laws, the needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds which for this nineteen years
we have let slip.
In like an oil-grown lion in a cave that goes not out to pray, now as fond fathers having
bound up the threatening twigs of birch only to stick it in their children's sight for
terror not to use, in time the rod becomes more mocked than feared.
So our decrees, dead to inflections, to themselves are dead.
When liberty plucks justice by the nose, the baby beats the nurse and quite a thought goes
all decorum.
It is interesting to note the metaphors that the Duke employs to describe the relationship
between the law-givers and those subject to the law.
The law-giver is the father, the lion, the nurse, while the subjects are weeds, children
and babies.
Thus the Duke identifies the essentially patriarchal nature of the law and the inherent
imbalance between the ruler and the ruled, those who apparently lack the necessary maturity
and restraint to exercise their liberty without the father's guidance.
The analogy to the relationship between God, the father and the inherently sinful human
is obvious and it reminds us that the law of the Old Testament still carries considerable
weight in early 17th century England as an account of what law and justice mean.
With the Fryer's obvious question, why don't you as Duke enforce the laws, the Tencio answers
that since he was guilty of not enforcing them before, to do so now would make him appear
tyrannical in the eyes of his subjects.
Contemporary audiences might not be satisfied with this answer from the Duke.
It strikes us as a rationalization of his unwillingness to be active and to be an active
magistrate for his people.
Moreover, when he also argues that he is testing Angelo to see if he is indeed as precise,
as strict and puritanical as he appears to be to see if power changed purpose, the Duke's
character seems more than a little devious.
Shakespeare's audience, however, would recognize from medieval morality plays the figure of
the wise man who observes and comments upon the folly and wickedness of those around him.
The argument that measure for measure is an allegorical rather than a realistic representation
of the relationship between power and justice, between authority and judgment, is one that
many critics have advanced.
And indeed, although the Duke is not a one-dimensional character, as are the characters in medieval
morality plays, he, like Angelo and Isabella, seem to represent only aspects of a complete
and complex human being rather than that entire being.
The Duke will eventually have to do more than observe.
He will have to act.
It is in his actions that his wisdom will be revealed to his subjects.
Actions that cannot simply be reduced to decisions about guilt or innocent, but which indicate
the complexity that inheres in any decision made about another, especially one that has,
as its consequence, the judicial taking of life.
The Duke is right to see this decision making as difficult and impossible of complete success.
Angelo, on the other hand, undertakes the role of magistrate, confident in his ability
to make the right decision every time, unhampered as he is he believes by those wanton stings
and motions of the sense that others must resist.
Although Angelo asks the Duke why he has been chosen to rule, it seems a mere formality.
Angelo does not seem to doubt that his decisions are just.
As the Duke is too lenient, so Angelo is too harsh, although he does not go beyond what
the law allows.
Claudio's crime with Julieta is as he himself puts it, too much liberty, rather than a measure
that is moderate approach to life.
Moderation as distinct from restraint or control cannot be imposed from without, but must come
from the moral centre of the self and thus is impossible to legislate.
The distinction between behaviour, which can be seen and therefore judged, and intent,
which is invisible, is also the distinction between seeming and being, a distinction that
is fully explored through the character of Angelo.
When he sent its Claudio to death for promiscuity, he is applying the law as written, a law
designed to impose restraint on human appetites and the consequences of those appetites to
the state, and one that must be exercised in order to have effect.
Angelo argues that we must not make a scarecrow of the law, setting it up to fear the birds
of prey and let it keep one's shape till custom make it their perch and not their terror.
Laws that are not applied are laws that can be ignored.
Resistant to the argument of his adviser, Escalus, that he, Angelo, must have been tempted
as Claudio has been, Angelo responds, it is one thing to be tempted, Escalus, another
thing to fall.
I not deny the jury passing on the prisoner's life may, in the sworn twelve, have a thief
or two guiltier than him that they try.
What knows the laws that thieves do pass on thieves?
You may so extenuate his offence for I have had such faults, but rather tell me, when
I that censor him do so offend, let my own judgment pattern out my death and nothing
come impartial.
Sir, he must die.
The speech is deeply ironic given that Angelo will himself fall to temptation in the same
way as Claudio, and therefore he here proclaims upon himself the sentence of death that he
has passed on Claudio, and the speech thereby locates one of the inevitable limitations
of human justice, that those who pass judgment may themselves be guilty of the crimes that
they condemn in others.
Angelo speaks to this problem in a very particular way when he says what knows the laws that
thieves do pass on thieves.
But Shakespeare's audience would have been aware of the much larger implications of his
speech when he insists that it is one thing to be tempted, another to fall, a statement
that suggests that he, Angelo, has not fallen.
In the most immediate sense, as in making a woman pregnant, this may be true, but in
the biblical sense, Angelo is, of course, a fallen man.
To the audience, Angelo's claim that he has not fallen would have been enough to alert
them to what must happen.
He, like all those born of Adam, is tainted, and no one can escape the consequences of
that original sin.
The audience would be ready, therefore, for what must happen before the end of the play.
Angelo must be tempted, he must fall, and because of the promise of redemption in Christ's
resurrection, he will be forgiven.
This concept of a fall that proves to be redemptive is known as Felix Culpa, the fortunate fall.
That is because it allowed Christ to show his love for mankind in redeeming them from
sin through his own sacrifice.
Angelo's temptation does not come in a conventional form.
He is not tempted by a seductress, but by the female version of his own Lord's disguise,
that is, Isabella, sister to Claudio, and a nun in a convent.
As a nun, Isabella is thus the female counterpart to the duke, who, disguised as a friar, has
now re-entered his kingdom.
Isabella comes to Angelo to plead for her brother's life, despite her condemnation of
vice and her desire that it be punished.
As Portia grants Shylock's claim, but pleads for mercy, so Isabella grants Angelo's authority,
but argues that, if he had been as you, and you as he, you would have slipped like him,
but he like you would not have been so stern.
Isabella's argument proposes a test of justice that sets up an ironic foreshadowing of the
final scene in the play.
How does the justice of the punishment hold up if the judge changes places with the condemned?
Under this hypothetical, the judge should consider not merely the crime and its circumstances,
but also how he would like to be treated.
Were he the guilty party?
By the final scene in the play, Angelo will endure such a reversal, and Isabella will have
Angelo's potency, and will show what it is to be a judge and what a prisoner.
As is appropriate given her avocation as a nun, Isabella relies in pleading for Claudio
not on secular reasoning and logic, but on the analogy between the human judge and his
divine counterpart.
In answer to Angelo's insistence that Claudio is forfeit of the law, Isabella invokes the
greater model of forfeiture and redemption, thus incidentally reminding Angelo that he
too is a sinner and in need of mercy.
She says why all the souls that were were forfeit once, and he that might the vantage
best have took found out the remedy.
Isabella here makes direct allusion to the Sermon on the Mount and the command to judge
not that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye judge, she shall be judged, and with what
measure ye meet, it shall be measured to you again.
Isabella's insistence that Angelo is a faulty human being like her brother, and that such
self-knowledge should make him merciful towards Claudio, moves Angelo, but not ironically,
to mercy, but to reenacting the very crime for which Claudio has been sentenced to death,
sexual promiscuity.
Shakespeare gives no motive or explanation for Angelo's sudden change from preciseness
to sexual harasser, any more than he offers us reasons why the Duke wishes to leave Vienna
and test Angelo.
The play is not about character so much as it is about power and the effects of power
and the degree to which the powerful and the powerless are bound in a symbiotic relationship
of judging and judged, a relationship that at any point threatens to be turned upside
down.
When Isabella demands that Angelo knock at his heart and ask it what it does know that's
like my brother's faults, it's as if her sudden insight into his moral being cracks open the
hard shell of his repressed sexuality and causes him suddenly to become that which she
had merely suggested he might be.
She speaks, he says, and it is such sense that my sense breeds with it.
His language itself marks the shift from the control exercised by reason or sense to the
actuality or sense of the flesh.
Her sense breeds his sense.
His fall occurs not when he thinks these thoughts, not even when he speaks them in an aside,
but when he falters in his decision about Claudio because of his desire for Isabella
and acts upon that desire by asking her to return the next day thus implying that he
is contemplating sparing her brother.
In other words, it is in his intent, the invisible motive that drives his actions that
condemns him.
When Isabella returns to Angelo the next day, his seduction of her and thus his fall from
seeming virtue to luxury is wrapped ironically in the language of law and religion.
In a mockery of a religious catechism as well as an imitation of a legal cross-examination,
Angelo asks Isabella a series of questions in order to assess how far she will go to
save her brother.
Will she, he asks, give up her body to save the body of her brother, that is, commit the
very sin that has condemned him?
Isabella's response is couched at first in the language of the hypothetical.
Better it were a brother died at once than a sister by redeeming him should die forever,
she says.
It is not until Angelo drops the seeming discourse of law and religion and gives his
sensual race the reign that Isabella understands his intentions.
She insists that she will expose him for the lecture that he is, but such justice can
only be imagined as long as the power lies with Angelo.
For now, the law makes curtsy to Angelo's will, and all of Isabella's purity is insufficient
to effect a change.
To whom should I complain, she asks.
Did I tell this who would believe me?
What compounds her misery at her powerlessness is her brother, Claudio's reaction to this
bargain of her body for his.
Outrage and horror at the proposal is Claudio's first and proper response, but thoughts of
his own impending death makes a coward of him.
And dismissing Isabella's spiritual objections, objections founded in her observance of divine
law, he substitutes the argument from nature.
He says, what sin you do to save a brother's life?
Nature dispends with the deed so far that it becomes a virtue.
In other words, the sin will be transformed into a virtue because of your intent in performing
it.
A slippery slope, this argument, to chaos in this world and perdition in the next.
The irony that Claudio should appeal to nature to win over his sister when he is under sentence
of death for being too natural for allowing his nature as an animal to govern his rational
spiritual self is not lost on Isabella, who responds, oh, you beast.
Another man, and this time her brother, is willing, it seems, to use her body to satisfy
his own desires.
As Isabella points out, there's a kind of incest in Claudio taking life from his sister's
shame.
This is prostitution of the worst kind, and illustrates once again that distinction between
mere appearance and the inner reality.
Even though Claudio has seemed to be repentant for his adultery, his moral being is still
corrupt, a harsh judgment, perhaps, because who does not understand his desire to live?
Shakespeare's audiences, contemporary audiences, rather, are inclined to ask, what's all the
fuss?
Why doesn't Isabella just sacrifice herself to save her brother's life?
Even those who might sympathize with Isabella find her rigidity somewhat self-righteous.
Once again, however, we should remember that Shakespeare's own audience would be responsive
to the moral dilemma in which Isabella finds herself, and would understand from listening
to sermons in their churches that such casuistry, that is, such theoretical contemplation of
hypothetical moral crises, was essential to the spiritual life.
What Shakespeare's audiences would also understand is that Angelo has no intention of sparing
Claudio.
Like Claudius in Hamlet, Angelo is a type, a villain, and therefore cannot be trusted
to bring about the proper, that is, just, resolution to that dilemma.
The only agent who can restore the imbalance now threatening to disrupt Vienna, a threat
equally as powerful as that of inaction under the Duke, is the Duke himself, one who is
removed from the action.
The Duke now disguised as a friar, and intimately aware that Angelo is willing to condemn others
for crimes his power allows him to commit.
The Duke says, shame to him whose cruel striking kills for faults of his own liking, trebles
shame on Angelo to weed my vice and let his grow.
O what may man within him hide, though angel, Angelo, on the outward side, craft against
vice I must apply.
The Duke must act at last to bring about justice, rather than simply observing the actors in
his play as they perform their roles.
No longer able to hold himself above the fray, he must, like all rulers, practice craft against
vice.
But in doing so, he inevitably finds himself mired in the same messy moral dilemmas that
he has witnessed others struggling with.
They are no longer the intellectual and theoretical problems that occupied him in his life removed.
His solution to Isabel's dilemma is to arrange for Angelo's former fiance, Marianna, whom
Angelo abandoned when she became impoverished, to meet Angelo in place of Isabella and to
consummate his relationship with her.
Angelo seems thus to commit exactly the same crime as Claudio.
The play distinguishes, however, between Claudio and Julieta's relationship and the one between
Angelo and Marianna.
English common law and the church recognize two kinds of informal marriage agreements,
both represented in this play.
It is important to recognize, however, that both kinds of marriage required the public
recognition of the promises.
In the case of Claudio and Julieta, however, they lack the denunciation, that is, the public
declaration, and have met in secret while they await a larger dowry, and thus are open
to the charge of fornication or adultery.
In the case of Angelo and Marianna, however, the public declaration has been made, and
although she is without a dowry, the sexual consummation of their relationship will reinstate
its legal validity.
Legally then, the duke's idea to substitute Marianna for Isabella is appropriate, but like
the duke's departure from Vienna and his subsequent disguise, there seems something devious in
the duke's way of managing his subjects' affairs.
The duke can finally restore some degree of moral order in Vienna when in Act V he unmasks
himself and renders justice to Isabella and Angelo, but he has only been able to do this
because he has witnessed and overheard that which he should not have done, listening in
as Isabella reveals to Claudio that awful bargain Angelo has offered her.
How can a judge act justly when he can deal only with another's actions and not with his
thoughts or intent?
Isabella acknowledges this limitation in the law when she pleads for mercy for Angelo.
She says, his act did not otake his bad intent and must be buried but as an intent that perished
by the way.
Thoughts are not subjects, intents but merely thoughts.
Without this secret, one might say almost illicit knowledge, the duke would have ruled
against Isabella and for Angelo when she demands justice.
Even the best of judges cannot always guarantee that justice is served, for there is always
the danger that falsity will be confused for truth and appearance for reality.
One can legislate morality but one cannot legislate a moral person and thus the duke
must fail in his desire to guarantee a morally pure society.
This is not to say that the second half of this final scene does not provide us with the
kind of dramatic resolution that we crave.
Claudio is revealed to be alive and reunited with Giulietta, Angelo is unmasked for the
villain that he is and joined to Mariana in marriage and Isabella is exonerated.
There is a final turn to the plot that unsettles this comedic ending and that is the duke's
proposal of marriage to Isabella, a parallel to the marriage between his deputy, Angelo
and Isabella's substitute, Mariana.
Neither the stoical duke nor the novitiate Isabella have shown any inclination for marriage
to anyone at any point in the play.
Are the generic expectations of comedy then forcing this ending?
What do we do with the silence from Isabella?
She provides no answer to the duke's proposal and the audience is left with a sense of the
precariousness of human justice and morality in its unrelenting struggle with injustice
and vice.
