Lecture 22 – Witnessing Slavery in Beloved
In this lecture we will turn to Toni Morrison's Rememorising of Slavery in Beloved, a novel
that examines the spiritual as well as the physical and political consequences of slavery.
Morrison's book is based on an actual case, that of Margaret Garner, who was charged with
the murder of her infant daughter, whom she had refused to allow to be taken into captivity
under the authority of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850.
I will also briefly situate this novel within the tradition of female slave narratives,
particularly Harriet Jacobs, 1861, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl.
Beloved, which is the name of the murdered child, examines the story of Setha, a slave
whose escape is violently interrupted when her former owners try to recapture her and
her children.
In this novel we become familiar with American slavery from the perspective of those who
lived through that vicious period in American history.
In particular we see the consequences of slavery on the institution of the family,
where children were sold away from their mothers, wives from their husbands and husbands from
their wives.
As I said, Setha's story is based on the 1856 case of Margaret Garner, who killed her child
when slave catchers tried to arrest her under the Fugitive Slave Law.
Under this 1850 law, those suspected of being runaway slaves could be arrested without a
warrant and turned over to the claimant on nothing more than his sworn testimony.
A suspected black slave could not ask for a jury, trial, nor testify on his or home
behalf.
Runaway slaves could be pursued into free states, captured and returned to their owners,
as happened in the case of Margaret Garner.
Margaret Garner arrived in Cincinnati accompanied by her husband and four children.
When they were tracked down by a U.S. Deputy Marshal, they refused to surrender.
The Marshal and his deputies broke down the door, where they found a horrible sight.
In one corner of the room was a nearly white child bleeding to death.
Her throat was cut from ear to ear.
Scarcely was this fact noticed when a scream issued from an adjoining room where they saw
a Negro woman holding in her hands a knife over the heads of two little Negro children
who were crouched to the floor.
The woman avowed herself the mother of the children and said that she had killed one
and would like to kill the three others rather than see them again reduced to slavery.
The newspaper reports of the incident comment on the fact that Margaret was a dark mulatto
and that the murdered child was almost white and a little girl of rare beauty.
Morrison omits these details from her story, perhaps because she wanted the focus of the
story to be on the spiritual, moral and physical anguish of the slaves themselves, and the
reference to the mulatto slave and her almost white child would divert attention to the
sexual relationships between the slaves and their owners that had produced children ranging
in color from black to almost white.
After the guilty verdict, Margaret and the other slaves were surrendered to the authorities
in Kentucky, whereupon Margaret's owner arranged for her and one of her children to be sent
down the river to be sold in Arkansas.
The steamboat upon which Margaret was traveling collided with another boat and Margaret's
child was drowned.
Margaret was then returned to her owner, who had promised to return her to Ohio where she
would be free, but once again sent her down the river, this time to the slave market in
New Orleans.
In a sermon delivered in Cincinnati shortly after the news of Margaret's treatment reached
the people, one minister preached on a text from Judges chapter 19 verse 30, and it was
so that all that saw it said, there was no such deed done nor seen from the day that
the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day.
The Margaret Dana case illustrates the central paradox of slavery, that one cannot enforce
laws that control the behavior of those whom the law neither recognizes as responsible
for their own actions, nor are able to comprehend the purpose of that law.
What kind of relationship can one have to the law if one is not recognized as an individual
with rights under that law?
How can one charge a slave, who is by definition a piece of property and not a human being,
with a bundle of rights and responsibilities?
How can you charge a slave that is with murder, which is by definition an act that can only
be committed by a human being?
Property can only be lost, stolen or destroyed, but not murdered.
This contradiction is represented in the behavior of the nephews in Beloved, the nephews of
Sethes owner who list her human characteristics on one side of a piece of paper and her animal
ones on the other in their effort to classify her and who engage in a traumatic rape of
Sethes breast milk in a grotesque parody of infant need and thus preemptively steal from
her newborn child Beloved.
Sethes later realizes her complicity in this act of recording by acknowledging, I made
the ink.
This scene in which Sethes is raped of her milk and the one that follows in which she
is beaten mercilessly by one of the nephews repeats one of the dominant themes of the
story, that is the tension between instinctive and animal behavior which contends with the
rational and human consideration of action and response.
Morrison's sympathy is of course with the slaves and their response to the brutality
they have endured, but she also indicates that the institution of slavery made beasts
out of those who condoned and profited from it.
Thus the prison guards in Kentucky who treat their slave prisoners as if they were merely
animals are dehumanized themselves by their attitude, while those slaves who survive like
Paul Dee are eventually ennobled by their suffering.
One of the ways in which the slaves as well as the free blacks were able to endure their
suffering was through the promise of salvation and one of the greatest ironies of the age
of slavery was that the Bible sustained both the slave and the slave owner, although not
all slaves accepted Christianity as their faith.
As the upper abolitionist commenting on Margaret Garner's case asserts, Margaret saw Christian
religion as a religion of slavery more cruel than death, even though her master was most
liberal in the support of the gospel and her mistress was a communicant at the Lord's
table and the professed follower of Christ.
Those who endorsed slavery frequently relied on biblical passages that suggested that those
who were marked by color were inherently inferior.
Specifically they relied on the passage in chapter four of Genesis where God curses
Cain for killing Abel and marks him to set him apart from his kin.
In 18th century America and Europe it was commonly assumed that Cain's mark was black
skin and that Cain's descendants were black and still under Cain's curse and thus racism
and the consequent enslavement of those of African ancestry was justified.
Moreover slave owners insisted that providing the slave with food and shelter and inculcating
them with Christian values was a defensible exchange for the labor that they exacted from
them.
Thus slavery was perceived as a kind of missionary work.
Rescued from their heathen and savage ways slaves could be redeemed by a life lived under
a Christian master.
Most slaves were not only unable to read the text of the Bible, they were actually forbidden
by law from learning or being taught how to read or write, although some enlightened slave
owners did instruct their slaves.
Even to read most slaves had no way of contesting prejudicial biblical interpretations.
Unlike Margaret Garner many slaves adopted the master's religion, mixing their own customs
and rituals with the Christian church and its doctrine and revising biblical narratives
to accommodate their own histories.
Morrison places an epigraph before the novel from St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans chapter
9, verse 25, emphasizing the inclusiveness of Christianity as conceived by the early church
fathers.
I will call them my people which were not my people and her beloved which was not beloved.
Paul's statement refers to the Gentiles that Christian Jews would have excluded from the
community of God and his letter stresses the inclusiveness of Christ's ministry and
the impossibility that humans would know exactly who was beloved by God.
The irony of this reference, of course, is that it is precisely those who would claim
to be Christians who deny the slaves the most basic freedoms of the human condition, including
the right to learn how to read the Word of God.
Thus, Baby Shuggs, Sethers' mother-in-law and the one who receives Sethers as she escapes
from slavery, Baby Shuggs relies for her preaching not upon the written Word of God as recorded
in the Bible, which she almost certainly could not read, but upon the Word of God as
she understands it through her spiritual and physical connection to God.
She decided that because slave life had busted her legs, back, head, eyes, hands, kidneys,
womb and tongue, she had nothing left to make a living with but her heart, which she put
to work at once.
She became an unchurched preacher.
She did not tell them to clean up their lives or to go and sin no more.
She did not tell them that they were the blessed of the earth, its inheriting meek or its glory
band pure.
She told them that the only grace they could have was the grace they could imagine, that
if they could not see it, they would not have it.
Here, she said, in this place we flesh, flesh that weeps, laughs, flesh that dances on bare
feet in grass.
Love it.
Love it hard.
Yonder, they do not love your flesh.
They despise it.
Baby Shug's thus revises conventional Christian doctrine as preach and accepted by the slave
owners and rewrites it to articulate the spiritual and physical agonies of the slaves.
At the same time, she encourages them to imagine grace, even though they receive none, and
to claim ownership of their bodies, even though they are enslaved.
Despite the unavailability of the written texts, the slaves know the narratives of the
Bible as oral narratives and therefore as models of a physical and spiritual journey
from enslavement to freedom, especially the journey of course of the Israelites.
The slaves adopted the account of the enslaved Israelites to narrate their own oppression
and thus preached a different kind of justice from the one they themselves experienced.
Crossing the River Jordan is thus explicitly connected to the passage across the Ohio River,
the river that Huck, Finn and Jim hoped to cross but miss in the fog, a river that marked
the separation of the slave states from the free states, although after the fugitive
slave law of 1850, crossing the river no longer ensured safety and freedom, as Setha discovers.
Moreover, situating the story of the African-American slave within a biblical narrative, emphasizes
the history of the slaves, one that is far more ancient than that of their American owners,
something that we easily forget.
And when we do forget this, we recreate the same erasure of identity that slavery aimed
to affect, with our belief that black Americans had no identity before they became slaves
in America.
Thus Morrison marks the anonymity of this human trade in her epitaph 60 million and
more, the number she claims of slaves who died on the Middle Passage, the journey from
Africa to the New World.
This figure has been the focus of critical attack upon the book, especially from Stanley
Crouch, an African-American writer who describes Setha as Aunt Medea and asserts that the figure
of 60 million is conveniently 10 times that of the number of Jews who died in the Holocaust
and that thus beloved is a blackface Holocaust novel.
He further argues that Morrison is playing the victim game and intends to produce such
guilt on the part of white critics as to make it immune from negative criticism.
If that is the case, she apparently failed because there are critics, both black and
white, who have argued for the failure of certain aspects of the book, the depiction
of the return of the murdered beloved as a ghost, for example, or the sentimental nature
of her account of baby sugar.
It has become a commonplace in discussions of slavery to speak about the loss of individual
identity on the part of slaves, to talk about slavery as the successful replacement of a
distinct human identity with a kind of bovine submissiveness more appropriate to work animals.
Such an effort, of course, explains the brand that marked the slaves as the property of
a particular owner, but more importantly, further dehumanize them as the equivalent
of animals.
Setha's mother reclaims her individual identity, however, precisely through that brand.
It marks her not as a slave, but as Setha's mother, the one who threw away the children
conceived after she was raped by white men and only kept Setha the fruit of a relationship
with a black man chosen by her.
Back there, she opened up her dress front and lifted her breast and pointed under it.
Right on her rib was a circle and a cross burned into the skin.
She said, this is your mam, this, and she pointed, I am the only one got this mark now,
the rest dead.
If something happens to me and you can't tell me by my face, you can know me by this
mark.
Her mother was hung, but for what crime Setha does not know.
But she does remember who her mother was and that she spoke a different language.
And this knowledge is something that Setha must eventually accommodate within her own
narrative of pain and suffering in order to make sense of her life.
This memory of her mother is one of those re-memories that Setha has tried to beat back
every day with the drudgery of work and sheer survival after her boys ran away from home
and baby Shugs has died.
In reminding us of the origins of these slaves, that they had a language, a tradition and
a culture before they became slaves, Morrison thus asserts that their identities remain
to some extent unassimilated by the white Anglo-American Christian world.
Remembering is the source of identity, but remembering is also for the slaves the constant
re-inscription of their physical and spiritual torment, as well as a reminder of how their
identities were erased under slavery.
In this novel, individual and racial memories are both the source of inspiration and the
source of agony.
Those memories are embodied in the arrival of Paul D., one of the many slaves who lived
with Setha and her husband Halle at the Garner plantation.
Note the name is the same as that of Margaret Garner.
Like other male slaves, Paul has only a single letter to identify him, as different from
others also named Paul.
The Garner plantation is ironically named Sweet Home, and as Paul D. remarks, it wasn't
sweet and it sure wasn't home.
Paul D.'s arrival at Setha's house begins the painful process whereby Setha confronts
her memories and her responsibility for the murder of her child.
Only one who has experienced the same pain as Setha can help her relive those agonies.
And thus Setha and Paul enact a mutual restoration of those selves that have endured the horrors
of slavery.
Paul D. has, like Setha, suppressed the memories, locked them into the tobacco tin lodged in
his chest.
Only the relationship with Setha begins the awful but necessary process of prying it open.
Likewise, the memories that Setha beats back every day must be confronted if they are to
be surpassed, and she is to reclaim that best thing herself, with all its memories of the
horror as well as those moments of tenderness.
The memories of the brutality of slavery are literally inscribed in the tree of scars
on Setha's back, left after the vicious whipping by the nephews of the man who comes to run
the Garner plantation after Mr. Garner dies.
Paul D. examined Setha's back after they have made love and sees not a tree, but a revolting
clump of scars.
Not a tree, as she said, maybe shaped like one, but nothing like any tree he knew, because
trees were inviting, things you could trust and be near, talk if you wanted to.
While Paul D.'s memories of trees are associated with the few moments of pleasure he can recall
from the plantation, Setha's are linked indelibly with the beating and the rape of her milk.
Morrison thus indicates that there is no single homogenous record of slavery, that to see
it as one misery, endured by all the slaves in the same way, is to repeat what the slave
owners had attempted, that is, the erasure of individual identities.
Setha's tree does not recall pleasure, but the pain of whipping.
Even so, in the midst of this memory lies another memory, of how she was saved by Amy,
the runaway indentured white girl who dressed her back and helped her to deliver Denver,
Setha's last child, and the only one who remains of the four.
Besides the literal inscription of her past on her back, Setha is also literally and figuratively
haunted by the ghost of the child she has murdered 18 years before in a desperate attempt
to avoid the infant's enslavement.
The house where Setha and Denver live, 124 Bluestone, just outside the city of Cincinnati,
is spiteful, full of a baby's venom and has driven her two sons away.
The consequences of Setha's murder of her baby are not just felt in the immediate family.
Baby Shug stops preaching, the remaining children are traumatized, but in the entire community,
which isolates Setha and her family for what seems to them to be her pride in saving her
daughter from enslavement.
Setha's crime pales, of course, compared to the brutality of the slave regime, and yet
for Setha to claim her full humanity and to be integrated back into the community, she
has to finally accept responsibility for what she has done.
She has to remember how she slit her two-year-old daughter's throat.
At first, with the embodiment of beloved as a young woman who appears mysteriously at
Setha's house one day, Setha can only respond as the nurturing mother she once was and which
slavery threatened to end.
Although Setha sees the murder of her child as an act of salvation, she is forced to reconsider
that when beloved begins to demand an explanation for her mother's cruelty.
It is not, however, until Paul D confronts Setha with a newspaper clipping that describes
her crime that she must face what has happened and begin the painful journey towards some
kind of redemption.
When Paul D asks her if she is the one described in the newspaper report, Setha will not answer
directly.
She circles around Paul D in her kitchen just as she circles around the subject, recalling
the difficulty of being the only woman on the plantation, of caring for her children
and of finally liberating them from slavery and thus being able to love them freely.
Setha identifies this freedom to love as not to need permission for desire, a permission
that both Setha and Paul now have to give themselves.
What Setha's explanation also emphasizes for the reader is the particular suffering
of women, especially mothers, under slavery.
In choosing to narrate the story of slavery from the perspective of a woman, Morrison
testifies to the double bondage of the black woman whose body became a weapon to be used
against her.
Expected to breed to increase her owner's wealth, the woman's slave was also under
suspicion as a sexually aggressive being, often raped by her master or overseer and
yet constantly under suspicion from the white mistress.
This peculiar burden is described in one of the best known slave narratives, Harriet
Jacobs' Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, published in 1861.
Harriet Jacobs was the slave of a doctor who repeatedly made sexual advances to her.
To protect herself, she took a white lawyer as her lover and had two children with him.
She eventually escaped to Philadelphia after hiding for seven years in a garret above her
grandmother's house.
When she approached publishers with the story of her life, she was rejected numerous times
on the grounds that the story was too critical of the morals of the slave owners and the
role of the Christian church in maintaining slavery.
Recognizing the difficulty of representing her story sympathetically to her white audience,
Jacobs persisted until she found a sufficiently determined publisher and finally published
her narrative under a pseudonym, Linda Brent, and with a white woman, Maria Lydia Child,
as the editor of her work to assure the public that it was authentic.
To return to Sethay's explanation, the difficulty of explaining to a man, even one like Paul
Dee who has experienced slavery, what it means to nurture a child who is then taken away
from you, prevents Sethay from finding the right words.
There are no correct words, she says, sufficient to account for what happened or to help Paul
Dee understand.
To her, it was simple.
When the slave catchers came into Baby Shug's garden, she collected every bit of life she
had made, all the parts of her that were precious and fine and beautiful, and carried, pushed,
dragged them through the veil, out, away, over there where no one could hurt them.
Paul Dee's response to her confession, if it can be called that because Sethay still
does not acknowledge any guilt, Paul Dee's response is to describe her love as too thick
and to remind her that her attempt to save her children didn't work.
Her two boys have run away and one girl is dead, the other, Denver, is too scared to
leave the yard.
Paul Dee insists that there could have been another way and that what Sethay did was wrong.
His judgment of her is harsh.
You got two feet, Sethay, not four.
In his disapproval of her behavior, Paul Dee voices two important principles.
The first is that Sethay cannot claim ownership of her children because to do so is to enslave
them all over again.
The second is that killing her child was the result of an instinctive but dangerously irrational
human reaction.
The range of responses to Sethay's action testifies to the difficulty of arriving at
a final and appropriate verdict on her.
In the course of the novel we hear about Paul Dee's reaction, he leaves Sethay, as well
as baby Shuggs, she stops preaching the word.
The free black community's response, it isolates 124 Bluestone, the white communities, some
want her return to slavery, some want her hung, and finally the laws.
Persuaded by Mr. Bodwin, a man who harbors slaves, Sethay is imprisoned for several months
and then released.
The narrator withholds either approval or disapproval, allowing the multiple responses
to produce a multifaceted reading of the crime.
Likewise, Toni Morrison herself offers in an interview a nuanced reading.
It was absolutely the right thing to do, Ms. Morrison said, but she had no right to
do it.
I think if I had seen what she had seen and knew what was in store, and I felt that there
was an afterlife, or even if I felt that there wasn't, I think I would have done the same
thing.
This nuanced moral position is represented in the narrative shape of the text with its
fragmented and non-linear form, both of which suggest the difficulty of telling a story
that relies upon the cause and effect of a world that works by rational principles,
a sane world then, rather than the insane world of slavery.
And that fragmented structure also suggests the impossibility for the freed slaves of
recapturing a past by which they might understand the present.
The unavoidable moral complexity of Sethay's case must be placed in the context of other
acts of violence against Jordan, most pertinently of course the acts engendered by slavery itself.
How can a morally corrupt system render legal judgment on one like Sethay?
Moreover, there are multiple acts of homicide in the Old Testament which are commanded by
God.
How can one reconcile the violence of that Old Testament God with the Christian call for
non-violence?
One might also locate Sethay's action in the context of Abraham's willingness to sacrifice
his son.
What makes Sethay's behavior morally unacceptable and Abraham's willingness to kill his son
a sacred moment?
Is it the claim of human agency that makes the difference?
That Sethay does not invoke God as the one who commanded the action, but insists rather
that she did it.
She did it alone.
Despite suggesting the fragmented life of those enslaved and the moral complexity of
Sethay's answer to the fugitive slave law, the seemingly random sequence of events in
the narrative also suggests the difficulty of accounting for all the victims of slavery,
those 60 million and more, as well as the ones that suffered even after the Emancipation
Proclamation in 1865 through lynchings, rapes, murders, schools burned to the ground and
property taken.
These individual stories remain untold, dismembered and unaccounted for as the narrative says.
Even if, however, they are dismembered, their memories can be honored through the story
of Sethay and Paul Dee.
Despite the horrors they have witnessed and experienced, Sethay and Paul Dee must, for
the sake of their own future and that of their race, continue to witness their past
in a spiritual and aesthetic sense through stories and prayer.
It was not a story to pass on, concludes the novel, invoking both the impossibility of telling
the full story of slavery it could not be passed on, but also the absolute necessity
of telling it.
One must not pass, that is, pass by or disregard these stories, however painful they are to
tell or to read.
