In this lecture we will turn to perhaps the most contested issue of the 19th century besides
slavery, votes for women.
The question of suffrage for women was not limited of course to the right to cast a vote,
but in fact opened up a Pandora's box of rights and responsibilities associated with
full citizenship.
One of the most pressing of such rights was service on juries.
The consequences of all male juries sitting in judgement on women are explored in Susan
Glassbell's 1917 story A Jury of Her Peers, which is based upon a trial Glassbell covered
as a reporter in Des Moines, Iowa.
Originally written as a play called Trifles that depicts the loneliness and isolation
of a woman trapped in a brutal marriage, the story suggests that the gendered nature of
society may require a gendered response to crime, an issue that we addressed recently
in Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter.
In a recent book entitled Untidy Origins, historian Laurie Ginsburg debunks the conventional
narrative of 19th century feminism, that the women's rights movement burst forth in 1848
when Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott and others met in Seneca Falls.
Ginsburg argues that such a neat beginning both excludes the many women who were working
towards female suffrage before that meeting, and also suggests that only women of a certain
class were actively engaged in such political activities.
Ginsburg describes a petition presented to the New York State Assembly in August of 1846.
The authors of this petition, that firmly demanded equal and civil and political rights
with men, were six farm women from Jefferson County in northern New York.
These were ordinary rural women who lived in dense and particular personal and economic
and political networks, and had settled in communities on the northern New York frontier
and were thus isolated from the prosperity and the intellectual bustle of the state.
What Ginsburg's works demonstrates is that there is no single narrative of women's legal
status in Anglo-American history.
Even if one followed the trail of legislative documents and court decisions, what goes unrecorded
is the large variety of local customs and habits, many of which are never institutionalized
in the form of written rules, as well as the variety of individual daily lives that are
never recorded.
Moreover, as people know from their own encounters with society's laws, their status under the
law is dependent on innumerable personal and social variables.
There is no such thing as perfect consistency in the application of legal rules to law's
subjects, only an imperfect match between what rights and responsibilities are assigned
and what an individual can claim.
What does appear consistent, however, is the nature of legal subjecthood that different
cultures in the Western world, across time, have articulated for women.
Despite recent assertions by scholars of women's history that women's social condition, rather
than improving with the liberalizing of political institutions, might have actually declined
since the Middle Ages, no one is arguing that, even at its best, women were perceived as
meriting the same treatment as men under the law.
The sources of women's subordinate status under the law are various, Judeo-Christian
theology, English common law, and in America the specific conditions of early colonial
life and the plantation life under slavery.
The difference in their treatment is directly related to the difference in their bodies.
As Adam and Eve's response after the fall reminds us, sexual difference is the first
sign that the pure relationship with God has been corrupted.
The biblical story thus seems to sanction a natural inferiority in women and one that,
as I pointed out in the lecture on the Hebrew Bible, is specifically located in their sexuality.
Women's inferiority in secular status must, however, be reconciled with the equality of
men and women before God.
That reconciliation is managed because women's spiritual equality is tied first to a condition
that they were supposed to abjure voluntarily, that is, single womanhood, and second, to
the specific conditions attached to the woman's sexuality in marriage.
Medieval canon law insisted that marriage was a consensual contract and that theoretically
equality in consent was essential to the validity of the marriage.
A woman had the right to choose with whom she would contract her marriage and coercion,
if proved, was sufficient grounds for the marriage to be annulled.
Women were also theoretically equal to their husbands in their right to demand and participate
in marital intercourse.
The legal contract between men and women, which is marriage, is the secular version
of the spiritual contract between God and the human soul and the subordination of women
to men socially and sexually, is thus sanctioned and strengthened by this appeal to divine
order.
Thus, sexual difference, or more specifically, women's difference from men, is perceived
not as the grounds for negotiating new versions of sexual equality under the law, but as the
fundamental opposition that secures the whole range of social and spiritual relationships
between women and men and women and God.
Doctors' women must mediate their contact with God through men, so they must mediate
their relationship to the secular law through their male relatives.
As I have already described in the lecture on Hawthorne, a married woman was covered
by her husband, merged into his legal and economic identity.
Moreover, the assumption that women were both physically and mentally inferior to men disbarred
them from civil and public offices.
They could not be judges nor lawyers, and they could not, of course, vote or sit on
juries.
Even as late as 1961 in Hoyt v. Florida, the Supreme Court concurred with a lower court
ruling that an all-male jury did not violate a female defendant's 14th Amendment right
to a jury of her peers.
It was not until 1968 that Congress passed a law ensuring that women would serve on juries
in all states.
Generally speaking, then, women's law existed not to carve out rights for women, but to
define them as women according to their relationship to men.
The powerful social ideology that grounds this legal subordination is the concept of
separate spheres, by which the male sphere is public, the world of government, trade,
business and law, and the female sphere is private, the domestic space, chartering, housekeeping,
all of which, of course, is unregulated and which yields no direct economic benefits for
the woman.
It was precisely because it was an uncontested assumption that women wanted and needed to
be in the domestic space that they were excluded from the public space, and thus their desire
to occupy that domestic space was seen as natural.
One should note, however, that many women benefited from the labor of other women who
were either by class or race deemed to be their natural inferiors.
For some women activists determined to change women's legal status, the right to vote was
the sole aim of their struggle.
For others, the struggle was for equal rights, and suffrage was one of those rights they
demanded.
One of the tensions that these suffrage groups experienced was generated by the passage of
the 15th Amendment, which had given the emancipated black slave the right to vote.
And indeed, some suffragettes tried to advance their argument by suggesting that allowing
women to vote would dilute the effect of the black vote, and thus achieve natural white
supremacy.
The struggle for women's suffrage ended, of course, with the passage of the 19th Amendment
in 1920, but that amendment did not guarantee women their rights as full citizens of the
nation.
Still hovering over the status of women under the law was the shadow cast by prior laws
and customs that had excluded women from participating in the public space.
Those who contended that giving women the right to vote had effectively also endowed
women with full civil and political rights continued to insist that a jury that did not
contain representatives of her peers could not try a woman.
The definition of what constitutes a peer is, of course, a contested one.
Is a peer someone who has faced the same experiences as you, lived within the same community, merely
of the same gender, or is a peer merely another citizen who has the same political rights as
you do?
For women's rights advocates, like Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Antony, legal peerage
was necessary precisely because women were perceived by men as inferior.
If there were two legal ranks, one male and one female, then laws made by and for men
could not apply to women.
If men were to respond that laws were neutral and not gendered, then by that argument legal
status must also be neutral, and women could not therefore be denied the opportunity to
sit on juries.
Susan Glassbell's story, a jury of her peers, grew out of a criminal trial she covered as
a reporter for a Des Moines, Iowa newspaper.
Margaret Hossack, a mother of nine children, and married for 33 years, which was charged
and convicted of the murder of her husband, who was found dead from two axe strokes in
his head.
Glassbell's interest in re-narrating Margaret Hossack's story must have been provoked by
the omissions and silences in the story of this abused woman.
The story was first published in 1917, and it would be 50 years or more before the issue
of domestic abuse would rise to the surface of public consciousness, and bring about a
change in the way the law responded appropriately to women whose crimes were committed under
desperate conditions.
At the time of the story's publication, in the early 20th century, wife battering was
considered a man's entitlement throughout all levels of society.
The rule of thumb principle of English common law, by which a man was permitted to beat
his wife as long as the stick was no thicker than a man's thumb, was consistently upheld
in case law throughout the 19th century.
Unlike her original, Margaret Hossack, who was permitted to speak in court in her own
presence, the accused woman in Glassbell's story, Minnie Wright, never speaks on her own
behalf.
In fact, she is never present in the story, only referred to by the other characters.
Such an absence suitably literalizes the absence of women in the courtroom, other that is than
in their capacity as wrongdoers.
The court in which Minnie Wright would eventually be judged was an entirely masculine arena.
No women would be present in any official capacity other than perhaps a young woman
reporter.
The story begins when Martha Hale is asked to accompany Mrs. Peters to the Wright farm,
where they are to collect some clothes and personal items for Minnie Wright, who is being
held in the county jail on the charge of strangling her husband, who is found dead in bed with
a rope around his neck.
Together with the women are Mr. Hale, who found the dead man, Mr. Peters, the county
sheriff, and the young county attorney, Mr. Henderson.
The Wright farm is a cold and lonely place, and once there the men begin their search
for clues as to Minnie's motive, leaving the women to collect Minnie's clothes.
It is immediately clear that the men have a quite different perception of the home from
that of the women.
The men are convinced already of Minnie's guilt.
They have come to find a motive for the murder.
Nothing in the kitchen speaks to them.
Nothing here but kitchen things, the sheriff comments dismissively, and they leave to search
the rest of the house, pausing only to remark on the mess of broken jam jars in her cupboard.
Trifles, says Mrs. Hale's husband, women are used to worrying over trifles.
The gendered nature of this remark and the corollary in terms of what matters in the
world, that is, those things presumably that men worry over, fixes quite clearly the divide
between the two women and the men.
This divided reality is reinforced when the county attorney comments on the dirty towels
at the sink and suggests that Minnie was not much of a housekeeper, to which Mrs. Hale
responds sharply by remarking that men's hands aren't always as clean as they might be, a
hint perhaps of the abuse that Minnie has suffered at her husband's hands.
In the foreshadowing of the tensions and distribution of authority in the courtroom, and indeed
in the world outside the kitchen, Mrs. Hale and the county attorney engage in a subtle
battle over the social conventions that marginalize the things that women value, while men's opinions
and values are taken seriously.
By the end of the story, one sees that there is much more at stake than simply the opinion
of Mrs. Hale and the attorney.
This is a battle over the value of a woman's life as opposed to that of a man's, and Minnie's
life hangs in the balance.
The arrogance of the men of law, the attorney and sheriff, that only they can uncover the
motive for the killing, and therefore by implication that only they can understand what would drive
a woman to murder her husband, is articulated in the attorney's joke to the men that the
women wouldn't know a clue if they came across it.
Not only it appears can the women recognize a clue when they see it, they can do more.
They can construct a narrative that makes sense out of what is otherwise a senseless
murder, which is the way in which the original murder was described in newspaper headlines.
The women's narrative would not stand up in court, however. Their story could not resist
the demand of the law for facts and a cause and effect chain of logic.
What Mrs. Hale and Mrs. Peters uncover as they move quietly, setting the kitchen to
order, is a life deprived of all joy. Shabby and much patched clothes, a broken stove, a
sagging rocking chair, a husband too mean to install a telephone to relieve his wife's
loneliness. None of these by itself is a motive for murder, and as yet the women see only
the effects of Minnie's deprivation and not a cause for violence. Nothing to show anger
or sudden feeling as Mr. Henderson requires.
However, Mrs. Hale, remembering how her kitchen would appear to an objective eye, she left
in the middle of making bread to accompany Mrs. Peters. Things begun and not finished
as she puts it. Mrs. Hale sees how the house can be made to turn against Minnie. Mrs. Peters
defensively says, but Mrs. Hale, the law is the law to which Mrs. Hale retorts and the
bad stove is a bad stove.
Put thus these two declarative statements and that's the two realities that contend
in this story. One, a public and male world of authority. The other, a domestic and female
world that seems to bear no relationship to that public world. It seems but a trifle.
While the statement that the law is the law appears to need no explanation or justification
for its power. It has all the self-evident and natural authority that the male world
does. The contrary assertion that a bad stove is a bad stove requires explanation in the
context of a narrative about murder.
In other words, Mrs. Hale understands that the bad stove needs interpretation. That is,
it doesn't automatically stand for something else in the way that, say, the sheriff stands
without question for the authority of the law.
What this moment suggests, however, is that if the men are not able to interpret the
signs that the kitchen offers of a narrative that would explain Minnie's actions, then
one might wonder whether they were the proper representatives of the law and what's more
whether the law itself might not stand in need of interpretation. That perhaps in the
case of a woman who might have killed her husband after years of abuse and isolation,
the law has to become something other than just the law, and that perhaps when that woman
stands trial for murder, she deserves something other than a jury made up of all men.
Looking from stove to sink, the sheriff's wife, too, finally recognizes the need to
see into things, to see through a thing to something else.
As their husband's footsteps above their heads, constantly reminding them of the superior
power that men possess in such matters, the two women begin to piece together the circumstantial
evidence to account for that moment when Minnie was provoked to show anger or sudden feeling.
As the two women move quietly to put the kitchen back in order so that it will no longer turn
against Minnie and incriminator, if not of murder than of being a bad housekeeper and
therefore by implication of other sorts of subversive behavior, as they straighten pots
kicked by the attorney, they draw together the threads of their narrative about Minnie.
A quilt piece that draws their admiration also shows a moment when the stitching went
awry. Something about the fabric alerts Mrs. Hale that something happened, some act of
violence or trauma is caught in the threads of the quilt.
The sewing, said Mrs. Peters in a troubled way, all the rest of them have been so nice
and even, but this one, why it looks as if she didn't know what she was about. Their
eyes met, something flashed to life, passed between them, then as if with an effort they
seemed to pull away from each other. A moment Mrs. Hale sat there, her hands folded over
that sewing which was so unlike all the rest of the sewing. Then she had to pull the knot
and drawn the threads.
What are you doing Mrs. Hale? asked the sheriff's wife, startled. Just pulling out a stitch
or two that's not sewed very good, said Mrs. Hale mildly.
I don't think we ought to touch things, Mrs. Peters said a little helplessly.
I'll just finish up this end, answered Mrs. Hale, still in that mild matter of fact fashion.
Despite Mrs. Peters protest, Martha Hale rips out the stitches and re-sews the quilt piece.
The two women have now silently entered into an agreement to let Minnie's home speak on
her own behalf rather than against her.
Mrs. Peters finds an empty bird cage with the hinge torn apart, prompting Mrs. Hale to
recall that Minnie used to sing real pretty herself. Later she will also describe Minnie
as kind of like a bird, real sweet and pretty but kind of timid and fluttery.
Both women are curious about where the bird is. And although the symbolism might seem
rather heavy-handed when described this directly, Glassbell's skill at dialogue is such, recall
that this was first to play, that these clues about Minnie's life and what may have driven
her to violence are presented to the reader in a series of remarks about the loneliness
of life for the farmer's wife, the desolate nature of the right farm, and the travelling
salesman who passed through last spring selling canaries, the cold nature of Mr. Wright himself.
Mrs. Hale says just to pass the time of day with him like a raw wind that gets to the
bone.
As we are pulled further and further into this domestic confession, it is the house that
speaks. We slowly move from the position of the curious bystander to that of active investigator
of the scene. And as the narrative unfolds, we will find ourselves moving ever closer
to passing judgment on Minnie, in other words, of serving on her jury.
As Mrs. Peters and Mrs. Hale move from being strangers to one another to acknowledging
that they share certain experiences, and thus acknowledging that they must also share those
experiences with Minnie, the two women also move from being intruders, strangers who observe
from the outside, to becoming Minnie's intimates, coming to understand and know her through her
shabby clothes, her broken stove, her quilt, and her broken birdcage.
Their greatest moment of intimacy comes when they actually search through her sewing box
to find her thread and scissors to take to her in jail. A rifling of her possessions that
would take on a very different aspect if conducted by the sheriff or attorney.
The two women discover a wooden box, an inside wrapped in silk, a dead canary, its neck broken.
And then again the eyes of the two women met. This time clung together in a look of dawning
comprehension, of growing horror. Mrs. Peters looked from the dead bird to the broken door
of the cage, again their eyes met. And just then there was a sound at the outside door.
Mrs. Hale slipped the box under the quilt-peaches in the basket and sank into the chair before
it. Mrs. Peters stood holding the table. The county attorney and the sheriff came in
from outside.
Well ladies, said the county attorney, as one turning from serious things to little pleasantries,
have you decided whether she was going to quilt it or knot it? We think, began the sheriff's
wife in a flurried voice, that she was going to knot it.
Mrs. Peters and Mrs. Hale are now decisively knotted together in their recognition of the
violence that has occurred on the farm. The attorney notices the birdcage but dismisses
its relevance to the case, unable to construct a narrative that would accommodate such trifles.
After the discovery of the evidence that would provide the prosecution with the motive they
need to prove Minnie's guilt, Mrs. Peters and Mrs. Hale identify the ways in which they,
as women, have shared in the suffering that Minnie has experienced.
Mrs. Peters, for example, recalls her rage as a child when a boy killed her kitten and
recognized the potential for violence even in herself. On the other hand, they also acknowledge
their complicity in the forms of social abuse that Minnie has suffered.
Mrs. Hale in particular laments her failure to visit Minnie and confesses her own part
in the isolation and unhappiness that has led to Minnie's crime.
This sense of shared suffering and shared guilt provides them with a way of rationalizing
their willingness to obstruct justice, or rather divert the law, by hiding the box with
the bird when the men come back into the kitchen. For a moment Mrs. Peters did not move, and
then she did it. With a rush forward she threw back the cork pieces, got the box, tried to
put it in her handbag. It was too big. Desperately she opened it, started to take the bird out,
but there she broke. She could not touch the bird. She stood there, helpless, foolish.
There was a sound of a knob turning in the inner door. Mother Hale snatched the box
from the sheriff's wife and got it in the pocket of her big coat, just as the sheriff
and the county attorney came back into the kitchen.
The entrance of the man of the law into the domestic space that is now not merely occupied,
but claimed by Mrs. Peters and Mrs. Hale on behalf of Minnie, provokes the final confrontation
between these two ways of knowing, these two ways of judging.
Well Henry, said the county attorney facetiously, at least we found out that she was not going
to quilt it. She was going to, what is it you call it, ladies? Mrs. Hale's hand was
against the pocket of her coat. We call it, not it, Mr. Henderson.
Mrs. Hale has the last words of the story. In her response to Mr. Henderson, she both
describes the relationship now established between the three women, the absent Minnie
being marked by her quilt and her canary. They have knotted, bonded together. And it
also describes their negation of the world represented by the attorney and the sheriff.
Not it, as in, N-O-T. Not it, Mr. Henderson. Not it, Mr. Henderson. Despite being married
to the law, Mrs. Peters is willing to conceal the evidence that would certainly convict Minnie.
Thus Glassville narrates a different story of guilt and innocence and the nature of
violence from the one that the law could neither recognize nor tolerate. The men's version
of Minnie's life would report on her poor skills as a homemaker while her husband would
be described as an honest, sober man who paid his debts and kept his word. The dead bird
would be used by a jury of 12 men to convict Minnie, whereas a jury of her peers, Mrs.
Hale and Mrs. Peters, as well as the readers, have judged her differently. The story also
suggests that women's facts are not facts in the way that the law understands them.
At least not until they are pieced together like a quilt into a recognizable shape that
the law can apprehend. Similarly, women cannot always articulate what they know within the
strict conventions of what counts as evidence in a court of law. For example, the complicated
story of domestic abuse remained untold until very recently because it could not be contained
with any of the pre-existing narratives of what constituted assault. This story also raises
questions, however, about the limits of what the law can tolerate. Can we allow a system
of law that permits gendered narratives and, as a consequence, gender judgments? And if
not, how can we call that justice?
