Let us now turn to Shakespeare's The Winter's Tale.
This tragic comedy depicts the consequences of a husband's irrational jealousy, but a
husband who is also a king, and therefore has the power to exact the most terrible
revenge on those whom he believes have betrayed him.
Symmetrically divided between the courts of Sicilia and Bohemia and their two kings,
the play moves from tragedy to romance, from the tyrannical imposition of a husband and
a king's will, to the tyrannical prohibitions of a father and a king's will.
Just as King Leontes abuses his authority when he, without apparent reason, charges
his wife Hermione and his lifelong friend King Polyxonies with adultery, so Polyxonies
too will interpose the father's law between his son Florezelle and Florezelle's beloved
Perdita, who is in the best traditions of romance the daughter of Leontes and Hermione.
The Winter's Tale illustrates the inextricable connections between the patriarchal regime
at the state level and that same regime at the family level, reflecting upon the potential
for both order and chaos that such a complexly interwoven system of law and morality enables.
This lecture will also place the play within the context of the post-Elizabethan political
struggle between King and the dual legislative body of Parliament and the common law.
By the time Shakespeare wrote the Winter's Tale, Elizabeth I was dead and James I of
England and VI of Scotland was on the throne, and with his ascension came a new version
of royal absolutism, one that James had already identified in the true law of free monarchies
published in 1598 before he ascended the English throne.
In his treatise, James claimed a free and absolute authority over his subjects and their
property and rights.
His authority was total and godlike, and his subjects had no power to resist, only to endure.
And if he were to err in that authority, the only recourse was to pray for his reformation.
In this lecture I want to offer a reading of the Winter's Tale that is situated within
these political and jurisprudential debates, but which also acknowledges that this play
is of a particular kind, a tragedy comedy or romance, and that its intent was clearly
to entertain.
Before I turn to the play, let me very briefly outline the political situation in early 17th
century England.
Very generally speaking, one could say that over the course of the 17th century, the political
and legislative power that resided with the King at the beginning of the century would
shift to the Parliament and the common law courts.
That shift began with the reign of James I, during which one of the most significant legal
figures of the late 16th and early 17th century, Sir Edward Cook, threw his weight behind the
authority of the law to restrict the King's power.
Cook did not start out as a supporter of the rights of Parliament and the common law, not
even when he became the Speaker of the House of Commons in 1593 or the Attorney General
in 1594.
His insistence on the moderating influence of Parliament, its legislation and the decisions
of the judges of the common law courts did not become pronounced until he was appointed
Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas in 1606.
Relying for his authority on medieval jurist Brachten, Cook argued that the King is subject
not to men but to God and the law.
The law, divine in its origin and sanction, Cook insisted, was the basis upon which civil
society was built, and this law was supreme above King and people equally, and was in part
expressed in the statutes passed by Parliament, by the folk customs that had been memorialised
in customary law, and by positive law which was common law as recorded in precedent.
By the end of the 17th century, Cook's position on the relative distribution of power between
King and courts would be the majority view.
Let me turn now to the plot and structure of the play.
The play is divided into two parts, the first separated from the second by a period of sixteen
years.
In the first part, Leontes, King of Sicily, seized with apparently irrational jealousy
of his wife, attempts to murder his best friend, Polyxonys, King of Bohemia, and condemns his
wife Hermione to death, despite the insistence of the oracle at Delphi that Hermione is innocent
of adultery.
Their newborn child, Perdita, believed by Leontes to be the offspring of Hermione's
affair with Polyxonys, is abandoned on the shores of Bohemia, which of course did not
and does not have shores.
The critical focus of the first part is the trial of Hermione in which she pleads her case
against the injustice of Leontes tyranny.
The trial comes to an abrupt end when the death of Mamillius, son to Leontes and Hermione,
is announced, a death caused by his father's persecution of his mother.
At the news, Hermione faints and is carried off stage.
Paulina, her confidant and strident defender, returns to announce her death to Leontes,
now chastened and remorseful at his behaviour.
The second part of the play takes place sixteen years later in Bohemia, where Perdita, raised
by good country folk, is being wooed by Floresel, the son of the king of Bohemia, our friend
Polyxonys.
After being denounced for his choice of wife by his father, Floresel and Perdita flee
to Sicily, of course, where Perdita's identity is discovered to Leontes.
Paulina arranges to take both Leontes and Perdita to the unveiling of a statue of Hermione,
which is in fact the living Hermione, concealed by Paulina for the last sixteen years.
The critical focus of the second half, one that balances the trial scene of the first
half, is the scene where Paulina unveils the statue of Hermione and that which was perceived
as fixed and cold and unchanging, is transformed into a living, breathing being.
We can readily identify the tragic comedic or romance conventions that govern the play.
The dead charred replaced by the living one, the banishment from and returned to home,
the conversion of the humble into the powerful, the sorrow that is finally replaced by happiness.
But how do these qualities fit with issues of legal and political import in the early
years of James's reign?
Let me begin with the literary conventions of the romance genre.
It is indeed a genre that speaks of the fantastic, that seems to bypass questions of truth and
falsehood, to speak of magic and transformation.
But it does so, I would suggest, not to reject a real world, but to establish an essential
connection between the fantastic and the real, so that those concepts which cannot be directly
and realistically represented might come alive.
What The Winter's Tale offers us is a series of transformations that are provoked by the
tyranny of the ruler.
A tyranny that appears to be founded in individual sexual jealousy and which disrupts not only
his immediate family, but by virtue of his role as king, the entire kingdom.
Thus we understand the powerful and inseparable connection between the structure of the family
and that of the larger society.
In the romance narrative, desire in its largest sense of longing or aspiration and power are
intimately connected, as they are in the actual world.
But the romance genre reveals, through magic, something that is often occluded in the actual
practice of politics and jurisprudence.
And that is that questions of truth and justice can only be understood through representation.
That is, through the performance or staging of what justice or truth might look like if
it were ever to take perfect embodied shape.
And thus those representations are, in essence, dramatic enactments, magical realizations
of what we hope justice is.
As Lyonte says about the statue of Hermione when Paulina unveils it, there's magic in
thy majesty which has my evils conjured to remembrance.
Moreover those acts of representations, like the play that embodies them, are fundamentally
acts of the imagination.
Shakespeare thus gestures towards an understanding of justice and the king's responsibility
for the enactment of that justice that can only be glimpsed at but never fully realized.
In concluding the play with a magical performance, Shakespeare diverts us from questions of truth
and falsity.
Indeed, he implies that truth and falsity are not, finally, the determinants of what
is just.
But truth and falsity are perhaps in some way irrelevant to justice?
The play suggests that, like relationships between men and women, power relationships,
such as those invoked in courts of law, have nothing to do with truth and falsity but everything
to do with enchantment.
Justice, like other forms of desire, is a magical performance and thus, like the play
itself, transformative.
That transformation is, however, necessarily transitory and thus the performance of justice,
like the play in which that justice is played at, must be endlessly repeated.
Let me trace some of these elements of this play which is, as I have suggested, a romance
of justice but is also a political allegory, a dramatic representation of the consequences
of tyranny when there is no effective counterbalance in the form of laws or a legislative body
that are superior to the tyrant.
First, let's look at the romance elements and Shakespeare's manipulation of these elements
to create this sense that truth and its corollary justice, in its perfect form, is an illusive
and inevitably transitory thing.
Shakespeare's manipulation of the conventions of the romance genre become clear when one
compares his play with the source text, a novel by Robert Greene entitled Pandosto, or
The Triumph of Time, which was first published in 1588.
In Pandosto, the title character is driven by passionate jealousy to drive away his friend
and banish his infant daughter.
This results in the deaths of Pandosto's wife and young son.
Eventually, Pandosto himself commits suicide when he realizes that the young woman he has
tried to seduce is his long lost daughter, Fornia.
A key difference between Shakespeare's play and the source text is that Leonti's jealousy
comes on suddenly, with no apparent cause, whereas Pandosto is persuaded by circumstantial
evidence to accuse his wife, much as, for example, Ocelot is drawn into murdering Desdemona
by a Yago's hints.
So the difference between those two texts is this sudden and unexplained burst of jealousy
on the part of Leonti's.
Some critics have gone to great lengths to argue that there are hints that Leonti's
has suspicions about his wife and Polyxonese.
But if one needs the help of critics to catch those hints, one might doubt whether Shakespeare
intended them as clues to Leonti's psychology.
Leonti's does react quickly and without apparent cause to the sight of his wife with
his best friend as do tyrants when doubt assails them about their invincibility or the validity
of their power.
What Leonti's does to his wife is precisely how tyrannical rule manifests itself without
cause, without warning, and without mercy.
Tyrants also insist upon absolute conformity to their beliefs, however illogical or unjust
they may be.
And so Leonti's demands that his advisor, Camillo, attest to Hermione's suspicious behavior
with Polyxonese.
Hermione's refusal does not provoke a more reasonable assessment from Leonti's, but
drives him further into a disassociation from reality.
I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee, pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
or else a hoverizing temporizer, that canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil
inclining to them both.
Where my wife's liver infected as her life, she would not live the running of one glass.
In a later scene with another member of the court, Antigonus, who is Paulina's husband,
Leonti's articulates clearly his understanding of the relationship between magisterial authority
and truth.
A relationship grounded in his royal prerogative to assert what constitutes the truth against
all counsel and advice.
Why, what need we commune with you of this, but rather follow our forceful instigation?
Our prerogative calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness imparts this.
Which if you, or stupefied, or seeming so instill, cannot, or will not relish a truth
like us, inform yourselves we need no more of your advice.
The matter, the loss, the gain, the ordering, and it is all properly ours.
Leonti's thus summarizes the nature of tyranny.
The matter, the loss, the gain, the ordering, it is all properly ours.
When Leonti's learns that Camillo and Polyxonies have fled, he seems briefly to acknowledge
that his reasoning is hostage to his power, but it is too late to turn back.
How blessed am I, then my just censure in my true opinion, a lack for lesser knowledge,
how accursed in being so blessed.
There may be in the cup a spider steeped, and one may drink, depart, and yet partake
no venom, for his knowledge is not infected.
But if one presently abhorred ingredient to his eye make known how he has drunk, he cracks
his gorge, his sides with violent heffs.
I have drunk and seen the spider.
The accusation of adultery by a king against his queen is merely a more elevated form of
the countless charges of sexual infidelity that haunt the histories of women whose social
powerlessness sits oddly with the power of their bodies to reproduce the father's lineage.
For the English audience there would have been a special resonance in this sudden accusation,
one that appeared to be motivated by a rupture in the intimate relationship between a husband
and a wife, but which was manifestly provoked by a political crisis.
I am speaking here of the charge of adultery advanced by Elizabeth I's father, Henry VIII,
against his wife, and Elizabeth's mother, Anne Boleyn.
Indeed, Shakespeare would go on in his last play to explore Henry VIII's politically motivated
charges against his first wife in the play Henry VIII or All is True, written sometime
between 1612 and 1613.
Henry VIII is structured through a series of trials of faith and loyalty, most prominently
the questioning of Catherine of Argan to test her loyalty to Henry.
It is a play that specifically examines the nature of justice and its relationship to
law in a polity struggling to balance on the one hand the king's claims to absolute authority
over both church and state, and on the other an emerging parliamentary prerogative.
Henry's attempt to set aside his marriage with Catherine of Argan was provoked by her
failure to provide him with a male heir to the throne, precisely the situation that provoked
Henry V years later in 1536 to have Anne Boleyn arrested and charged with adultery, incest
and treason.
One can see the connections of these events to the plot of The Winter's Tale, where the
male heir, Mamillius, the son of Leontes and Hermione dies, and the king is left apparently
with no heir at all until his daughter is restored to him.
With fear of political and religious chaos, should there be no clear claimant to the throne,
had plagued the 16th century and was to plague the 17th century as well.
The reunion of Perdita and Hermione with Leontes, which is the most dramatic difference
between the source text and Shakespeare's version, thus restores the dynastic family
to its original wholeness, and with Perdita's marriage to Floresel, the son of the king
of Bohemia, represents the promise of future political stability through their male heirs.
The restoration of both the unjustly accused wife and the abandoned daughter is not the
only major innovation in the play.
Shakespeare also creates the character of Paulina, who conceals Hermione for 16 years
and then reveals her as a statue to the penitent Leontes, in a scene that has been characterized
as either movingly poignant or dramatically unconvincing and improbable.
The statue scene, where Leontes is required to awake his faith in order to understand
what will transpire, redeems the scene in the first half of the play where Hermione stands
on trial for adultery.
In both scenes, Paulina orchestrates such a dramatic transformation of what constitutes
truth and therefore justice, that the once tyrannical Leontes must acknowledge his errors
and bow to the wisdom of this mankind witch, as Leontes has termed Paulina.
Before Paulina confronts Leontes with the charge that his tyranny has killed his son
and wife, Hermione must withstand an assault on her character in a trial that articulates
the nature of law as Leontes sees it.
Leontes' insistence that his wife's guilt is synonymous with his proper understanding
of what constitutes her guilt, or to put it another way, if Hermione is innocent then
he must be a tyrant, indicates the interconnected nature of the sexual, the political and the
legal and the social in Shakespeare's imagination.
Domestic tyranny is only by degree less dangerous than public tyranny.
Both indicate an excess and abuse of that authority that must be properly exercised by
the king, magistrate, father to sustain the community.
Leontes defends himself against this charge of tyranny by pointing to the open proceedings
which will follow the rule of law.
Let us be cleared, he says, of being tyrannous, since we so openly proceed in justice, which
shall have due course even to the guilt or the pagation.
And yet the verdict is of course a foregone conclusion, as Hermione knows, relying only
on divine justice for support.
She says, but thus if powers divine behold our human actions, as they do, I doubt not
then but innocence shall make false accusation blush and tyranny tremble at patience.
Even the message from the oracle at Delphi to which Leontes has sent for advice cannot
dethrone his fixed idea that his wife is guilty.
The message reads, Hermione has chased Polyxonese blameless, Camillo a true subject, Leontes
a jealous tyrant, his innocent babe truly begotten, and the king shall live without
an heir if that which is lost be not found.
Leontes' only response to this message, given his insistence that he is right and
his wife is guilty, is to reject the authority of the oracle.
There is no truth at all in the oracle.
The session shall proceed, this is mere falsehood, he says.
We recall from Lecture 4 how dangerous it is to reject the divinities and Leontes no
less than Oedipus will pay the price for his excessive reliance on his own intuitions and
so-called reason.
And indeed, right on cue, as in a Greek tragedy, Leontes' arrogance is immediately punished
by the death of his son, Memilius, the male heir whose paternity Leontes had grown suspicious
of and whose place will be occupied at the end of the play by the son of the man he has
accused of fathering Memilius, that is, Polyxonese son Floresel, who will marry Leontes' daughter.
As quickly and arbitrarily as Leontes had jumped to the wrong conclusions about his
wife, he reverts to a proper understanding of affairs.
Apollo, pardon, he says, my great profaneness against thine oracle, I reconcile me to Polyxonese,
new woo my queen, recall the good Camillo who I proclaim a man of truth of mercy, for
being transported by my jealousies to bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose Camillo for
the minister to poison my friend Polyxonese.
Thanks again, critics have struggled to give Leontes some recognisable psychological motivation
for this reversal, but I would insist that just as his acts of tyranny needed no explanation,
arbitrariness being the very nature of tyranny, so his remorse needs no explanation, it is
merely the other side of tyranny.
Another way of saying this is that Leontes is now as tyrannous as excessive, that is,
in his remorse as he has been in his wrongheadedness.
That is why when Paulina tells him that Hermione has died of grief, her language picks up the
excessiveness of his behaviour.
But oh thou tyrant, she says, do not repent these things, for they are heavier than all
thy woes can stir, therefore but take thee to nothing but despair, a thousand knees ten
thousand years together, naked fasting upon a barren winter, and still winter in storm
perpetual could not move the gods to look that way thou wert.
Go on, go on, thou canst not speak too much, I have deserved all tongues to talk their
bitterest, says Leontes.
In a description of what faces Leontes, still winter in storm perpetual, she both recalls
his inflexibility, his refusal to heed the advice of others, to see another truth, and
simultaneously fixes this rigidity in a form as permanent as the statue of Hermione that
she will uncover at the end of the play.
Thus Leontes' punishment for his tyrannous behaviour is to emulate in his grief the very
fixedness and tyranny of thought that has produced this injustice in the first place.
It is not until he can breathe life into that which is apparently dead, that is the
body of his wife, that he will finally redeem his crimes and understand the work of justice.
That act, as we will see in the final scene, is an act of the imagination, a thing as far
from the fixity and coldness of the statue as justice is from injustice.
Before we turn to that final scene, let me briefly outline how the behaviour of polyxonies
towards his son mirrors the behaviour of Leontes, although with certainly far less disastrous
consequences.
Discovering that his son is in love with a shepherdess, Polyxonies threatens to disinherit
him if he does not disengage himself immediately.
His language reminds us of the violence of Leontes' speech when confronted with what
he believed to be his wife's disloyalty.
Of course, Polyxonies is understandably distressed that his son is not making a politically astute
marriage, but still his reaction seems a little excessive when he tells Perditor that
I'll have thy beauty scratched with briars and made more homely than thy state.
And then he turns to his son, for thee, fond boy, he says, if I may ever know thou dust
but sigh, that thou no more shall see this knack, as never I mean thou shalt, will bar thee
from succession.
For hold thee of our blood, know not of our kin, mark thou my words.
Polyxonies' threat to disinherit his son would, of course, leave him without an heir
and thus abandon his kingdom to uncertainty and disorder.
Once again Shakespeare reminds us of how closely tied the individual regime is to the social
regime.
The question of proper succession with all its political implications is, of course, fully
explored in Shakespeare's history plays, but the anxiety surrounding this issue is
never far from the surface.
Let us turn to the final scenes of the play where Paulina affects her second transformation,
once again making us question the truths of what we see, this time turning what seems
fixed and permanent into that which is living and therefore transient.
Unlike the trial scene, which was a public display, according to Leontes, of law in operation
and justice pursued, the unveiling of Hermione's statue takes place in an intimate setting,
in a chapel in Paulina's house, and the figure stands lonely, apart, and hidden by a curtain.
Just as in the trial scene Paulina judges the truth of Hermione's innocence and Leontes'
guilt, so here Paulina makes the truth reveal itself, that Hermione lives and thus Leontes
can finally ask for forgiveness.
Witnessed by the daughter who was once the evidence of Hermione's guilt and is now the
proof of her innocence, justice has done.
As Hermione comes to life and steps from her pedestal, so justice is no longer merely
an aspiration but a living thing.
As Leontes notes, such transformations are achieved by magic, and you can recall that
he once accused Paulina of being a witch, but this is a magic that brings with it the
promise of redemption, the kind of magic, in other words, that divine justice promises.
The allusion to this other kind of magic, the magic performed at the mass when the bread
and the wine is transformed into the body and blood of Christ, is evident in Leontes'
plea, oh she's warm, if this be magic let it be an art lawful as eating.
The beauty of his wife's human female form, once condemned with Paulina as the embodiment
of a mankind witch, is now celebrated as the conjurer, the performer of a certain kind
of justice, and it is a justice that is linked directly to God's justice, the embodiment
of which is mercy as incorporated in the sacrifice of Christ.
So finally let me return to where I began, to speak of the play both as a romance and
as a commentary upon a specific historical situation.
The play rehearses both the innumerable transformations of desire appropriate to the romance and models
various forms of authority and subjection appropriate to Stuart England.
To turn to the play in its specific historical moment, and to see it as a representation
of a debate between two primary forms of political authority, royal absolutism on the one hand
and the power of parliament and its legislative enactments on the other is not to ignore the
literary conventions that shape the play's structure and plot.
On the contrary, the performance that works its magic on the stage is intimately allied
with the performance that works its magic in the court.
The audience for both must believe in an illusion, in the possibility of transformations and
conversions, even as they simultaneously recognize the transient nature of those ideal moments.
Shakespeare speaks both to the audience in the theatre and to the spectators in the courtroom
when he says it is required that you do awake your faith.
