Lecture 16 Puritans and New, The Scarlet Letter
In the Scarlet Letter published in 1850, Nathaniel Hawthorne returns to America's Puritan past,
a past with which Hawthorne had a direct relationship. Among his forebears was John
Hawthorne, one of the judges of the Salem witch trials, which took place in 1692.
The protagonist of the novel, The Scarlet Letter, the one who wears The Scarlet Letter,
is Hester Prynne, whose life is determined by her relationship with a man, not her husband.
Hester turns from her shame and the alienation of her community, however, and becomes an
independent thinker, a philosopher whose experiences eventually allow her to become a kind of proto-feminist,
a maternal figure to the women of her society whose lives are lived under the same authoritarian regime
that has condemned her. Let me begin by placing the novel in its 19th century context to suggest
how Hawthorne employs the historical perspective of the Puritans to reflect upon the continuing
subservience of American women under the law. In a column in an 1835 Illinois newspaper under
the title The Frugal Housewife, one finds the following statement about the differences between
men and women. Man is daring and confident, woman is diffident and unassuming, man is great in action,
woman in suffering, man shines abroad, woman at home, man talks to convince,
woman to persuade and please, man has a rugged heart, woman a soft and tender one,
man prevents misery, woman relieves it, man has science, woman taste, man has judgment,
woman sensibility, man is a being of justice, woman of mercy. One should not, of course,
assume that such an account was reflective of a consensus about women's relationship to man.
On the contrary, one might very well believe that if they needed to be told what the difference
was, some women might have forgotten how they should behave. However, generally speaking,
in the first third of the 19th century, women accepted that their role was to provide a moral
and emotional center to the man's public life. Women were supposed to cherish their
difference from men and endeavor to attain an ideal condition. This cult of true womanhood,
or cult of domesticity, valued for primary female virtues, piety, purity, submissiveness,
and domesticity. As pious moral beings, women were supposed to correct the errors of men's ways.
Women naturally possessed modesty, affection, and tenderness in order to correct the naturally
more aggressive, more reserved, and less tender man. Likewise, a woman's purity was seen to be
both the deterrent to the aggressive male and the sign that the other virtues were present in
abundance. No pure woman, for example, would complain about exercising more affection for her
husband than he extended to her. A woman's purity demonstrated her superior moral nature,
and without such a constraint on their behavior, men would collapse into barbaric sensuality.
The third quality was submissiveness, and this virtue reinforced the others. To accept their
position was the way women demonstrated their submissiveness to God. Their role was to suffer
and be silent. Such social doctrine was drawn directly from the Bible, especially the works
of St. Paul who compared the relationship between husband and wife to that between man and God.
The husband is the head of the family, as Christ is the head of the church.
The wife who exhibited all these virtues produced the perfect domestic space for her husband
to refresh his spirits and restore his body after his work out in the world.
Even if one concludes that this version of a woman's duty and a wife's fate was stressed
precisely because it was so rarely achieved in reality, the laws that governed American
women, especially married women, supported this restricted view of their potential.
Like their English counterparts, women were seen as dependent and unequal under the law.
Following the principles of the English common law, married women lost their separate identity
and were merged into the identity of the husband. Essentially, the wife was the property of the
husband and thus as property could not herself own property, nor could she make a will enter a
contract or sue in court without her husband's consent. Divorces however were possible on the
grounds of desertion, adultery or habitual drunkenness. Of course, women were seen and heard in public
despite these restrictions and they played an increasingly important role in religious and
social reform movements, especially abolition and suffrage. What relationship do these 19th
century expectations of women's roles have to the Puritan colony in which Hester Prynne lived?
Comparing the four primary virtues that were advanced as vital to a woman's spiritual and
moral well-being in the 19th century with the social and legal systems that operated in the
Massachusetts colony in the 17th century, we see that the same virtues were considered paramount for
a woman, piety, purity, submissiveness and domesticity. Unlike certain other colonies such as Rhode
Island, Massachusetts had established a legal system without lawyers based entirely on Puritan
principles of justice. Women were subordinated to their husband's authority and were required to
surrender any property they had possessed before marriage. Divorce was impossible to obtain.
Women were expected to behave modestly, to promote domestic virtues that in turn would promote the
well-being of the colony and to maintain a decorous public appearance. Hester Prynne's sin, of which
her child Pearl is the evidence, clearly violates all the expectations of female behavior in the
Puritan colony. And while it might be an exaggeration to say that nothing had changed between the 17th
and the 19th century, it is clear that women's essential relationship to the male-dominated
society did not alter very significantly. One wonders if this is the significance of Hawthorne's
declarative sentence in the middle of the custom house, his long prefatory essay to the novel,
the sentence that reads, but the past was not dead. In one sense, Hawthorne is clearly referring
to his own past. The figure of his ancestors haunts his imagination, and in the custom house,
with its archival repository of historical documents, he feels the presence of all those
Hawthorns who helped to establish the town of Salem and its custom house. But perhaps he also
refers to the ongoing presence in that present moment of those 17th century laws and moral customs.
Customs that also required attacks, like the goods in the custom house, although not necessarily a
monetary one. Moral customs that press upon the Hester Prynne's of 19th century Salem
with the same weight as they did 200 years before. Just as the women of 19th century Salem would
suffer the same indignities as Hester should they lose their purity. So in this prefatory
essay on the custom house, Hawthorne imagines himself as his ancestor as John Hawthorne,
the grave bearded sable cloaked and steeple-crowned progenitor. What his ancestor gave birth to was
the community of Salem, of which Hawthorne is now a part, and the role of custom house official,
which is the role that Hawthorne now occupies. And what Hawthorne will produce in his turn
as progenitor is the story of the scarlet letter. Thus he speaks himself of those
thoughts, as he says, that had seemed so vital and so active, yet had been put to rest so quietly,
they revived again. One of the most remarkable occasions when the habit of bygone days awoke
in me was that which brings it within the law of literary propriety to offer the public the sketch
which I am now writing, the sketch being the novel. In his novel, Hawthorne brings the past to life,
and the materiality of the daily life that he fears will oppress him in the custom house now
becomes the material for his story of Hester Prynne, which he finds amongst the dusty manuscripts,
a small package carefully done up in a piece of ancient yellow parchment.
What draws his attention in that small package was a rag of scarlet cloth in the shape of the letter
A. In this image of the red cloth among the yellowing parchment, we recognize the tensions
that Hawthorne will explore in the story, between a world of color and materiality,
and a gray world of spiritual abstraction, between the sensuality that makes life possible,
and the laws that restrain that energy, between the sexuality of Hester and the desiccated body
of Chillingworth, her husband, between Hester's willing acknowledgement of sin and Dimmesdale's
anguished moral refusal. To accommodate these tensions, Hawthorne adopted the mode of the romance,
which, according to Hawthorne's own definition, is the world where the actual and the imaginary may
meet. We need to distinguish here between romance as Hawthorne uses that term, which suggests a
search for some kind of truth and a confluence of the past and the present, and the way I have
employed the term to speak of narratives in which the plot produces the proper ordering of the world
of the hero and the heroine, and which are therefore frequently unrealistic and thus romantic.
In claiming to have found the story of the scarlet letter in an old manuscript, however,
Hawthorne employs the conventional device for introducing the romance narrative,
one that allows the author to become the editor of the manuscript, thus distancing himself from
the story and retaining the aura of a customs house official who occupies a world far removed
from the world of Hester Prynne and Dimmesdale. Later, however, he confesses that he has taken
nearly or altogether as much licences as if the facts have been entirely of his own invention.
This is an ambiguous world, then, that we have entered, somewhere between fact and fiction,
somewhere between the past and the present, between Hawthorne the custom official and Hawthorne the
writer. The customs house is a realm of solidly concrete realities with its ledgers and lists
of goods and merchants, unlike the world of the imagination where Hawthorne has embellished on
the romance of the scarlet letter. Thus, in his description of the custom house and its officials,
Hawthorne positions the vast world of local and international commerce with its laws of trades
and nations against the story of a single woman. This further tension between the laws that govern
the world of men and their commercial enterprises and the letter of the law that marks Hester's
sexual transgression points to another way in which the 17th century makes itself felt
in this 19th century. The editor's imaginative reconstruction of Hester's story pits two versions
of the law against each other. One version comprehends law as a human manifestation of God's
commandments, an Old Testament understanding. The other version argues for laws founded on a
morality based upon human compassion and understanding. What Hester does in her willingness to accept
the first version of that law, that is the Old Testament version, is to convert the strict code
into the second version of the law. And Hester, I would argue, is the only one in the novel who
can bring about this transformation. Hawthorne represents punishment as twofold. There was the
visible kind that was administered by the civil agents of the law, the magistrates and the governors
of the colony. And this is symbolized in the novel by the prison, the pillory and the scaffold.
And then there is the invisible kind that was administered by the guilty conscience of the
sinner or the criminal. A more enduring kind sometimes and filled with remorse and relentless
suffering. His fascination with forms of punishment, especially those associated with the colony
founded in part by his ancestors, is recorded in his diary entries where he reports about reading
about the laws of the colony and 17th century criminal cases from England, particularly those
recorded in the volumes of the notable English trials that I mentioned in my discussion of the
Mary Blandy case. A comment by a friend, James Fields, suggests the value that these volumes
had to Hawthorne as a writer. Fields reports, he, Hawthorne, often told me that he spent
more hours over them and got more delectation out of them than Tongue could tell. And he said,
if five lives were vouchsafe to him, he could employ them all in writing stories out of these books.
Punishment was associated for Hawthorne with the grimness of the old Puritan colonists whose
lives were a grim battle for survival at the edge of the ocean hemmed in by the wilderness.
There was no evidence, concluded Hawthorne, that the severity of the punishments produced a more
moral society. Indeed, one might conclude that the several forms of punishment attendant upon sins
and antisocial behavior indicated a higher degree of moral infraction. But of course,
one recognizes that the more forms of behavior one prohibits or condemns, the more need there is for
those punishments that must follow. Hester's punishment, the wearing of the letter that
indicated her crime, was one of the many employed to visibly mark the sinner or criminal. Sometimes
the wearing of the mark was for only a few hours, at other times it lasted for years or as in Hester's
case for a lifetime. In some cases, the criminal would be required to wear a rope halter around
his neck to indicate how close he had come to hanging. And in the case of one unfortunate victim,
he was required to wear the halter forever. Hester's punishment for adultery, the wearing of
the letter A, was a less rigorous version of what the law allowed in such cases, and that was death.
The colonial administrators found their justification for the severity of the punishment in Leviticus
or Deuteronomy. And there was a long list of offenses for which the punishment could be death,
witchcraft, premeditated poisoning, murder, conspiracy, idolatry, and bestiality among others.
In the Scarlet Letter, Hawthorne portrays the widow of the magistrate, Mistress Hibbins,
as being on familiar terms with the devil, but her claims are dismissed by the community as
insanity rather than reality. Generally speaking, the death penalty for adultery seems not to have
been applied, except in the most outrageous of cases. The story opens with Hester in the
pillory, just one of the several public sites that proclaim her shame. And the narrative will
return us to the pillory at the end when Dimmesdale, the Puritan minister, delivers the election
sermon and confesses his relationship with Hester. In the course of the story, Hester Prynne transforms
the sign of her disgrace into a sign of dignity and moral fortitude. The very opposite of what
Dimmesdale does when exploiting his congregation's expectations that as a minister he can perform as
a sinner without actually being one, he actually confesses his transgression knowing that it will
not be received as such. He thereby had spoken the very truth and transformed it into the various
falsehood. This confusion of truth and falsehood mirrors the ambiguity of the scarlet letter
as both the sign of sin and as a commitment to a kind of selfhood that is pure. Moreover,
by placing the scarlet letter on Hester's breast, Hawthorne draws constant attention as the punishment
itself would have done to what the punishment does not visibly address, and that is the other
partner in the crime. Every side of Hester with her lurid mark, further emphasized by the presence
of the offspring of that crime, her child, Pearl, every side of her would remind the community
that the other partner went unmarked, that the punishment had been reserved for the woman alone
while the man no doubt witnessed her shame every day and yet appeared guiltless.
That Hester refuses to name her partner despite promises of a milder punishment and that Dinsdale
not only witnesses her shame but is required by his position to preach against it and to
condemn her is one of the piercing ironies of the story. It is primarily through the character of
Hester that Hawthorne demonstrates that morality consists not in laws rigorously enforced and
obeyed but in the continuous struggle of the individual conscience to understand her sin.
Indeed, this relationship between the individual and God is at the heart of the pure and religious
sensibility but has been perverted, Hawthorne suggests, into the mere outward show of repentance
and faith. In her decision to remain in the community which has shamed her,
Hester believes that perchance, the torture of her daily shame, would at length urge her soul
and work out another purity than that which she had lost, more saint-like because the result of
martyrdom. Neither Dinsdale nor Chillingworth can begin to match Hester in her real understanding
of the nature of sin. The tension between these two forms of moral truth is symbolized in part
by the banishment of Hester to the forest where she lives outside of the community and thus
civilization but where she works out her own understanding of the guilt that is finally
redemptive, unlike that which torments Dinsdale. Hester's banishment recalls the banishment of
the Puritan prophetess Anne Hutchinson whose gender provoked the accusation of heresy against her
and one of whose accusers was William Prynne. Hester's husband, Chillingworth, from whom she
has fled and who reappears till torment her, serves to emphasize the moral impoverishment of
religion and law without compassion. Chillingworth, whose name suggests the sensibility he imparts to
the world, is at first a sympathetic figure. At least he can claim a moral superiority to
Hester who has been unfaithful to him in his absence. But that sympathy is eroded when he
turns his attention to seeking revenge on his rival, Dinsdale. Hawthorne presents Chillingworth
as a man whose intellectual talents are perverted into the study of revenge. In his precise and
calculated plan to win Dinsdale's trust so that he might be the one confident to whom he will turn,
Chillingworth occupies the very furthest point from Hester's compassionate and generous morality.
Chillingworth desires to make himself the one trusted friend to whom should be confided all the
fear, the remorse, the agony, the ineffectual repentance, the backward rush of sinful thoughts
expelled in vain. All that guilty sorrow hidden from the world whose great heart would have pitied
and forgiven him to be revealed to him, the pitiless, to him the unforgiving, all that dark
treasure to be lavished on the very man to whom nothing else could so adequately pay the debt
of vengeance. In Chillingworth's anticipation of feeding off of Dinsdale's suffering, he employs
language that returns us to the custom house, also a place of dark treasure and debt. In converting
the spiritual wards of sin, confession and remorse into the language of commerce, profit and loss,
Chillingworth reveals the moral calculus that infuses the world that both he and Dinsdale occupy,
a world far removed from the freely given assurance that Hester's appearance with her
scarlet letter provides to the community. When Chillingworth undertakes to restore the health
of Dinsdale, the full irony of the situation is exploited. Dinsdale's decline is the direct result
of the sin he cannot confess and the wrong he has done to the very man who posing as his
physician torments him to death. Chillingworth recognizes that Dinsdale's illness is psychosomatic,
his disease is a guilty conscience and the cure is confession and purification,
what Aristotle terms catharsis. But Dinsdale is still enthralled by the horror of his sin,
which is what makes him vulnerable to Chillingworth's psychological inquisition.
Unable to achieve the state of grace that Hester has, Dinsdale can only imagine the letter A
etched against the sky, not the sacredness of his relationship with Hester. The crucial
scene between Dinsdale and Hester occurs when the two meet in the forest outside the constraints
and laws of their society and the romance of the actual and the imaginary is converted into the
romance narrative we are more familiar with. In a parody of the Puritan conversion from a state of
sin to one of purity, Hester ministers to Dinsdale and guides him to believe in the prospect of a
new life. He calls Hester my better angel and speaks of being made anew. His recognition that
they are not the worst sinners in the world is accompanied by his realization that Chillingworth's
crime is worse than theirs. He is violated in cold blood, he says, the sanctity of a human heart.
While this may indeed be true, such a romantic vision of sin cannot be accommodated within the
moral code that has until now bound him to his world. His acceptance of his own sensuality and
his condemnation of Chillingworth are both the momentary products of this sacrament in the forest
and cannot last. Dinsdale cannot accept, as Hester has done, that what they did has a consecration
all its own. To do so would be to accept a natural law rather than one produced by the culture
to which he has committed himself. In this tension between nature and culture,
we recognize a battle fought out repeatedly in the texts we have discussed. Recall, for example,
the struggle in the Aristaia to convert the forces of nature into the restraints of culture,
or the conflict between nature and culture in measure for measure.
More than their mutual desire ties Dinsdale and Hester together. Their child, Pearl,
is both the fruit of their sin and the promise for the future. She is both the daughter of the
forest, an elfin figure, and therefore representative of the forces that the community cannot contain,
and the moderating influence of compassion in its most cultured form, like a pearl.
This promise of compassion is suggested when she kisses her father Dinsdale,
as he lays dying in Hester's arms, and in her inheritance of her stepfather,
Chillingworth's money. One should note here the reappearance of the romance motif in the
pattern of the illegitimate woman whose legitimacy is coincidental with the inheritance of wealth.
In the case of Pearl, her money allows her to leave the colony and return to Europe,
thus uniting the present and the past, as Hawthorne has done in authoring the story.
In the final scenes of the novel, two ways of responding to guilt are represented.
Hester, no longer a figure of sin, but one of grace and dignity,
watches as Dinsdale dramatically enacts the penitence he has been unable thus far to articulate.
Hester's sin was witnessed by the community, and Dinsdale's penance is performed on the same
scaffold in front of the same community. Hawthorne thus distinguishes between the
private penitence undergone by Hester and this public act of confession.
A gender distinction appropriate to the spaces women and men occupy in their lives.
The gendered nature of penance and confession is reinforced by the novel's structure.
The public shaming of the woman at the beginning is balanced by the public confession of the
man at the end. At the midpoint comes Dinsdale's midnight vigil on the scaffold,
a private moment in a public place, a performance of repentance and confession
rather than the genuine display of remorse. I want to distinguish here between legal
punishment and penance. Dinsdale, it seems, is seeking a public recognition of his guilt,
a punishment that would finally end his suffering, and in so doing, Dinsdale makes clear his
alliance with the community and against Hester, who has been able to withstand alienation from
the same community as part of her penance. No private penance carries the weight and force
of the public confession and punishment because private penance cannot afford the community
the necessary reassurance that sin has been identified and conquered. And in Hester's
deliberate and exaggerated embellishment of the scarlet letter that she wears, we see her
defiance of the community's judgment on her, which is not the same as saying that she denies
that she has sinned. For Hester, sin is a private matter, part of the relationship between her
conscience and God, according to Puritan theology. For Dinsdale, however, both sin and its secular
equivalent law is a social matter. Hester's quiet resistance continues after after Dinsdale's death
and Pearl's departure when she ministers to the women of the community, teaching them the subtle
origins of their distress and how they might rise above it. As Hester Prynne had no selfish ends,
nor lived in any measure for her own profit and enjoyment, people brought all their sorrows and
perplexities and besought her counsel as one who had herself gone through a mighty trouble.
Women, more especially in the continuing recurring trials of wounded, wasted, wronged,
misplaced, or erring and sinful passion, or with the dreary burden of a heart unyielded
because unvalued and unsought. They came to Hester's cottage, demanding why they were so
wretched and what the remedy. In thus concluding a narrative about a woman's sin and punishment,
Hawthorne invokes paradoxically both the image of the healer, a Christ-vigour,
and a penitent sinner, one who has both refused and complied with human judgment,
one whose story is both past and present, both history and romance, both actual and imagined.
