Lecture 8. Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice
One of Shakespeare's most controversial plays, The Merchant of Venice, even now provokes
passionate discussion about the anti-Semitic values it seems to condone.
In this lecture we will examine the argument for and against this understanding of the
play as well as the laws governing the rights and limitations of the foreign citizen in
England and the plays rendering of the law of contract.
We cannot, however, examine these historical circumstances as if they were sufficient to
explain the power that the play conveys through its language and structure, and so we will
also analyse several key speeches to guide our understanding of how the literary performance
of these juridical religious values marks the difference between dogmatic adherents
to moral precepts and their enactment in daily life.
The director of the most recently filmed version of The Merchant of Venice, which was made
in 2005, Michael Radford, has said that he decided to make the film because the subject,
a potentially tragic dispute between a Christian and a Jew, spoke directly to our modern situation.
He said, that is, two cultures that don't understand each other in terms of customs
and beliefs.
To speak of the play as a failure of understanding as a refusal to compromise because one's adversary
appears not merely to be wrong but to be radically evil, is to remind us again that the sacredness
of religious beliefs finds its secular corollary in the sacredness of the law that springs
from those beliefs, and that this deep intermingling of religion and law produces both their complex
existence but also their dangerous power.
Shakespeare's audience would have been acutely aware of the danger that lies in religious
extremism.
Within the previous half a century of the play's production in 1596, the country had
witnessed a deadly battle between the Roman Catholics and the Protestants.
As Mary the First, daughter of Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon, came to the throne
and persecuted the Protestants, to be followed by her half-sister, Elizabeth I, who reverted
to the Anglicanism of her father and persecuted those who were Catholic.
To practice one's religion was not, therefore, simply a question of one's private relationship
with God.
Indeed, even as late as 1829, Catholics were still forbidden from voting in England.
One's religious identity was synonymous with one's political identity, and therefore also
an assertion of one's loyalty, or lack of it, to the monarch and the state.
If the Roman Catholics were considered potential traitors because of their allegiance to a higher
authority than the monarch, that is, to the Pope in Rome, then Jews were even more dubious
because they appeared to owe no allegiance to any higher authority.
Having refused to accept the divinity of Christ, they could be seen to reject all divine authority.
They were, therefore, the most dangerous of political subjects, the non-believers.
Their estrangement from both the religious and secular cultures of Europe had led to
Pope Innocent III to decree in the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215 that Jews should be
forbidden from holding public office, and should be forced to wear clothing that distinguished
them from Christians.
Jews were expelled from England in 1290, and were not officially readmitted until 1656.
In Venice, Jews were required to live in a part of the city that was sealed off at sunset,
the gates guarded by Christians, and had to wear red caps when they left the ghetto.
They were permitted to practice money-lending, a profession forbidden to Christians, but
were not allowed to own any real estate.
To enforce the monarch's authority over her subjects, both Protestant and Catholic,
Parliament had passed Elizabeth's Act Against Sectories in 1593.
The Act was in part an answer to the increasing number of Catholic plots, and its intent was
clear.
Not merely to punish those who did not attend Anglican services, but to insist that loyalty
to the Queen was synonymous with attendance at church.
In other words, religious belief and political loyalty were one in the same.
To be other than an Anglican was, in and of itself, a sign of criminal intent and even
of sedition.
Loyalty was now legislated.
The Act came hard upon the heels of an accusation against the Queen's physician, Rodrigo Lopez,
that he had plotted with the King of Spain to murder the Queen.
His Jewish background only intensified the anti-Spanish sentiment of the English.
Shakespeare situates these issues of loyalty and religious affiliation in Venice, a place
known for its moral and political tolerance, suggesting that the tensions generated when
religious beliefs rigidly controlled the exercise of justice were not limited to England.
The plague is seen, nevertheless, as a commentary on Elizabethan culture in which the state
must balance two competing forces.
This is going to sound remarkably contemporary.
The need on the one hand for national security and a unified polity, figured in Queen Elizabeth
as defender of the Protestant faith against the traditional and much-wanted liberties
of the individual English subject.
Another set of competing impulses is evident in theological terms.
The strict interpretation of the law that is made necessary by political conditions,
and which is articulated in the Old Testament, versus the mercy that divine law recommends
and which is figured in the coming of Christ.
And the third tension we can see is the legal tension, the struggle to balance justice according
to the strict letter of the law against equity, which is justice seasoned with mercy.
It is this last struggle that we see played out most particularly in the dramatic courtroom
scene in Act IV of the play where Shylock wets his knife in preparation for cutting
off a pound of flesh from Antonio.
How does Antonio the Christian find himself at the mercy of Shylock, the Jew?
And what relationship does the romance plot between Bassanio and Portia have to these
weighty issues of statecraft, law and religion?
One needs to return to the ideas articulated in the Old Testament about the relationship
between God and man to the idea of covenant and its secular counterpart, the contract,
to understand how Shakespeare weaves together the main plot and the marriage plot between
Bassanio and Portia.
The play's title, The Merchant of Venice, gives us a clue about the inevitable interconnection
between Antonio's life and Shylock's.
Who, one might ask, does this title refer to?
For both Antonio and Shylock are merchants.
Although we readily recognize that Antonio is a merchant in the traditional sense, buying
and selling merchandise, trading commodities across nations, where Shylock buys and sells
bonds, loans and debts, and thus only enlarges his own stock and never another's.
But it is not because Antonio fails at trading that he turns to Shylock for a loan, but rather
because of a personal investment, a personal contract with his friend Bassanio, who needs
money to support his courting of Portia.
We see right from the start of the play how the personal, intimate relationships of one's
life are inextricably co-mingled with the public relationships that constitute the society
of which one is a part.
Antonio's complaint that he is sad, although he does not know the reason for his sadness,
is met by his companion, Solarno's guest, that he is sad because his mind is tossing
on the ocean along with his trading ships.
Antonio denies such a cause for sadness, and another companion, Solarno, insists then that
he must be in love, to which Antonio also replies in the negative.
We have been introduced in this brief opening scene to the two contracts that govern these
men's lives.
One is commercial, the other amorous, but as we come to find out very quickly, the two
are interchangeable, for when Bassanio seeks Portia as his wife, he also seeks her for
her wealth.
And when Shylock's daughter, Jessica, flees her father's house to marry a Christian, she
also removes a large part of Shylock's fortune with her.
Marriage, a contract ideally based upon love, and commercial exchange, a contract based
upon legal forms, are two ways of binding individuals into social arrangements, and
both ways are human reflections of the covenant between God and humankind, and at a lesser
level between the monarch or head of state and the citizen subject.
As the play unfolds, it gets harder and harder to distinguish between the bonds of personal
affection that bind people together, in marriage or in homosocial accord, and the bonds of
commerce that likewise draw two merchants into a contractual union.
In this play, these two means of exchange, these two ways of fulfilling desire, one through
personal affection and the other through the non-personal form of contract, are constantly
invoked as ways of determining on the one hand who belongs to the society in Venice
or Belmont, which is Portia's home, and on the other who is an alien, who is exiled from
Venetian society.
The first scene of the play brings these two forms of contractual agreement together when
Bassanio comes to Antonio to ask for the resources that he will need to woo Portia.
Bassanio immediately links his personal affection to Antonio to his financial indebtedness when
he explains how he needs to come fairly off from the great debts wherein my time, something
too prodigal, hath left me gauged.
To you, Antonio, I owe the most in money and in love, and from your love I have a warranty
to unburden all my plots and purposes, how to get clear of all the debts I owe.
Antonio's answer is immediate, and his willingness to enter into a contractual arrangement in
which he will be at a disadvantage, because it's based only on credit and not on an equal
exchange of goods or promises, is directly the result of his love for Bassanio.
Thou knowest, says Antonio, that all my fortunes are at sea, neither have I money nor commodity
to raise a present sum.
Therefore go forth, try what my credit can in Venice do.
That shall be racked even to the uttermost, to furnish thee to Belmont and to fair Portia.
This scene between Antonio and Bassanio, in which personal affection has been transformed
into commercial transaction by the demands of the public marketplace, in which marriage
must be contracted, is followed immediately by the conversation between Portia and her
maid Narissa, in which the terms of Portia's father's will are explained.
It is curious that just as Antonio has declared that he is sad, so Portia announced that she
is a weary of this great world.
Like Antonio, however, who cannot or will not give the reason for his sadness, Portia
argues that she is weary of following her father's commands for her marriage.
O me, she says, the word choose, I may neither choose whom I would nor refuse whom I dislike,
so is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father.
Is it not hard, Narissa, that I cannot choose one nor refuse none?
The will that binds Portia, a contract between a dead father and a living daughter, is representative
of the Christian patriarchal economy that controls the world of both Belmont and Venice.
Despite the romantic description of Belmont offered by Bassanio, Portia's world is as
tightly managed by the law of the father as Venice, as tightly managed one comes to see
as the Jewish world that Jessica, daughter of Shilach, inhabits.
Both Portia and Jessica long to choose for themselves, but such a demonstration of women's
desire and her capacity to contract herself in marriage is threatening to both the Christian
and the non-Christian worlds of the play.
Jessica's allotment with Lorenzo and their subsequent good fortune as the inheritors
of Shilach's wealth should not be seen as tacit approval of her willful behaviour.
That allotment has, after all, almost cost Antonio his life.
She inherits Shilach's wealth not because she follows her father's will, as Portia does,
but because she chooses a Christian over a Jew and thus confirms the superiority of Christian
law and custom over that of Jewish custom.
Narissa has described Portia's father's way of selecting her husband for her as a lottery,
and the term reminds us that, like commercial transactions, the selection of a spouse can
never be a perfectly rational decision.
Antonio can send his argoses off to trade with a rational expectation that they will
return his investment, but he can never be completely sure.
He will have to rely on some luck, some good fortune, as well as his wisdom to ensure a
profit.
Likewise, a man who seeks Portia as his wife must rely upon some luck in reading the signs
that the three caskets offer.
Those unlucky suitors who have failed to interpret the relationship between the language on the
caskets and their appearance, whether gold, silver or lead, are doomed to failure.
Before Bassanio can try his luck and skill at the lottery of the marriage, he must appear
before Portia as a proper suitor, that is, as one who has the appearance of wealth and
status, if indeed he does not have the wealth itself.
It is Shylock who provides the necessary money to create this illusion by loaning Bassanio's
3,000 ducats with Antonio's word as bond.
The scene between Shylock, Bassanio and Antonio, in which the bond is negotiated, is central
to how one reads Shylock's character.
Either as an abused and maligned man who finally breaks under his daughter's elopement and
theft, or as a man determined from the beginning to have his revenge on Antonio and on all
Christians if he can arrange it.
Bassanio negotiates the bond with Shylock eagerly, and in so doing seems to welcome
him into the company of Christians, inviting him to dine with them that evening.
It might seem a friendly gesture, but Bassanio's offer ignores, either deliberately or forgetfully,
that eating is not an innocent pleasure.
It marks the difference between the Christian and the Jew.
As Shylock remarks, to eat with them is, he says, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation
which your prophet, the Nazarite, conjured the devil into you.
I will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so following, but
I will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with you.
Bassanio's invitation may seem innocent, and Shylock's refusal rude, but it is part
of the pattern of the play to insist on Christianizing all public and private pleasures and relationships.
With the appearance of Antonio, we see the depth of rank or between the two men, each
representative of their respective religion.
First, Shylock describes his hatred of Antonio, how like a falling publican he looks, I hate
him for he is a Christian, but more for that in low simplicity he lends out money gratis
and brings down the rate of usants here with us in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip, I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred nation, and he rails, even there where merchants most do congregate.
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift, which he calls interest, cursed be my tribe
if I forgive him.
Shylock gives several reasons here for his hatred, that Antonio is Christian, that he
brings down the interest rate on loans by lending out money for free, and because he
hates Jews and actively speaks out against them where they do business.
Antonio's condemnation of usury and the practice of one of the few businesses that Jews were
legally permitted to engage in, strikes us as just a little self-righteous and hypocritical.
When Antonio comes himself to take advantage of the practice, without any preliminary greeting,
Antonio announces to Shylock that although I neither lend nor borrow by taking nor by
giving of excess, yet he says to supply the right once of my friend, I'll break a custom.
Apparently friendship, especially that between Antonio and Bassanio, justifies this breaking
of the custom.
What then is the moral position that Antonio occupies?
His religious and moral principles, founded as they are on religious beliefs, are fungible?
What value do we ascribe to the Christian faith when Antonio, its most outspoken representative,
can jettison his convictions about the immorality of usury to satisfy the material needs of
his friend?
The extent of Antonio's hatred of Jews, and this is anti-Semitism, is evident in Shylock's
description of Antonio's behavior towards him.
He says, Signor Antonio, many a time an oft, on the realto, you have raided me, you call
me Miss Believer, cutthroat dog, and spit upon my Jewish gabardine, and all for use
of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help.
Go to then.
You would come to me and you say, Shylock, we would have monies.
You say so.
You that did void your room upon my beard and foot me as you spurn a stranger cur over
your threshold.
Monies is your suit.
What should I say to you?
Shall I not say hath a dog money?
Is it possible a cur can lend three thousand ducats?
Unyielding, even in the face of this account of his hypocrisy, Antonio nevertheless invites
Shylock to enter into a bond with him forged through mutual hatred, not love.
It is the very opposite of the bond that Antonio has forged with Bassanio and that Bassanio
hopes to forge with Portia.
But both of these loving bonds, these contracts founded in love and friendship, are sealed
with Shylock's money.
Is then the merry bond that Shylock proposes, the money for a pound of flesh, the work of
a devil, riven with hatred and the desire for revenge, or is it, as he claims, because
he would be friends with Antonio?
There's no way of knowing.
It is plausible that Shylock would want to soften Antonio's hatred, especially if that
means that Antonio's public denunciations might cease.
As an alien, an outsider in Venetian society, he wouldn't hurt to have the good will of
a man as important as Antonio, or perhaps he takes pleasure in imagining the outcome
if Antonio's ventures should fail, if Antonio's risk taking should appear finally to be more
barren than his moneylending.
An indication of how we might read this scene comes from the scene that immediately follows
it.
As before, the action moves from Venice to Belmont.
And here we find another outsider.
The Prince of Morocco has arrived to try his luck with the lottery of the caskets.
He, like Shylock, is an alien, marked by his complexion, as Shylock is marked by his red
cap and the Jewishness it signifies.
Like Shylock, Morocco calls upon our sympathy one minute and our ridicule the next, as he
flourishes his scimitar and addresses Portia in the fulsome rhetoric of a man not quite
at home in the language he uses.
And like all the suitors who have gone before, he too cannot read the signs, the language
of the casket.
It appears that no foreigner, neither the Prince of Morocco nor the one who came before
the Prince of Aragon, can speak the language of love and of contractual engagement that
will secure Portia's hands in marriage.
Moreover, the very thing they aspire to, that is to cement a marriage with Portia and thereby
establish a family, a dynasty, that reinforces and promotes the patriarchal foundations of
society, this desire is at risk when they attempt the lottery.
You must take your chance, says Portia, and either not attempt to choose at all, or swear
before you choose if you choose wrong, never to speak to lady afterward in way of marriage,
therefore be advised.
These failed suitors thus place themselves in a position analogous to Antonio, who begins
the play mysteriously sad and unmarried and finds himself at the end of the play alone,
searching as several marriages are celebrated around him.
While Portia awaits Bassanio, Jessica elopes with Lorenzo.
While Portia is content to follow her father's will submissively, Jessica violently flouts
the law of the father and not only steals from his house dressed as a boy, thus emphasizing
her unfeminine behavior, but also literally steals from Shylock's house, taking delight
in gilding herself in her father's wealth, a theft that is ironically greeted by Lorenzo's
accomplice, Grasciano, with the comment, a Gentile and no Jew.
That this takes place while Shylock meets with Bassanio and Antonio to seal the bond
only confirms for Shylock the insidious hypocrisy and deceit of the Christians.
Antonio's loss of Bassanio causes as much grief to his heart as Shylock's loss of his
daughter, but only Antonio's feelings are recognized as worthy of pity.
For Shylock, there is only mockery and cruel mimicry.
I never heard a passion so confused, so strange, outrageous and so variable as the dog Jew
did utter in the streets.
My daughter, oh my duckets, oh my daughter, fled with a Christian, oh my Christian duckets,
justice, the law, my duckets and my daughter, a sealed bag, two sealed bags of duckets of
double duckets stolen from me by my daughter, and jewels, two stones, two rich and precious
stones stolen by my daughter, justice, find the girl, she hath the stones upon her and
the duckets.
The double meaning of stones, both jewels and the crown jewels as in testicles, confirms
the link between Antonio and Shylock, both of whom are now without heirs, both of whom
are Baron.
It is this triple insult to Shylock's authority that his daughter has fled, has stolen his
jewels and has denied her heritage in marrying a Christian that turns the merry bond into
the grim demand for Antonio's heart.
A demand that is fed by the news that many of Antonio's ships have been lost at sea
and thus he cannot repay the loan.
The famous, if you prick us do we not, bleed speech is a tense mixture of revenge and pity,
of fierce hatred and forbearance.
Despite being moved by Shylock's insistence that to be Jewish is to feel as Christians
do, one cannot forget that he has already hoped to catch Antonio once upon the hip
and that his demand for revenge is neither a Christian nor a Jewish sentiment.
While Shylock grieves and plans revenge, Portia waits for Bassanio to choose the right casket,
which of course he does.
In immediately juxtaposed scenes we witness two exchanges.
In the case of Shylock and Antonio, the flesh must be given in exchange for the duckets
that cannot be repaid.
In a sense one could also argue that Antonio's flesh substitutes for the duckets stolen from
Shylock by his daughter.
This is a bond based on hatred.
And in the case of Portia and Bassanio, both body and wealth pass into Bassanio's possession,
but this is a bond based upon love and therefore willingly undertaken by Portia, who claims
to be,
the happiest of all is that her gentle spirit commits itself to yours to be directed, as
from her lord, her governor, her king, myself and what is mine to you and yours is now converted.
But now I was the lord of this fair mansion, master of my servants, queen of myself, and
even now but now this house, these servants and this same myself are yours, my lord.
The joy of the courtship is interrupted by the news from Venice that Antonio is arrested
for debt and Shylock refuses all entreaties to release him from his forfeiture.
That such explicitly commercial transactions intrude into what should be the place of romance
and private pleasure reminds us once again of the inextricability of these two worlds.
Indeed the two worlds were already mixed although the language of romance has veiled this.
We are not told the source of Portia's wealth but one can imagine that she might be the
daughter of a wealthy merchant like Antonio and that her marriage has been arranged and
conceived by her father as an extension of his successful commercial practices.
In other words the risk taking that is endemic in choosing a spouse has been controlled by
his insistence on the lottery of the three caskets.
We also see the limits of the world of commerce in the attempt to settle the dispute between
Antonio and Shylock by throwing money at it.
But throwing money at the problem will not solve it when one party has a principled reason
to insist that the contract be on it, even if the reason is based on hatred.
Let us turn to the courtroom scene in Act 4, scene one where we see the principles of
law in action against it appears both the wealth of Bassanio and the authority of the
state.
Unable to resolve the dispute with money, Portia actively engages with the issue by disguising
herself as the learned Dr. Balthasar and comes to address the court.
She does not come to defend Antonio nor to accuse Shylock but to settle the question
of how to interpret the contract, one that apparently the learned counselors of Venice
are unable to read.
In this as an interpreter she places herself in the same position as her suitors have been
in reading the caskets and thus reinforces the importance of knowing how to read cultural
signs.
Critics have suggested that the debate in the courtroom is between the demands of justice
Shylock deserves his bond and equity justice must be tempered with mercy.
Indeed at one point Portia acknowledges that only Shylock's mercy can save Antonio.
There is also another tension at work in the courtroom, one between the demands of the
community and the demands of the individual, a tension that heralds what one might call
the modern age with its insistence upon the rights of the individual as distinct from the
submersion of individual identity in the body of the state.
It is this tension between the individual and the state that is most clearly played out
in the duke's inability to act to accommodate Antonio's distress because to do so he says
would ruin the credit that Venice has as a society under the rule of law.
It is the demand for consistent reliable legal judgments, a demand that arises from the needs
of a mercantile economy that trumps the call for equity even if mercy is one of those attributes
of God and becomes the thrown in monarch better than his crown, his scepter shows the force
of temporal power but mercy is above this sceptered sway, it is enthroned in the hearts
of kings.
The debate between law and equity was one being fought out in both the law courts and
the royal courts of England over the authority of the common law and the authority of the
court of chancey described as a court of conscience.
The chancellor, the chief judge of the court of chancey was a royal appointment and therefore
inclined to support the monarch's authority.
The common law however was increasingly resistant to the pressure exerted by the crown and
under Sir Edward Cook was becoming increasingly independent of royal influence.
The struggle between these two courts reflects a struggle between the growing power of the
merchant class aligned with the court of common pleas and its exclusive authority over cases
involving property and land on the one hand and the power of the throne as demonstrated
in the authority of the chancey court to interfere in common law cases.
In turn one can argue that the distinction between the merchant class and the supporters
of royal prerogative was the distinction between those who saw the law as a way of protecting
and advancing individual rights, specifically the individual rights of the property class
and those who saw the law as part of the fabric that bound society together under the sovereign.
These two goals were not automatically opposed but one sees in the case of Shylock v Antonio
that the Duke of Venice is powerless to act in an equitable fashion to settle the cases
he wishes because to do so would be to empty the law of its power to keep the community
of Venice stable.
When Porsche turns from begging Shylock to extend mercy to Antonio the argument from
equity to employing the law to enforce Shylock's demands, in other words to force him to do
what he says he wants to do which is to cut off a pound of flesh from Antonio's body
nearest to his heart, she has demonstrated that despite his position and his authority
the Duke of Venice is powerless.
It is not within the Duke's power to grant mercy because to do so would as Porsche points
out call the established laws of Venice into dispute.
Such a dispensation of mercy lies only with Shylock for equity is the claim of the individual
conscience.
The Christian community is for one brief moment subject to Shylock and it is his failure
to realize until it is too late just how powerful he might be under the laws of Venice
that makes his defeat so much more powerful.
Shylock stands in the court with the claim that he argues is more powerful than Venice's
laws.
He stands he says for the law and indeed it is the Old Testament law that he invokes and
he has sworn an oath in his synagogue to have his revenge on Antonio.
Putting aside for the moment the question of how appropriate oaths of revenge are in
the place of worship one understands that for a Jew in a Christian society there is
no recourse to the laws because as is quite clear from the punishment for shedding a Christian's
blood that is death the laws are made by and for the Christian community.
It is no surprise then that as a substitute for the death of Shylock the mercy extended
to him by the Duke should comprise the loss of his wealth and his religion.
The equitable judgment rendered by the Christians on the Jew is in the end far less merciful
than that which the Duke of Venice would have had Shylock extend to Antonio.
