It's July 336 BCE.
We're sitting in the theatre at Agai, modern Vagina, about 45 miles southwest of Pessaloniki.
This is Macedonia in northern Greece.
Agai is an ancient and venerable site.
It's where the kings of Macedonia are buried.
Today is a great festival occasion.
People have gotten up in the middle of the night to get a seat in the theatre.
Now it's just before dawn.
At any moment, the sun will rise.
The theatre is packed.
The audience has come from far and wide to witness athletic and musical contests hosted
by Philip II, king of Macedonia.
Yesterday, Philip's daughter, Cleopatra, married her maternal uncle, Alexander, king
of the Melossians.
Marriage between uncles and nieces is common in the Greek world.
And besides, this is what we call a dynastic marriage, a marriage intended to cement relations
between the Macedonians and the neighbouring Melossians.
Cleopatra is the sister of a rather more famous Alexander, later to be known as Alexander
the Great.
The sibling's mother is Olympias.
And Cleopatra's marriage celebration is, to coin a phrase, a very big, fat Greek wedding.
Philip has invited numerous guest friends from all over the Greek world.
The institution of guest friendship, Xenia, is very important to the Greeks.
Wealthy aristocrats commonly have guest friends from all around the Greek inhabited world.
That is to say, other wealthy aristocrats who provide them with hospitality if they happen
to be passing by.
Philip has also invited many Greek dignitaries, so it's an international gathering.
And today, the day after the wedding, these wealthy aristocrats and dignitaries are sitting
in the front seats of the theatre with the Macedonians seated behind.
At the very moment when the sun rises, a trumpet blast pierces the air and a choir bursts into
song.
To this musical accompaniment, twelve dazzling statues of the twelve Olympian gods are carried
into the theatre, statues of Zeus and Hera, Athena, Aphrodite, Poseidon, Hephaestus and
so forth, all brightly painted, looking as if they are alive.
The statues of the gods are often paraded at festival times, as statues of Jesus and
Mary and the saints are by Roman Catholics in many countries to this day.
But hang on, there's a thirteenth statue, you can't make it out at first, and then
yes, you see that it's a statue of Philip himself.
The pious, god-fearing Greeks around us can't resist a slight intake of breath, perhaps
even a gasp, like everyone else in the theatre.
Does this mean Philip is putting himself on a par with the Olympian gods?
That's what we call hubris, and it's a very dangerous state of mind because it's bound
to excite the envy of the gods.
They don't like anyone giving themselves heirs.
As sooner or later, they'll come down on Philip with divine wrath, like a ton of bricks.
Before you have a chance to process all of this, Philip, dressed in a white robe, enters
the theatre to another, and this time almost deafening, fanfare.
He's flanked on one side by his twenty-year-old son, Alexander, the future Alexander the Great,
and on the other by his new son-in-law, also named Alexander.
Philip is also accompanied by bodyguards.
He doesn't go anywhere without bodyguards these days, but as soon as he reaches the
centre of the orchestra of the theatre, that means the circular dancing space, he orders
his bodyguards to stand aside.
What does he have to fear?
Everyone in the theatre has risen to his feet and is clapping and stamping and cheering
the visitors out of politeness and the Macedonians out of genuine feeling.
Philip is enormously powerful, and you wouldn't want to get on the wrong side of him, but
he's also enormously popular with his own people.
That's because Philip II has put Macedonia on the map.
Well, not just on the map, but at the centre of the map.
Macedonia was nothing till Philip came to the throne twenty-three years ago.
It was a backward state on the edge of the Greek world, dominated by its more powerful
neighbours, the Illyrians and the Molossians.
So-called real Greeks, that's to say Athenians, Corinthians, Thebans, Spartans and so on,
they don't think of the Macedonians as true Greeks.
They turn up their noses at them.
Before Philip came along, the Macedonians lived in villages.
They were semi-literate and produced little art, and to this day scholars aren't sure
whether the Macedonians spoke a dialect of Greek or a variant of it.
But thanks to Philip, the Athenians and the Corinthians and their like can't look down
on the Macedonians anymore.
Macedonia has more power over the Greek mainland than any single state has ever exercised before.
Its phenomenal rise is due almost wholly to Philip himself.
So what if he thinks of himself as more than human?
I say more power to him.
Philip, who is 46 years old, is today at the pinnacle of his success, both politically
and militarily.
True, he is a bit of a wreck physically.
He has sustained several injuries in battle.
About 10 years ago, a lance shattered his right collarbone.
And a few years ago, his right femur was damaged, leaving him lame.
One of his arms was maimed, too, and he is blind in the right eye.
Or more accurately, he is missing his eyeball.
This we believe from a reconstruction of Philip's head by forensic surgeons.
It's based on remains of a skeleton in the royal tombs at Vergina that is thought to
belong to Philip.
Philip deals with all his aches and pains with a little bit of help from the old booze.
Like most Macedonians, Philip is a heavy drinker.
And despite his injuries, he is, so far as we know, healthy and fit and at the top of
his game.
As for his personality, he's pretty violent.
He gets into towering rages, especially when drunk.
And I'll describe one of those rages in a moment.
Even so, he's done a lot for his people.
And he's made them feel good about being Macedonian.
It's even better than winning the World Series.
On the domestic front, Philip married his possibly seventh wife, Cleopatra, the same
name coincidentally as his daughter, a year ago.
And she has just given birth to a daughter named Europa.
When I say seventh wife, I don't mean that Philip has made a string of bad choices.
Rather the Macedonian royal house practices polygamy.
Unlike poor old King Henry VIII in England, Philip doesn't need to get a divorce each
time he takes a new wife or indeed pay alimony.
Of course, this means there is plenty of intrigue going on at court with his various wives jockeying
for power.
All of them wanting to promote their own offspring as the next king of Macedonia.
To complicate matters, Philip is also having love affairs with men.
Bisexuality is fairly common in the Greek world and this may well be what leads to his downfall
as we'll see in a moment.
I mentioned that Macedonia under Philip rules mainland Greece.
That is in consequence of a crushing victory he won two years earlier in the year 338 over
the Athenians and the Thebans at Chironia, a city in central Greece.
Greek political freedom is extinguished as a result of this victory.
From now on, the Greek's destiny is to pass from the control of one superpower to another.
Into the hands of the Macedonians and then into the hands of the Romans and never again
to enjoy independence and not that is until 1832 when the Greeks finally win their independence
from the Ottoman Turks.
The Greeks don't know that their freedom has been extinguished of course because they don't
know the future so they will continue to agitate energetically for it, all to no avail.
Philip has succeeded in becoming top dog partly by clever political maneuvering and partly
by superior generalship.
He's run rings around the Greeks by taking advantage of their disunity just as the Romans
will do later.
He's also demonstrated the superiority of kingship to the politics of independent city
states which are characterised by factious internal squabbling.
At the time, Greece is still made up chiefly of the city states known as Paulais which
jealously guard their autonomy and in consequence find it difficult to combine against an outside
enemy.
The kingship, by contrast, enables Philip to act decisively.
Philip's ambitions don't stop at the borders of mainland Greece either.
He's now planning to cross into modern-day Turkey with the intention of launching an
attack on the Persian Empire.
Last year he summoned the representatives of all the conquered Greek states to meet
at a council known as the Sunhedrion.
The council was Philip's way of creating what he hoped would be a unifying institution.
In preference to imposing direct rule upon the Greeks, which he could have done after
the victory at Carinea.
He calls himself the council's hegemone or leader, a rather bland and innocuous title
that is intended to put people's fears at ease.
It was at this council that Philip announced his intention to undertake an expedition against
Persia to which every member state would have to contribute forces.
And how is it that Macedonia has become a powerful military state with an army that
dominates mainland Greece?
The answer is we just don't know.
All we can say is that Macedonia's rise seems largely due to the personality of Philip himself.
A speech later put into the mouth of his son, Alexander the Great, by the second century
CE Greek historian, Arion, puts it succinctly.
Alexander says to the Macedonians, Philip found you vagabonds and poor, mostly clothed in
sheepskins, pastoring a few sheep on the mountains and putting up a poor fight against your enemies.
He gave you cloaks to wear instead of sheepskins and brought you down from the mountains into
the plains.
He turned you into city dwellers and civilized you by the gift of good laws and customs.
We see Philip and his reign largely through the eyes of contemporary Athenians.
They are the Greeks who chiefly interact with him and who alone have left a literary testimony.
And also, through the words of later non-Macedonian writers, we don't have a Macedonian account
of Philip's reign, or indeed, any Macedonian testimony of any period.
Macedonia hasn't left us any literature.
In consequence, we know very little about the internal structure of the Macedonian kingdom
during Philip's reign, for the very good reason that it wasn't of interest to anyone outside
of Macedonia.
So, here you are in the theatre at Agai with everybody stamping and cheering and clapping.
Philip is standing at the centre spot with his son on one side and his son on law on
the other.
And just at the moment when he is beginning to believe his own propaganda, and perhaps
even thinking of himself as a god, history turns on a dime.
Something terrible happens.
One of the members of Philip's bodyguard runs forward and stabs the king in the chest.
Everyone gasps in horror.
Philip staggers to the ground, his white cloak turning crimson and staining the beaten earth
as he falls.
His son Alexander rushes forward to grasp hold of him.
You can't see anything because everyone is crowding around the body.
Everything is confusion and turmoil.
And a moment later people flee from the theatre in panic.
Is this a plan to take over the throne?
That's your immediate fear.
Philip isn't short of enemies, either at home or in the Greek world at large.
There may well be other conspirators with other targets in mind.
Perhaps there's going to be a general bloodletting.
murder always holds a grim fascination over the human imagination, even when it has taken
place long ago.
We're going to examine Philip's murder as if it were what forensic experts call a cold
case, one that has gone unsolved in this instance for well over 2,000 years.
I don't mean that the identity of the assassin is unknown.
The assassin, as we saw, is a member of Philip's personal security detail.
He was very well trusted.
His name is Porcenias.
What is unknown, however, is his motive and whether Porcenias acted alone or on orders
and if so, on orders from whom.
One explanation proposed by a historian named Diodorus Siculus, a Diodorus of Sicily who
lived 300 years later, is that Porcenias craves celebrity.
He was allegedly studying with a sophist named Hermocrates and at some point asked his
tutor, what can I do to become most like a god among men?
Hermocrates replied, by killing the man who has accomplished most.
And in cautious remark, if ever there was one, well, I don't believe this anecdote for
one minute.
Bodyguards don't usually take lessons from philosophers and philosophers don't usually
advocate assassination.
But it's an interesting theory, even though there are plenty of examples of people committing
crimes to become famous or to achieve glory.
A more compelling motive, also reported by Diodorus and endorsed by Aristotle, Philip's
contemporary and the one-time tutor of Alexander the Great, is that Porcenias killed Philip
in a fit of jealousy.
The story goes that Porcenias had been Philip's lover.
Philip rejected him, probably several years earlier, and began an affair with another
man who, coincidentally, is also named Porcenias.
I hope this isn't getting too complicated.
We've now got two Alexanders, two Cleopatra's and two Porcenias's.
Anyway, Porcenias, the jilted lover, reputedly began mocking Porcenias as the new flavour
of the month, calling him effeminate, a debauched and so on.
And this bullying drove the new lover to such despair that he decided to commit suicide,
which he did in battle by heroically stepping in front of Philip to save his life at a moment
when blows from several quarters were raining down on him.
The story doesn't end there.
To get even, a high-ranking friend of the dead Porcenias, named Attalus, invites the
surviving Porcenias, the jilted lover, to dinner, gets him drunk, and then gets his
muleteers to gang-rape him.
Porcenias complains bitterly to Philip, but to little avail.
Philip doesn't want to alienate Attalus, who, in an entirely other story, Philip has just
appointed as one of the generals in charge of the force headed to Turkey to attack the
Persian Empire.
So he tries to appease Porcenias.
He does so, the story goes, by promoting Porcenias, by making him one of his bodyguards.
Bad decision, as things turned out, Porcenias is deeply hurt.
He thinks himself treated shamefully by Philip, first by his rejection, and second by his
refusal to punish Attalus.
So he avenges himself against Philip in the most public way possible.
Well, that, at least, is a plausible theory.
Now to the big question.
Is the murder of Philip due entirely to a personal grievance held by a jilted lover?
Perhaps, but there are other tantalizing possibilities.
A historian, Justin, who wrote probably in the third century CE, claims that Porcenias
is suborned by Philip's wife Olympias, the mother both of Alexander the Great and of
the newly wedded Cleopatra.
There are some very good reasons why Olympias would want her husband dead at this precise
moment, apart from the fact that they have always had a very tempestuous marriage.
One of these reasons is the fact that Philip only recently married Cleopatra, his seventh
wife, who happens to be the niece of Attalus, the same man who reputedly engineered the
gang rape of Porcenias, and whom Philip had appointed general.
The new wife, Cleopatra, is about 30 years younger than Philip, and Olympias is understandably
deeply jealous.
All the more so because the new wife has already given birth to a daughter.
Philip dotes on her, we're told, so inevitably Olympias feels rejected, it's a classic story.
But to make matters worse, Olympias seems to be extremely vindictive by nature.
There's also evidence to suggest that she's been working on her son, the future Alexander
the Great, to make him dislike his father.
And to up the ante, Olympias has every reason to fear that if Cleopatra bears Philip a son,
that son will replace her son, Alexander, as the heir to the Macedonian throne.
And this gives Alexander a motive to kill his father as well.
At Alexander's sister's wedding the day before, the general Attalus got drunk and proposed
a toast.
He said he hoped his niece would give birth to a son who would become Macedonia's legitimate
heir to the throne.
Macedonia's legitimate heir to the throne?
Imagine the effect of that remark on the future Alexander the Great.
He was furious.
Wasn't he the legitimate heir?
Alexander enraged, shouted out, what do you think I am, you idiot, a bastard?
And then he threw his cup at Attalus.
And at this point Philip became enraged too and demanded that his son apologize to Attalus.
Alexander apologized.
You must be joking.
He never apologizes to anyone.
And when he refused, Philip lunged at him with his sword.
Being drunk, everyone got blind drunk at Macedonian banquets it seems.
He stumbled against the table and fell over, whereupon Alexander memorably quipped, here's
a man who's about to cross from Europe into Asia and he can't even get safely from one
couch to another.
Well, fortunately no one was killed, at least not on that occasion.
But what makes Attalus's remark about legitimacy all the more inflammatory is the fact that
Olympias, Alexander's mother, isn't a purebred Macedonian to begin with.
She is an epurate, a member of a neighboring people like the Melossians.
In the event, Philip decides the best thing to do for everyone's sake is to banish Alexander
from court.
He also banishes Olympias, sending her off to stay with her brother.
It's said that a family friend named Demaratus arrives in Pella, the capital soon afterwards,
and when Philip asks him how things in Greece are going, the family friend replies somewhat
sarcastically, it's right you're concerned about the Greeks since you've filled your
home with bitterness and ruin.
Shortly after this, Philip recalls Alexander.
But although tempers cool, it's fair to say that at the time of the murder, there is no
love lost between father and son.
And there's something else that is rankling Alexander.
His father is about to set off on the expedition to Concapersha, and he, Alexander, is going
to be left at home to govern Macedonia as regent.
How much fun is that?
Alexander is just 20, very young, admittedly, but he's already acquired a lot of experience
in battle, and it is entirely natural that he would feel deep resentment at the fact
that his father will claim sole glory for himself in the upcoming campaign had he lived
to experience it.
So what would you do if you were Alexander faced with all these reasons to feel resentment?
You might well want to see your father dead, especially if you've got a bit of wine in
your belly, which raises the tantalizing question, was Alexander in On the Murder Plot?
Back now to the murder, Philip falls to the ground and dies almost instantly.
No one knows what's going to happen next.
The question on everyone's mind is, was the killer acting alone, or did he have accomplices?
Is Philip's son Alexander also a target?
Porcenius flees from the theatre and is pursued by Philip's bodyguards.
He's left his horses, three of them, tethered at the gate, not far from the theatre.
He's just about to mount one when his foot becomes trapped in a vine, and he falls to
the ground.
The other bodyguards rush upon Porcenius while he's still struggling to free himself.
They raise him to his feet, and then each of them spears him, and he dies instantly.
The news of Philip's murder spreads like wildfire.
In the Greek world at large, there is an understandable belief that Macedonia is going to implode.
Several states try to throw off the Macedonian yoke.
However, Macedonia does not implode, far from it, nor is there any prolonged controversy
over the succession.
This is largely due to the initiative of Philip's trusted lieutenant, a man named Antipater.
After the assassination, Antipater immediately orders the arrest of some alleged accomplices,
and then without a trial or any inquiry, he promptly has them executed.
Under the circumstances, it is probably the best thing to do.
In addition, Antipater immediately presents Philip's son Alexander to the army, which hails
him as king.
The fact that Antipater has been close to Philip, no doubt helps Alexander to secure
the throne uncontested.
The future Alexander the Great now proceeds to carry out a purge of all those who were
connected with Porcenius.
That includes Porcenius' three sons.
Macedonian law condones the execution of close relatives of a traitor, so there is nothing
irregular in Alexander taking this step.
It is entirely appropriate.
But he also murders all those who stand to benefit from his father's death.
He even sends a letter to Parmenion, one of the generals who was sent with the advance
force to Asia to do away with General Attalus, the man who insulted him at the wedding.
In turn, he will leave it up to Olympias to murder Philip's wife Cleopatra and her young
daughter Europa.
So, again, was Alexander in on the plot against his father?
The finger points in his direction, but conclusive evidence is lacking.
And what about the Macedonians themselves?
What do they think about it all?
The official view, no doubt, is that a jilted lover, perhaps acting singly, perhaps with
accomplices, has murdered Philip.
But there must be a lot of people who don't buy into this explanation.
People who accept various conspiracy theories, some of them wacky, some of them not so wacky,
who see it as rather too convenient that Porcenias is killed immediately after the assassination.
This prevents him from testifying at a trial.
Why should we believe that the Macedonians are any less suspicious of their political
leaders than we are today?
The first year of Alexander's reign is a bit dodgy.
The Illyrians on the western border agitate, but without consequence.
The Thebans to the south revolt when he is away campaigning on the Danube, but he will
destroy their city and enslave the survivors some 30,000 in all.
In short, the Macedonian state totters ever so briefly, but it does not fall far from
it.
It is about to go on to much greater things.
Under orders from Alexander, the Greek cities send their troops to the Hellespont where
they assemble in anticipation of the invasion of Persia.
It is to be the greatest expedition that ever set out from Greek soil.
What precisely Alexander has in mind is anyone's guess.
He seems to be fired up both for conquest and for exploration in equal measure.
He will go on to defeat the Persian army in three great battles and acquire the Persian
throne, and he will change the world for all time by exporting Greek culture to the east.
That will not be enough to satisfy either his ambition or his curiosity either.
He will continue eastwards and might continue on and on, seeking the edge of the world,
did not his army eventually revolt and say enough is enough.
But that is another story.
Philip is buried in the royal cemetery at Agai, close to where he was murdered.
In 1977, a Greek archaeologist named Manolis Andronicus will discover a tomb that he believes
to contain Philip's remains.
But though the identification has been accepted by many scholars, it has not been accepted
by all, and the debate goes on.
Everything connected with Philip's death, it seems, may be destined to remain controversial.
