Only three days ago, the leaders of two tough political factions were rounded up and found
guilty of murder after a riot. They were taken out of the city to be hanged. But as fate
would have it, the gallows scaffolding broke. Two of the accused murderers have survived.
Both of them escape and find sanctuary in a nearby church.
One of them is the leader of a faction known as the Blues who support a local chariot racing
stable. The other is a leader of the rival Greens which backs a competing chariot racing team.
But the opposing factions are about to join together and petition the Emperor Justinian
to pardon the men on the grounds that God already has miraculously spared them.
As I speak, the Emperor and his wife Theodora are walking up the spiral staircase that connects
the Imperial Palace to the vast stone hippodrome where the chariot races are held.
There's a buzz in the air due to these latest events. The political riots, the bungled hangings,
the last-minute escape, and the pleas for pardon. Things could turn very nasty at any minute,
and my suspicion is that they will. We're in Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine
Empire, on January the 13th in the year 532. As many as 80,000 spectators are seated in the
hippodrome today, preparing for a spectacular slate of chariot races. In the marble imperial box
known as the Cathisma, which is situated at the eastern end of the track, Justinian and Theodora
take note of the crowd and the two rival chariot teams. The rough and tumble supporters of the
blues and the greens, these factions as we call them, wear their team colors and hurl insults at
each other. There's nothing unusual in the crowd using a day at the hippodrome to petition the
Emperor for a favor. In fact, it's customary to shout out requests between the races. After all,
this is when the excitement of the occasion and the good cheer that goes with it are most likely
to make Justinian favorably disposed towards their requests. Plus, it is the only time when
commoners can express their demands in a way that guarantees that the Emperor will take notice.
Often, the shouting is orchestrated by the aristocrats who use the occasion to advance
their own agendas. But on this day, the atmosphere is very different from usual. Spirits are running
extremely high. The tension makes even the Emperor and his closest circle uneasy. Then,
something happens that has never occurred before. The supporters of the blues and the greens join
in unison to hurl insults at the Emperor. It's clearly going to be a long day for the Emperor.
Twenty-four chariot races are scheduled, each one a grinding contest of skill, bravado, nerve,
and luck. Deathly spills on the ensuing mayhem of twisting carts, razor sharp hoofs, spilled blood,
gouged flesh, broken bones, raise the colour of the crowd. And after each race, the supporters of
the blues and greens are like petition Justinian to pardon the convicted men who remain safe in
the church for now, though the sanctuary is surrounded by the Emperor's soldiers.
Each time the crowd petitions the Emperor, Justinian obstinately ignores this unruly horde.
And now, after the twenty-second race, the shouts of the mob congeal into one voice, crying
long life to the merciful blues and greens. They are clearly mocking what might normally
be respectful homage to the Emperor. And their chant shifts aggressively to
Nika, Nika, Nika, that is Greek for victory, victory, victory.
It is the name we give to this extraordinary event, the Nika riots, a popular protest,
the likes of which have never been seen before in history.
Fencing that anything could happen and fearing the crowd could rise up and tear them apart,
Justinian and Theodora bolt out of their loger. They race down the spiral staircase that leads
from the hippodrome to the palace, and they seal themselves off from the baying mob.
With them, huddle their closest aides and select members of the Senate.
And here we will leave Justinian and Theodora for a moment, their purple hearts pounding,
fearful for their royal lives.
Chariot racing was a popular sport in the ancient world, and had been ever since it became an
Olympic event at the games of 680 BCE. Legend has it that chariot racing made an even earlier
entrance into Rome during the reign of the first king Romulus, who ruled during the middle of the
8th century BCE. Pretty well every major city acquired a hippodrome, we know of 175 of them
scattered throughout the empire. The sport would remain prominent in the east, in Constantinople
in particular, as late as the 7th century CE. In time the factions became less violent however,
and the sport would cease to function as an outlet for the expression of popular discontent.
In the west it stopped being popular long before the events we are describing here,
and nowhere did the sport attract so many fanatical adherents as it did in Constantinople
during the 4th, 5th and 6th centuries CE.
Let's talk for a moment about what we call the Byzantine Empire. It is named after an
early Greek settlement called Byzantium, which stood on the site of the later city,
Constantinople. It is an empire that presents us with something of a paradox.
While the peoples living within its borders are predominantly Greek, and Greek is the language
they speak, they don't refer to themselves as Helliness, as would the Greeks. Instead,
they call themselves Romioi or Romans. The official title of the Byzantine Empire is the
Basiliaton Romione, the Empire of the Romans, and the official name of the city is Constantinopolis
near Rome, the city of Constantine, New Rome. The emperor Constantine celebrated its founding as
his new capital with chariot races in the year 330. With it, the center of gravity in the Mediterranean
shifted from Italy in the west to the Balkans and to points further east.
Today we know Constantinople as Istanbul in modern-day Turkey. The name derives from the Greek
ace-tain-polin, meaning to the city. During Justinian's time, Constantinople was arguably the
greatest metropolis on the face of the earth, with a population close to a million.
The fact that the Byzantine Empire survives, whereas the western half doesn't, is due to a
number of factors. By the late third century CE, approximately 70% of the empire's total
population lives in the east. And this population is more prosperous than the one living in the
west. It is supported by industries that produce hardware, luxury goods, military supplies,
and textiles. And it also derives a lot of wealth from trade.
Another advantage is that the Byzantine Empire has a shorter frontier to patrol against invading
barbarian tribes than the west does. The western frontier consists of the Rhine and the upper Danube.
The eastern empire needs only to guard the lower Danube.
Yet another asset that Constantinople possesses is that it is almost completely surrounded by water,
and it is extremely well defended, with walls that are 13 miles in length.
Last but not least, the east has a better army and a better navy than the west does.
The defining moment in terms of the Roman Empire's separation comes in 395,
with the death of Theodosius I, the last emperor to rule both east and west.
His grandson Theodosius II is the first Roman emperor to be born in Constantinople and to rule
there throughout his reign. And his, moreover, is a very long reign from 408 to 450.
Longevity matters in history, as well as in life. There should be a bumper sticker that says that.
The long reign of Theodosius II ensured stability, and that in turn cemented Constantinople's
prominence. The oddity is that the Byzantine emperors saw themselves as upholding traditional
Roman values and institutions. And in many ways they did. Constantinople's constitution was
based on the Roman model, with a senate and annually elected magistrates. There is no distinction
between church and state in the Byzantine Empire, to comprise a single indivisible entity.
This means that the emperor's authority and rule on earth parallel God's authority and rule
in heaven. The emperor is regarded both as a representative of Christ and as God's
vice-regent. This is reflected in the close resemblance in portraits of emperors to portraits
of Christos Pantocrator, Christ the All-Powerful. It is the emperor's duty to attend to the physical
and spiritual welfare of his subjects. He is the people's guardian, their savior, and their
All-Powerful Judge. And just recently, Justinian has managed to offend both leading factions,
the blues and the greens. As a result, Justinian and his advisors are at their wits end. They don't
know how to diffuse the tension. And here they are, surrounded by tens of thousands of people
screaming that one word, Nika, ready to lynch them. Justinian I, who is known as Justinian the Great,
will rule the Byzantine Empire from 527 to 565. He is a parvenu of peasant extraction. His elevation
to the imperial purple was due to the unexpected accession to the throne before him of his uncle
Justin. Justinian thumbed his nose at proper society and at his uncle before his accession
by wedding a former mime artist named Theodora. Theodora performed, wait for it,
sex acts on stage. She may have been a prostitute. The Byzantine church did not extend the sacrament
to actors or prostitutes when the couple met. She was considered persona known grata. To make
the situation more fraught, Justinian as the heir to the throne was destined also to be the head of
the Byzantine church. Brushing aside the condemnation of their match, however, the pair married
seven years before the events we are describing. When Justinian does become emperor, he turns out
to be authoritarian and something of a social conservative. To begin with, he is ruthless in
his suppression of polytheism. Ever since his predecessor Constantine embraced Christianity
about 200 years earlier, Christians and polytheists had been coexisting more or less peacefully. But
Justinian declares all out war on polytheism. He forces tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds of
thousands, to convert to Christianity. Those who refuse are exiled or executed. Justinian also passes
tough legislation against male homosexuals and he tightens state oversight of Plato's famous academy
in Athens, an intellectual stronghold of polytheists. In so doing, he ends a tradition of intellectual
freedom and inquiry that had lasted nearly 1,000 years. Justinian's other great passion is the law.
He sets up a commission to recodify all the laws that have been enacted from the time of the emperor
Hadrian down to the present, a period of approximately 400 years. The corpus joris
Kiwilis, the code of civil law, also known as the code of Justinian, becomes a highly influential
compilation of statutes and pronouncements. It brings order out of chaos to jurisprudence.
In the 11th century, the corpus will be adopted as the basis for legal education through most of Europe.
At the same time, Justinian is, in many ways, a dreamer. He has the grandiose vision of restoring
the Roman Empire to its former glory by recovering the territory that it lost during the previous
century. He does not himself conduct any military campaigns. Instead, he sends out his great general
Belisarius, first to Africa to fight the vandals, and then to Italy to fight the Ostrogoths.
In both theaters of combat, Belisarius will be largely successful, but these wars lie in the future.
At the time of the Nicar riots, Belisarius happens to be very close to Constantinople,
which is extremely fortunate for Justinian. The contemporary historian Procopius alleges that
Belisarius' wife Antonia is a sexually promiscuous woman whose mother also came from the theater.
It's actually a very similar portrait to the one he paints of Justinian's wife Theodora,
and to whom I now want to turn. Theodora is a woman of great beauty and high intelligence,
despite her lowly birth. She is one of the most fascinating women in history.
Our knowledge of her derives mainly from Procopius, a legal advisor to Belisarius,
who wrote a work entitled Anecdota, meaning literally things not intended for circulation.
Anecdota is usually translated as the secret history. The work was so scandalous that Procopius
took the wise decision not to publish it during his lifetime, and that raises the interesting
question as to why he wrote it and with what audience in mind. Newsweek magazine once described
the secret history as one of the supreme hatchet jobs of all time, and I think that's spot on.
Theodora's father was a bear feeder who worked for the Green Faction. Her mother was a dancer,
and when her father died, her mother married a man who was denied her former husband's job with
the Greens, but was offered a comparable position with the Blues, and that rescued the family from
poverty. It also ensured that Theodora would become a passionate lifelong supporter of the Blues.
She had become a public entertainer at a young age. The job description,
porn star, would probably not be wide of the mark. Procopius tells us that it was Theodora's custom
to lie naked on the floor of the theatre, while specially trained geese picked at grains of barley
sprinkled on her body. You can almost hear him licking his lips as he writes. He claims that she
had few gifts as an entertainer, writing that she was neither a pipe player nor a harpist nor did
she have any expertise in dancing, but she sold her beauty to all and sundry, plying her trade
with almost every inch of her body. But Procopius also concedes that she was very funny and a good
mimic, and immediately became popular in this art. For instance, he says, she was a kind of
comedian who delights the audience by letting herself be cuffed and slapped on the cheeks,
and makes them guffaw by raising her skirts to reveal to the spectators those feminine secrets
here and there, which custom veils from the eyes of the opposite sex.
Justinian very likely consorted with members of the Demimonde, like so many potentates and
royals have done throughout history. If they'd been alive today, the tabloids and the paparazzi
would have had a field day with this outrageous royal couple. Theodora was just 16 when she
met Justinian. He was more than twice her age. Their marriage scandalized church and court,
as you can imagine. The late emperor, Justin, Justinian's uncle, despite his initial opposition,
eventually came round and passed a decree to the effect that an actress who had abandoned her
former profession would no longer bear the taint of the association, and be free to marry whomever
she pleased, even a senator, which is a position Justinian held at the time.
I have to say that I have a great deal of admiration for Theodora. Although she is what we would
call today a social climber, arguably one of the most accomplished social climbers of all time,
she is also a woman of remarkable tenacity, insight, and political shrewdness. She can
certainly hold her own among the most powerful political, religious, and social leaders in the
empire. Furthermore, once she marries Justinian, Theodora dramatically reinvents herself. She
becomes his confidante at court and a model of wifely devotion, roles that she will perform
to perfection throughout their 23 years of marriage. In the months leading up to the riots,
Justinian has been raising taxes significantly, and this has provoked outrage among aristocracy
and commoners alike. Particular hatred is focused upon Justinian's chief tax collector, a prefect
named John the Cappadocian, who has proved to be extremely efficient in his job. In addition,
the Greens dislike Justinian because he and his wife favor the blues. And then there is Theodora
to throw into the mix a seemingly vulgar and ignorant upstart, a disgrace to polite society
and a stain upon the church. Such, no doubt, is the gossip that accompanies her in any public
setting. So there are many grievances bubbling just below the surface, and they are all ready
to erupt. What is it like to watch chariot racing in the ancient world? I have to confess
that I find the thought of it extremely thrilling. The hippodrome at Constantinople is U-shaped.
Tears of seats surround the track. The wealthy sit on marble seats in the lowest tier. The
high perloy are relegated to wooden seats at the top, just like in the Colosseum.
The gates where the horses wait before the race begins are spring-loaded and all open at the
same time. The four-horse chariots dash out of their gates and hurtle around the track, reaching
speeds of more than 40 miles per hour on the long stretch, which is about 450 meters long,
and then slow down at the U-curve. Then they gather speed again and barrel down the other
long stretch until they come screeching to a virtual halt at the hairpin turn at the very end.
A barrier known as the spina, or spine, divides the two stretches from one another.
A statue of gods and heroes and emperors are on display along the spina, along with loot
taken in war, obelisks, fancy tapestries, you name it. Usually two teams of horses represent
each of the two stables or faction. Each race consists of about seven laps.
The Dutch historian, Fiek Meijer, has calculated that a chariot race would last about nine minutes.
Pilots are frequent. They're so frequent that the slaves responsible for cleaning up the wreckage
can hardly complete their job before horses, chariots, and drivers turn around another lap
and come hurtling down upon them again. Injuries and fatalities are the order of the day.
Procopius calls this passion for chariot racing a psuche's nocema, or disease of the soul.
It's an apt description. No doubt many in the audience are hoping they'll witness at least
one pile-up during the day. Charityers frequently start out as slaves, though in time they could
grow rich and famous. In fact, hardly any celebrities in Antiochus were able to do that.
Hardly any celebrities in antiquity generate such fanatical devotion as charioteers.
It's a decent profession if you happen to survive. Charioteers are referred to as histriones,
stage actors. We hear of one charioteer named Diocles, who lived in the second century CE
and competed in 4,257 races. He won 1,462 times and amassed a huge fortune of over 35 million
cestuses. During earlier times, four factions rivaled one another, including also the whites and
reds, but by the time of Justinian, only two principal stables remain, the blues and the greens.
So, we're back at the point on the first day of racing when Justinian and Theodora make their
hurried escape from the imperial box to the adjoining palace, terrified by the bane crowd.
A day later, on January 14, Justinian makes a potentially fatal misjudgment. He agrees to
resume the races, believing they will relieve the rioting that has ensued.
Instead, the population becomes even more inflamed. The streets are no longer safe. A mob
gathers at the praetorium, the headquarters of the police. It releases the prisoners and sets fire
to the building. It also burns down the beautiful church of Hagia Sophia, sacred wisdom, erected by
the emperor Constantine, along with the public bars and even part of the imperial palace.
Justinian remains seated inside the palace, along with leading members of the senate. He attempts to
placate the crowd by agreeing to remove three of his ministers, including the chief tax collector.
But this does little to calm things down. Here in treachery, Justinian evicts the senators from
the palace. One of them, an elderly ex-consul named Hippatius, who is the nephew of the former
emperor named Anastasius, ill-fatedly goes home. When he gets there, Hippatius finds himself
surrounded by a mob that drags him away amid cries that he is to be crowned Justinian successor.
Hippatius' wife desperately pleads with the mob to leave her husband alone,
but to no avail. Hippatius is hoisted onto his supporter's shoulders and born to the hippodrome
for the improvised coronation. Things are going from bad to worse and Justinian now faces the
supreme crisis of his career. His life is in danger and he contemplates fleeing from the capital.
It is Theodora who changes the course of history. I'm going to paraphrase the rousing speech that
Procopius puts into her mouth in the historical work he writes called Wars.
May I never be separated from the imperial purple that I wear, nor live to see the day
when the people I meet fail to address me as their mistress, Theodora declares.
She then turns to Justinian and scolds him as follows.
If you want to save yourself by taking to flight, go ahead. For my part, I approve the old saying
that kingship makes a good shroud to be wrapped in. In other words, she would rather die and be buried
in the shroud of a ruler because that is honorable than be buried in the attire of a commoner.
Procopius doesn't tell us what Justinian says in reply, but it is evident that he is deeply
affected by her words. Energized, the emperor now orders his general Belisarius and a eunuch named
Naseis to put down the mob. Naseis enters the hippodrome and succeeds at dividing the blues
from the greens. With the coronation of Hepatius, now interrupted, the blues attempt to bolster
from the hippodrome. Belisarius and the imperial army block the exits and slaughter the rioters.
It is one of history's bloodbaths. The lowest ancient estimate puts the death toll at 30,000.
Hepatius, a hapless victim who by no choice of his own ends up on the wrong side of history,
is arrested and executed. Many questions about the Nicar rights will never be answered.
One of them is, what did the blues and greens want? After their peaceful requests for pardons
turned to violence, did they seek only the release of the two faction leaders who had been condemned
for death and were hiding in the church? Or was that a pretext for something more ambitious?
Were they seeking to overthrow Justinian himself? The British historian Alan Cameron,
author of Circus Factions, believes that the factions abandoned themselves to rioting and
burning for its own sake, as often happens when movements lose direction and morph into mobs.
Perhaps. After the Nicar riots, Justinian deflects attention from Byzantium's domestic
problems by embarking on a war in Africa as part of his drive to reunite the Roman Empire.
It takes him, or rather Bellisarius, nearly 20 years to win back Italy alone. The campaign
puts serious strains on Constantinople's resources and in the long term achieves very little.
Then in the spring of 542, Justinian survives an outbreak of the bubonic plague carried by
Mediterranean black rats. Justinian's plague, we call it today. The pandemic is thought to have
killed 25 million people, roughly a third of the empire's population. Justinian himself dies peacefully
in 565. His finest moment was when he listened to his wife and held fast rather than take flight.
It ensured that the Byzantine Empire would survive.
There is one enduring benefit of the Nicar riots. The Aya Sophia, with its massive gold dome,
one of the most spectacular structures in the world, never would have been built had not the
rioters destroyed a previous, less ambitious Aya Sophia. Justinian ordered the new architectural
wonder to be built just weeks after he quelled the mob, no doubt as a symbol of Constantinople
rising anew from the ashes. As for Theodora, I feel intense sympathy for her. Even though
Procopius gives her credit for stiffening Justinian's resolve, very few people in history suffer as
badly as she does by not having some more favorably inclined historian to record her achievements.
In large part, the venom Procopius heaps upon her was probably shared by the majority of his
upper class readers, not least because it was consistent with the widespread distrust of female
sexuality that existed throughout antiquity and deplorably continues into modern times.
