We're waiting outside the cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption in Clermont in southern
France.
It's November the 27th in the year 1095, a Tuesday to be precise.
Pope Urban II is about to make an important announcement.
It's been a rough period for the papacy over the past two and a half centuries.
Some of Urban II's predecessors have been deposed, imprisoned, starved to death, and
killed in sundry ways.
As a consequence, the Pope has taken up residence in Avignon, in southeast France, rather than
in Rome.
But things are looking up.
Urban II is a forceful and energetic figure.
He has successfully defended his position as head of the Christian Church against attempts
by a rival, calling himself Pope Clermont III.
Urban has also improved relations between church and state by instituting a number of
ecclesiastical reforms.
The church in the Middle Ages carries enormous weight.
We're talking about a period of unquestioning faith underpinned by the fear of eternal damnation.
At the age of 60, Urban is at the height of his powers.
He enjoys widespread support among European nobility, and he's made the papacy a power
to be reckoned with.
His authority is greatly respected in France, Italy and Spain, at a time when new tensions
are bubbling up in such far-flung capitals as Rome, Constantinople, and the Holy City
of Jerusalem.
Though England, somewhat characteristically, I have to say, is always suspicious of papal
interference.
We don't know what Urban's speech is going to be about, which contents haven't been
leaked beforehand.
All we know is that it's going to be momentous.
A church council is in session, and the council's penultimate meeting is underway.
So far, the discussion has been pretty standard, a decree forbidding the clergy to marry excommunications,
nothing earth-shattering.
All of this business has been conducted inside the cathedral behind locked doors.
But the crowd, we number among, that has gathered to hear the Holy Father cannot possibly fit
inside the cathedral, so his papal throne has been set up on a platform in a field outside
the city walls.
Do speeches have the power to alter the course of human history?
I have to say, yes they do.
Think of the funeral oration that Mark Antony delivers in the Roman Forum in 44 BCE over
the body of Julius Caesar.
It turns the crowd against the assassins, Brutus Cassius and their lot, and paves the
way for the ascendancy of Octavian, the future emperor Augustus.
Bracked by grief and tears, Mark Antony, with the help of Shakespeare, states, I come to
bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them, the good is oft interred with their bones.
Bear with me, my heart is in the coffin there with Caesar, and I must pause till it come
back to me.
Or consider the words that Procopius puts into the mouth of Theodora in Constantinople
in CE 532, when her husband, the Byzantine emperor Justinian, is thinking of fleeing
the capital at the time of the Nicar riots.
If you want to save yourself by taking to flight, go ahead.
For my part, I approve the old saying that kingship makes a good shroud to be wrapped
in.
Who knows whether this strong-minded woman doesn't, in this moment, save the Byzantine
empire from dissolving.
Or in recent times, consider the Gettysburg address which Abraham Lincoln delivers in
1863.
It consists of fewer than 300 words, and according to popular myth, was deemed a flat failure
at the time it was delivered.
From the Pennsylvania battlefield, Lincoln majestically states,
The world will little note nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget
what they did here.
It is for us, the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who
fought here have thus far so nobly advanced.
It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us.
That from these on a dead, we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave
the last full measure of devotion.
That we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain.
That this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom, and that government
of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.
For Martin Luther King's, I have a dream speech delivered at the Lincoln Memorial in
Washington D.C. in August 1963, and calling for an end to racism in America.
I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted, and every hill and mountain shall
be made low, the rough places will be made plain, and the crooked places will be made
straight, and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together.
The speech we are going to consider today, delivered in a field in Claremont, is at least
as momentous as any of these, and it continues to render consequences more than 900 years
later, right down to the present day.
So let me add a bit of background.
Jerusalem has been in Muslim hands for three and a half centuries at this time, although
until recently the Muslims have not prevented pilgrims of other faiths from visiting the
holy city, nor from worshiping at its shrines.
Nevertheless, both the Church and the West are deeply, to put it mildly, offended by Islam's
occupation of this holiest of cities.
Jerusalem, the city at the center of Judaism, the city that played a special role in the
life and death of Jesus Christ, is now under Muslim control.
It is this circumstance that lies at the root of the looming crisis, although it will be
fanned by tales of atrocities perpetrated against the Christians who live under Muslim
rule.
The Christian West faces challenges and crisis from other sources as well.
Urban has recently received an urgent appeal for help from Constantinople, from the Byzantine
Emperor Alexios, who implores him to provide military aid to help defend the Byzantine
Church against the heathens.
The Emperor Alexios is eager to win back territory lost to the Seljuk Turks, who only recently
have established a competing empire extending from Anatolia in Turkey to modern-day Iran.
Indeed, part of the problem in the year 1095 is that pilgrims are no longer able to travel
safely through modern-day Turkey on their way to the Holy Land, due to the fact that
Seljuk Turks have taken control of the region.
By the time of Pope Urban's address, virtually no Christian pilgrims are able to visit Jerusalem.
At last, Urban II rises from his throne.
People scrain forward to hear his words, and he begins.
Of the confines of Jerusalem and the city of Constantinople, a horrible tale has gone
forth.
A horrible tale has gone forth.
I want to try to put you in the mindset of the Pope and of the people who hunger for
his words on this chilly November day.
As the Pope starts speaking, we in the audience are horrified by what he is telling us, and
in only moments we will be all fired up in kind.
We hear that a race from the kingdom of the Persians, that's the Pope's term for the
Seljuk Turks, and a cursed race, a race utterly alienated from God, has invaded the lands of
the Christians and has depopulated them by the sword, pillage, and fire.
In other words, Jerusalem, the most sacred place on earth, is being defiled by the Seljuk
Turks, a people the Pope is setting out to demonize.
Urban is preparing to pit Christianity against Islam, the followers of Christ against Muslim
followers of Muhammad, in a way that is deliberately provocative, even incendiary.
And now, Urban thrusts in his rhetorical sword.
When they wish to torture people by a base death, they perforate their navels, and dragging
forth the extremity of their intestines, bind them to a stake.
Then with flogging, they lead the victim around until the viscera.
Having gushed forth, the victim falls prostrate upon the ground.
What shall I say of the abominable rape of the women?
The image of intestines being extracted is obviously intended to inflame Urban's audience
further, by demonstrating the depravity of the infidels.
Jerusalem, the holy city, is a sink of filth.
It is as if the apocalypse is at hand.
Urban continues.
Jerusalem is the navel of the world.
This, the Redeemer, has made illustrious by his advent, has beautified by residence, has
consecrated by suffering, has redeemed by death, has glorified by burial.
This royal city is now held captive by his enemies.
She, that is, Jerusalem, the pope is about to conclude, seeks therefore and desires to
be liberated, and does not cease to implore you to come to her aid.
Accordingly, undertake this journey for the forgiveness of your sins with the assurance
of the imperishable glory of the kingdom of heaven.
Now you have it.
By rescuing Jerusalem from this accursed race, we will be fulfilling God's will and
preparing for the second coming of Christ.
And as a reward for our efforts, we are promised forgiveness for our sins.
On this chilly day, in November 1095, history has just turned on a dime and lurches in a
new direction.
Jonathan Riley Smith, a professor of ecclesiastical history at Cambridge University and author
of The First Crusade and the Idea of Crusading, says, Pope Urban is authorizing war in his
capacity as pope and inspiring tens of thousands to undertake it, a fact duly recognized by
Europe's military leaders at the time who write about a mission that they credit Pope
Urban with initiating.
When Urban calls for a holy war to liberate Jerusalem, he is repeatedly interrupted by
cries of Deos Levolt.
God wills it.
So the story goes, the bishop of Le Puy is the first to kneel down at the pope's feet
and request permission to answer the call.
Hundreds follow suit.
Eventually, tens of thousands answer the call, perhaps as many as 100,000, mainly from France,
Italy and Germany, but also from Scotland, England and Denmark.
To some extent, the crusaders, as we call them, acquire a single identity.
No longer French or Italian, they become members of an international army driven by a single
minded goal.
Well this is the speech that Urban delivers, or at least one version of it that history
hands down to us.
I hate to be a spoil spot, but we don't actually know what Urban says.
We have four different accounts of the speech and they are all written from memory.
Not surprisingly, they are all very different.
Only one of the four writers, a Frenchman named Robert the Monk, claims even to have
been present, and to state the obvious it must have been very difficult for people even
to hear the pope.
Perhaps Urban spoke slowly and the faithful at the front scrupulously passed what he said
back to the people behind them.
Certainly his voice can't have traveled very far.
In a way, it really doesn't matter.
What does matter is that his speech galvanizes the audience.
Urban doesn't mince words when he describes how the Muslims are maltreating the Christians
and desecrating their shrines in the Holy Land.
Events like these can be neither verified nor denied.
The word crusade doesn't even exist at the time.
Urban cites the innocuous Latin term itere, meaning journey or road.
The word crusader doesn't enter the language until the 18th century.
Still, as one of the most powerful speeches ever delivered, young and old, rich and poor,
clergy and laity, noblemen and commoners, everybody who hears it is deeply affected,
their emotions blown away by what the Holy Father has said.
The heart of this address is a belief in what the British historian Thomas Asbridge, author
of the first crusade, calls sanctified violence.
Asbridge says this produced a new model of sacred warfare that truly resonated with the
needs and expectations of medieval Europe.
Who could possibly resist Urban's appeal?
And yet, with hindsight, I can't help reflecting that it would have been better, much better,
for Christians, Jews and Muslims alike if Urban had come down with a fever and kept his
mouth shut.
Pope Urban doesn't deliver just one speech.
He travels all over France and Italy tirelessly promoting his campaign, stirring up the populace
and writing letters to places he cannot visit.
Of course, other clerics promote the first crusade from pulpits throughout Christendom.
However, recent research reveals that the majority of those who sign up for the first crusade
come from regions that lie in Urban's path, promoting the idea of a holy war designed
to recapture Christ's homeland.
Were it not for Urban's emotional appeal, it's at least possible that the movement
would never have gotten started.
So yes, speeches do matter.
In the late 11th century, famine and plague are widespread and many people, the poor especially,
answer Urban's summons in the belief that a better life awaits them elsewhere.
But there is a religious dimension to this as well.
The Pope tells us that if we take up the cross, Christ will absolve us of all our sins.
And like most Christians living in this era, we are haunted by the fear of eternal damnation.
The church promotes fear of divine judgment as a way of strengthening its power over the
human imagination.
The terrors that await us, if we are packed off to hell, are regularly depicted in grisly
detail in sculptures over the west porch through which one enters a church or cathedral.
Answering Urban's appeal, therefore, is a way to banish that fear for good.
And once the Pope is finished, we loudly shout our assent along with everyone around
us, till we are practically hoarse, and then we try to push our way to the front.
All of every station in life sign up for this mighty mission, many of them completely
unsuited to military life.
Urban has perhaps inadvertently let slip the dogs of war.
In turn, the church hurriedly puts in place measures to organize the orderly departure
of those of us who sign up.
I think it's safe to say that Urban was not expecting such an enthusiastic response.
He's hardly versed in military matters, and there's no indication that he has consulted
with any prominent lord or baron to discuss what strategy to employ to achieve the desired
goal of liberating the Holy Land from the hands of the Seljuk Turks.
In fact, not the least of his dubious accomplishments is his amazing ability to initiate a military
expedition without any experience of warfare, and to persuade raw recruits that their cause
is unassailable.
Those of us who sign up have ten months to settle our affairs.
Basically, this means handing them over to the church for safekeeping during our absence.
We're required to seek permission from our spiritual advisors, but once we've done this,
we can't back out or turn back.
If we do, we'll be excommunicated.
The great age of religious pilgrimage began in the 10th century and continued until late
in the 11th century, shortly before Urban's call to arms.
Pilgrims believe that by undertaking the journey, they will be granted forgiveness for their
sins.
It is a fascinating phenomenon.
It involves persons of all social ranks, some embark on a pilgrimage on their own, others
in groups that occasionally number in the thousands.
It generally takes a year or more to complete a religious pilgrimage.
The holy places in Palestine are the prime destination, although Rome and other sites
are also popular.
But this military pilgrimage is something else altogether.
The first crusade is scheduled to depart on the Feast of the Assumption of the Virgin
in August 1096.
That means taking up the body of the Virgin into heaven once her earthly life has come
to an end.
However, the church is quite unable to control the enthusiasm that Urban has unleashed.
Many people leave well ahead of the due date, eager to be the first to arrive and to gain
the promised rewards.
This includes the bands to which we give the title, the Peasants' Crusade, which sets
out from the Rhineland in Germany under the leadership of an itinerant monk called Peter
the Hermit.
We are now at one of the great turning points in history.
Islam and Christianity are about to embark on a collision course that will bring them
to the place they are today.
The Christian's journey, some 2,000 miles or more in length, causes terrible sufferings.
Thousands die of disease and other catastrophes along the way.
It's been suggested that no more than a third of those who set out actually reach Jerusalem,
and yet the expedition succeeds.
The crusading army is anything but saintly, and when it takes Jerusalem, it carries out
an indiscriminate massacre of the mixed Muslim and Jewish population.
The Muslims expelled much of the Christian population before the siege began.
But against all odds, Jerusalem is rested from Muslim control and falls to the Crusaders.
It is one of the most extraordinary campaigns in military history.
The fact the crusaders are victorious is due largely to their unshakable faith, not
dissimilar perhaps to the belief that the pharaoh Ramesses II has in the god Amun at
the Battle of Kadesh, not that faith alone brings about victory.
As a result of the first crusade, the world will never be the same again.
The very foundations of Western culture are remade.
The Byzantine Empire is able to breathe again because crusader states are established in
the region, thereby limiting the power of the Seljuks who have been oppressing it.
It's important to acknowledge that the Byzantine Emperor, Alexius, could not have envisaged
the scale of the migration that would occur as the result of his appeal for help any more
than urban did.
In fact, when Alexius learned of the army that was traveling in the direction of his
capital at Constantinople, he was filled with alarm.
And of course, the same is true of all of us.
We are incapable of knowing the consequences of our actions or how our lives and the lives
of others may be altered in the course of a moment.
Still, there is no escaping the fact that individuals matter and that individuals make
a difference.
No individual bears a heavier responsibility for the broad contours of modern history than
Pope Urban II.
It's true that he had domestic problems, including those posed by a rival claimant to the papal
throne, so much so that it wasn't safe for him to enter Rome.
Even so, we cannot assume that he hoped to use the distraction of a foreign war to shore
up his position.
And responsibility is one thing, blame another.
I refuse to blame Pope Urban.
Urban remained tireless right up until his death, four years after the speech at Clermont,
when his international army, or what remained of it, arrives outside the walls of Jerusalem
in July 1099.
We have met a number of extraordinary people in this course.
Ramesses II, Socrates, Alexander the Great, Hannibal, Julius Caesar, Cleopatra, Jesus
of Nazareth, the Byzantine Empress Theodora, the Chinese Empress Wuzetien, the Prophet
Mohammed and others.
And they have all played a decisive role in shaping the course of history.
Which has been my privilege to explore with you a series of events that open themselves
up for particularly close scrutiny.
We have, I believe, been able to hear the heartbeat of history, and at times to catch
the intake of breath of some of the extraordinary people who made history come alive.
I hope that you, too, have found yourself brought alive and caught up in the events
we have explored, so much so that you have found yourself living inside of history.
In conclusion, I want to take you back to the beginning of this course, to the year
480 B.C.E., and to the moment when, Xerxes, the Great King of Persia, is poised to invade
Greece.
There he is, proudly reviewing his army and navy at the Helispont, the modern-day Dardanelles,
before he crosses into Europe and undertakes the invasion of Greece.
One moment, Xerxes considers himself blessed, and the next, he suddenly bursts into tears,
struck by the fact that in 100 years, neither he nor any of his men will still be alive.
It is an insight both obvious and profound, like so many others that historical writing
has bequeathed us, and one that says so much about human life.
The moment reveals one of the fault lines that defines human history to this day, that
the vision between East and West, Xerxes, doesn't realize it, of course.
But he is about to set out on a journey that will define relations between the two for
centuries, even millennia.
The story, as told to us by the 5th century Greek historian Herodotus, may have been invented.
But what Herodotus is saying is that Xerxes could have called the invasion off, and he
didn't.
As a result, tens of thousands of people will perish.
Pope Urban belonged to an era that was still dominated by that fault line 1500 years later.
He was living out the consequences of Xerxes' fateful decision.
Both Xerxes and Urban have, in distinctive ways, shaped the world we live in today, as
all of us do, by our own degree.
Among the many challenges facing us today, and in future generations, is how to repair
that fault line so that history does not go on again and again repeating itself.
I want to end this course with the reverie by Niccolò Machiavelli, the author of The
Prince, in an essay entitled On the Coming of Evening.
I quoted it at the beginning of this course.
I return to my house and enter my study, and at the door I take off my everyday clothes,
covered with mud and dust, and I put on garments, regal and courtly, and thus reclothed appropriately.
I enter the ancient courts of ancient men, where, being lovingly received by them, I
feed on that food that alone is mine, and for which I was born, where I am not ashamed
to speak with them, and to ask them the reason of their actions.
And they, out of their humanity, answer me.
And for hours of time, I feel no boredom, I forget every trouble, I do not fear poverty,
death does not terrify me, I am completely transferred into them.
I cannot begin to tell you how many hours, days, months, and solid years I have spent
in upstate New York, feeling no boredom, forgetful of trouble, and scornful of death,
lovingly received in the ancient courts of ancient men.
Thank you for accompanying me on this fascinating journey across space and time.
May we one day continue our journey together.
