How on earth can I argue for a local science? I'm going to be laughed out of the room if
I argue for a local science.
But this is kind of what Bill Wimsat hints at in the causal ticket, right?
Thank you, thank you, thank you.
It seems to me that what those folk psychology terms mean, represent, are what dynamical system
theorists would call the constraint regime that holds the dynamics together.
The next stage of this is going to be a study of all the different modes of constraint that
are all operating simultaneously.
This is Brain Inspired. Hey everyone, I'm Paul. Alicia Juarrero is a philosopher and
has been interested in complexity science for a long time. In her own words, since before
complexity was cool. I like that.
In this episode, we discuss many of the topics and ideas. In her new book, Context Changes
Everything, How Constraints Create Coherence.
The book makes the thorough case that constraints should be given way more attention when trying
to understand complex systems like brains and minds, how they're organized, how they
operate, how they're formed, how they're maintained, et cetera, et cetera.
So as you probably know, modern science, thanks in large part to the success of physics,
focuses on, or mostly on, a single kind of causation, the kind involved when one billiard
ball strikes another billiard ball.
But that kind of causation neglects what Alicia argues are the most important features of
complex systems, the constraints that shape the dynamics and possibility spaces of systems.
Much of Alicia's book describes the wide range of types of constraints that we should
be paying attention to, and how they interact and mutually influence each other.
I highly recommend the book, and you may want to read it before, during, and after our conversation.
It's partly because, if you're like me, the concepts that we discuss still aren't comfortable
to think about in terms of normal modes of explanation in science.
Thinking across levels of organization turns out to be hard.
You might also want the book handy because, hang on to your hats, we also jump around
a lot among many of the concepts that are in our book.
So context changes, everything comes almost 25 years, almost a quarter of a century, after
her previous classic, Dynamics in Action, which we also discuss, and which I also recommend,
especially if you want more of a primer to her new, more expansive work.
These ideas touch on all things complex, of course, from self-organizing systems, like
whirlpools, to ecologies, businesses, societies, and of course, minds and brains.
Find the show notes at braininspired.co.
I'm sure you could tell, I very much enjoyed this conversation.
We also have some guest questions from friends of the podcast, Kevin Mitchell, who's also
coming up on a near future episode about his new book, and Max Shine, from Down Under.
Thanks for listening, here's Alicia.
Context changes, everything is almost a quarter...
And human is Cuban hyperbole.
Oh, what does that mean?
Humans tend to exaggerate, I probably should have said, context changes, most things are
a lot of things, human hyperbole.
Well I was going to tie it to your previous work, Dynamics in Action, which is now almost
a quarter of a century old.
And so what you could say about that is that context changes action is a very coarse and
terrible summary of that classic now work.
And so I was thinking maybe context changes, everything is just kind of an expansion on
those ideas.
It really is.
It really is.
After I wrote that one, I thought, well, I've got nothing else to say, but you know, there's
been so many issues, and one of the things is people said to me, you know, there's nothing
that's context free, I'd use that term in that one.
Oh yeah.
Yeah, yeah, that's true.
So what do I call it?
Well, what about context, it depends.
So I'm thinking maybe I gave short shrift to that one, to that kind of constraint.
You know, things start, and of course AI and language models and so on, and for E, I think
came out of the process.
So there were a lot of things that I thought once the pandemic started, I thought, you
know what, just sit down and do it, you know, and just put it all together.
And Steve, you see if it comes together, and I was pleased it did.
Yeah, me too.
I mean, you mentioned the phrase context free, which you have changed now to context dependent
in the new book.
Independent.
Oh, that's the contact.
Right, context independent.
Yeah, see, that's what I was going to say is, you know, the book, I love the book.
It is challenging, and one that I will have to revisit over and over, because, well, no,
it's not bad.
So I'm already, that's not a bad thing.
I'm already a slow reader, and I'm a slow thinker, apparently, as well, at least to
give me depth.
I'm a writer is what I am.
I don't write very clearly.
I don't know why I'm good in the classroom, but I'm terrified.
I just, it looks still, I spent most of my time just editing.
Sure.
Well, that's what, so what I want to ask you is, what has changed in your views since
Dynamics in Action?
And, you know, besides just expanding, you know, you cover like so many different constraints
and topics in this book.
But what I wanted to comment on before that is, one of the reasons why I'm going to have
to go back to it over and over is because the terminology and is, you're like inventing
some of it.
But a lot of it is kind of still, for me, still fuzzy in terms of like what it actually,
like it's definition and how, like how I set the boundaries, you know, with these terms
and what they mean and how I can use them.
And so, you know, and we'll come back to this, but anyway, that's why I'm going to be revisiting
a lot.
So maybe let's start with, you know, what's changed in 25 years in your thinking?
I think what's changed is that when I wrote Dynamics in Action, I basically meant it as
a brief against analytic action theory.
Okay.
Can you summarize analytic action theory?
Well, the idea that either that intentional behavior, intentional action, you know, the
book starts with what's the difference between a wink and a blink, difference being that
you should be able to explain away anything that philosophy of mind considers intentionality
or intention.
So teleology was reduced away.
The idea of contentful intentions were reduced away.
And so my thought was, because I had published a number of standalone papers about what's
wrong with behaviorist reductions of intention, what's wrong with identity theory attempts
to reduce intentions is on, that complex dynamical systems theory was a very good way of entering
this whole field that would solve a lot of the problems or wouldn't get you into the
problems that all these other attempts did.
But in the last 20-some years, I keep thinking, you know, most stuff in reality is irreversible.
Most stuff is context.
So it applies not just to action, but it applies a lot more broadly.
And so I think I stick my neck out a bit more with respect to general ontology or general
cosmology by using the same notion of constraint more broadly than just for action.
Yeah.
Well, I had to revisit dynamics in action.
As you know, and as you write about in your newer book, Context Changes Everything, neuroscience
has embraced the dynamical systems perspective.
And you talk about some of the studies that, you know, some of the people who have been
in those studies have been on this podcast.
On this podcast, we talk a lot about the dynamical systems view.
And then going back to dynamics in action, it's like, oh, my God, it's all there already.
I mean...
Thank you.
It's fascinating to me that somebody like Mark Churchland, whom I use in one of the chapters,
is the son of Paul and Patricia Churchland, who were the foremost advocates of the liminative...
Right.
Oh, I didn't even think of that.
Everything is as a mind.
I'm thinking, oh, my goodness, this is the revenge par excellence of dynamical systems
theory.
Because I once met Paul Churchland here in DC, Dick Schlagel at GW, and invited him
to speak.
And I asked him back then, this must have been, this must have been just about when Context
Changes...
I went and dynamics came up.
It was years ago.
And I...
Haven't you ever considered cut dynamical systems theory?
That has nothing to say about neurology or the reality of the case.
Paul Churchland said that in person, and I've never forgotten, I'm thinking, no.
And the reason I was almost sure that was so is because, but way back when, I was talking
a lot to people in operations, research and network theory and that kind of thing.
And they're like, you know what, there's got to be a network property in the brain that
has emergent properties that somehow loops back down and is able to influence behaviors
such that these emergent properties get realized in behavior.
That's the difference between an action proper and behavior.
There's got to be some of that.
But no, I think that just traditional notions of causality, traditional notions of ontology,
that only the tiny little fundamental components are real.
So it was all, let's look for the neuron.
Right.
It does this.
Yeah.
So I find it really, really very rewarding that dynamical systems theory has been vindicated
in a sense.
Yeah.
I wonder what the elder Churchlands, their daughter is also in neuroscience, by the way.
I wonder what they think of the dynam...
I wonder if they've come around at all because the tagline sort of of eliminateitivism is
that folk psychology, the words that we use in folk psychology aren't real things, right?
And then there's a reductionist way to understand things and that's the best way.
But the dynamical systems viewpoint kind of, it's kind of in between that, right?
Because it allows for a top-down thing, but it doesn't necessarily say anything about the
terms and concepts we use.
Well, that's why I think I stick my neck out in this one where it seems to me that what
those folk psychology terms mean, represent, are what dynamical system theorists would
call the constraint regime that holds the dynamics together.
And so they are capturing an emergent property that is powerful and that's where the whole
problem of causality kept bugging me because, thinking, Carl Gillette's book on reduction
and emergence where he says, you know, nowadays the physicists, like Brian Rocklin, for example,
have espoused the truth or the reality of emergent properties.
But they still don't want to allow that those emergent properties are causally influential
on their components.
In other words, they cannot change behavior.
They cannot change in a sense neural architecture in virtue of their emergent
properties. Whereas that's what I think complex dynamical systems let's you do.
Maybe we could suggest that way into causality around a lot.
No, that's great.
You'll have to. I do it too.
So we're going to be in a real swamp here pretty soon.
But, you know, so one of the things in dynamics and action also is, you know, you've
railed against this modern notion of efficient causation as the only valid kind of causation.
And since you're just talking about causality, maybe we should talk about that.
And then I want to come back to also what you have changed your mind about perhaps since then.
But so, you know, famously, there are these four different types of causations from Aristotle's
days, from Aristotle, and an efficient causation, the billiard ball that thing X hits things
Y and then that moves things thing Y. That's the only valid kind of causation.
And a lot of your labor is trying to bring back notions of the other of formal
causality and causality via constraint.
And so do you think that and from my limited perspective, because I'm reading works like
yours and like a lot of similar kinds of works that are trying to bring make teleology not
such a bad word and bring like these constraints to bear, because of that, I feel like the old
story, the modern story of efficient causation is the only causation.
I feel like that's dissipating.
Do you believe that also?
I think it's still very present in physics, especially with regards to the kind of causality
that we would call top down causality, that in fact, emergent properties really are not
causally powerful, that all the heavy lifting, as Van Orten would say, it all happens bottom
up. And so it's really to be explained through efficient energetic transfer.
But I think that's because the idea of causality as efficient boxes you into the the
boxes you into the impossibility of top down causation, because if there were top down
causation with that kind of causality, you'd have over determination, you'd have a violation
of the closure of the physical and you'd have all these problems.
And so therefore no way that can't happen.
Well, but if you think of what I found fascinating, that's one of the reasons why I
adopted the notion of constraint was every time natural scientists, hard scientists got into
trouble thinking in terms of efficient causality, then immediately the term starts being used as,
well, it's factors or conditions or constraints that are causal.
Well, okay, so I'll grant you efficient causality as the term for cause.
So let's call it influence by constraint.
And that's what I was trying to do, because I certainly don't want to go to an
environmental notion of formal cause.
I don't want to go to, you know, Deus Ex Machina, or, or your, you know, Paley's
teleology, or even Aristotle's teleology, which was all built in, set up from the beginning.
That's the way that that's why that's why Darwin, Darwin bought into this.
And so Darwin thought he was very concerned about the notion of evolution.
He said you have new species appearing that that would mean that it wasn't all built in
from the start.
And therefore this developmental process was only an unfurling of preexisting
potential.
And what I want to say is that constraints really create new potential, because I think
that's what you get from prigazine.
I think that's what prigazine gets the, he was the good pregoser now that we think
about it.
He was the one who he got the Nobel Prize for dissipated structures, I think for that
very reason.
But you mentioned physics, and maybe it's just in biology that the notion of circular
causality and causality via constraint is more comfortable among biologists.
I think the biologists, biology was the last holdout.
They refused to get shoehorned into the model of efficient mechanical causality.
And as I was reading your email and reading one of the latest issues of Science Magazine
on Australia, you know, they're talking about the dispersal of distribution of black
beans throughout Australia.
And the assumption was, well, this precedes the Westerners who arrived in Australia.
But now they're revisiting the idea that some of the salt lines of the native Australians
have accounts of these plants and the dispersion.
So the Science Magazine article talks about combining not only the genetic flow of the
genes of the black bean plant, but also biogeography and these ethnographic accounts.
So I think that you see it now more in ecology, in addition to just straight biology.
But you see it.
And of course, the social scientists have always used other causal factors as their
reasons. But of course, that's what led the heart scientists to say, well, that proves
they're not sciences.
The social scientists, because they need to, because they need to appeal to you
unique causes to things that don't scale as a universal law.
And because they use top down factors that are not efficient causes, that shows for
sure they're not science.
Before maybe this can just be a jumping off point to any of these can be jumping off
points because we can go any direction.
But have you changed your mind about anything in particular with regard to the story of
context and constraints over the last quarter century?
No, I've just sort of expect, I think I focus more on context independent constraints,
because what I think that does.
And hang on, I'll just say context independence means it's an external constraint that
drives a system far from equilibrium, like a gradient or gravity, etc.
It pulls on the system.
Gradient, particularly.
And when you start looking at the different kinds of gradients, either the spatial
temporal gradients of gravity, you know, the gravitational.
I like that you just illustrated gravity right there.
That means that that space, time is not homogenous and uniform.
There are inhomogeneities in space and time.
Polarities, we know the importance of polarities all over the place.
We have polarities in electric and magnetic, but also in developmental anterior
posterior, right and left in the development of an embryo.
There are we have.
I think in social systems, we certainly have levels of organization that would
give you different different points of equilibrium at different stages.
So I think the importance of that, the importance of boundary conditions, I think,
as a setting for a context.
So basically, I think of the of context independent constraints as those that
determine, in a sense, the bounds of possibility space.
They kind of determine the basic fundamental characteristics of possibility space.
But you need both context independent and context dependent.
And I'll just briefly define context, context dependent constraints are those
that which bring things back essentially away from context independence, which means
more toward equilibrium.
And when you get these mixing and match, maybe not.
I know, I know, I just caught myself saying more toward equilibrium.
But away from independence, we'll say maybe that's correct.
Yeah.
But when you get these interacting is when when you can have the ability to develop
complex systems.
I think the reason I had given context free context independent constraints short
shrift back when is because I don't think context independent constraints.
Complexify, they don't they don't enable complexity.
All you get in principle would be a clump.
Yeah.
Correct.
They wouldn't match the poles.
Yeah.
And clumps and masses and agglomerations have no emergent properties.
So context independent constraints don't don't create complexity.
Once you have a a a space of possibilities with a certain in
homogeneity in it, then I think complex dependent constraints can kick in.
My question is, well, why do they show up?
Why do context independent constraints appear?
And I'm wondering whether, again, the boundary conditions, if if if the clumps
are dense enough and they can't move much, then do accidental linkages?
The indeterminism, are you hinting at indeterminism in the universe?
Even the bumps and jostlings of regular Brownian motion, that if if there, I always
try to ground what I say in in heart sciences.
And I always end up going back to things like the Bernard cells and the BZ reaction.
Otherwise, I'm very worried that philosophers will be accused of flights of
fancy that are not grounded in anything scientific.
And so I keep thinking, all right, so you've got Bernard cells and a pan of
water heated uniformity from below and at a certain threshold of non-equilibrium,
in other words, at a certain gradient, correct?
Yep.
The status quo cannot be maintained.
In other words, conduction cannot be maintained.
And so the system flips to linking individual water molecules into local perturbation.
But if that gets amplified by the conditions, then it becomes a self
reinforcing feedback loop.
And that's, I think, where you see the context dependent constraint kicking in.
That then the linkages create standalone units.
Almost like when you're playing hangman.
You know, we know that instinctively, because if we have towards the end of a
word that we don't know what that is, a T and then an I, well, there are two more to go.
Well, it's either going to be NG or ON, because these form like standalone
units, because they, the context dependence concatenates and becomes a standalone unit.
And now you've got in language, you'd have a phony, right?
But in, that's what a laser is.
A laser is context dependent constraints of a whole bunch of photon streams getting
linked together in a way that they become a standalone entity with emergent properties.
Yeah.
So you're talking about, and you just mentioned why you use these examples,
because they're less dangerous, I suppose, because they're in some
sense simpler, more, I'm going to say low dimensional, because they're like from physics.
So it feels more comfortable.
Maybe that's a way to say it, but you do venture into these more, you know,
like biological systems in the book.
And one of the questions I had for you is, so I'm glad that you're sometimes
pausing just a little bit before you say causality or something.
Yeah, I always do.
Yeah.
Because that's where immediately a physicist will say, no, that's not causality.
Yeah, right, right.
Well, then like, and then I don't know what's going on in your head if you're
searching for a different term, because, or, you know, alternative types of terms,
because, you know, reading your book, and one of the reasons why I need to
revisit it multiple times.
And I look forward to it is just because things feel so new to me and the
terminology so new that I don't feel like they don't feel comfortable, right?
So I'm trying to think like, how do I apply this term?
And how does this concept interact with this kind of constraint?
And they're interlocking in dependencies.
And how do I think about applied to the brain?
And so what I'm wondering is, are these going to feel, you're the expert.
How do these feel super comfortable to you?
Just switching and thinking about these things, interacting and the different modalities?
I wish I had made, I had coined the term enabling constraints.
It goes back to Patty, Howard Patty, and a whole bunch of these biologists who
talked several of whose books have the same similar title hierarchy theory.
And it's because the enabling constraint is able to create a self-organization that
can then also embed in the next higher up level of constraints.
So I particularly want to use the notion of enabling constraints as constraints that
enable the formation of a more complex dynamic.
And that is, and how does that relate to a limiting constraint?
Contrast that with a limiting?
That would be the, I think we tend to use the term constraint, especially in physics
and in mechanical engineering, especially as limiting, as closing off options.
But the biologists tend to use them very often as factors, conditions, feedback
loops, catalysts.
See, the nice thing about the notion of a catalyst, two things, a lot of things.
One is it spans chemistry and biology.
And even in so-and-so as a catalyst of change, and we say that of people.
So it's used in that sense, but also because a catalyst is conserved.
It does not use up any energy of its own.
And so what I like about that notion is that it's a causal factor.
It's a causal, it's an influencer.
That is not in the efficient causality mode.
So are feedback loops.
And the thing about a feedback loop, which I love, is that for eons, since I was on
that never change, the idea of something creating itself or feeding back on itself
to change itself was forbidden, was verboten.
Because, again, from Aristotle's notion, then it would have to be before and after itself.
It would have to be before itself is caused.
It would have to be after itself is caused.
Oh, no, you can't have that.
The notion of simultaneous causality does not allow for parts interacting to produce
holes that have emergent properties, which then simultaneously loop back down and
constrain the parts of which the hole is made up.
And so that's why I love the notion of feedback loops and catalysts in particular.
But then I think once that hole coalesces, then you've got stabilizing
constraints, because it has to hold together for a persistent length of time.
Because unlike neuroequilibrium thermodynamics, the thing doesn't fall apart.
The thing about these Ben-Arts cells is that while the conditions hold, it holds
together despite changes at the component level.
Perturbations, yeah.
So fluctuations, internal fluctuations and perturbations, it has a metastability, which
I also like, which is different from thermal equilibrium of classical
neuroequilibrium thermodynamics.
While the thing holds, it has a stabilizing power to stabilize the
constraint regime as a whole.
And what is it?
You say it has a stabilizing power.
That's the whole.
What is the dynamic constraint regime that constitutes a Ben-Arts cell?
A Ben-Arts cell is not a thing other than the water molecules that make it up.
Or the constraints that go into establishing the conditions that make it up.
The boundary conditions as context-independent constraints.
And then the linkages of the molecules.
Yeah.
Right?
Yeah.
Yeah, it's just so hard to think of across scales, these myriological.
Yes, it's extremely difficult to think across scale, because we tend to think
in terms of efficient cause across scale.
Yeah.
And all of these biologists was, I always wondered for a long time, why did these
biologists like Stan Salti, Howard Patti, a lot of them started talking about
semiotics and semiosm, why did they ever get into this?
And it finally dawned on me because the relationship between levels of
organization and Herbert Simon knew this.
The near decomposability.
Relations of constraint, they're not relations of energetic exchange, right?
So the higher level is a form of constraint on the possibility space of
the lower level.
So it doesn't let it veer off and disintegrate.
It's interesting the word integrity.
It's beautifully here because it just holds it together.
Yeah.
So when I think of top-down constraints, those are limiting because they hold
that possibility space within a dynamic range.
And so the thing holds, an organism holds together.
Our metabolism might change, a spleen might be removed, a goldbladder might be
removed with a constraint regime holds.
Can you name something that is not an emergent property of something else?
Oh, culture.
Culture is not an emergent property?
Culture is an emergent property.
Do you want me to-
No, can you name something that's not an emergency?
Oh, quantity is emergent, but it's not an interesting emergence.
Okay.
So that's fine.
No, thank you.
That's a good point.
When I think of emergent properties, the emergent properties that I'm interested
in are qualitatively different properties that affect the behavior of the component
level so that that qualitative property continues in effect.
That's why homeostasis, I think of as an emergent property that has interesting
features, because it controls the goings-on at the lower level such that homeostasis
homostatic balance holds.
Whereas a whole bunch of pile of debris in my backyard.
It's still emergent with respect to-
Balance.
Balance.
Is what?
Science.
It's bigger.
Well, it's bigger, but if you throw a bowling ball into it, it would be harder to move
than if you just had one piece of debris out there, right?
Well, that's true, but it does not change the characteristics of any of the-
There's no top-down.
There's no-
All right.
There's no top-down.
See, that's what's been driving my thinking for 20-some years, right?
And that is, how can you explain top-down causality without falling victim or making the mistakes of
and all that other stuff?
And that's what I think complex dynamical systems gives me.
And I think the rise of ecology in the last 25 years has helped enormously,
because we used to think, oh, well, we can kill off the plank, then that's not a big deal.
Right.
Yeah, yeah.
Correct?
And the thing is the understanding that it may mess up the constraint regime that holds the whole
thing together is the idea that there are systemic properties that really affect the components.
I think that's gone a long way to making us aware of top-down,
in a respectable scientific way.
On the other hand, one of the features of complex self-organizing systems is their robustness.
So if you did kill off all the mosquitoes, we might be okay.
I suspect, though, I think robustness means that they degrade gracefully.
I like that.
That it doesn't fall apart the way if you break the axle on a bicycle that will try to go whatever.
That will just, the thing won't work at all.
It seems as though complex dynamical systems, far from equilibrium,
they get a bit out of kilter, but they continue to work for a fair amount of time until then it
reaches its level of instability that that constraint regime cannot hold.
New phase change coming up.
And you get an entirely new phase change that falls apart.
So I suspect that if we killed off all the mosquitoes,
we do not know what might enter that, that open niche now.
Right. Yeah. Well, there's been all sorts of disasters with introducing
a non-native species to kill off one thing.
It turns out they're invasive.
Exactly. I suspect we've got to be careful because of that kind of problem.
Before the thing falls apart, you might have some really nasty surprises that you didn't expect.
Hey, you mentioned homeostasis and again, we're going to jump around.
But I had Henry Yin on and I've had a few other people on who talk about the brain
more as a control system than necessarily a complex system that we need to think about
things more in sort of the old cybernetics way of a control system.
However, the set point of our thermometer is not set externally.
We're setting our own set point, right?
So homeostasis is in certain bounds.
Well, that's what I was going to ask you about.
How do you think, rather, about when we're setting our internal desired temperature,
let's say, that we need to be around 98.6?
How do you think about that?
Where does that set point come from?
Bottom up, top down, or is it just the-
I think everything, not only comes up, bottom up, top down, but
pass forward.
I think-
Pass forward, environment and-
We forget temporal constraints as well.
For example, folks up in the Himalayas and in the Andes have a whole different
oxygen hemoglobin.
Capacity.
Capacity and characteristic because of centuries of adaptability, millennia of adaptability.
So we forget temporal constraints as well, right?
It seems as though the same temperature in the fall feels colder than it does in the spring,
because by the time we get to the spring, we've had a whole winter.
So I think it's multi-dimensional, multi-scalar,
temporally, I think we forget time.
And all of these complex dynamical systems, I remember a phrase of Prigogenes,
I was fortunate enough to meet him a couple of times, and I've never seen this
written down, but he used to use that phrase more than once in person.
They carry their history on their back.
Oh, I like that.
I love that phrase.
In other words, their very dynamical architecture and characteristics embody,
and that's where the 4E is coming, embody the conditions under which they were created,
evolved and so on.
His examples were snowflakes.
They might have all started with the same, but over the time that they fell to earth,
they, their actual architecture changes to embody the temperature, the pressure,
the, all the atmospheric conditions through which they modified themselves and adapted
and until they reached the ground.
So I think that's true for us as well, for body temperature, for body states.
I'm, I'm fascinated by that whole notion of inflammation, all the, all these set points
that I think, in a sense, those mark the parameters of what you might call the constraint dome.
You know, we've got the proteome.
Oh, there it is.
There's the word, the constraint dome.
I just, I just, I was reading proteome and epigenome and stuff.
Well, you know, we need a constraint dome.
We do.
Well, that's all in your book.
The constraint dome is it.
Yeah, but I don't, I've never occurred to me to use that phrase, which I like,
because it's a whole bunch of them together at once.
Right.
Right.
That's the problem and sort of just mentally trying to imagine these things.
But real quick, you know, you mentioned temporal constraints, but in a sense,
this is a question, all or most constraints are temporal in nature because a constraint is,
by definition, slower than the process that it's constrained.
Like a catalyst, right, is more stable than the reaction that it's catalyzing and that's,
so it can act as a constraint.
Correct.
But then the cells which enable the tissues, the cell dynamics, which enable the tissues,
that's faster than the, than the, so, so you have a whole bunch of, so therefore,
what's important are the interfaces between the levels of organization.
And what are the, what are the constraints that govern those interfaces?
And we would call them what, codes, rules, laws, but local, but local, very, oftentimes very local,
right?
Right.
Well, that's so, okay, there's this, a lot of the physical laws, like, like, you know,
the notion of a force, right?
For some reason, well, when you think about it, it's, it doesn't make any sense.
But for some reason, when you grow up with it in physics classes and you think, oh,
force, I know what a force is, but when you really think about it, it becomes very unnatural,
like saying the same word over and over and you lose its meaning.
Are these ideas going to seem as natural to me, eventually, as the concept of a force,
which is, it turns out, a slippery idea also?
I would hope so, but that's what I'm always worried about, about neologisms and, and I
worried about using the word constraint, but it seemed as though it was...
What else would you call it?
Better than a cause, because as if I, if I use the word cause, then the assumption that
that has to be energetic transfer, that's almost a, that's a losing battle.
That's why.
So I don't know what else to cause, call it, but to think in terms of enabling constraints is bottom
up that, that within certain boundary, within certain context independent frameworks, they
can generate emergent properties, which in turn operate as second order top down context
dependent constraints, if you will.
It's easier to just call a constraint regime.
Yeah.
Okay, regime to the word.
Hold the, the components together so that they continue to satisfy the emergent properties
of the whole.
Do you feel like we'll, we will be able to write a constraint cookbook to generate dynamical
complex systems that we want to generate eventually?
If we think of it as formal systems, the way we used to where you would have a universal law,
yeah, Newton's laws of motion.
And I think my answer is no, because if I'm emphasizing context dependence,
those laws would be what car popper would call, well, yeah, those applies to, to a normal science.
But evolution to a whole new constraint structure, to a whole new constraint regime,
such as the transition, I would say, from physics to chemistry, chemistry to biology,
biology to psychology first, or sociology first, or whatever you want to call it,
and on and on and on, that requires a whole new constraint regime.
It's a, it's a, it's a topological nightmare, nightmare and transition.
You know what's interesting?
Prigazine detested catastrophe theory.
And I never understood why.
This idea that Peter Allen, who worked with him for, with Prigazine for a long time,
you know Peter Allen's work?
Peter Allen, really nice work.
He's retired now from Cranfield in England.
But he did a lot of work with Prigazine in Brussels at the Free University.
And the idea that the transition from independent photon streams to a laser,
the transition from a independent water molecules to a benign cell,
the transition from a whole bunch of chemical transformations to a living organism,
is a, is akin to a, to a bifurcation, to a topological bifurcation,
that you have entirely new coordinates that apply at this new level.
That to me gives
reality to emergent properties.
Oh, ontologically real?
Oh, I, I wanted to say ontologically real.
Okay, that's dangerous.
I don't have to worry about, about tenure.
So I don't have to worry about, about retreating to epistemology
where the going gets stuff.
So well, you know, that's our models.
And that's the way we make sense of information overload.
And so, no, damn it.
I want to say they are, they are ontologically real.
That, that the constraint regime that holds a benign cell together
or a culture together or a laser together.
Are real.
They are not stuff.
They are not things.
I certainly don't want to reify them.
But I don't see why we don't allow the dynamical interdependencies,
which is all these constraint regimes are, right?
They are, they are interlocking interdependencies.
I thought, I thought reify meant make real.
Oh, well, yeah, sure.
Part of it, but, but then only stuff, stuff is real.
Oh, okay.
Okay.
So therefore process is our real process.
That's why Whitehead rails against the reification
because he emphasized that processes are real.
And I want to say, and the constraints that keep processes
within a certain space, face space are also real.
They are as real as the face space they are kept into.
Which one do you give, do you give more credence to processes
or are you a process philosopher, so to speak?
Good question.
You know, dynamical systems theory seems to place
and if nothing else equal to the links as the nodes.
Yeah.
The question of whether the nodes or condensates,
Mark Bergauer uses that term, the condensates of links
of a lot of stable linkages.
Oh, that's cool.
And the nodes as stable condensates, no, as nodes are condensates
of stable links or those that happen very often and so on.
So it's hard to say, in this new book, I stick my neck out
because I did not realize that there's still a question
about exactly what covalent bonds are.
Oh, yeah.
I think when you dig into any established thing,
there's, we realize, yeah.
There you go.
And the interconversion of matter and energy certainly says,
well, you know, so is a material thing simply the condensate
of a bunch of constrained energy forces, links and constraints,
or are the forces and the links, the manifestation
or the behavior of the, then if relativity theory is correct,
which I'm assuming, then it doesn't matter.
They're interconvertebral, right?
But again, they're very local.
See, I want to, I was thinking, how on earth can I argue for a local science?
I'm going to be laughed out of the room if I argue for a local science.
But this is kind of what Bill Wimsat hints at in the causal ticket, right?
Thank you, thank you, thank you.
I have a sweet spot in my heart for Bill Wimsat, even though I've never met him,
because I learned that he, I don't know who told me or how I'd learned about it.
He was on the committee that approved my first paper.
Oh, oh.
His action theory rests on a mistake.
And so I think that I published that first paper so many years ago.
Wow, that's awesome.
I think Wimsat is fact, you know, and that brings in the notion of explanation, how
he's been arguing that sometimes explanations look upwards, not just downwards.
Why?
Because if you do believe that there are emergent properties and they are causally constrained.
With the eye roll, folks, who are only messing with me.
Exactly.
Then you have to be able to make reference in any complete explanation to its influence
as well as to the influence of the bottom up components, which is the way we tend to,
we always look downwards.
Yeah.
And let me tell you, I think the reason folks like David Chalmers and Company,
all this business about psycho, panpsychism.
Panpsychism, yeah.
I think what's driving that is that any time you find top down causality, you cannot much
deny, that's got to be mental.
Well, let's put it differently.
It's got to be top down and it's a constraint regime influencing its components.
But I don't want to say that they're just as chemical properties are emergent for physical,
biological properties are emergent from chemical, psychic properties are emergent
at a certain level of organization.
I don't want to say that that emergent property way up at the psychic level also exists.
I really don't want to say the Bernard cell is thinking.
Or is conscious or is aware.
But I do want to say there is a top down phenomenon.
I think I suspect that a lot of what's driving the panpsychic.
What would we call it?
Fad?
I hope so.
I cannot imagine that anybody's taking tears.
I think it's a, it's a, that's all I can do.
Let's call it paradigm to give it a little more credence than fad.
I don't want to get in trouble, Alicia.
Okay, I have to talk about that.
I just spoke at the theory of consciousness conference in Taramina this past spring.
And I suddenly realized I said the same thing I talked about.
I talked with that conference in Antwerp 20 some years ago.
And I was left out of the rule 20 some years ago.
Oh, wow.
I was talking about constraints and dynamical systems and so on.
Going, now interesting, you get a lot of this talk about constraints.
Say, I mean, people were talking a lot about constraints.
What is the lesson from that?
Because you've stuck to your guns and did you just brush that off your back?
And this is an aside, it's more of a personal question, you know,
because a lot of people face laughter or dismissal.
Well, I wasn't literally left out, but I was ignored.
And nobody asked me questions and they just said it's the equivalent.
People were polite.
Maybe they didn't understand it.
Well, I didn't explain it clearly.
But I think it was just, it didn't fit the standard bottom up identity theory
or supervenience theory, which was what was popular at the time,
or eliminatism, I never can say, at the time.
So it was ignored just as, I hate to say it, absolutely.
You know, Bill Bechtel, who's a nice guy and he's very good.
He's a new mechanist.
He's a mechanisms all the way proponent.
Well, if you look at his mechanics, they've sort of changed.
And he came to Cuba, he and Adele came to Cuba with me in a conference
I organized in Havana years ago.
And I think his mechanism is not your grandmother's mechanism.
That's true.
But he's adapted, like you just said.
But it's sort of like, come on, Bill, just acknowledge complex, dynamical.
Can't do it.
It's kind of, yeah.
Well, it's hard to change your mind when you've done it so wrong.
Yeah.
You mentioned explanation a few minutes ago.
So in dynamics and action, I think the last chapter or the next last chapter,
you make a call for the necessity of explaining these sorts of myriological
interactions in terms of hermeneutics or a narrative story.
And in this newer book, I think I searched and I think hermeneutics was in there maybe once or
twice.
But you also talk, you bring up the idea of order parameters, which are kind of like
these hyperparameters of dynamical systems.
So I'm wondering where you stand in terms of explanation.
My original thought was, well, if I could just list all the constraints and the
types of constraints and how they're interacting, is that an explanation?
Do I need a narrative story?
Are these order parameters?
What would satisfy me or a reviewer of a paper as an explanation of some cognitive
function, for example?
Well, I used the term hermeneutics.
Another eye roll.
Another eye roll.
Yeah.
I mean, I don't like neologism, although that hermeneutics goes back to biblical
existence.
Right.
Well, that's, yeah, when you look it up, it's all about the Bible.
But your point was to go across levels.
You really need to account for these things.
And narrative might be the only way to do that.
Gertz's notion that I borrowed that back then from Cliff Gertz, who almost defined
her hermeneutics and said, it's kind of like sailing.
You have to tack from the very global to the very local, back to the global, back to
the local, and see how all these constraints interact and change each other.
And I love also the notion of mutual constraint satisfaction, which is what I think is happening.
I think probably narrative does a way better job of accomplishing that
than a Hempel and Oppenheimer, Hempel and Oppenheimer,
deductive, nomological model.
So to that extent, I don't think I've changed my tune.
I just, I'm not using the notion of narrative.
When somebody nowadays says, Proust's Madeline's, you bring up the whole constraint regime of the
culture of his history, of his childhood, of his experience, that to me is almost like an
order of parameter. It's a parameter in that it is the intersection of a whole bunch of different
independent variables that together give you a whole tapestry of a whole different face,
possibility space. Could you think of a concept as a constraint?
I think I certainly think of a concept of a constraint and a framework, a cognitive framework
being a whole tapestry of concepts. But in such as cognitive, it's emotional.
I mean, think of, think of, think of all faction. And all faction does not
go directly to the cortex initially, right? But I think a concept has a lot of
characteristics that are important. One is they're multiply realizable.
That's a big theme in your book.
That's a big theme in my book because a triangle or triangularity as a concept
is multiply realizable. It's not a one-to-one
capture of the individual physical features of one instance. And I think that we know the child
is able to, has understood the concept when they're able to apply that concept to an instance they
haven't seen before or they were not taught about. So I think that's extremely important.
I think what a local constraint regime does is it captures a type, what philosophers used to call
types and universals, or a concept or what we would call an emotion. Not this emotion now here.
An emotion, yeah.
You know, this type of emotion. It's a bunch of constraint regimes that can be identified
with a term like fear or anger or pleasure or avoid an approach. All these are code terms.
To that extent, the reductions, they're code terms, but they do capture something very real.
And that is a whole complex constraint regime.
That kind of swirls around this, let's say, fear or something. It takes with it, you know,
fight or flight, et cetera. And it's almost like a process that is itself kind of condensated to
use your term earlier, but still a process and brings with it, carries with it on its back
its history and all of the things associated with it.
Correct, correct, correct.
Yeah. Okay, so I didn't tell you this. And I know we're jumping around. I actually
elicited a few guest questions from previous guests. The first one I'm going to play for you,
and this is kind of kind of maybe segue into a conversation about minds and brains and then
later AI. The first one I'm going to play to you is from Kevin Mitchell. I'm going to have him
back on the podcast in a couple of weeks about his new book, Agents, Free Agents,
How Free Well Gave Us Agency.
Okay, so I'm just going to play this to you, make sure that you can hear it.
Hi, Alicia. This is Kevin Mitchell. I really loved your new book, which very clearly lays out the
case that constraints are causes. That is that the way things are organized is every bit as much of
a cause of how they evolve through time as the basic laws and forces of physics. In particular,
you highlight the really key idea of enabling constraints, especially in hierarchical systems,
that organizing the elements at one level can enable new kinds of properties to emerge at higher
levels. You say in chapter 16 that emergent properties and powers were not merely waiting to
be revealed. They are genuine creations of path dependent, multiple constraint satisfaction.
And I wanted to push back on that a little and suggest that, in fact, many of the organizations
we see in living organisms and design systems are there because of some functionality.
They serve a useful purpose, and that many such functional motifs or architectures
are in fact waiting to be revealed. Under this view, a lot of the design work done by evolution
is actually an exploration of a kind of platonic design space, followed by retention of useful
motifs rather than a real creation de novo. So I wonder what you make of that notion. Thanks.
All right, so that was a long one, but did you get it all?
Yes, I think I got it all. That's a heck of a question, because I think logically, of course,
there is a platonic, maybe undercurrent. But in fact, I think I'm more like Aristotle did not
believe that Plato's forms existed in a transcendental realm. And I want to stay agnostic about
that. But I certainly want to say that they are embodied and revealed and acted upon
in virtue of the confluence of these constraints occurring at a particular moment, at a particular
time. Locally. You know, I think I used to think of myself more as a platonist when I remember
getting into philosophy. And I got into philosophy because back in the day, a lot of schools allowed
you to, if you were not a science or math major or engineering major, you could substitute a
symbolic logic course for math requirement as one of your requirements. Anything to get rid of,
not to do math, which I am sorry, I did. But when I took the first philosophy course, it was like
discovering a whole new platonic world. It was like, you know, if I'd taken another history course,
yeah, you know, it's another king, another queen, another war, another this. But this was like a
whole new floor in a building that I'd never seen before. That's that kind of transformation.
But more and more, I want to kind of remain grounded and rooted to
natural phenomena. So I really want to naturalize my arguments and speculating about a platonic
transcendental realm. Well, he said a kind of platonic. He hedged a little bit. Well, if that's
the case, then I'm perfectly happy with his book that way. So that what is the kind? Well,
in Aristotle's case, it's the Aristotle believed in forms. It's just that he believed in embodied
forms and forms as they were. And so what I want to say is that they are created by this confluence
of constraints. My main concern is to make sure that they are taken seriously such that
meaning is taken seriously. In other words, the unembedding
organizational level gives meaning to the components. The amount of
glucose in a fudge brownie that I can eat and not get sick is given meaning by what my homeostasis
metabolism is operating as. Well, yeah, you're okay now, but don't do it very often kind of thing.
So that meaning is the multiple realizability of the ambiguous
aspect being disambiguated by context. But but not not and I use the word context very deliberately.
I don't want to use context to mean any old environment. I want to mean the environment
in which a system is embedded and from which it has drawn some of its context is enabling constraints
and in terms of which it implements its stabilizing or top down constraints. So so
I want to say these are these are new and the properties are real so that
yes, superconductivity and a laser has brand new properties that are real. Did they exist in a
pre existing platonic realm? I don't think I want to speculate on that. I'm perfectly happy
so long and to me real means it has causal power. It has some kind of it makes it makes a difference.
If it's any phenomenal, you know, then I don't that kind of emergence. Yeah, weak emerges that
kind of mergers doesn't interest me that much. Okay, I don't want to speak for Kevin, but
kind of reformulating his question, you know, a lot of what you and the field and dynamical
systems theories talks about is these state spaces and when you're on a dynamical like when
you're on a trajectory within the state space, you can visit different areas within the state
space, not all of them and the constraints constrain where you can visit in the state
space, right? But if you I wonder if that that kind of platonic realm that Kevin is alluding to
is you can think of it as the state space that whether a state space is a real thing, right,
on a trajectory, later we can say that we can define the state space by the trajectory and the
boundary conditions of the possible values that it could have taken. But if it's not visiting
a particular area of the state space, would that and it did, would that then be a new thing?
Or would it be visiting a thing for which it already had a capacity for and thinking in terms
of like the functions that Kevin was talking about? I think that's what normal science is. Normal
science is the visiting of areas in a possibility space. It hadn't visited before, but it's pretty
much the same possibility space. I think that's development, biology. I think evolution. I think
there are times when it's the entire possibility space that is new. That's what I want to call
a creative emergent characteristic. Is this related to Stuart Kaufman's adjacent possible idea?
Maybe. Whether we go step by step going from each adjacent possible or in the case of a
Bernard cell, it doesn't seem that it's adjacent possible. It seems as though there's a threshold
of instability on which you need to reorganize all the parameters, all the variables. Everything
acquires a different meaning because it's in a qualitatively different space.
It seems to me that's what happens, for example, a cell in a petri dish as opposed to a cell
within a tissue. It's a different qualitative phenomenon. It's the new possibility space
that I want to say is being created is an emergent quality. It's not just a new
corner in the existing possibility space. I'm perfectly happy going adjacent possible.
This is from Max Shine, who's been on the podcast. He calls himself a systems neurobiologist,
and he really tries to think across scales. A lot of his research is dealing with things
like how neuromodulation interacts with network level things. These things are hard to think about
and to research, obviously. Let me pull up this question. Hi, Alicia. This is Max Shine from
the University of Sydney. When we think about top-down constraints over bottom-up activity,
we often invoke concepts like the self. I can imagine myself being hungry and that will help
constrain the types of actions that I might take in order to find food and satiate my hunger.
There are a number of really fascinating situations, like the so-called flow state
and also states with pharmacological manipulation, when the sense of self can dissolve. Yet you
still see quite coherent cross-scale behavior. People don't just crumble into a heap. They can
still perform music and sports at a high level or have a nice walk through the forest. My question
is, do you view the sense of self as an illusion, or do you think of it just as one of many ways in
which a system that's organized across scales can be organized? Thanks. Max wants to know
whether his question was better than Kevin's. No, I'm just kidding. No, they're very good, both of
them. You know, I keep thinking how, with Gazaniga's experiments with the cut corpus callosum,
that there were a whole bunch of weird things like we discovered about somebody was shown an
image to the right eye, another image to the left eye, and people confabulated.
And so you wonder if in these cases where the self seems to dissolve,
there's nevertheless enough connectivity to maintain a coherent structure.
Structure being the self? What's the structure? Yes, I would say a dynamic, a whole dynamic
constraint that keeps being you. To a lesser example, I think people who sleep walk or who are
hypnotized will nevertheless not bump into the coffee table. They go around the coffee table.
But these could be sort of on the automatic side of behavior, right? So there's automatic and
controlled processes. Right, right. So that, well, but there is control enough that you walk and you
don't, you maintain an awareness. Right, but maybe the flow state would be, because Max mentioned the
flow state, when that is like when your automatic processes take over, but you still barely have
some sort of control and you're in a heightened, you're trying really hard and it kind of switches
and then you're watching yourself do it kind of. Yeah, yeah. And you wonder whether we can,
could that be a bit like these optical illusions where you can see one side and not the other?
And so to what extent do those constraints, to what extent do those levels of awareness
conflict with each other, can mutually support each other and reinforce each other or not?
Again, I think that the next stage of this is going to be a study of all the different
modes of constraint that are all operating simultaneously. As I started writing this,
all of a sudden things like entrenchment, like buffering, I have a whole chapter of where I
catalog some of these buffering and entrenchment and scapholds and all of these that seem to
all be operating simultaneously and that certainly a lot of the social scientists have understood
very, very well. In public policy, oh look, have we entrenched this rule in regulation,
it will hang on for way longer and avoid any kind of attempts to remove it as a regulation that
I live in DC, that's why I think about it. And so you wonder, starting to map things in terms of
constraints, in terms of possibility spaces, might start to illustrate how all of these work and
the possibility of therapeutic intervention as a result because that's what all this recent talk
about psychedelics. No, you wonder to what extent a psychedelic literally disintegrates the
constraint regime of the self, of the pre-established coordinates and parameters and so on.
Exactly, the ego. You wonder to what extent that is a disruption of the constraint regime,
more than the disruption of vision or, yeah, vision too, you get maybe hallucinations,
but that's not as interesting as, you know, I go like that and I push my elbow, I can hallucinate
all these standard, optical illusions, we don't call them hallucinations, we call them optical
illusions, right? So at what point do we start looking at this and the answer is that's going
to take a lot of very interesting research, kind of like Ramachandran's famous example with the
phantom limb and the mirror and so on. How is that possible unless there is some
control regime that is modulating the sense of pain that incorporates, you know, I can imagine
being in an automobile accident and having my arm mangled or I hear these descriptions of these
IEDs and you know, picking up chalkboard scraping and things like that. Correct, correct, and so
you go, well, here's everything together because if you didn't have the visual input, if you didn't
have the conceptual understanding of what this means, on and on and on, you wonder if the pain
would be, would be different. And so how all of these constraint regimes interact and what are
the necessary inputs at each point to maintain that particular constraint regime so that then
you have a global sense of self that I'm not sure we're all that coherent when every in every day.
I don't feel coherent, but my wife would beg to differ.
Weird enough to be operating, but it's not like, you know, if I heard something horrible happening
outside, I wouldn't react and I even even in a sense of flow, I think there's enough cognitive
control that if some horrendous perturbation, the standard answer is you drive home and you
don't even know if you went through that red light or you don't because you drive home in that
and that path every day and you don't even think about it. But certainly if a child ran across
your front of the then you'd immediately get out of that flow and react. So there's how much
control in which case, how can we use it therapeutically for obsessive compulsive disorders,
for PTSD, for all of these, I think those are all disorders disorders of constraint regimes. So
regulation of regulate, it's a it's the regulatory system that's shot, it's like the on switches
on all the time, or the it is modulating it the way it's supposed to modulate it. So these are
regulatory meaning constraint regime issues, not structure, not function. It's the regulatory
constraint regime that modulates these other two that that we don't understand that much about, I
think, all CD, PTSD, chronic anxiety or depression, all of these that are sort of I think we've pretty
much taken care of, no, we haven't taken care of it, but we understand how it worked the low
hanging fruit of the, you know, yeah, well, you know, the glucose is out of whack, that causes,
but where stress or epigenetic stress can be inherited several generations down,
that's a regulatory issue. Then that's what methylation does. And that's what I think
a lot of these constraint regimes do. So there's this phenomenon sort of piggybacking on what
Mac was asking about, there's this phenomena in psychedelics, right, you can use them
therapeutically. And in some cases, like near death experiences serve as therapeutic events,
and people come back kind of different, right? Correct. And is this a way to is one way to
imagine that, and maybe even electroshock therapy is another example, I'm not sure if that's a good
example, but yeah, yeah, you have all these kind of entrenched constraints locally in your brain
in your mind and operating things. And then when you so I'm sure you're aware of the psychedelic
study that when you administer psychedelics, often what happens is there's higher connectivity
in your brain, less modularity, right? And could could you maybe there's a speculation,
but would you think of that as just resetting all of the attractor states and then when they
come back up, they can come back in slightly different ways, they might not probably and it
might open up, it might make the interfaces more porous to contemporary experience. So
you don't have to be worried that the explosion is the IED, or that that that you don't have to
wash your hands a million times in order to because you know, yes, I think that the that more and
more as we read these kinds of novel forms of therapy that they are, they usually are targeting
issues of regulation. Really, to me, fascinating. Yeah, this is then starting to study how exactly
that connectiome stays stays whole. Strain dome connect, they all because all the connectome,
the proteomics and all the rest of them, all the ohms, all the ohms then are modulated by the whole
constrained dome of the entire. But that also includes the constraints of your society. You
know, I love traveling to Europe. When I travel to Europe, the weight of history is very obvious
compared to the United States. You ask somebody at a restaurant in anywhere in Europe, and how do
you prepare this dish? Half of the time, it's the way it's always been prepared. Yeah. Whereas in
America, if you do it the same way as you did it six months ago, oh, you're stale, you're boring,
you're old, it's encouraged the constraint regime. Now, that's not to say that they're not all sorts
of problems for marginalized societies where the constraint regimes are very clearly kept and
trenched very deliberately. Yes, I understand that. But it's all a question of the constraint
coming from the culture as well. That's why in the four E's, the whole, for example, their emphasis
on affordances. This is the, so I don't know if we said earlier, this is like the inactive embodied,
what are the other two? The four E's. Anyways, embodied cognition. Correct. Yeah.
Embodied cognition, which Andy Clark and Paolo and even Merlin Dallen, where about when? Extended.
Extended embodied and acted. There we go. We got three out of four.
You know, I always say, I frankly do not think that a chair affords opportunities for seating for
a lot of people. You hear stories of folks from, I don't know which culture who were brought to
the United States, and they will stand on the toilet because it didn't occur. And I don't think
a tatami mat affords opportunities for sleeping for those of us who were not raised in a Japanese
school. I mean, affordances are clearly embodied, embedded in the constraint of the society in which
you grew up, or you know about. Embedded. You just said the fourth E. It's embedded. It is. Okay.
And I think how things get, see, I don't think you have embeddedness in Newtonian science. Right.
Things are just plunked into a featureless space and time in Newtonian science.
Yeah. Well, that's the beauty of it too, because it's simplicity, right? It's
spherical cows. It's in a vacuum. It's, yeah. Correct. But it's featureless. Whereas embeddedness
is you're really embedded, meaning that embedding layer affects you,
and you are a part of that embedding dynamic as well. It goes both ways.
All right. I want to ask you, because we're coming up on time, and I have a thousand other things
to ask you, but let's stay on brain and mind for just one more question here. And then I have some,
I want to ask you about artificial intelligence and your thoughts on that. So thinking about
dimensionality and going up in these a myriological level, right? So a lot of this modern neuroscience
is reducing the dimensionality of your brain activity into these low dimensional manifold
structures, and then the dynamics come in when you have a trajectory along that manifold.
And a lot of some people think that that's, well, maybe that's the closest thing that we
can get to right now in describing, in relating brains to minds. And then, but marrying that idea
with the idea of capacity. And this goes back to Kevin Mitchell's question. What I want to think
is that I'm not a low dimensional mind. I'm a, I have a high capacity, right? Is there a way,
like, is there a story I can tell myself that I'm going from the high dimensionality
brain activity that I have moving quote unquote up a level to mind? And that can, that's a messy
statement I know. Can I increase my dimensionality? Do I have to reduce it?
No, I think, for example, letters form words. I think of a word as
a higher dimension. You can do more with those words. You have options available in words
and keep going sentences. But that's certainly true for atoms, molecules.
Is the higher dimension, does that, do you mean, is it a higher
possibility space? Or is it, I guess that's kind of equated to higher dimensionality.
Yeah, that's what I think of. It's a higher possibility space whose coordinates are relational.
Okay. And if that's the case, then you have a way higher possibility space. So that's why,
for example, the example I used in the book, which is Mant's understanding of how these chimps
are able to understand. Because the possibility space they have forged is a task defined
possibility space. But it's of a different type. Exactly. The type is simpler in that you have one
concept of a type that captures all the way. You have to look at the colored dots, you have to
look at the movement of the dots and so on. But it's the task that is defined. And the behavior is
executed in terms of that task. Is that lower dimensional? I think it's way more sophisticated
than it would just in terms of the intensity of the flash of light. But here the task is a huge
constraint as well. Yes, but it's a much more complex dynamic than would be the physical
features alone, right? Yeah. So it's sometimes people say that complex systems are a simplified
description of what's going on. Sometimes I think of it more like streamlined. Okay. The
streamlining gives you characteristics that you wouldn't have otherwise. And so the organization
of that monkey's brain in response to training, which would be the neighboring constraints.
All right. It seems to me opens up a world for the monkey that may be captured by
the essential characters of the task, but not of the pure physical component alone. So in that sense,
I think of it as an expansion. Chemistry can do more than physics. Biology can do more than
chemistry, even though they are nonetheless not violating any of the underlying laws. It's the
organization and the complexity of that organization that opens up possibilities, I think.
All right. So my mind could be more cool than my brain activity. I could feel better about my
mind than my brain. Probably, yeah. Brain gets really... And I think that's true. I think as
people age, they get worse at tasks that are just repetitive. Oh, I thought that's all they could
do are tasks that are repetitive. But I think understanding connections and understanding
nuances and things like that. Oh, I'm thinking way aged. You're thinking like our age, maybe.
Well, I'm thinking of the difference between...
I don't know. It's more like difference between understanding and just pure speed of activity.
But my grandmother, who's 99, she cannot learn a new card game.
Right? She can play bridge, but she can't learn a new card game. But that's 99.
Yeah. So maybe that's even a different type.
Any one or maybe she's not interested in it. Maybe. Come on, grandma.
Yeah. But I see it's a different kind of understanding. I don't know. Would you call that
wisdom? Well, hopefully, I think that's what philosophers were looking for. Yeah. And the
question is, but I don't think it automatically happens as you get older. An awful lot of old
fools around there. Sure are. Yeah. Sure are a lot of old fools out there.
Okay, Alicia, I don't want to take all day for you. So I want to switch to artificial
intelligence here for a few moments. Are you good on time for a few more minutes?
Great. This is a lot of fun for me. No, me too. So I was actually kind of surprised
in revisiting dynamics in action. And you go into it in a little more detail, I think,
in context changes, everything that you refer to like neural network examples. And in both books,
you talk about the semantics that come along with syntax when you put recurrence in these
neural networks. And you cite Jeffrey Hinton and actually Michael Plout who or David Plout, who was
one of the authors on that paper, I did a course with him. Anyway, that's neither here nor there.
But I always call them hidden plot and shallots because hidden and shallots probably plot and
shallots are hidden. But they're that that I will go ahead and finish up. Anyway, again,
I'm cute, but I shouldn't. Yeah. Well, so given what we've been talking about and, you know,
these interlocking systems and how important that is for complexity and the constraints,
given all that, I'm slightly surprised. And you talked about a constraint of closure from
Massimo and me. Moreno and Massimo. Moreno and Massimo, which I love that book also.
But that is very specific to like biological systems and not just biological systems,
but complex systems in the natural world. And it's not those types of things that we've been
talking about are not built into neural networks or only some of them are because maybe you talk
about the recurrence and how that can lead to semantics. So anyway, I was slightly surprised
that I started reading about like the neural networks because I thought, oh, well, a lot of
the things that it seemed to be important in these complex dynamics that give rise to our
rich mental worlds and rich ecologies and stuff are missing in the artificial intelligence systems,
or maybe they're not. And I wonder what you think is missing in current AI.
I think what's missing in current AI is context. In other words, somatic, somatic.
Oh, okay. Well, because context, I think, is it context changes? No, no, that's the title of your
book. All you need is, all you need is attention, which is a different form of context. And like
the modern transformer, which underlies all these large language models is all about context
in terms of word. But it does not have somatic information. It does not include
historical context. Well, this is how it's changed over time. So I think you need,
it does not include social, except indirectly as the social aspects get revealed in languages.
Otherwise, you don't have direct somatic interaction. Now, once you have these things,
once you have the chip, or the video chip, in a machine that you kind of
raise as a child with all the video, with all the video, with all the auditory, with all that.
You're actually, you're speaking exactly to my previous guest. I haven't released this yet,
but he raises artificial agent chicks exactly like newborn chicks to look at
this developmental trajectory of return. Which people did with chimps, remember? They
tried that without, did not turn out very well. Because at some point it didn't scale up. Now,
the question is whether the, but I think that if in fact, we have, we have eons of evolution
behind us, of the planet of the, of life and so on, you wonder if you can short-circuit any of that
and get. Right. Well, we seem to be partially. Well, I mean, I certainly want to say a sunflower
is aware of the sun. Okay. Tropism is a form of awareness. I don't care what you call it.
Is it self-awareness? No, I don't think so. I wouldn't want to say that. So it's the thought
example of the, you know, which the elephants and so on. Now they're saying crows can do it and so on.
So is that, what is it like to be a crow as well as a bat? So at what point do you start saying,
well, this is not just, it recognizes its body with something and you wonder,
or it really recognizes itself as a self or is there a self in the, in the
chimp that can point to the screen when it sees its image with a thought on its forehead.
At each point, I would say it's an emergent property, but certainly I've got to tell you those
hint and plot and chalices. I had been playing around with these problems for ages and I had
not sat down to write dynamics in action until I read hint and plot and chalice, which at the time
was, I went, the fact that, that, that's really simple. I mean, we're talking how many decades ago,
neural network was able to, according to chalice, I think it was when somebody asked him, how do
you explain that it produces the errors of deep dyslexia, not surface dyslexia? And his answer
was, I can only explain it by saying it self-organized a semantic attractor. So semantics
would be an emergent property that changes the output. That's what I, why we would call it
strong emergence. That's what I, why I would call it top down. It changes the probability
distribution of what its behavior is such that it produces an output that reflects the semantics
of the attractor. But so AI does not have closure of constraints. So this is another idea that,
you know, it's not self-generating. It's, it's byproducts don't feedback in that sense, or,
or maybe you have a different outcome. Now, now. Now it doesn't. Exactly. Okay. That's the question.
The question always is not, not what's practically doable today, but in principle. Sure, sure. But
I mean, are we going to have to emulate life then? Are we going to have to have artificial
life to have what, whatever the hell real artificial, real intelligence, real artificial
intelligence is, right? And that's again, an answer for the constraint on how many of these
constraints are really not necessary for, for intelligent systems that would assist a neurologist
or a, you know, maybe you don't need experience, you know, emotion or you know, I mean, I don't know.
So, but my, but what I find fascinating is that even without somatic input, without any of this
other stuff, the kinds of errors that people talk, oh, they hallucinate, that it's so similar to the
kinds of errors that you got with the split brain gazaniga issues, the thing is making up
some kind of story that would make all the inputs it has so far coherent.
Correct? Even if it is, well, that's a typo. I've seen one where the output, well, the people
were, the trainer was saying, no, that's not right. That's not right. That's not right. At one point
it said, well, you know, that wasn't just a typo. Excuse me. That's amazing. Yeah. Yeah.
What ideas or concepts do you find yourself like revisiting the most when you're working? What
ideas do you have? Do you revisit and are unsure about or think you need to grapple with more?
I think the notion of how do you account for the emergent properties,
characteristics in each particular case in each particular individual? How do we
how? Is there any hope to be able to map this other than say, well, if each one is unique,
then well, then that's the end of science. That's it. I mean, we need some kind of general
formal. We both winced there. Yeah, I don't know. I don't know how to phrase it. Is it a back,
forth, hermeneutic kind of multiple constraint satisfaction? How does that work? And I love
that example that I got from Kusler and Koenig, I think their book way back went on psychology of,
you know, imagine you're renting out an apartment and the apartment has one large
wall and it's got a window here and so on. And this is going to be your bedroom and so
you're constrained because the bed has to fit against maybe a wall, but then the chest doesn't
fit because the other wall. So it's a question of multiple constraint satisfaction. So do you
turn the chest of drawers into a night table because that's the only place it fits. And so
you're adjusting it and it's constant adjustment, but that's what you see in dynamical systems.
That's the kind of meta stability that someone riding a bike or someone on a tightrope, you
know, one of these people going on a highway or a tightrope. It's not the kind of equilibrium of
your old time, near equilibrium thermodynamics. It's a meta stability where it's a constant
adjustment of constraints. Correct? And so how do we, is there any hope to be able to map this
in a way that provides some kind of general guidance as to how this is going to play out
in a particular situation? How much do you have to know of the background? How much, you know,
do you have to know of the context to be, you know, and I think, I think that's one good thing
about that Aristotle had said was, you don't, you can't teach law, medicine, and ethics,
because those are eminently context dependent compared to science. So, so how do you do it?
You can only do it through apprenticeships, because the apprentice gives you this. And
when I talk class, this is what I do. You know, you get a feel for it. So, so is that what a good
coach in a business does? Because they've got enough of a feel for it. They might not be able
to formalize it into a standard algorithm, but they've got a feel for the situation that therefore
can provide guidance. This is why a coach doesn't need to be more of an expert than the expert as
well, I imagine. You know, you have to have a feel for it. And how do you, how do you formalize the
feel of something? And that's what, that's what a, that's what a master musician does. I just
finished reading a book by Adam Gopnik called The Real Work, and it's about the mystery of mastery.
Okay. Oh, it's fun to read. And so he talks about, you know, how do you,
is the master seeing something that's at a different level? And Hofstadter used to talk
about that when he talked about the chess master, who's shown a chess game in progress for a few
seconds, and then they're asked to reproduce the feel for the board. They would always put
the pieces in different locations than what was actually presented to them. But the strategy,
the strategic position, white and black were in, remained the same. Interesting. So what are they
seeing? That the newbie doesn't see. The newbie is worried about
playing the piano one finger here, one finger there. Simulating each move. That's like the physical
signal that's coming in. Obviously mastery means that you see a level of organization
that in the case of chess's strategy, in the case of magician is the
prestidigitation, it's the magic. And what is it that you're seeing that then matters?
And I think that's the constraint regime that we're all trying to figure out. Why is it that the
same person that the soldier next to that one didn't get PTSD? They were in the same explosion.
Because they were more of a man. See, that was the old tradition. It had to be an internal
and internal characteristic. Whereas what I'm saying is what are the interdependent constraints
that make a difference? You began that with like wondering if there is no hope,
or if there is hope. Is there hope? Do you feel optimistic? Look, you've got to assume
that we're all humans. So there's got to be some commonalities somewhere. At what scale,
at what granularity? It's hard to say because you look at families and you see kids from the same
family raised by the same friends, going to the same school, and they're so different. So you wonder,
how does that happen? Is that all in birth order? I mean, there was a time where people
talked a lot about that. If temporal constraints matter, then temporal order has to matter at
some point. But to what extent, to what degree? I think that's what the... What's fun about this
is that there's a whole new possibility space of research that opens up when you look in terms of
constraints rather than looking in terms of... When the people were into the genome, I thought,
people are assuming again, one disease per genome. Looking back, that's crazy.
That's never going to happen. I knew that that was the case.
You knew that. I didn't know that. I mean, yeah, because I had this linear thought,
that's the way I was raised. And so... We all were raised that way. That's what we all assume.
But now the question is, well, is it going to be one protein fold per disease or per disease?
So at what point is it... No, it's the context that makes it fall this way rather than that,
and therefore gets this functionality rather than that, even though it's the same string of amino
acids. All right, so it's the confirmation. So what is it in the context that makes it conform a
certain way? Well, in the case of development, we know that one cell in one part of the fertilized
egg is the one that... Because if it's in that location, that's what's going to
turn into the first neural crest. Is that pure random? Then that raises, that brings randomness
there rather than at the quantum level. So how does that work? Who knows? But it's fun to think
about. It opens up a whole new way of looking at a whole level of organization that we thought was
just illusory or just epistemically convenient. But if we really say, all right, now let's pretend
just for the sake of argument, it's real. How does this play out? What does this mean? What are the
implications? I mean, it's not just one level, though. God, I now want to ask you, what's beyond
consciousness? What's... It's turtles all the way up. I just used that. It's everywhere. It's the
whole tangled... It's an entangled bank that's... But it's not random. People use the word still,
use the word chaos when they refer to things like the Lorenz attractor to mean it's this sort...
No, it's just a high level of organization that we didn't appreciate before. That Lorenz
butterfly is very organized. Are you kidding? But it never repeats the same trajectory twice
because of its path dependence and so on. So we have to understand what are the constraints that
lead to that higher level of organization and how does that work? Well, Alicia, in terms of
possibility spaces, it just occurred to me that if the science, the philosophy of constraints,
is a possibility space, your book Context Changes Everything filled the hell out of that space.
I'm glad that we got to visit some of those places today. I really appreciate it. Thank you for
asking me. It was fun. A lot of fun. Thank you so much. Thank you.
I alone produce Brain Inspired. If you value this podcast, consider supporting it through
Patreon to access full versions of all the episodes and to join our Discord community.
Or if you want to learn more about the intersection of neuroscience and AI,
consider signing up for my online course, Neuro AI, The Quest to Explain Intelligence.
Go to braininspired.co to learn more. To get in touch with me, email Paul at braininspired.co.
You're hearing music by the New Year. Find them at thenewyear.net.
Thank you. Thank you for your support. See you next time.
