Hardship will show you who your real friends are. That's for sure. Can you read the quote once more?
Don't eat with people you wouldn't starve with
The following is a conversation with Andrew Huberman his fifth time on the podcast
He is the host of the Huberman lab podcast and is an amazing scientist teacher human being and
Someone i'm grateful to be able to call a close friend
Also, he has a book coming out next year that you should pre-order now called protocols and operating manual for the human body
This is the lex freeman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors in the description and now dear friends
Here's andrew Huberman
You think there's ever gonna be a day when you walk away from podcasting? Definitely
I mean I
came up
within and then on the periphery of
skateboard culture
And for the record, I was not a great skateboarder
I always have to say that because skateboarders are relentless
If you call something you didn't do or whatever
I mean, I could do a few things and I loved the community
And I still have a lot of friends in that community jim feebo at deluxe. You can look him up
He's kind of the man behind the whole scene. I know tony
hawk, dany whale these guys I got to see them come up and get big and stay big in many cases start huge companies like
Danny and calling the case our dc
Some people have a long life and something some don't but one thing I observed and learned a lot from in skateboarding
At the level of observing the skateboarders and then the ones that started companies
and then what I also
observed in science
and still observe is
You do it for a while
You do it at the highest possible level
for you
and then at some point
You pivot and you start
supporting the young talent coming in
In fact, the greatest scientists people like richard axl
Catherine do lock
There are many other labs in neuroscience carl diceroth
They're not just known for doing great science. They're known for
Mentoring some of the best scientists that then go on to start their own labs
and I think in podcasting
I am very fortunate. I got in in a fairly early wave not the earliest wave
But thanks to your suggestion of doing a podcast fairly early wave
And I'll continue to go as long as it feels right and I feel like I'm doing good in the world and providing good
But I'm already starting to scout talent
My company that I started with rob more psychom media
A couple other guys in there too. Mike play back our photographer ian macky
chris ray martin fobes
We are a company that produces podcasts right now. That's huberman lab podcast
But we're launching a new podcast perform a dr. Andy galpin
Nice
And we want to do more of that kind of thing finding a really great talent highly qualified people credential people
and I've got
A new kind of obsession with scouring the internet
Looking for the young talent in science in health and related fields
And so will there be a final episode of the
hlp
Yeah, I mean bullet buster cancer
Aside, you know someday they'll be the very last and thank you for your interest in science
And i'll clip out
Yeah, I love the idea of walking weight and not be dramatic about it
Right when it feels right you can leave and you can come back whenever the fuck you want, right?
John steward did this well with the daily show
I think that was during the 2016 election when everybody wanted him to stay on and he just walked away
Dave chappelle for different
Reasons walked away disappeared came back gave away so much money
Didn't care and then came back and was doing like stand-up in the park in the middle of nowhere
Genius you have habib who undefeated walks away at the very top of of a sport. Is he coming back? No
It's the least we don't know. Yeah, right. You don't know. I don't know if he bears everywhere or words
Yeah, I think you know, it's um, it's always a call, you know, you know the last
Few years have been tremendous growth. We launched in january 2021 and even this last year
2024 has been huge growth
you know in all sorts of ways it's been wild and
We have some short form content planned
That's 30 minute shorter episodes that really distill down the critical elements. We're also
Thinking about moving to other venues besides podcasting
so there's always the thought and the discussion but when it comes to like when to hang up your cleats, you know, it's like
There just comes a natural time where you can do more to mentor the next generation coming in
Then focusing on self and so there will come a time for that
And I think it's critical. I mean, again, I saw this in skateboarding like danny
And callin and danny's brother daemon started dc with ken block the driver who unfortunately passed away a little while ago
rally car driver
and
They eventually sold it. I think to quicksilver or something like that, but
They're all phenomenal talents in their respective areas
but they brought in the next
You know on the next line of amazing riders for the plan b thing, you know, paul rodriguez for skateboarders
They know who this is now in science
There are scientists like fine men for instance. I don't know if anyone can name one of his mentor offspring
So there are scientists who are phenomenal
Like beyond world class, right multi-generational world class who don't make good mentors
I'm not saying he wasn't a good mentor, but that's not what he's known for and then there are
scientists who are known for being excellent scientists and and great mentors and I think there's no higher
Um celebration to be had at the end of one's career if you can look back and like hey
I put some really important knowledge into the world people made use of that knowledge
And guess what you spawned all these
other
scientific offspring or sport
offspring or
podcast offspring
I mean in some ways we look to rogan and to some of the other earlier podcasts is like they
You know, they paved the way ronda patrick first science podcast out there
so
You know it eventually
The baton passes but fortunately right now everybody's active and it and it feels really good
Yeah, well you're talking about the healthy way to do it, but there's also
Uh
a different kind of way where you have uh, something like uh
Grisha gregory perlman the mathematician who refused to accept the fields medal
So he's one of the greatest living mathematicians and he just walked away from mathematics and rejected the fields medal
What did he do after he left mathematics?
life
Private 100% I respect that he's become essentially a recluse is these photos of him
Looking very broke like he could use the money. He he turned away the money. He turned away everything
you know, there's there's
You just have to listen to the inner voice
You have to listen to yourself and make the decisions that don't make any sense for the rest of the world and make sense to you
I mean bob dillon didn't show up to pick up his Nobel Peace Prize. That's punk. Yeah. Yeah, he probably grew in
no variety for that
Yeah, maybe just doesn't like going in sweden, but it seemed like a big fun trip
I think they do it in a nice time of years, but hey, that's his right. He earned that right
I think the best artists aren't doing it for the prize. They aren't doing it for the fame or the money
They're doing it because they love the heart. Yeah, that's the the rick ruven thing. He got a verb it through
Download your inner thing
I don't think we've talked about this that
this obsession that I have about how
rick
has this
way of being very very still in his body
But keeping his mind very active
as a practice
When spent some time with him in italy last june
And we would tread water and his pool in the morning and listen to
history of rock and roll and hundred songs
Um amazing podcast by the way. It is yeah
And um, and then he would spend a fair amount of time during the day, you know in this kind of meditative state
Where his mind is very active body very still
And then carl dice roth when he came on my podcast talked about how he forces himself to sit still and think in complete sentences late at night
after his kids go to sleep
and
You know, there's a state of mind rapid eye movement sleep
Where your body is completely paralyzed and the mind is extremely active and people credit rapid eye movement sleep with some of the more
elaborate emotion filled dreams and the source of many ideas
and there are other examples
Einstein
People described him as taking walks around the princeton campus then pausing
and
Would ask him what was going on and the idea that his mind was continuing to churn forward at a high rate
um
So, you know, this is far from controlled studies, but we're talking about some incredible minds and creatives who have a practice of
Stilling the body while keeping the mind deliberately very active
Very similar to rapid eye movement sleep. And then there are a lot of people who also report, you know
Great ideas coming to them in the shower while running
So it can be the opposite as well where the body is very active and the and the mind is perhaps more on
Kind of like a default mode network not really focusing on any one specific thing
You know interesting as a there's a bunch of physicists and mathematicians have talked to they talk about
sleep deprivation
And going crazy hours through the night obsessively pursuing a thing
And then the solution to the problem comes when they finally get
rest right and and we know we just did this sixth episode special series on sleep with matt walker
we know
that
When you deprive yourself of sleep and then you get sleep you get a rebound in rapid eye movement sleep
You get a higher percentage of rapid eye movement sleep
And matt talks about this in the podcast and he did an episode on sleep and
Creativity sleep and memory and rapid eye movement sleep comes up multiple times in that series
There's also some very interesting stuff about cannabis withdrawal and rapid eye movement sleep people are coming off cannabis often will suffer from
Insomnia, but when they finally do start sleeping they like dream like crazy
Cannabis is a very controversial topic right now. Oh, yeah, I saw that what happened
There's a bunch of drama around
Episode you did on cannabis. Yeah, we did a episode about cannabis talked about the health
Benefits and the potential risks right it's neither here nor there
It depends on the person depends on the age depends on genetic background a number of other things
We
published that episode well over a year ago and it had no issues online so to speak
And then a clip of it was put to x where you know
The real action occurs as you know your favorite
box
Yeah, yeah, the the the four ounce gloves as opposed to the 16 ounce gloves
That is x versus instagram or youtube
there was
Kind of an immediate dog pile from a few people in the cannabis research field to phds and mds
Yeah, there were people on our side. There were people on our side. I mean
You know the the statement that got
Things riled up the most was this notion that for certain individuals
there's a
High potential for inducing psychosis with high thc containing cannabis for certain individuals not all
That sparked some issues
There was really a split, you know
See this in different fields it
There was one person in particular who came out swinging with language that
In my opinion is not like of the sort that you would use at a university
venue
Especially among colleagues, but that's fine. You know, we're all grown-ups. Well for me from my perspective. It was strangely rude
and it
had an era of like elitism
that
to me
Was it the source of the problem during covet that led to the distrust of science
And the the popularization of disrespecting science because so many scientists spoke with an arrogance and a douche baggery
That I wish we would have a little bit less of yeah, it's tough because most academics
Don't understand that people outside the university system
are
they don't they're not familiar with
like the inner workings of science and
And the culture and so you have to be very careful how you present when you're a university professor
And when yeah, so, you know, he came out swinging at some, you know
A four letter word type language and he was obviously upset about so I simply said what I would say anywhere
Which was hey look you come on the podcast. Let's chat
and
Why don't you give your tell me where I'm wrong and let's discuss and
and
Fortunately, he agreed
And initially he said well, no, how can I be sure you're not going to misrepresent me and so I said we got on a
Dm then an email then eventually phone call and just said hey listen like you're welcome to record the whole conversation
We've never done a gotcha on my podcast and let's just get to the heart of the matter. I think this this little controversy is
perfect
kindling for for a really great discussion and
And he had some other conditions that we worked out and and I and I felt like
Cool like he's really interested although you get a very different person on the phone than you do on twitter
I will say he's been very collegial and that conversation is on the schedule
I said it will fly you out or put you up. He said no he wants to fly himself
He really wants to make sure that there's like kind of a space between
um
I think some of the perception of science and health podcasts in the academic community is that
It's all designed to sell something. No, we run ads so it can be free to everyone else
Yeah, but I think look in the end. Um, he agreed and I'm excited for the conversation
It was interesting because
In the wake of that little exchange
There's been a bunch of press from traditional press about cannabis has now surpassed alcohol
in many in many cultures as
Within the united states as when I say cultures. I mean demographics
The united states as the as the drug of choice
um
There have been people highlighting the issues of potential psychosis in high thc containing
and so it's
Kind of interesting to see how traditional media is sort of on board certain elements that you know, I put forward and
I think there's some controversy as to whether or not the different strains the indicas and sativas
I have are biologically different, etc. So we'll get down into the weeds pun intended
During that one and I'm excited. It's the first time that we've responded to
A direct criticism online about
Um scientific content in a way that really promoted like oh here the idea of inviting a particular guest
And so it's great. Let's get a guest to um his expert in cannabis
I I believe I could be wrong about this that he's a behavioral neuroscientist is slightly different training
but look he seems highly credentialed to be fun and we
You know, we welcome that kind of exchange
I
I'm not being diplomatic. I'm just saying like it's cool. Like he's coming on
No, you you know, and he was friendly on the phone, right?
Like he literally came out online and was like basically like kind of like fu
Like f this and fu, but you get someone on the phone. It's like, hey, how's it going? And then like, oh, yeah
Well, you know, I there was an immediate apology of like, hey, listen. I came out. Normally. I'm like not like that
But online, you know, you got a different. Yeah. Okay, so it's a little bit like it's a little bit like jiu-jitsu, right?
People say all sorts of things I guess but if they if you're like, all right, well
Let's go then it's probably a different story
You know, it's not like jiu-jitsu because the jiu-jitsu people don't talk shit because they know what the consequences are
Let me let me just say on mic and off mic. You have been very respectful towards this person
And I'm look up to you and respect you and admire the fact that you have been
That said to me that guy was being a dick and when you graciously politely invited him on the podcast
He was still talking down to you the whole time. So I really admire and look forward to listening to you talk to him
But I hope others
don't do that
like you are
a positive
humble voice
Exploring all the interesting aspects of science like you want to learn if there you've got anything wrong
You want to learn about it the way he was being a dick
I was just
Hurt a little bit not because of him but because like there's some people I really really admire
Brilliant scientists that are not their best cells
On twitter on x definitely. I don't understand what happens to their brain. Well, they regress
They they regress and and they also are protected, you know, you know, when you remove the
I mean no scientific argument should ever come to physical blows, right?
But when you remove the real world thing of being right in front of somebody, um
People will throw all sorts of stones at a distance, you know an over a wall
and they've got their
Their wife or their husband or their boyfriend or their dog or their cat to go cuddle with them afterwards
um
But you get in a room and it's like, you know
confrontational people
In real life are are pretty rare
But hopefully if they do it they're like willing to back it up with knowledge in this case, right?
We're not talking about physical altercation. Yeah, he kept coming and he kept putting on conditions
How do I know you want this and I was like, well, you can record the conversation
How do I know you want that? Listen, we'll pay for you to come out. How do you know and eventually he just kind of relented?
and um
And it to his credit, you know, he's agreed to come on
I mean he still has to show up
But once he does, you know, we'll treat him right like we would any other guest
Yeah, you treat people really well and I I just hope that people are a little bit nicer on the internet
Yeah, well, you know x is an interesting one because you it thickens your skin
You know to just to go on there. I mean you have to be ready to deal with sure
But I can still criticize people for for being douchebags because like that's still not good inspiring behavior like especially for scientists
That should be sort of symbols of
Scientific thinking which requires intellectual humility
Humility is a big part of that and twitter is a good place to illustrate that
Yeah, eight years ago. I used to I was a student in ta then
Instructor and then directed a cold spring harbour course on visual neuroscience. These are summer courses that
Explore different topics and at night we would host
Um, what we hoped were battles in front of the students
Where you'd get two people on it, you know, would it be neural prosthetics or molecular tools that would first, you know
Restore vision to the blind kind of arguments
You know, kind of like it's kind of a silly argument because there's gonna be a combination of both, right?
but
You'd get these great arguments
But the arguments were always couched in data and occasionally you'd get somebody would go like or would curse or something
But it was the rare very um very well placed
You know, um insult it wasn't you know coming out swinging
Um, I think ultimately, you know twitter is a record of people's behavior
That the internet is a record of people's behavior and here i'm not talking about news reports about people's behavior
I'm talking about how people show up
Online up is really important. You've always carried yourself with a ton of composure and respect and
You know, you just you would hope that people would grow from that example
Well, I'll tell you that the the podcasters that i'm scouting it's their energy
But it's also how they treat other people how they respond to comments and um, you know
We're blessed to have pretty significant reach when we put out a podcast like someone else's podcast
It goes far and wide so like a skateboard team like a laboratory where you're selecting people to be in your lab
You're you want to pick people that you would enjoy working with and they're collegial
Etiquette and etiquette is is lacking nowadays
But you're in the suit and tie bringing it back
bringing it back
Uh, you said that your conversation with james hollis
A union psychoanalyst had a big impact on you. What do you mean?
james hollis is a
84 year old union
psychoanalyst who's written 17 books including under Saturn shadow
Which is on the healing and trauma of men the eating eden project. Excuse me, which is about relationships and creating a life
I discovered james hollis in an online lecture that was recorded. I think in san diego. It's on youtube
The audio is terrible called creating a life
And this was somewhere in the 2011 to 2015 span
I can't remember and I was on my way to europe and I called my girlfriend at the time
I was like, I just found the most incredible lecture i've ever heard
and I
he talks about
the shadow
he talks about
Your developmental upbringing and how you either align with or go 180 degrees off your
Parents tendencies and values in certain areas. He talked about
The specific questions to ask of oneself at different stages of life to live a full life
so it's always been a dream of mine to meet him and to record a podcast
and
He wasn't able to travel so our team went out to dc and sat down with him
we rarely do that nowadays people come to our studio and
He came in he had some surgeries recently and he kind of came in with some assistance from a you know a cane and then
sat down and just
Just blew my mind it from start to finish
He didn't miss a syllable
and every sentence that he spoke was
like a quotable sentence of with real potency and
Actionable items. I think one of the things that was most
striking
To me was how he said when we take ourselves out of stimulus and response
And we just force ourselves to spend some time in the quiet of our thoughts
While walking or while seated or while lying down doesn't have to be meditation, but it could be
that
We access our unconscious mind in ways that reveals to us who we really are and what we really want
And that if we do that practice repeatedly 10 minutes a day here 15 minutes a day there
that we start to really touch into
Our unique gifts and the things that make us each us and the directions we need to take
But that so often we just stay in stimulus response. We just do do do do do, which is great. We have to be productive
um, but we miss those
um
important messages and
interestingly he also
Put forward this idea of what is this like get up shut up suit up. Yeah something like that like get out of bed suit up
And shut up and get to work. He also has that in him kind of a Goggins type mindset
So be able to turn off all this self-reflection and self analysis and just get shit done get shit done
But then also take dedicated time and stop and just let stuff geyser to the surface from the unconscious mind
and he quotes shakespeare and he quotes yung and he quotes
Everybody through history with with incredible accuracy and um
and in exactly the way
Needed to drive home a point, but that conversation to me was one that I really felt like okay, you know
If I don't wake up tomorrow for whatever reason
That one's in the can and I feel really great about it. It's it to me. It's the most important
guest recording we've ever done
um
In particular because he has wisdom
And while I hope he lives to be
204
Chances are he's got another what 20 30 years with us. Hopefully
More but I really really wanted to capture that information and get it out there
So I'm very very proud of that one
um
And he's the kind of guy that anyone listens to him young old male female whatever and you're gonna get something of value
What do you think about this idea?
of the shadow
that uh
The good the bad that we were press
That hides from plain sight when we analyze ourselves. That's there. You think there's like a ocean
We don't have direct access to yes
Yeah, young said it we have all things inside of us and we do and some people are more in touch with those than others and
Some people it's repressed. I mean does that mean that we could all be
You know horrible people or marvelous people
Benevolent people perhaps I think that
um
Thankfully more often than not people lean away from the like violent and
harmful parts of their their shadow, but I think spending time
thinking about
you know ones
Shadow shadows is super important. How how else are we going to grow otherwise?
you know, we have these unconscious blind spots of denial or
um
Repression or whatever, you know, the psychiatrists tell us
But yeah, it clearly exists within all of us. I mean, we have neural circuits for rage. We all do we have neural circuits for
altruism
um, and no one's born without these things
and some people they're atrophied and some people they're hypertrophied but
Looking inward and and recognizing what's there is
key
Or positive things like creativity. Maybe that's what rick rubin is accessing when he goes silent
Silent body active mind
That's interesting. What is it for you?
What place do you go to?
That generates ideas that helps you generate ideas. I have a lot of new practices around this
I mean, I'm all like always exploring for protocols. I have to it's like in my nature
um
When when I went and spent time with rick, I I tried to adopt his practice of staying very still and just letting stuff
You know come to the surface or the dystherothian way of
Formulating complete sentences and while being still in the body
what I
I found works better is what my good friend tim armstrong
Does to write music he writes music every day. He's a music producer. He's obviously a singer guitar player for rancid
um, and he's helped
dozens and dozens and dozens of
female pop artists and punk rock artists
write great songs and many of the
famous songs that you've heard from other artists
Tim helped them write
Tim
Wakes up sometimes in the middle of the night and what he does is he'll start drawing or painting
So what he's done and joni mitchell talks about this too. You find some creative outlet
that's
like 15 degrees off center from your
Main creative outlet and you do that thing. So for me, that's drawing. I like doing anatomical drawings
Neuroscience based drawing drawn neurons that kind of thing and if I do that for a little while
My mind starts churning on the the nervous system and biology and then I come up with
Areas I'd like to explore for the podcast
Ways I'd like to address certain topics right now
I'm very interested in autonomic control of beautiful paper came out that shows that anyone can learn to control their pupil sizes
And without changing luminance through a bio feedback mechanism
um, and that gives them
control over their so-called automatic autonomic nervous system
And I've been looking at what the circuitry is and it's it's beautiful. So I'll draw the circuitry
That we know underlies autonomic function and as I'm doing that I'm thinking
Oh, like what about autonomic control and those people that supposedly can control their pupil size
Then you go in and there's a paper published in nature press one of the nature journals
And there's a recent paper on this like oh cool
And then we talk about this and then how could this be put into a kind of a post or how could this?
You know, so doing things that are about 15 degrees off center from your main thing is a great way to access
I believe that the circuits for in tim's case painting goes to songwriting
I think for
Joni Mitchell that was also the case, right? I think it was drawing and painting to singing and songwriting
For rick. I don't know what it is. Maybe it's
listening to podcasts. I don't know that that's his business. Do you have anything that you like to
Focus on that allows you then an easier transition into your main creative work
No, I'd really like to focus on emptiness and silence
So I pick the dragon. I have to slay. So whatever the problem I have to work on and I just sit there
And stare at I love how fucking linear you are
And I just and if there's no if you're tired, I'll just sit
I believe in the in the power of just waiting
and
Usually I'll stop being tired
Or the energy rises from somewhere or an idea pops from somewhere
But there needs to be a silence and an emptiness. It's an empty room. Just me and the dragon and
We wait, that's it. Like if it's a usually with programming you're thinking about a particular design like how do I design this thing
To solve this problem
Any cognitive enhancers? I've got it quite the gallery in front of me. Well, that's right. Yeah
Should we walk through this? Yeah, this is not there's not a sales thing. It's just
Um, I tend to do this bounce back and forth your refrigerator just happened to have a lot of different choices
So water all my refrigerator. I know right. There's no food in there. There's water
There's element which they now have canned. Yeah, and yes, they're a podcast sponsor for both of us
But that's not why I cracked one of these open. I like them provide their they're cold
And that's by the way, my least favorite flavors. I was saying that's that's the reason it's still left in the fridge
The cherry one is really good. The black cherry. There's an orange one
Yeah, I pushed the um the sled this morning and pulled the sled for my workout at the gym
And and it was hot today here in austin. So um some salt is good and then matina urba mate zero sugar full confession
I helped develop this i'm a partial owner, but I love urba mate half argentine been drinking mate since i was a
Little kid there's actually a photo somewhere on the internet when i'm like three sitting on my grandfather's lap sipping mate out the
Gourd and then this my fun interesting. This is just a little bit of coffee
With a scoop of brian johnson gave me cocoa just like pure unsweetened cocoa
So I put that in chocolate and I like it it just for the taste
Well, actually nukes my appetite and since i'm we're not going out to dinner tonight until later. I figure that's good
Yeah, brian's an interesting one, right? He's really pushing this this thing the optimization of everything
Although he just heard his ankle. He posted a photo. He heard his ankle
So now he's injecting bpc body protection compound 157 which many many people are taking by the way
I did an episode on peptides
I should just say, you know bpc 157 one of the known effects in animal models
Is angiogenesis like development of new vasculature, which can be great
In some context, but also if you have a tumor you don't really want to vascularize that tumor anymore
So I worry about people taking bpc 157 continually
but um
And there's very little human data. I think there's like one study and it's a lousy one. So a lot of animal data
Some of the peptides
Are interesting. However, there's one that I've experimented with a little bit called pinealyn
Which um, I find even if I've just taken it twice a week before sleep
Then it times it seems to do something to the
Circadian timekeeping mechanism because then on other days when I don't take it
I get unbelievably tired at that time that normally I would do the injection
These are things that I'll experiment with for a couple weeks and then typically stop maybe try something else
but I stay out of
Things that really stimulate any of like a major hormone pathways
When it comes to peptides, there's actually a really good question of how do you experiment?
Like how long do you try to think to figure out if it works for you?
Well, I'm very sensitive to these things. So I and I have been doing a lot of things for a long time
So if I add something in it's always one thing at a time and I notice right away
If it does not make me feel good like there's a lot of excitement about some of the
so-called growth hormone secretogogs
hypermoralin, testemoralin, sermoralin
Um, I've experimented a little bit with those in the past and they've
Nuked my rap and eye movement sleep
But given me a lot of deep sleep, which doesn't feel good to me, but other people like them
I also
just
Generally try and avoid
Taking peptides that tap into these hormone pathways because you can run into all sorts of issues
But some people take them safely
But usually after about four or five days
I know if I like something or I don't and then I move on, but I am not super adventurous with these things
I know people that will take cocktails of peptides with multiple things. They'll try anything
That's not me and I do blood work
um, but also I'm you know, I'm mainly
reading papers and podcasting and um, I'm
Teaching a course next spring. Stanford. I'm gonna do a big undergraduate course
um, so I'm trying to develop that course and things like that so
Um, I don't need to lift more weight or run further than I already do which is not that much weight or far as it is
All right, you're not going to the olympics. You're not trying to no truly maximize some aspect of your performance
No, and I'm not and I'm not trying to get down below whatever, you know, seven percent body fat or something
I don't have those kinds of goals
So hydration electrolytes caffeine in the form of mate and then this coffee thing and then and then here's one that I think
I brought out for discussion. This is a piece of Nicarat. They're not a sponsor
um
nicotine is an interesting compound
it will raise blood pressure
and it um
Is probably not safe for everybody, but you know, the nicotine is gaining in popularity like crazy mainly these um
Pouches that people put in the lip not we're not talking about. I'm smoking vaping dipping or snuffing
you know, my
interest in nicotine started this was in 2010
I was visiting columbia medical school and I was in the office of the great neurobiologist richard axl won the noble prize
Co-recipient with linda buck for the um discovery of the molecular basis of olfaction
Brilliant guy. He's probably in his late 70s now probably. Yeah, and he kept popping nicorette in his mouth
And I was like, what's this about and he said, oh, well, this was just anecdote, right?
But he said but he said this he said, oh, well, you know, it protects against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's
I said it does and he goes, yeah, I don't know if he was kidding or not
He's known for making jokes and then he said that when he used to smoke
It really helped his focus and creativity
But then he quit smoking because he went lung cancer and he found that he couldn't focus as well
So he would choose nicorette. So occasionally like right now
Well, each I do a half a piece, but I'm not russian
So I'm a little, you know, you know, did you spot the whole thing in your mouth?
So I'll do a couple milligrams every now and again
And it definitely sharpens the mind on an empty stomach in particular, but you fast all day
You're still doing one meal a day one meal a day. Yeah. Yeah, I did a nicotine pouch with Rogan at dinner
And I got high. Yeah, that's a lot
That's like usually six or eight milligrams
I know people that
get a canister of zin
Take one a day pretty soon. They're taking a canister a day. So you have to be very careful. I will only allow myself
two pieces of nicorette total
per week
And you will notice that
You know in the day after you use it, you know, sometimes your your throat will feel a little bit like
Like a little spasmy like you might want to cough once or twice
And so, you know, if you're a singer or your podcast or something you have to do a long podcast
You want to just be mindful of but yeah, you're supposed to kind of like keep it in your cheek and
Now here we go, but it did make me
Intensely focused in a way that was a little bit scary because um the nucleus basalis
Is in the you know, basal forebrain nucleus has cholinergic neurons that radiate out
axons little wires that release acetylcholine into the neocortex and elsewhere
and when you focus on one particular
Topic matter or one particular area of your visual field or listening to something and focusing visually
We know that there's a an elaboration of the amount of acetylcholine release there and it binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptor sites there
So it's a kind of an attentional modulation
by acetylcholine. So you're getting in with nicotine. You're getting a
Exogenous or artificial
heightening of that
circuitry and the time I had talk of Carlson on the podcast. He told me that apparently
It helps him as he said publicly
keep his
Love life vibrant really it caused a visa constriction
Like he literally said it makes his dick very hard. He said that publicly also
Okay, well as little as I want to think about Tucker Carlson's
sex life
no disrespect
uh the
Major effect of nicotine on the vascular my understanding is that it causes vasoconstriction not vasodilation
drugs like cialis to dallafill
Viagra etc vasodilators they allow more blood flow
Um
Nicotine does the opposite less blood flow to the periphery, but provided dosages are kept low and I don't recommend people use it frequently
Or at all and I don't recommend young people use it, you know, um, you know
25 and younger brain's very plastic at that time and um, and certainly smoking dipping
Vaping it's nothing aren't good because you're gonna run into we were running into trouble
For other reasons, but in any case, um, well and even there vaping is a controversial topic
Probably safer than smoking but has its own issues and
I said something like that and boy did I catch a lot of heat for that
You can't say anything as a health science educator not piss somebody off
You know, it just depends on where the the center of mass is and how far outside that you are
For me the caffeine is the main thing
And actually it's a it's a really big part of my life and one of the things you recommend that people wait a bit in the morning
Oh, yeah to consume caffeine if
they
Experience a crash in the afternoon that this is one of the misconceptions. I
um
I regret maybe even discussing it for people that crash in the afternoon
Oftentimes if they delay their caffeine by 60 and 90 minutes in the morning, they will offset some of that
But if you eat a lunch that's too big or you didn't sleep all the night before you're not gonna avoid that
afternoon crash
But I'll wake up sometimes and go straight to hydration caffeine, especially if I'm gonna work out. Here's a weird one
If I exercise before
8 30 a.m
Especially if I start exercising when I'm a little bit tired
I get energy that lasts all day
If I wait until my peak of energy, which is mid morning 10 a.m. 11 a.m.
And I started exercising then I'm basically exhausted all afternoon and I don't understand why I mean it depends on the intensity of the
Workout, but so I like to be done showered
and
Heading into work by 9 a.m. But I don't always meet that much
So you're saying it doesn't affect your energy if you start out with exercising
I think you can get energy and wake yourself up with exercise if you start early and it and then that fuels you all day long
I think that if you wait until you're feeling at your best to train
Sometimes that's detrimental because then in the afternoon when you're doing like the work we get paid for
Like research podcasting, etc. Then oftentimes, you know, your your brain isn't firing as well
That's interesting. I haven't really rigorously tried that wake up and just start running or this is the gioco thing
And then there's this phenomenon called entrainment where if you force yourself to exercise or eat
Or socialize or if you bright light at a certain time of day for three to seven days in a row pretty soon
There's an anticipatory circuit that gets generated. This is why
anyone in theory can become a morning person
to some degree or another and this is also
Beautiful example of why you wake up before your alarm clock goes off, you know
People wake up and all of a sudden it goes off
It wasn't because it clicked it's because you have this incredible timekeeping mechanism that exists in sleep
And there's some papers that have been published in the last couple of years
Nature neuroscience and elsewhere showing that people can answer math problems in their sleep simple math problems, but math problems nonetheless
This does not mean that if you ask your partner a question in sleep that they're going to answer accurately
like they might screw up the whole
A cumulative probability of 20 across multiple months. All right, listen, what happened? What happened? Here's the deal
A few years back. I did a four and a half hour after editing four and a half hour episode on male and female fertility
The entire recording took 11 hours
and
At one point during the and by the way, I'm very proud of that episode
There's many couples have written to me
And said they now have children as a consequence of that episode and my first question is what were you doing during the episode?
But in all seriousness, um, we should say that it's four and a half hours
and
People then they should listen to the episode. You're it's extremely technical episode
Like you're not stopped dropping facts and and referencing huge number of papers. It must be exhaust
I don't understand how you can possibly that's about sperm health sperma genesis. It talks about
The ovulatory cycle it talks about things people can do that are that are considered
Absolutely supported by science that talks about some of the things kind of out on the edge a little bit that are a little bit more experimental
It talks about IVF. It talks about xt. It talks about
Um, all of that it talks about frequency of pregnancy as a function of age
et cetera
um, but there's this one portion there in the podcast where I'm talking about the
uh, probability of a successful pregnancy
as a function of age and
so
There was a clip that was cut in which I was describing cumulative
probability
And by the way, we've published cumulative probability historians in many of my laboratory's papers
Including one that was a nature article in 2018. So we run these all the time
And yes, I know the difference between independent and cumulative probability. Okay, that's like I do
um, the way the clip was cut
And what I stated unfortunately combined to like a pretty great gaffe
Where I say you're just adding percent
I said you just adding percentages 20 20 to 120 percent and then I made us kind of
Unfortunately, my humor isn't always so good and I made a joke. I said
um 120 percent, but that's a different thing altogether. What I should have said was
um, that's impossible
You know and here here's how it actually works
but then that it continues where I then described the cumulative probability histogram for um
Successful pregnancy, but somewhere in the early portion. I I misstated something right. I made a math error
Um, which implied I didn't understand the difference between independent and cumulative probability
Which I do and it got picked up and and run and people had a really good laugh with that one at my expense
And so what I did in response to it was rather than
Just say everything I just said now
I said
I just came out online and said hey folks
In an episode
They did this on fertility. I made a math error
Here is the formula for cumulative probability
Successful pregnancy at that age. Here's the graph. Here's the you know, and I
Offered it as a teaching moment in two ways one for people to understand cumulative probability
It was sort of interesting to a number of people that had come out critiquing the gaffe
also, um like biology and folks came out pointing out that they didn't understand cumulative probability
So there was a lot of posturing, you know, the dog pile oftentimes people are quick to dog pile
They didn't understand but a lot of people did understand some smart people out there, obviously
I called my dad and he was just laughing. He goes. Oh, this is good
This is like the old school way of of hammering academics. Um
But the point being there was a teaching moment
Um, give me an opportunity to say hey, I made a mistake. I also made a mistake in another podcast where I
Did a micron to millimeter conversion and or centimeter conversion, but and we always correct these in the show note captions
We correct them in the audio now
um, unfortunately on youtube, it's harder to correct you can't go and edit in segments we put in the captions, but
That was the one teaching moment if you make a mistake that's substantive and relate to data
You you apologize and correct a mistake use this teaching moment
The other one was to say, hey, you know
In all the thousands of hours of content we've put out. I'm sure I've made some small errors
I think I once said serotonin 1m and dopamine and you know, you're going you're you're riffing and
It's a reminder to be careful
To edit double check but the internet usually edits for us and then we go make corrections
But it didn't feel good at first but ultimately, you know, I can laugh at myself about it
Long ago at Berkeley when I was teeing my first
Class it was a biopsychology class between 1998 or 1999
I was drawing the pituitary
Gland it which is you know, it has an interior and a posterior lobe actually is a medial lobe too
I have five six hundred students in that lecture hall and I drew it was chalkboard
And I drew the two lobes of the pituitary and I said my back was to the audience
I said, you know, and so they just sort of hang there
And everyone just erupted in laughter because it looked like a scrotum with two testicles
And I remember thinking like oh my god
I don't think I can turn around like in face this
You know and like I only got to turn around sooner or later
So I turned around and we just all had a big laugh together. It was embarrassing
I'll tell you one thing though. They never forgot about the two lobes of the pituitary
Yeah, and you haven't forgotten about that either right. There's a high
High salience for these kinds of things and it also was
kind of fun to see
How excited people get to see people trip
It's like an elite sprinter trips and does something stupid like, you know
Runs the opposite direction out of the blocks or something like that and and or uh, you know
I recall it one world cup
Match years ago a guy scored against his own team. I think they killed the guy. Do you remember that?
Some South American or Central American team. Yeah, and they killed the guy
But yeah, let's let's look it up. I just said
World cup. Yeah, he was gunned down
Andres Escobar, yeah scored against his own team in 1994 world cup in the United States
Just 27 years old playing for the Colombia national team. Yeah, last name Escobar. It's a good name
I think it would protect you
listen, you know, so
There are some gaffes that get
people
killed
right, so
you know
How forgiving are we for online mistakes?
You know, I said just the nature of the mistakes people were quite gracious about the
the gaff and some weren't and you know, it's interesting that
We
As you know public health science educators
You know, we'll do long podcast sometimes and and you need to be really careful. What's great is AI
Allows you to check these things now more readily
so
that's cool and
There are ways that it's now going to be more self-correcting. I mean, you know, I think
There's there's a lot of errors out there on the internet and people are finding them and it's cool
Like things are getting cleaned up. Yeah, but mistakes nevertheless will happen. Are you do you feel the pressure?
of
Not making mistakes. Sure
I mean, you know, I try and get things right to the best of you know, to the best of my ability
Um, I check with experts. It's kind of interesting when people really don't like something that was said in a podcast
A lot of times I chuckle because I'm you know at Stanford. We have some amazing scientists, but I talk to them else people elsewhere
um, and
it's always interesting to me
how
You know, I'll get divergent information
And then I'll find the overlap in the Venn diagram and I have this like question
Do I just stay with the overlap in the Venn diagram?
They I didn't episode on oral health. I didn't know this until I researched that episode, but
Oral health is
critically related to heart health and brain health that there's a bacteria that causes cavities streptococcus, you know
that
can make its way into other parts of the body through the mouth that
Can cause serious issues. There's the idea that some forms of dementia some forms of heart disease are start in the mouth
basically
I talked to no fewer than four
Dentists dental experts and there was a lot of convergence. I also learned that
Teeth can demineralize that's the formation of cavities
They can also remineralize as long as the cavity isn't too deep it can actually fill itself back in
Especially if you provide the right substrates for it
That saliva is this incredible fluid that has all this capacity to remineralize teeth provided the milieu is right
Things like alcohol-based mouth washes killing off some of the critical things you need
This is fascinating and I put out that episode thinking oh, I'm not a dentist
I'm not an oral health episode. I talked to a pediatric dentist. There's a terrific one doctor downscore stacy
staci on
Instagram does great content talk to some others
Um
And like and then I just waited for the attack. I was like here we go and it didn't come
And dentists were thanking me. I was like, whoa
You know
That's a rare thing more often than not if I do an episode about say psilocybin or mdma
You get some people liking it or adhd and the drugs for adhd
We did a whole episode on the riddle and vivants adder all stuff
You get people saying thank you, you know, I prescribe this to my kid and it really helps and and this and
But they're
Private about the fact that they do it because they get so much attack from other people
so
I like to find the center of mass
report that
Try and make it as clear as possible
And then I know that there's some stuff where I'm going to catch shit
What's frustrating for me is when
Like I see claims that I'm like against fluoridization of water, which I'm not right
Like we talked about the benefits of fluoride it builds a hyper strong bonds within the teeth
I went and looked at some of the
the literally the crystal struck not excuse me not the crystal structure, but the they
Essentially the like micron and sub micron structure of teeth is incredible and where fluoride can get in there and form these super strong bonds
And you can also form them with things like hydroxyapatite. And why is there fluoride in water? Well, it's the best
Okay
You get you say some things that are interesting
But then somehow it gets turned into like your against fluoridization
Which I'm not or I've been accused of being against sunscreen. I wear mineral based sunscreen on my face
I don't want to get skin cancer or I use a physical barrier
There is a cohort of people out there that think that all sunscreens are bad. I'm not one of them
I'm not what's called a sunscreen truther
But then you get attacked for like if you so we're talking about there are certain sunscreens that are problematic
So what and ronda patricks now starting to get vocal about this and so there are certain topics. It's interesting for which
You have to listen
carefully to
What somebody is saying, but there's a lump or or lumping as opposed to splitting of of what health educators say
And so it just seems like like with politics. There's this like urgency to just put people into a camp of
Expert versus like renegade or something and it's not like that. It's just not like that. So the short answer is I really strive
Really strive to get things right, but I know that I'm going to piss certain people off and you've taught me
and
joe's taught me and
Other podcasters have taught me that like if you worry too much about it
Um, then you aren't going to get the newest information out there like peptides
There's very little human data unless you're talking about by lisi or the melana
You know the stuff in the alpha melana site stimulating hormone stuff
which are prescribed for female libido to enhance female libido or
Um, sermorellen which is for certain growth hormone deficiencies with with rare exception. There's very little human data
But people are still super interested and a lot of people are taking and doing these things
So you you want to get the information out do you try to
Not just look at the science but research what the communities are talking with the various communities
They're talking about like maybe research what the conspiracy theorists are talking about just so you know
All the armies that are going to be attacking your castle
Yes, so like for instance
There's a community of people online that believe that like if you consume seed oils or something that like
You're setting up your skin for sunburn and if you don't you know, like there's all these like
Theories, but I liked so I like to know what the theories are. I like to know what the extremes are
But I also like to know what the standard conversation is, but there's generally more agreement than disagreement. I think where um
You know, I've been kind of bullish actually is you know, or like supplements like people go
Oh supplements. Well, there's food supplements like a protein powder
Just different than a vitamin and then they are compounds
There are compounds that have real benefit
But people get very nervous about the fact that they're not regulated
But some of them are are vetted with for potency and for um safety with with more rigor than others
You know, and it's interesting to see
How
people who take care of themselves
And put a lot of work into that are often attacked that's been interesting
Also, one of the most controversial topics nowadays is ozampic munjaro. I'm very middle of the road on this. I don't understand why the
Quote-unquote health wellness community is so against these things
I also don't understand why they have to be looked at as the only route for some people
They've really helped them lose weight and yes, there can be some muscle loss and other lean lean body loss
But that can be offset with resistance training. They've helped a lot of people
And other people are like, no, this stuff is terrible
I think the most interesting thing about ozampic munjaro is that they are glp one
They're in the glp one pathway glucagon like peptide one
and it was discovered in healer monsters, which is a
uh
Lizard basically and someone what the now the now the entomologists will dive on me
It's a big big lizard looking thing that doesn't eat very often
And they figured out that there's this peptide that allows it to
curb its own appetite
At the level of the brain and the gut
And it has a lot of homology to sequence homology to what we now call glp one
So I love anytime there's animal biology links to cool human biology links to a drug
That's powerful that can help people with obesity and type 2 diabetes and there's evidence that can even curb some addictions
um
Those are newer data
But I don't see is it either or in fact, I've been a little bit disappointed at the way that the um
Whatever you want to call it health wellness biohacking community has like slammed on ozampic munjaro
It's like they're like just get out and run and listen
There are people who are carrying substantial amounts of weight that running could injure them
They get on these drugs and they can improve and then hopefully they're also doing resistance training and eating better
And then you know, you're bringing all the elements together
Well, why do you think the criticism has happened? Is it that ozampic became super popular?
So people are misusing it or that kind of thing? No, I think what it is is that people
Think if it's a pharmaceutical, it's bad. Yeah, and then or if it's a supplement
It's bad depending on which camp they're in and and it wouldn't be wonderful to kind of like fill in the gap between this divide, you know
um, what I would like to see in politics and in health is
Um, neither right nor left, but what we can just call a league of reasonable people that looks at things on an issue by issue basis
And fills in the center because I think most people are in that are I don't want to say center in a political way
But I think most people are reasonable. They want to be reasonable, but that's not what sells clicks
That's not what that's not what drives interest
Um, but I'm a very like like I look at issue by issue person by person
I don't like in group out group stuff. I never have I've got friends from all walks of life
I said this another podcast and it always sounds like a like a political statement, but like the the
push towards like
You know polarization is it's so frustrating if there's one thing that's discouraging to me as I get older each year
I'm like, wow, are we ever going to get out of this?
like
polarization
Speaking of which, how are you going to vote for the presidential election?
I'm still trying to figure out how to interview the people involved and do it. Well, what do you think the role of podcast is going to be in this
year's election
I would love
a long-form conversations to happen with
With the candidates. I think it's going to be huge. I would love trump to go on rogan
I would I'm embarrassed to say this, but I would love to
Honestly, we'd love to see Joe Biden go on Joe Rogan also
I would imagine that both would go on but separately separately. I think it's I think a debate
Joe does debates, but I think Joe at his best is one-on-one conversation really intimate
Um, I I just wish that Joe Biden would actually do long-form conversations. I thought he had done it
It wasn't me. I think it was on
Jay Shetty's podcast. He did Jay Shetty. He did he did a few but what I mean long form. I mean
Um, really long form like two three hours and more relaxed
It was much more orchestrated because what happens when it's the interviews a little bit too short
It becomes into this generic
Political type of
NBC cnn type of interview you get a set of questions and you don't get to really
Feel the human
Expose the human to the light in it the full we talked about the shadow the good the bad and the ugly
So I think there's something magical about two three four hours
But it doesn't have to be that long, but it has to have that feeling to it
Where there's not people standing around and everybody's nervous and you're going to be
Uh
Strictly sticking to the question answer type of feel but just shooting shit
Which Rogan is the best by far in the world at that. I don't think people really appreciate
how
skilled
he is
at what he does
And the number I mean the three or four podcasts per week plus plus the ufc announcement saying plus
comedy tours and stadiums plus
you know
doing comedy shows in the the middle of the week plus
You know husband and a father and a friend and
Jiu-Jitsu the guys got like superhuman levels of output
I I agree that long-form conversation is a whole other business
And I think that people want and deserve to know the people that are
Running for office at a in a different way and to really get to know them
Well, listen, you know, I I guess you
I mean, is it clear that he's going to do jail time or maybe he gets away?
No, I don't think I'm because I was gonna say I mean that does that mean you're gonna be podcasting from imprisonment
Yeah, we're going to back down going to
Figure out how to commit a crime so I can get in prison. Please don't please though. Well, that's I'm sure they have visitors
Right. That just doesn't feel an authentic way to get the interview. But yeah, I understand
You wouldn't be able to wear that suit. You'd be wearing a different suit. That's true. Yeah
Um, it's gonna be interesting and and you do I'm not just saying this because you're my friend
But you would do a marvelous job. I think you should sit down with all of them separately to keep it civil and um and see what
What happens?
Here's one thing that I found really interesting
In this whole political landscape
When I'm in Los Angeles, I often get invited to these like
They're not dinners, but gatherings where you know a local
Um, you know, a bunch of podcasters will come together
But a lot of people from the entertainment industry big agencies
Big tech like big big tech many of the people have been on this podcast
and
They'll host a discussion or debate and what you find if you look around the room and you talk to people is that
About half the people in the room
Are very left leaning and very outspoken about that and they'll tell you exactly who they want to see in the
When the presidential race and the other half
We'll tell you that they're for the other side a lot of people that
People assume are on one side of the aisle or the other
Are in the exact opposite side now some people are very open about who that who they're for but
it's been very interesting to see how
Um when you get people one on one
They're like telling you they want x candidate to win or y candidate to win and sometimes like really?
I can't believe it like you like yep, and so it's what people think about
um
People's political lean is as often
Exactly wrong and and that's been
eye-opening for me
And I've seen that um in university campuses too
And and so it's going to be really really interesting to see what happens in in november in addition to that as you said
Most people are close to the center
Despite what twitter makes it seem like
Most people whether they're sent a lot to center right they're kind of close to the center
Yeah, I mean here's to me the most interesting question who is going to be the next
big candidate in years to come
Like who's that going to be right now? I don't I don't
I don't see or know of that person. Who's it going to be? Yeah, the young promising candidates. We're not seeing them
We're not seeing like who another way to ask that question
Who would want to be?
Well, that's the issue right?
You know it who wants to live in this 12 hour news cycle where you're just trying to
You know dunk on the other team so that nobody notices like that you're the shit that you fucked up
You know like that that's not like that's not only not fun or interesting. It also is just like
it's got to be psychosis inducing at some point and
I think that
You know god willing we're gonna you know
some young
guy or woman is like on this and refuses to
to back down
And was just like determined to be president and will make it happen
But like I don't even know who the
Bible candidates are
Maybe you lex, you know, we should ask sagar sagar would know
Yeah, yeah
Maybe sagar himself
Sagar's show is awesome. Yeah, he and crystal do a great thing. He's incredible
Especially since they have somewhat divergent opinions on things. Yeah, that's what makes it so cool. He's great
He looks great in a suit looks real sexy. He's taking real good care of himself. I think he's getting married soon
Congratulations sagar forgive me for not remembering your wife a future wife's name. He uh, he won my heart by giving me
A biography of hitler as a president. That's what he gave you. Yeah, I gave you a hatchet
With a poem and that just shows the fundamental difference with a poem inscribed in it
Which was pretty damn good
I realized everything we bring up on the screen is like really
Depressing like the soccer player getting killed
Can we bring up something happy? Uh, sure. Let's go to uh nature's metal instagram
Those are pretty intense. We actually did a collaborative post on a on a shark thing. Really? Yeah, what kind of shark thing?
so to generate the fear vr stimulus for my lab in 20
Was it yet 2016 we went down to guadalupe island off the coast of mexico
Me and a guy named michael muller who's a very famous
portrait photographer, but also takes photos of sharks and
we
used
360 video to build vr of great white sharks brought it back to the lab
We published that study in current biology
in 2017 went back down there
um
and
That was the year that
I exited the cage
That you lower the cage with a crane and that year I exited the cage
I had a whole mess with a air failure the day before I was breathing from a hookah line while in the cage
I had no scuba on divers were out
The thing got bow constricted up and I had an air failure and I had to actually share air and it was a whole mess
Story for another time
But the next day because I didn't want to get ptsd and it was pretty scary the next day I cage exited
Um with some other divers and it turns out with these great white sharks
In guadalupe the the water's very clear and you can swim toward them
And then they'll they'll veer off you if you swim toward them. Otherwise, they see you as prey
Well in the evening you've brought all the cages up and you're hopefully all alive
and we
We're hanging out fishing for a tuna. Uh, we had a one of the the crew on board had
um
A line in the water was fishing for tuna for dinner and a shark took the tuna off the line
And it's a it's a very dramatic take and you can see the the just absolute
Size of these great white sharks the the waters there are filled with them. That's the one
But so this video just the neural link link was shot by matt mcdougall
Who is the um head neurosurgeon at neural link there it is takes it now
Believe it or not looks like it missed like it didn't get the fish it actually just cut that thing like a band saw
So i'm up on the deck with matt
Yeah, and so when you look at it from the side you you really get a sense of this
Of the the girth of this freaking thing
So as it comes up
Size of that thing and they move through the water with such speed just a couple
So when you're in the cage and the cage is lowered down below the surface
There they're going around you're not allowed to chum the water there. Some people do it
um
But and then when you cage eggs sit they're like, well, what are you doing out here?
And then you know they you swim toward them they veer off
But what's interesting is that if you look at how they move through the water
All it takes for one of these great white sharks when it sees
A tuna or something it wants to eat is like two flicks of the tail
And it becomes like a missile. It's just unbelievable economy of effort
And ocean ramsey who is in my opinion the greatest of all cage exit shark divers this woman who dealt with
enormous great white sharks
She really understands their behavior when they're aggressive when they're not going to be aggressive. She and her husband Juan
I believe his name is do they understand how the tiger sharks differ from the great white sharks?
We were down there basically
Like not understanding any of this we never should have been there and actually the air failure of the day before
Plus cage eggs in the next day
I told myself after coming up from the cage exit. That's it. I'm no longer taking risks with my life
I want to live got back across the border
Um a couple days later and I was like, that's it. I don't take risks with my life any longer
But yeah, mcdougal not mcdougal shot that video and then it went
quote-unquote viral
through uh, nature is metal we passed them that video actually, uh
I saw a video
Where an instructor was explaining how to behave with a shark in the water
And that you don't want to be swimming away because then you're acting like a prey
And then you want to be acting like a predator by looking at it and swimming towards it right towards them and they'll bank off
Now if you don't see them they're ambush predators
You know, you're swimming in the surface and apparently if they get close you should just like guide them away by
Like grabbing them and moving some people will actually roll them
Um, but if they're coming in full speedy, you're not going to roll the shark
But here we are back to dark stuff again. I like the shark attack map and the shark attack map shows that
Um, you know, northern california. There were a couple actually a guy's head got taken off
Um, he was swimming north of san francisco. There's been a couple of northern, uh, california
That was really tragic, but most of them are in florida in australia florida
The surfrider foundation shark attack map. There it is. Yeah, they have a great map. There you go
So they look like they have all the scars on them. So if you if you zoom in on
I mean, look at this if you go to the north america
Um, look at skulls. There's there's a yeah where they're where they're deadly attacks
Um, but in yeah, northern california. Sadly, this is really tragic if you zoom in on this one
Um, I read about this
This guy if you can click the link
50-year-old male he was in chest high water. This is just tragic. I feel so sad for him and his family
you know, he's just um
Three members of the party chose to go in he was you know
Nine gai was in his chest high water 25 to 50 yards from shore
Great breached water seized his head and that was it, you know, so it does happen. It's very infrequent
um
If you don't go in the ocean, it's a very very very low probability. Um, but but if it doesn't happen
Six times in a row
120 chance. Yeah, who do you think wins a saltwater crocodile or a shark? Okay?
I do not like saltwater crocodiles. They scare me to no end moller michael moller who dove all over the world
He sent me a picture of him
diving uh with
Salty saltwater crocs in cuba. It was a smaller one. But goodness christ. Have you seen the size of some of those saltwater crocs?
Yeah, um, I'm thinking that I'm thinking the the sharks are so agile. They're amazing
They've head cammed one or body cammed one
moving through the kelp bed
And you look and it's just they're so agile moving through the water and and it's looking up at the surface like the camera's
Looking at the surface and you just realize if you're out there, um, you're not
In your swimming and you get hit by a by a shark you're not gonna talk shit and say that a salty has way
more bite force, but according to the internet
Recently data indicates that the shark has a stronger bite
So I was I was assuming that a crocodile would have a a stronger bite force and therefore agility doesn't matter
But apparently a shark
Yeah, and turning one of those big salties this is probably not that you know turning around
It's like a battleship. I mean those sharks are unbelievable. They hit from all sorts. Oh, and they
They do this thing
We saw this you're out of the cage or in the cage and you and you'll look at one and you'll see its eye kind of like
Looking at you. They can't really fove it
But they'll look at you and you're tracking it and then you'll look down and you'll realize that one's coming at you
They're they're they're ambush prayers. They're working together
They're fascinating. I like I like how you know
That they can't fovee
You're already considering the vision system there. Yeah, it's a very permanent eyes on the very primitive eyes on the side of the head
Their vision is decent enough. They're mostly obviously sensing things with their
Electro sensing in the water, but also
Oh faction
Yeah, I spend far too much time
Thinking about and learning about the the visual systems of different animals if you get me going on this like we'll be here all night
See, this is what I have this my blood out too. I saw this in a store and I got it
Because this is from a shark
Goodness. Yeah, I can't say I ever saw one of teeth this big, but it's beautiful. It's beautiful
Yeah, it's probably you know
Probably your blood pressure just goes and you you don't feel feel a thing. Yeah
Before we went down for the cage exit a guy in our crew
pat dosos
Very experienced diver
asked one of the south african divers that
So, you know, like what's the contingency plan if like somebody catches a bite and they were like
He was like every man for himself and they're like basically saying like if somebody catches a bite like that's it
Yeah, you know
Anyway, I thought we were gonna bring up something happy
Oh, that is happy. Well, we nature is beautiful. Yeah, what nature is beautiful. Uh, we lived
But you know that there are there are happy things you brought up nature is metal. This is this is the difference between
russian
Yeah, americans and americans is like maybe there's actually a good time to bring up
Your ayahuasca journey. I've never done ayahuasca
But i'm curious about it. I'm also curious about
ibogaine iboga
But you told me that you did ayahuasca and
That for you, it wasn't the dark scary ride that it is for everybody else. Yeah, it was an incredible experience for me
I did it twice actually and have you done high dose psilocybin? Never. No, I just did small dose psilocybin a couple times
So I was you know nervous about it. I was very yeah, I understand myself
I've done high dose psilocybin. It's terrifying, but I've always gotten something very useful out of it
So, I mean I was nervous about like whatever demons might hide in the shadow in the yungi in the shadow
like I was I was nervous
But I think it turns out. I don't know what the lesson is to draw from that but my experience
Be boys russian
It must it must be the russian thing. I mean, there's also something to the jungle
There it strips away all the bullshit of life and you're just there
I I forgot the outside civilization exists. I forgot time because like
When you don't have your phone
You don't have meetings or calls or whatever you you lose the sense of time the sun comes up the sun comes down
That's the the fundamental biological timer. You know every mammalian species
has a short wavelength. So you think like blue uv type but like
Absorbing cone and a longer wavelength absorbing cone and the and it does this interesting
Subtraction to designate when it's morning and evening because when the sun is low in the sky, you've got short wavelength and long wavelength light
Like when you look at a sunrise, it's got blues and yellows orange and yellows
You look in the evening reds orange and and blues and in the middle of the day
It's like full spectrum light now. It's always full spectrum light but because of some atmospheric
Elements and because of the low solar angle you like that difference between
The different wavelengths of light is is the fundamental signal that the neurons in your eye pay attention to
And signal to your circadian timekeeping mechanism like we are that the core of our brain and the suprachiasmatic nucleus we are
we are
like
Wired to be
Entrained to the rising and setting of the sun like that's the biological timer which makes perfect sense because you know obviously as the planets
Um as the planets spin and revolve
I also wonder like how that is affected by you know in the rainforest the sun is not visible often
So you're under the cover of the trees. So maybe that affects
Well, there are social rhythms
They're feeding rhythms sometimes in in terms of some species will signal the timing of activity of other species and
um
But yet getting out from the canopy is is critical
Of course, even under the canopy during the daytime, there's far more photons than at night
You know, there's always when i'm telling people to get sunlight in their eyes in the morning and in the evening
People say there's no light no sunlight this time here. I'm like it go outside on a really overcast day
It's far brighter than it is at night, right? So um, there's still lots of sunlight even if you can't see the sun as an object
but I I love
Time perception shifts and you mentioned that in the jungle it's linked to the rising and setting of the sun
You also mentioned that on ayahuasca you zoomed out from from the earth
These are like to me the most interesting aspects of having a human brain as opposed to another brain
Of course, only ever had a human brain, but which is that you can
consciously set your
time
Domain window like you can we can be focused here
We can be focused on all of austin or we can be focused on the entire planet
You can make those choices consciously
But in the time domain it's it's hard like different activities bring us into fine slicing a more or more broad binning of time
depending on what we're doing
programming or exercising or researching or podcasting but
um, just how unbelievably
um fluid the human brain is in terms of its
The aperture of of the time space window of our cognition and of our experience
And I I feel like this is perhaps one of the more valuable
Tools that we have access to that we don't really leverage as much as we should which is when things are really hard
you
Need to zoom out and see it as one element within your whole lifespan and that there's more to come
um
You know, I mean people commit suicide because they can't see beyond the time domain they're in or they think it's going to go on forever
Um, when we're happy we rarely think this is going to last forever, but uh, which is interesting contrast in its own right
but I think that
Psychedelics while I have very little experience with them
I have saw them and it sounds like they're just a very interesting
Window into the the different apertures
Well, how to surf that wave is probably a skill
One of the things I was prepared for and I think it's important is not to resist
I think
I understand what it means to resist the thing a powerful wave and it's not going to be good
So you have to be able to surf it so I was ready for that to relax through it. Maybe because I'm quite good at that
from
knowing how to relax and all kinds of disciplines
playing piano and uh
Guitar when I was super young and then through jiu-jitsu knowing the value of relaxation and through all kinds of sports
Should be able to relax the body fully just accept whatever happens to you that process is probably why it was a very positive experience for me
Do you have any interest in iboga? I'm very interested in ibogaine iboga
There's a colleague of mine and researcher at Stanford Nolan Williams
Who's been doing some transcranial magnetic stimulation and brain imaging on people who have
taken the ibogaine ibogaine
um
As I understand it gives a 22 hour psychedelic journey where no hallucinations with eyes open, but you close your eyes and you get a
um a very high resolution image of actual events that happened in your life
But then you have agency within those movies. I think you have to be
Of healthy heart to be able to do it. I think you have to be on a heart rate monitor. It's not trivial
It's not like these other psychedelics
But there's a wonderful group
called veteran solutions
um that
has used iboga combined with some other psychedelics
um in the veterans community to
to great success for things like PTSD and
It's a group. I've really tried to support in in any way that I can mainly by being vocal about the great work they're doing
but um, you hear incredible stories of people who are just like
Like near cratered in their life or zombied by PTSD and other things post war
um get back a lightness or achieve a lightness and a clarity
Um that they didn't feel they had so I'm very curious about these compounds. Um, the state of Kentucky
We should check this but um, I believe it's taken money from the
Opioid crisis settlement for ibogaine research. I mean, so this is like no longer. Yes. If you look here, let's see
Did they do it? Oh, no. No. Oh, no
They backed away Kentucky backs away from the plan to fund opio treatment research
They were going to use the money
To treat opio. Now officials are backing off 50 billion. What is on its way over the coming years 50 billion dollars
50 billion dollars is on its way to state and local government over the coming years
The pool of funding comes from multiple legal statements with pharmaceutical companies that profited from manufacturing or selling opioid
Painkillers, Kentucky has some of the highest number of deaths from the opioid
So they were going to do psychedelic research with ibogaine
Supporting research on illegal illegal folks
Psychedelic drug called ibogaine. Well, I guess they backed away from it. Well
Sooner or later, we'll get some happy news up on the
Internet during this episode
Talk about the the the shark and the crocodile fighting. Yeah. Yeah, that's true. That's true
And you survived the jungle. Well, that's the the thing
I was I was I was writing to you on what's that multiple times because I was going to put on the internet
Are you okay? And if you're like alive and then I was going to just like put it to twitter
Just like he's alive, but then of course you're far too classy for that. So you just came back alive
Well jungle or not
One of the lessons is also, you know, when you hear the call for adventure
Just fucking do it. I was gonna ask you it's kind of silly question, but like give me a
Small fraction of things on your bucket list
Bucket list. Yeah
Go to mars
Yeah, what's what's the status of that?
I don't know. I'm being patient about the whole thing red planet ran that cartoon of you guys
Going to my that was pretty funny. That's true. That was pretty funny. One where Goggins is already up there. Yeah
That's a great. That's a funny one
Probably also true. Uh, I would love I would love to die in mars
But I just love humanity reaching onto the stars and doing this
Bold adventure and taking big risks and exploring. I love exploration
What about seeing different animal species? I'm a huge fan of this guy Joel Sartori
Um, where he he has this photo arc project where he takes portraits of all these different animals
If people aren't already following him on instagram. He's doing some really important work
um
this guy's
instagram is
Amazing like portraits. Well, look at it. Look at these portraits the amount of um,
I must say personality because we don't want to project anything onto them. But yeah, the the like the eyes
And he'll occasionally put him a movie. No, there's a little owl. I delight in things like this
I've got some content coming on animals and animal neuroscience and eyes
And now dogs or all kinds of all animals
um, and I'm very interested
in um
Kids content that that incorporates animals. We have some things brewing there
Like I could look at this kind of stuff all day long
Look at that bat like bats people think about bats is kind of like little flickering a little annoying disease carrying things
But look how beautiful that little sucker is
How's your uh podcast with the cookie monster coming?
Oh, yeah, we've been in discussions with cookie the um
It's uh, can't say too much about that. But um, cookie monster embodies dopamine, right? Cookie monster wants cookie
Right wants cookie right now, you know, like it was that it was that one tweet cookie monster
I bounce because cookies come from all directions
You know, it's like it's just embodying the the desire for for something and and which is an incredible aspect of ourselves
The other one is you remember a little while ago
Elmo put out a tweet
Hey, how's everyone doing out there and it went viral
And you know the surgeon general of the united states have been talking about the loneliness crisis
He came on the podcast and you know a lot of people have been talking about problems with loneliness mental health issues with loneliness
Elmo puts out a tweet. Hey, how's everyone doing out there? And
Everyone gravitates toward it, you know
So that the different sesame street characters really embody the different that kind of aspects of self through very like narrow
Neural circuit perspective
You know snuffle off against the shy and um oscar the grouch it's grouchy, right and the count
Won a tool the archetypes of yeah, the archetypes is very young in once again. Yeah, and I think that um
You know the creators of sesame street clearly either understand that or it's an unconscious genius to that
So yeah, there are some things brewing on on uh conversations with sesame street characters
It's not I know you'd like to talk to vladimir putin. I'd like to talk to cookie monster
It illustrates the differences in our like a sophistication or something. Well, that's illustrates a lot. Yeah
But yeah, I also I love animation
So I'm not anime. That's not my thing but animation. So I'm very interested in the use of animation to get
Uh science content across so there are a bunch of things brewing
but um, but anyway, I delight in
Sartori's work and and and it's there's a conservation aspect to it as well. But I think that um
Mostly want to thank you for finally putting up something that like where something is not being killed or like let some sad
Sad outcome. Well, these are all really positive. They're really cool. They're really cool and every once in a while look at look at that
mountain line
But I also like to look at these and and some of them remind me of certain people
Right, so let's just scroll through like for instance. I think when we don't try and process it too much
So like like okay, look at this cat this is amazing
Like I feel like that somebody I feel like this is like a like someone I met once
as a curiosity and curiosity and a playfulness
um carnivore
Carnivore frontalized eyes
Found in forces the area right so then you go down, you know, it's like
This beautiful fish neon pink
Right, so it reminds you of some of the like the influencers you see on instagram, right? Except this one's natural. Just kidding. Um
Uh, let's see no filter. Um filter. Yeah
um
Let's see like I feel like
Bears I'm a big fan of bears. Yeah bears are beautiful. This one kind of reminds me of you a little bit
There's like a stoic nature to it a curiosity
So you can kind of feel like the essence of animals. You don't even have to do psychedelics to get there
Oh, look at that. He's like the behind the scenes of how it's actually yeah
and then there's um
Wow, yeah
Yeah, the in the jungle the diversity of life was also stark
From a scientific perspective just the the fact that most of those species are not identified was fascinating
Right. It was like a little every little every little insect is a kind of discovery
Right. I mean one of the reasons I love new york city so much
Just by its problems at times is that um everywhere you look there's life
It's like a tropical reef if you've ever done scuba diving or snorkeling you look on a tropical reef and it's like
There's some little crab working on something and like everywhere you look there's life
You know the bay area if you go scuba diving or snorkeling it's like a kelp bed
You know the bay area is like a kelp bed every once in a while some big fish goes by it's like a big IPO
But like most of the time not a whole lot happens
Actually, the bay area it's interesting as I've been going back there more and more recently
um
There are really cool little subcultures starting to pop up again. Nice. Um
There's incredible skateboarding the gx-1000 guys are these guys that that bomb down hills
They're in
Nuts like they're just going like that's just speed not tricks
You gotta see gx-1000 these guys going down hills in san francisco
They are wild and occasionally unfortunately occasionally someone will get hit by a car, but gx-1000
Look into intersections. They have spotters. You can see someone there
Um, oh, I see there's uh
Into traffic. Yeah into traffic. So in san francisco. Yeah, this is crazy. Like this is unbelievable and
um, and they're
They're just wild
But in any case
What's on your bucket list that you haven't done? Well, I'm working on a book. So I'm actually going to
Head to a cabin for a couple weeks and right which I've never done
People talk about doing this, but I'm gonna do that
That's I'm excited for that just the mental space of really dropping into writing like jack dickelson in the shining cabin
Let's hope not. Okay. Let's hope not, you know before
I mean only started doing public facing anything for posting on instagram in 2019
But I used to head up to walla la on the northern coast of california
um, sometimes by myself
um to a little cabin there and spend a weekend by myself and just
Read and write papers and things like that. I used to do that all the time
I I I missed that so some of that
Um, I'm trying to spend a bit more time with my relatives in argentina relatives in on the east coast
See my parents more. They're in good health. Thankfully. I want to get married and have a family. That's an important priority
And put a lot of a lot of work in there. Yeah, that's a big one. Yeah. Yeah, I'm putting a lot of work
Into the the the runway on that
um, what are advice
for people about
That or give advice to yourself about how to find love in this world how to find how to build a family
Get there and and then I'll listen to it someday and see if I hit the marks
um
Yeah, but well, obviously pick the right partner
But also like do the work on yourself. No know yourself
That the oracle know thyself and I think
um, listen
I have a friend. He's a new friend, but he's a friend uh who I met
for uh a meal
He's a very very well known actor overseas
And his stuff has made it over here and um, we become friends and we went to lunch
And we were talking about work and being public facing and all this kind of thing and
And then I said you have kids, right? He says he has four kids. I was like, oh, yeah, you know
I see your posts with the kids. You seem really happy. He said he just looked at me leaned in and he said
It's the best gift
you'll ever give yourself
And he also said and pick your partner the mother of your kids
very carefully
So, you know, that's good advice coming from excellent advice coming from somebody who's, you know, very successful in work and family
So that's the only thing I can pass along. We hear this from friends for ours as well, but
um kids are amazing and family is amazing and um
You know, that's the different
People all these people who want to like be immortal and like live to be 200 or something, you know
There's also the the old fashioned way of you know, having children that
Live on and evolve a new legacy
But they have, you know, half your dna. So that's exciting. Yeah, I think you make an amazing dad. Thank you
It seems like a fun thing and you know, I've also gotten advice from friends who are
Super high performing and have a lot of kids
They'll say just don't overthink it
All right, start having kids
Let's go right. Well the chaos of kids is kind of the like
You can either bury you or it can or it can give you energy
But I grew up in a big pack of boys always doing like wild and crazy things and so that kind of energy is great
And and if it's not a big pack of wild boys, it's you know
You have daughters and they can be you know, different form of chaos sometimes same form of chaos
Um, how many kids do you think you want? Hmm?
You know, it's either two or five
Yeah, very different dynamics. You're one of two, right? You know the other yeah
Um, I mean, I'm very close with my sister
I couldn't imagine having another sibling because it there's so much richness there. We talk almost every day
Sorry, you know three four times a week, you know
Sometimes just briefly but we're we're tight, you know, we're
Really look out for one another
um
She's an amazing person like truly an amazing person and has like
Raised her daughter in an amazing way. She's like
You know, my niece is like
Going to head to college in a year or two and like my sister's done an amazing job
And her dad's done a great job too. They they both really put a lot into
um
The family aspect and she has to spend time with a really amazing person in the
In peru in the amazon jungle and he is one of 20 kids. Wow. So he's got
It's mostly guys. That's just a lot of brothers and I think two sisters
I just said jonathan height on the podcast the guy who's talking about the anxious generation causing the american mind
He's great, but he was saying that you know in order to keep kids healthy
They need to not be on social media or have smartphones until they're 16
I've actually been thinking a lot about
Getting a bunch of friends onto neighboring properties, you know, everyone talks about this
Not creating a commune or anything like that, but I think I think jonathan's right. We were more or less
Our brain wiring does best when we I'm raised in
Small village type environments where kids can forage the whole free range kids idea
And I grew up skateboarding and building forts and dirt clawed wars and all that stuff
Um, it would be so strange to have a childhood without that
Yeah, and I think more and more
As we wake up to the negative aspects of the digital interaction will put more and more value to in-person interaction
So I mean it's cool to see for instance kids in new york city
I'm just kind of moving around the city with so much sense of agency. It's really really cool
The suburbs like where I grew up
Like as soon as we could get out take the 7f bus up to san francisco and hang out with you know
Wild ones like you know while there were dangers
I mean we couldn't wait to get out of the suburbs the moment that you know
Forts and dirt clawed wars and stuff didn't didn't cut it. We just like wanted into the city. So I um bucket list
I will probably move to a major city not los angeles or san francisco
um
In the next few years
new york city
Potentially there's all such different flavors of experiences. Yeah, so I'd love to live in new york city for a while
I've always wanted to do that and I and I will do that
I've always wanted to also have a place in a very rural
Some area so colorado montana are high on my list right now and to be able to
Pivot back and forth between the two would be great just for such different experiences
I and also I like a very physical life
So the idea of getting up in the sun with the sun in the montana or colorado type environment
um
And I've been doing some putting some effort towards finding a spot
Um for that and new york city to me
I know it's got its issues and people say it wasn't what it was. Okay. I get it but listen
I've never lived there. So for me would be entirely new and um
You know
Schultz seems full of life
There is an energy to that city and he represents that I mean there's yeah
And and the full diversity of weird that is
represented in new york city is great. Yeah, you walk down this tree
There's like a person with like a cat on their head and no one gives a shit. Yeah, that's great
All right, San Francisco used to be like that the joke was like
You have to be naked and on the fire and San Francisco before someone takes it but now it's changed
But again, it recently I've noticed that San Francisco. It's not just about the skateboarders. It's there's um some community
Houses of people in tech that are super interesting. There's some community housing
of people not in tech
That I've learned about him and um known people have lived there and and it's it's cool like there's stuff happening
Um in these cities that's new and different. I mean, that's what youth is for they're supposed to evolve evolve things out
uh
So amidst all that you still have to get shit done. I've been really
obsessed with tracking time recently
Like making sure I have daily activities of habits that I'm maintaining
and I'm very
Religious about making sure I get shit done. Do you use an app or something like that? No, just google sheets
So basically a spreadsheet and I'm tracking daily and I write scripts that
That uh, whenever I achieve a goal it glows green
Yeah, do you track your workouts and all that kind of stuff too? No, just the fact that I got the workout done
Yeah, so I just it's a checkmark thing. So I I'm really really big
On making sure I do a thing. It doesn't matter how long it is. I have a rule for myself that I
Do a set of tasks, uh for at least five minutes every day
And it turns out that many of them I do way longer, but just even just doing it
I have to do it every day and there's currently
11 of them
It's just a thing like one of them is playing guitar, for example
So do you do that kind of stuff? Do you do uh, like daily habits? Yeah, I do my um
I wake up if I don't feel I slept enough
I do this non-sleep-deep-rest yoga nidra thing that I've talked about a bunch
We actually released a few of those tracks as audio tracks on spotify
um
10 minute 20 minute ones puts me back into a state that feels like sleep and I feel very rested
Actually matt walker and I are gonna run a study. He's just submitted the IRB to run a study on nsdr
And what is actually doing to the brain? There's some evidence of increases in dopamine, etc
But those are older studies still cool studies, but um, so I'll do that
get up hydrate and if I've
Got my act together. I punched some caffeine down
Like some matina some coffee maybe another matina and
Resistance train three days a week run three days a week and then take one day off
um
And like to be done by 839 and then I want to get into some real work
I actually have a sticky note on my computer
It's like just like reminding me how good it feels to accomplish some real work and then I go into it right now
It's the book writing
researching a podcast and just
fight tooth and nail to stay off
Social media text message. What's app youtube all that?
Get something done. How long can you go? Can you go like?
three hours
Just deep focus if I hit a groove. Uh, yeah 90 minutes to three hours if I'm really in a groove
um
That's tough for me. I start the day actually that's why I'm afraid I'd really prize that
Those morning hours I start with the work. Yeah, and it's it's it's uh
I'm trying to hit the four hour mark of deep focus great
I love it. Then it often can't work. It's important. I'm really really deeply. Yeah
It's it's often torture actually. It's really really difficult. Oh, yeah the agitation but I've
Sat across the table from you a couple years ago when I was out here in austin doing some work
And I was working on stuff you were and I noticed you're just like stare at your notebook sometimes just like
pen at the
Same position and then you'll get back into it like there are those won't you're building that hydraulic pressure and then go
Yeah, I try and get something done of value then it the communications start and
Talking to my podcast producer. My team is everything. I mean like the the magic potion in the podcast is rob more
right
Who's in the has been in the room with me every single solo
Costello used to be in there with us because that's it people have asked journalists have asked can they sit in friends have asked
Nope
just rob
and
For guests interviews. He's there as well. And I talk to rob all the time
all the time we talk multiple times per day and
You know in life
I've I've made some errors in certain relationship domains in my life in terms of partner choice and things like that and
Certainly don't blame all of it on them. But you know, I played my role but but in terms of picking
business partners
And friends like you know to work with I mean rob
It's just it's been bull's-eyes and it's just rob has been amazing my play back our photographer and the guys I mentioned earlier like
We just
Communicate as much as we need to
And we pour over every decision like near neuroticism before we make we put anything out there and
So including like even created decisions of like topics to cover all that
Yeah, like a photo for the book jacket the other day Mike shoots photos then
And then we look at them. We pour over them together
Logo for the perform podcast with Andy Gallop and then we're launching like is that the right contour Mike's the real
He's got the aesthetic thing because he was at DC so long as a portrait photographer
And his cute with close friends with
Ken block
To Jim conna like all the car jumping in the city stuff like I mean Mike is a master. He's a he's a true master of that stuff
and um
And we just pour over every little decision, but even which sponsors, you know, there are dozens of ads now
By the way that that whole josser-sizer thing of me saying oh a guy went from a two to a seven
I never said that that's AI
Like I would never call it number off somebody a two to a seven. Are you kidding me? It's crazy. So it's AI if you bought the thing
I'm sorry
But like our sponsors we list the sponsors that we have and why on our website and like the decision
Do we work with this person or not? Do we still like the product?
I mean we've we've got ways with sponsors because of like changes in the product or change, you know
Most time it's amicable all good
But you know like just every detail and that just takes a ton of time and energy
but I try and
Work mostly on content and my team is constantly trying to keep me out of the other discussions
But I because I obsess but um, yeah, you you have to you have to have a team of some sort someone that you can run
Things bot for sure, but one of the challenges the larger the team is
And I I'd like to be involved in a lot of different kinds of stuff including engineering stuff robotics work research
All of those interactions at least for me take away from the deep work the deep focus
Unfortunately, I get
Drained by social interaction even with the people I love and really respect and all that kind of stuff
You're an introvert. Yeah, like fundamentally an introvert. So
To me it's a trade-off getting shit done versus
Collaborating and I have to choose wisely because without collaboration without a great team
Which I'm fortunate enough to be a part of
Like you wouldn't get anything really done
But as an individual contributor to get stuff done like to do the hard work of
Researching or programming all that kind of stuff. You need the hours of deep work
I used to spend a lot more time alone
That's that's on my bucket list spend a bit more time dropped into work alone
it I think social media like
It causes our brain to go the other direction
I try and answer some comments and then and then get back to work. I'm really
After going to the jungle, I
appreciate not using the device
I've played with the idea of
Like spending certainly maybe like one week a month not using social media at all
I used it. So after that morning block, I'll eat some lunch and I'll usually do something while I'm doing lunch or something
And then a bit more work and that real work deep work and then
Around 2 30 I do a non-sleep deep rest to go short nap wake up. Boom
Maybe a little more caffeine and then lean into it
Again, and then you know if you I find if you really put in the deep work
Two or three bouts per day by about five or six p.m. It's over
I was down at Jaco's place not that long ago and in the evening did a sauna session with him and
Some family members of his and some of their friends
And it's really cool like they all work all day and train all day and then in the evening
They get together and they they sauna and cold plunge. I'm really into this
whole thing of
gathering with other people
At a specific time of day. I have a gym at my house and I you know tim will come over and train or
you know
That we've kind of slowed that down in recent months, but I think
Gathering in groups once a day being alone for part of the day. It's like very fundamental stuff
We're not saying anything that hasn't been said millions of times before but how often do people actually do that?
And and and call the party, you know, like be the person to like bring people together if it's not happening
That's something I've really had to learn
Even though I'm an introvert like hey, I'm like gather people together
You came through town the other day and there's a lot of people at the house
Yeah, Brad actually I was playing because I was getting a massage when you walked in
I don't sit around getting massages very often
But I was getting one that day and then everyone came in and the dog came in like everyone's piled in. It was very sweet
Again, no devices, but choose wisely the people
You gather with right right and I was clothed
Thank you for clarifying. I wasn't which is very weird
Uh
Yeah, yeah, the the the frenzy surround yourself with that. That's another thing. It's like
I understood that from my Alaska and from just the experience in the jungle is like
Just select the people
Just be careful how you allocate your time. I just saw on
Somewhere Conor McGregor has this good line. I wrote it down about loyalty
He said don't eat with people you wouldn't starve with
That guy's I mean, he's being on loyalty all the shit talk all of that set that aside
To me like loyalty is really big
because then if you invest in certain people in your life and they stick by you and you stick by them and
What what else is life about? Yeah, well hardship will show you who your real friends are. That's for sure
and
um, you know, we're fortunate to have a lot of them
It'll also show you who you know, who really like has put in the time to try and understand you and
And understand people like people are complicated. I love that. So
Can you read the quote once more?
Don't eat with people you wouldn't starve with
Yeah, so in that way a hardship is a gift
It shows you definitely and it makes you stronger. It definitely makes you stronger
Let's go get some food. Yeah, you're one meal a day guy. Yeah, I actually ate something earlier
But it was like a protein shake and a couple pieces of bil-tongue. I hope we're eating a steak
I hope so too. I'm full of nicotine and caffeine. Yeah. What do you think? How you feel? I feel good
Yeah, I was I was thinking you'd probably like I only did a half a piece
And I won't have more for a while, but a little too good. Yeah
Thank you for talking once again, brother. Yeah, thanks so much Lex. Um
It's been a great ride this podcast thing and you're the reason I started the podcast you inspired me to do it
You told me to do it. I did it and you've also been an amazing friend. You showed up in some
Some very challenging times and you've shown up for me publicly. You've shown up for me in my home and my life and you know
It's an honor to have you as a friend. Thank you. I love you brother. Love you too
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Andrew Huberman to support this podcast
Please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from Carl Jung
Until you make the unconscious conscious it will direct your life
And you will call it fate
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time
