I remember the reaction where he had drawn these characters and he was slowly moving around and like people had no experience with 3D navigation.
It was all still keyboard. We didn't even have mice set up at that time, but slowly moving, going up, picked up a key, go to a wall.
The wall disappears in a little animation and there's a monster like right there and he practically fell out of his chair.
It was just like, ah, and games just didn't do that.
You know, the games were, the gods eye view, you were a little invested in your little guy, you can be like, you know, happy or sad when things happen,
but you just did not get that kind of startle reaction.
You weren't inside the game.
Something in the back of your brain, some reptile brain thing is just going, oh shit, something just happened.
And that was one of those early points where it's like, yeah, this is going to make a difference.
This is going to be powerful and it's going to matter.
The following is a conversation with John Carmack, widely considered to be one of the greatest programmers ever.
He was the co-founder of id Software and the lead programmer on several games that revolutionized the technology, the experience and the role of gaming in our society,
including Commander Keen, Wolfenstein 3D, Doom and Quake.
He spent many years as the CTO of Oculus VR, helping to create portals into virtual worlds and to define the technological path to the metaverse and meta.
And now he has been shifting some of his attention to the problem of artificial general intelligence.
This was the longest conversation on this podcast at over five hours.
And still, I could talk to John many, many more times and we hope to do just that.
This is the Lexington podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's John Carmack.
What was the first program you've ever written?
Do you remember?
Yeah, I do.
So I remember being in a Radio Shack going up to the TRS-80 computers and learning just enough to be able to do 10-print John Carmack.
And it's kind of interesting how, of course, I've, you know, Carnegie and Enrichie kind of standardized Hello World is the first thing that you do in every computer programming language and every computer,
but not having any interaction with the cultures of Unix or any other standardized things, it was just like, well, what am I going to say?
My name.
And then you learn how to do go to 10 and have it scroll all off the screen.
And that was definitely the first thing that I wound up doing on a computer.
Can I ask you a programming advice?
I was always told in the beginning that you're not allowed to use go-to statements.
That's really bad programming.
Is this correct or not?
Jumping around code.
Can we look at the philosophy and the technical aspects of the go-to statement that seems so convenient, but it's supposed to be programming?
Certainly back in the day, in basic programming languages, you didn't have proper loops.
You didn't have four-wiles-and-repeats.
You know, that was the land of Pascal for people that kind of generally had access to it back then.
So you had no choice but to use go-tos.
And as you made what were big programs back then, which were a thousand line basic program, is a really big program.
They did tend to sort of degenerate into madness.
You didn't have good editors or code exploration tools.
So you would wind up fixing things in one place, add a little patch, and there's reasons why structured programming generally helps understanding.
But go-tos aren't poisonous.
Sometimes they're the right thing to do.
Usually it's because there's a language feature missing like nested breaks or something where it can sometimes be better to do a go-to cleanup or go-to error rather than having multiple flags, multiple if statements littered throughout things.
But it is rare.
I mean, if you grep through all of my code right now, I don't think any of my current code bases would actually have a go-to.
But deep within sort of the technical underpinnings of a major game engine, you're going to have some go-tos in a couple places probably.
Yeah, the infrastructure on top of like the closer you get to machine code, the more go-tos you're going to see, the more of these like hacks you're going to see.
Because the set of features available to you in low-level programming languages is limited.
So print John Carmack, when is the first time, if we could talk about love, that you fell in love with programming?
You said like this is really something special.
It really was something that was one of those love at first sight things where just really from the time that I understood what a computer was.
I mean, I remember looking through old encyclopedias of the black and white photos of the IBM mainframes with the real-to-real tape decks.
And for people nowadays, it can be a little hard to understand what the world was like then from information gathering where I would go to the libraries and there would be a couple books on the shelf about computers and they would be very out of date even at that point.
Just not a lot of information, but I would grab everything that I could find and, you know, devour everything.
Whenever Time or Newsweek had some article about computers, I would like cut it out with scissors and put it somewhere.
It just, it felt like this magical thing to me, this idea that the computer would just do exactly what you told it to.
I mean, and there's a little bit of the genie monkey's paw sort of issues there where you'd better be really, really careful with what you're telling it to do.
But it wasn't going to back talk you.
It wasn't going to have a different point of view.
It was going to carry out what you told it to do.
And if you had the right commands, you could make it do these pretty magical things.
And so what kind of programs did you write at first?
So beyond the print John Carmack.
So I can remember as going through the learning process where you find at the start you're just learning how to do the most basic possible things.
And I can remember stuff like Superman comic that Radio Shack commissioned to have.
It's like Superman had lost some of his super brain and kids had to use Radio Shack TRS-80 computers to do calculations for it to help him kind of complete his heroics.
And I'd find little things like that and then get a few basic books to be able to kind of work my way up.
And again, it was so precious back then.
I had a couple books that would teach me important things about it.
I had one book that I could start to learn a little bit of assembly language from.
And I'd have a few books on basic and some things that I could get from the libraries.
But my goals in the early days was almost always making games of various kinds.
I loved the arcade games and the early Atari 2600 games.
And being able to do some of those things myself on the computers was very much what I aspired to.
And it was a whole journey where if you learn normal basic, you can't do any kind of an action game.
You can write an adventure game.
You can write things where you say, what do you do here?
I get sword, attack troll, that type of thing.
And that can be done in the context of basic, but to do things that had moving graphics.
There were only the most limited things you could possibly do.
You could maybe do breakout or pong or that sort of thing in low resolution graphics.
And in fact, one of my first sort of major technical hacks that I was kind of fond of was on the Apple II computers.
They had a mode called low resolution graphics where of course all graphics were low resolution back then.
But regular low resolution graphics, it was a grid of 40 by 40 pixels normally.
But they could have 16 different colors.
And I wanted to make a game kind of like the arcade game Vanguard, just a scrolling game.
And I wanted to just kind of have it scroll vertically up.
And I could move a little ship around.
You could manage to do that in basic, but there's no way you could redraw the whole screen.
And I remember at the time just coming up with what felt like a brainstorm to me where I knew enough about the way the hardware was controlled,
where the text screen and the low resolution graphics screen were basically the same thing.
And all those computers could scroll their text screen reasonably.
You could do a listing and it would scroll things up.
And I figured out that I could kind of tweak just a couple things that I barely understood to put it into a graphics mode.
And I could draw graphics and then I could just do a line feed at the very bottom of the screen.
And then the system would scroll it all up using an assembly language routine that I didn't know how to write back then.
So that was like this first great hack that sort of had analogs later on in my career for a lot of different things.
So I found out that I could draw a screen.
I could do a line feed at the bottom.
We would scroll it up once.
I could draw a couple more lines of stuff at the bottom.
And that was my first way to kind of scroll the screen, which was interesting in that that played a big part later on in the idSoftware days as well.
So do efficient drawing where you don't have to draw the whole screen, but you draw from the bottom using the thing that was designed in the hardware for text output.
Yeah.
Where so much of, until recently, game design was limited by what you could actually get the computer to do.
Where it's easy to say, like, OK, I want to scroll the screen.
You just redraw the entire screen at a slight offset.
And nowadays, that works just fine.
Computers are ludicrously fast.
But up until a decade ago or so, there were all these things everybody wanted to do.
But if they knew enough programming to be able to make it happen, it would happen too slow to be a good experience, either just ridiculously slow or just slow enough that it wasn't fun to experience it like that.
So so much of kind of the first couple of decades of the programming work that I did was largely figuring out how to do something that everybody knows how they want it to happen.
It just has to happen two to ten times faster than sort of the straightforward way of doing things would make it happen.
And it's different now because at this point, lots of things you can just do in the most naive possible way and it still works out.
You don't have nearly the creative limitations or the incentives for optimizing on that level.
And there's a lot of pros and cons to that.
But I do generally, I'm not going to do the angry old man shaking my fist at the clouds bit where back in my day, programmers had to do real programming.
It's amazing that you can just kind of pick an idea and go do it right now.
And you don't have to be some assembly language wizard or deep GPU arcanist to be able to figure out how to make your wishes happen.
Well, there's still, see, that's true.
But let me put on my old man with a fist hat and say that probably the thing that will define the future still requires you to operate at the limits of the current system.
So we'll probably talk about this.
But if you talk about building the metaverse and building a VR experience that's compelling, it probably requires you to not to go to assembly or maybe not literally,
but sort of spiritually to go to the limits of what the system is capable of.
And that really was why virtual reality was specifically interesting to me where it had all the ties to.
You could say that even back in the early days, I have some old magazine articles that's talking about DOOM as a virtual reality experience back when just seeing anything in 3D.
So you could say that we've been trying to build those virtual experiences from the very beginning.
And in the modern era of virtual reality, especially on the mobile side of things, when it's standalone, you're basically using a cell phone chip to be able to produce these very immersive experiences.
It does require work.
It's not at the level of what an old school console game programmer would have operated at where you're looking at hardware registers and you're scheduling all the DMA accesses.
But it is still definitely a different level than what a web developer or even a PC steam game developer usually has to work at.
And again, it's great.
There's opportunities for people that want to operate it either into that spectrum there and still provide a lot of value to the world.
Let me ask you sort of a big question about preference.
What would you say is the best programming language?
Your favorite, but also the best.
You've seen throughout your career, you're considered by many to be the greatest programmer ever.
I mean, it's so difficult to place that label on anyone.
But if you put it on anyone, it's you.
So let me ask you these kind of ridiculous questions of what's the best band of all time.
But in your case, what's the best programming language?
Everything has all the caveats about it.
Nowadays, I do program a reasonable amount of Python for AIML sorts of work.
I'm not a native Python programmer.
It's something I came to very late in my career.
I understand what it's good for.
But you don't dream in Python.
I do not.
And it has some of those things where there's some amazing stats when you say if you just start, if you make a loop, a triply nested loop and start doing operations in Python,
you can be thousands to potentially a million times slower than a proper GPU tensor operation.
And these are staggering numbers.
You know, you can be as much slower as we've almost gotten faster in our pace of progress and all this other miraculous stuff.
So your intuition is about inefficiencies within the Python sort of?
It keeps hitting me upside the face where it just, it's gotten to the point now I understand.
It's like, OK, you just can't do a loop if you care about performance in Python.
You have to figure out how you can reformat this into some big vector operation or something that's going to be done completely within a C++ library.
But the other hand is it's amazingly convenient.
And you just see stuff that people are able to cobble together by just import a few different things.
And you can do stuff that nobody on Earth could do 10 years ago.
And you can do it in a little cookbook thing that you copy pasted out of a website.
So that is really great.
When I'm sitting down to do what I consider kind of serious programming, it's still in C++.
And it's really kind of a C flavored C++ at that where I'm not big into the modern template metaprogramming sorts of things.
I see a lot of train wrecks coming from some of that over abstraction.
I spent a few years really going kind of deep into the kind of historical Lisp work and Haskell and some of the functional programming sides of things.
And there is a lot of value there in the way you think about things.
And I changed a lot of the way I write my C and C++ code based on what I learned about the value that comes out of not having this random mutable state that you kind of lose track of.
Because something that many people don't really appreciate till they've been at it for a long time is that it's not the writing of the program initially.
It's the whole lifespan of the program.
And that's when it's not necessarily just how fast you wrote it or how fast it operates, but it's how can it bend and adapt as situations change.
And then the thing that I've really been learning in my time at Meta with the Oculus and VR work is it's also how well it hands off between a continuous kind of revolving door of programmers taking over maintenance and different things and how you get people up to speed in different areas.
And there's all these other different aspects of it.
C++ is a good language for handover between engineers.
Probably not the best.
And there's some really interesting aspects to this where in some cases languages that are not generally thought well of for many reasons like C is derided pretty broadly that, yes, obviously all of these security flaws that happen with the memory and unsafeness and buffer overruns and the things that you've got there.
But there is this underappreciated aspect to the language is so simple, anyone can go and if you know C, you can generally jump in someplace and not have to learn what paradigms they're using because there just aren't that many available.
I think there's some really, really well written C code.
I find it great that if I'm messing around with something an open BSD say, I mean, I can be walking around in the kernel and I'm like, I understand everything that's going on here.
It's not hard for me to figure out what I need to do to make whatever change that I need to.
While you can have more significant languages, like it's a downside of Lisp where I don't regret the time that I spent with Lisp.
I think that it did help my thinking about programming in some ways.
But the people that are the biggest defenders of Lisp are saying how malleable of a language it is that if you write a huge Lisp program, you've basically invented your own kind of language and structure because it's not the primitives of the language you're using very much.
It's all of the things you've built on top of that.
And then a language like Racket, kind of one of the more modern Lisp versions, it's essentially touted as a language for building other languages.
And I understand the value of that for a tiny little project, but the idea of that for one of these long term supported by lots of people kind of horrifies me where all of those abstractions that you're like, OK, you can't touch this code till you educate yourself on all of these things that we've built on top of that.
And it was interesting to see how when Google made go, a lot of the criticisms of that are it's like, wow, this is not a state of the art language.
This language is just so simple and almost crude.
And you could see the programming language people just looking down at it.
But it does seem to be quite popular as basically saying this is the good things about C. Everybody can just jump right in and use it.
You don't need to restructure your brain to write good code in it.
So I wish that I had more opportunity for doing some work in go.
Rust is the other modern language that everybody talks about that I'm not fit past judgment on.
I've done a little bit beyond Hello World.
I wrote some like video decompression work in Rust just as an exercise.
But that was a few years ago and I haven't really used it since.
The best programming language is the one that works generally that you're currently using.
Because that's another trap is in almost every case I've seen when people mixed languages on a project, that's a mistake.
I would rather stay just in one language so that everybody can work across the entire thing.
And we have, I get meta, we have a lot of projects that use kind of React framework.
So you've got JavaScript here and then you have C++ for real work.
And then you may have Java interfacing with some other part of the Android system.
And those are all kind of horrible things.
And that was one thing that I remember talking with Boz at Facebook about it where like,
man, I wish we could have just said we're only hiring C++ programmers.
And he just thought from the Facebook meta perspective, well, we just wouldn't be able to find enough with the thousands of programmers they've got there.
It is not necessarily a dying breed, but you can sure find a lot more Java or JavaScript programmers.
And I kind of mentioned that to Elon one time and he was kind of flabbergasted about that.
It's like, well, you just, you go out and you find those programmers and you don't hire the other programmers that don't do the languages that you want to use.
But right now, I guess, yeah, they're using JavaScript on a bunch of the SpaceX work for the UI side of things when you go find UI programmers, they're JavaScript programmers.
I wonder if that's because there's a lot of JavaScript programmers, because I do think that great programmers are rare, that it's not, you know,
if you just look at statistics of how many people are using different programming languages, that doesn't tell you the story of what the great programmers are using.
And so you have to really look at what you were speaking to, which is the fundamentals of a language.
What does it encourage you?
How does it encourage you to think what kind of systems does it encourage you to build?
There's something about C++ that has elements of creativity, but forces you to be an adult about your programming.
Well, it expects you to be an adult.
It does not force you to.
So it brings out people that are willing to be creative in terms of building large systems and coming up with interesting solutions,
but at the same time have the sort of the good software engineering practices that amend themselves to real-world systems.
Let me ask you about this other language, JavaScript.
So if we, you know, aliens visit in thousands of years and humans are long gone,
something tells me that most of the systems they find will be running JavaScript.
I kind of think that if we're living in a simulation, it's written in JavaScript.
You know, for the longest time, even still, JavaScript didn't get any respect,
and yet it runs so much of the world and an increasing number of the world.
Is it possible that everything will be written in JavaScript one day?
So the engineering under JavaScript is really pretty phenomenal.
The systems that make JavaScript run as fast as it does right now are kind of miracles of modern engineering in many ways.
It does feel like it is not an optimal language for all the things that it's being used for
or an optimal distribution system to build huge apps in something like this without type systems and so on.
But I think for a lot of people, it does reasonably the necessary things.
It's still a C-flavored language.
It's still a braces and semicolon language.
It's not hard for people to be trained in JavaScript and then understand the roots of where it came from.
I think garbage collection is unequivocally a good thing for most programs to be written in.
It's funny that I still, just this morning, I was on, I was seeing a Twitter thread of a bunch of really senior game dev people
arguing about the virtues and costs of garbage collection.
You will run into some people that are top-notch programmers that just say,
no, this is literally not a good thing.
Oh, because it makes you lazy?
Yes, that it makes you not think about things.
And I do disagree.
I think that there is so much objective data on the vulnerabilities that have happened in C and C++ programs,
sometimes written by the best programmers in the world.
It's like nobody is good enough to avoid ever shooting themselves in the foot with that.
You write enough C code, you're going to shoot yourself in the foot.
And garbage collection is a very great thing for the vast majority of programs.
It's only when you get into the tightest of real-time things that you start saying it's like,
no, the garbage collection has more costs than it has benefits for me there,
but that's not 99 plus percent of all the software in the world.
So JavaScript is not terrible in those ways.
And so much of programming is not the language itself.
It's the infrastructure around everyone that surrounds it,
all the libraries that you can get and the different ways you can deploy it,
the portability that it gives you.
And JavaScript is really strong on a lot of those things,
where for a long time, and it still does if I look at it,
the web stack about everything that has to go when you do something really trivial in JavaScript
and it shows up on a web browser to kind of x-ray through that
and see everything that has to happen for your one little JavaScript statement
to turn into something visible in your web browser.
It's very, very disquieting, just the depth of that stack
and the fact that so few people can even comprehend all of the levels that are going on there.
But it's again, I have to caution myself to not be the in the good old days old man about it
because clearly there's enormous value here.
The world does run on JavaScript to a pretty good approximation there
and it's not falling apart.
There's a bunch of scary stuff where you look at console logs
and you just see all of these bad things that are happening,
but it's still kind of limping along and nobody really notices.
But so much of my systems design and systems analysis goes around.
You should understand what the speed of light is,
like what would be the best you could possibly do here.
And it sounds horrible, but in a lot of cases,
you can be a thousand times off your speed of light velocity for something
and it's still be okay.
And in fact, it can even sometimes still be the optimal thing in a larger system standpoint
where there's a lot of things that you don't want to have to parachute in someone like me
to go in and say, make this web page run a thousand times faster.
Make this web app into a hardcore native application that starts up in 37 milliseconds
and everything responds in less than one frame latency.
That's just not necessary.
And if somebody wants to go pay me millions of dollars to do software like that
when they can take somebody right out of a boot camp and say, spin up an application for this,
often being efficient is not really the best metric.
It's like that applies in a lot of areas where it's kind of interesting
how a lot of our appliances and everything are all built around energy efficiency,
sometimes at the expense of robustness in some other ways or higher costs in other ways
where there's interesting things where energy or electricity could become much cheaper in a future world
and that could change our engineering trade-offs for the way we build certain things
where you could throw away efficiency and actually get more benefits that actually matter.
That's one of the directions I was considering swerving into was nuclear energy
when I was kind of like, what do I want to do next?
It was either going to be cost-effective nuclear fission or artificial general intelligence.
And one of my pet ideas there is like, people don't understand how cheap nuclear fuel is
and there would be ways that you could be a quarter of the efficiency or less,
but if it wound up making your plant 10 times cheaper, that could be a radical innovation and something like that.
So there's some of these thoughts around direct fission energy conversion, fission fragment conversion
that maybe you build something that doesn't require all the steam turbines and everything
even if it winds up being less efficient.
So that applies a lot in programming where it's always good to know what you could do
if you really sat down and took it far because sometimes there's discontinuities
around user reaction times.
There are some points where the difference between operating in one second and 750 milliseconds,
not that huge.
You'll see it in web page statistics, but most of the usability stuff, not that great.
But if you get down to 50 milliseconds, then all of a sudden this just feels amazing.
It's just like doing your bidding instantly rather than you're giving it a command,
twiddling your thumbs, waiting for it to respond.
So sometimes it's important to really crunch hard to get over some threshold,
but there are broad basins in the value metric for lots of work
where it just doesn't pay to even go that extra mile.
And they're craftsmen that just don't want to buy that and more power to them.
If somebody just wants to say, no, I'm going to be, my pride is in my work.
I'm never going to do something that's not as good as I could possibly make it.
I respect that and sometimes I am that person,
but I try to focus more on the larger value picture and you do pick your battles
and you deploy your resources into play that's going to give you sort of the best user value in the end.
Well, if you look at the evolution of life on Earth as a kind of programming effort,
it seems like efficiency isn't the thing that's being optimized for.
Like natural selection is very inefficient, but it kind of adapts
and through the process of adaptations, building more and more complex systems
that are more and more intelligent, the final result is kind of pretty interesting.
And so I think of JavaScript the same way.
It's like this giant mess that things naturally die off if they don't work
and if they become useful to people, they kind of naturally live
and you build this community, large community of people that are generating code
and some code is sticky, some is not and nobody knows the inefficiencies
or the efficiencies or the breaking points like how reliable this code is
and you kind of just run it, assume it works and then get unpleasantly surprised
and then that's very kind of the evolutionary process.
So that's a really good analogy and we can go a lot of places with that
where in the earliest days of programming when you had finite,
you could count the bytes that you had to work on this,
you had all the kind of hackers playing code golf to be one less instruction
than the other person's multiply routine to kind of get through
and it was so perfectly crafted.
It was a crystal piece of artwork when you had a program
because there just were not that many, you couldn't afford to be lazy in different ways
and in many ways I see that as akin to the symbolic AI work
where again, if you did not have the resources to just say,
well, we're going to do billions and billions of programmable weights here,
you have to turn it down into something that is symbolic and crafted like that
but that's definitely not the way DNA and life and biological evolution and things work.
On the one hand, it's almost humbling how little programming code is in our bodies.
We've got a couple billion base pairs
and it all fits on a thumb drive for years now
and then our brains are even a smaller section of that.
You've got maybe 50 megabytes and this is not like Shannon Limit
perfectly information dense conveyances here.
It's like these are messy codes.
They're broken up into amino acids.
A lot of them don't do important things or they do things in very awkward ways
but it is this process of just accumulation on top of things
and you need scale, both you need scale for the population for that to work out
and in the early days in the 50s and 60s,
the ancient era of computers where you could count
when they say like when the internet started even in the 70s,
there were 18 hosts or something on it.
It was this small finite number
and you were still optimizing everything to be as good as you possibly could be
but now it's billions and billions of devices and everything going on
and you can have this very much natural evolution going on
where lots of things are tried, lots of things are blowing up,
venture capitalists lose their money when a startup invested in the wrong tech stack
and things completely failed or failed to scale
but good things do come out of it
and it's interesting to see the mimetic evolution of the way different things happen
like mentioning Hello World at the beginning.
It's funny how some little thing like that
where everybody, every programmer knows Hello World now
and that was a completely arbitrary sort of decision
that just came out of the dominance of Unix and C
and early examples of things like that.
So millions of experiments are going on all the time
but some things do kind of rise to the top and win the fitness war
for whether it's mind space or programming techniques or anything.
Like there's a site on Stack Exchange called Code Golf
where people compete to write the shortest possible program for a particular task
in all the different kinds of languages
and it's really interesting to see folks kind of
that are masters of their craft really play with the limits of programming languages.
It's really beautiful to see and across all the different programming languages
you get to see some of these weird programming languages
and mainstream ones,
the difference between Python 2 and 3,
you get to see the difference between C and C++ and Java
and you get to see JavaScript, all of that.
And it's kind of inspiring to see how much depth of possibility
there is within programming languages that Code Golf kind of tasks reveal.
Most of us if you do any kind of programming
with the boring kind of very vanilla type of code,
that's the way to build large systems
but it's nice to see that the possibility of creative genius
is still within those languages, it's laden within those languages.
So given that you are once again one of the greatest programmers ever,
what do you think makes a good programmer?
Maybe a good modern programmer.
So I just gave a long rant slash lecture at Meta to the TPM organization
and my biggest point was everything that we're doing
really should flow from user value, all the good things that we're doing.
It's like we're not technical people,
it's like you shouldn't be taking pride just in the specific thing
like Code Golf is the sort of thing, it's a fun puzzle game
but that really should not be a major motivator for you.
It's like we're solving problems for people
or we're providing entertainment to people,
we're doing something of value to people
that's displacing something else in their life.
So we want to be providing a net value over what they could be doing
but instead they're choosing to use our products.
And that's where, I mean it sounds triter corny
but I fundamentally do think that's how you make the world a better place.
If you have given more value to people than it took you and your team to create
then the world's a better place.
People have gone from something of lesser value
chosen to use your product and their life feels better for that
and if you've produced that economically, that's a really good thing.
On the other hand, if you spent ridiculous amounts of money
you've just kind of shoveled a lot of cash into a woodchipper there
and you should maybe not feel so good about what you're doing.
So being proud about like a specific architecture
or specific technology or a specific code sequence that you've done
it's great to get a little smile like a tiny little dopamine hit for that
but the top level metric should be that you're building things of value.
Now you can get into the argument about how you, you know, what is user value
how do you actually quantify that
and there can be big arguments about that
but it's easy to be able to say,
okay this pissed off user there is not getting value from what you're doing.
This user over there with the big smile on their face
the moment of delight when something happened
there's a value that's happened there.
I mean, you have to at least accept that there is a concept of user value
even if you have trouble exactly quantifying it
you can usually make relative arguments about it.
Well, this was better than this, we've improved things.
So, you know, being a servant to the user is your job when you're a developer
you want to be producing something that other people are going to find valuable
and if you are technically inclined then finding the right levers to be able to pull
to be able to make a design that's going to produce the most value
for the least amount of effort
and it always has to be kind of divide, there's a ratio there where you
it's a problem at the big tech companies
you know, whether it's, you know, MetaGoogle, Apple, Microsoft, Amazon
companies that have almost infinite money
I mean, I know their CFO will complain that it's not infinite money
but from most developer standpoints it really does feel like it
and it's almost counterintuitive that if you're working hard as a developer on something
there's always this thought, if only I had more resources
more people, more RAM, more megahertz, then my product will be better
and that sense that at certain points it's certainly true
that if you are really hamstrung by this
removing an obstacle will make a better product, make more value
but if you're not making your core design decisions
in this fiercely competitive way where you're saying
feature A or feature B, you can't just say let's do both
because then you're not making a value judgment about them
you're just saying well they both seem good
I don't want to necessarily have to pick out which one is better
or how much better and tell team B that
sorry we're not going to do this because A is more important
but that notion of always having to really critically value
what you're doing, your time, the resources you expend
even the opportunity cost of doing something else
that's super important
Well let me ask you about the big debates that you're mentioning
of how to measure value
is it possible to measure it kind of numerically
or can you do the sort of Johnny Ive, the designer route
of imagining sort of somebody using a thing
and imagining a smile on their face
imagining the experience of love and joy that you have
when you use the thing
that's from a design perspective
or if you're building more like a lower level thing
for like Linux you imagine a developer that might come across this
and use it and become happy and better off because of it
so where do you land on those things
is it measurable, so I imagine like Meta and Google
will probably try to measure the thing
they'll try to, it's like you try to optimize engagement or something
let's measure engagement
and then I think there is a kind of
I mean I admire the designer ethic of like
think of a future that's immeasurable
and you try to make somebody in that future
that's different from today happy
so I do usually favor
if you can get any kind of a metric that's good
by all means listen to the data
but you can go too far there
where we've had problems where it's like
hey we had a performance regression
because our fancy new telemetry system
is doing a bazillion file rights
to kind of archive this stuff
because we needed to collect information to determine
if we were doing, you know, if our plans were good
so when information is available
you should never ignore it
for actual users using the thing
human beings using the thing
large number of human beings
and you get to see sort of at large numbers
so there's zero to one problem of when you're doing something really new
you do kind of have to make a guess
but one of the points that I've been making at Meta
is we have more than enough users now
that anything somebody wants to try in VR
we have users that will be interested in that
who do not get to make a completely green field blue sky pitch
and say I'm going to do this
because I think it might be interesting
I challenge everyone
there are going to be people
whether it's, you know, working in VR on your
like on your desktop replacement
or communicating with people in different ways
or playing the games
there are going to be probably millions of people
or at least if you pick some tiny niche
that we're not in right now
there are still going to be thousands of people out there
that have the headsets
that would be your target market
and I tell people
pay attention to them
don't invent fictional users
don't, you know, make an Alice Bob Charlie
that fits whatever matrix of tendencies
that you want to break the market down to
because it's a mistake to think about imaginary users
when you've got real users
that you could be working with
but, you know, on the other hand
there is value to having a kind of wholeness
of vision for a product
and companies like Meta have, you know
they understand the trade-offs
where you can have a company like SpaceX
or, you know, Apple and the Steve Jobs era
where you have a very powerful leading personality
that I, you know, that can micromanage
at a very low level and can say
it's like, no, that handle needs to be different
or that icon needs to change the tint there
and they clearly get a lot of value out of it
they also burn through a lot of employees
that have horror stories to tell about
working there afterwards
my position is that
you're at your best when you've got a leader
that is at their limit of what they can kind of comprehend
of everything below them
and they can have an informed opinion
about everything that's going on
and you take somebody, you've got to believe
that somebody that has 30, 40 years of experience
you would hope that they've got wisdom
that just out of boot camp person
contributing doesn't have
and that if they're like, well, that's wrong there
you probably shouldn't do it that way
or even just don't do it that way
do it another way
so there's value there
but it can't go beyond a certain level
I mean, I have Steve Jobs stories of him
saying things that are just wrong
right in front of me about technical things
because he was not operating at that level
but when it does work
and you do get that kind of passionate leader
that's thinking about the entire product
and just really deeply cares about
not letting anything slip through the cracks
I think that's got a lot of value
but the other side of that is the people saying
that, well, we want to have these independent teams
that are bubbling up the ideas
because it's almost
it's anti-capitalist or anti-free market
to say it's like I want my great leader
to go ahead and dictate all these points there
where clearly free markets bring up things
that you don't expect
like in VR we saw a bunch of things
like it didn't turn out at all the way
the early people thought were going to be the key applications
and things that would not have been approved
by the dark cabal
making the decisions about what gets into the store
turn out to in some cases be extremely successful
so I definitely kind of wanted to be
there's a point where I did make a pitch
it's like, hey, make me VR dictator
and I'll go and get shit done
and that's just, it's not in the culture at Metta
and they understand the trade-offs
and that's just not the way
that's not the company that they want
the team that they want to do
It's fascinating because VR
and we'll talk about it more
it's still unclear to me
in what way VR will change the world
because it does seem clear that VR will
somehow fundamentally transform this world
and it's unclear to me how
let me know when you want to get into that
hold on a second
stick to the you being the best programmer ever
in the early days when you didn't have
adult responsibilities of leading teams
and all that kind of stuff
and you can focus on just being a programmer
what did the productive day
in the life of John Carmack look like
how many hours of the keyboard, how much sleep
how much source of calories that fueled the brain
what was it like, what time did you wake up
so I was able to be remarkably consistent
about what was good working conditions for me
for a very long time
I was never one of the programmers
that would do all-nighters going through
work for 20 hours straight
it's like my brain generally starts turning to mush
after 12 hours or so
but the hard work is really important
and I would work for decades
I would work 60 hours a week
I would work a 10 hour day, 6 days a week
and try to be productive at that
now my schedule shifted around a fair amount
when I was young without any kids
any other responsibilities
I was on one of those cycling schedules
where I'd kind of get in an hour later
each day and roll around through the entire time
and I'd wind up kind of pulling in
at 2 or 3 in the afternoon sometimes
and then working again past midnight
or 2 in the morning
and that was when it was just me
trying to make things happen
and I was usually isolated off in my office
people generally didn't bother me much
and I could get a lot of programming work done
that way
I did settle into a more normal schedule
when I was taking kids to school
and things like that
So kids were the forcing function
that got you to wake up at the same time
It's not clear to me that there was
much of a difference in the productivity
with that
where I kind of feel
if I just get up when I feel like it
it's usually a little later each day
but I just recently made
the focusing decision to try to push my schedule
back a little bit earlier to
getting up at 8 in the morning
and trying to shift things around
I'm often doing experiments
with myself about what should I be doing
to be more productive
and one of the things that I did realize
was happening in recent months
where I would go for
a walk or a run
I cover like four miles a day
and I would usually do that
just as the sun's going down
here in Texas now
and it's still really damn hot
but I'd go out at 8.30 or something
and cover the time there
and then the showering
and it was putting a hole in my day
where I would have still a couple hours
after that
and sometimes my best hours were at night
when nobody else is around
nobody's bothering me
but that hole in the day was a problem
so just a couple weeks ago
I made the change to go ahead
and say alright I'm going to get up a little earlier
I'm going to do a walk or get out there first
so I can have more uninterrupted time
so I'm still playing with factors like this
as I kind of optimize my work efforts
but it's always been
it was 60 hours a week
for a very long time
to some degree I had a little thing
in the back of my head where I was almost jealous
of some of the programmers
that would do these marathon sessions
and I had like Dave Taylor
one of the guys that he had
he would be one of those people
that would fall asleep under his desk sometimes
and all the kind of classic hacker tropes
about things
and a part of me was like
always a little bothered that that wasn't me
that I wouldn't go program
20 hours straight
because I'm falling apart
and not being very effective after 12 hours
I mean yeah 12 hour programming
that's fine when you're doing that
but you're not doing smart work
much after
at least I'm not
but there's a range of people
I mean that's something that a lot of people
don't really get in their gut
where there are people
that work on four hours of sleep
and are smart
and can continue to do good work
but then there's a lot of people
that just fall apart
so I do tell people that
I always try to get eight hours of sleep
it's not this
you know push yourself harder
get up earlier
I just do worse work
where I know there's
you can work a hundred hours a week
and still get eight hours of sleep
if you just kind of prioritize things correctly
but I do believe in working hard
working a lot
there was a comment that
Game Dev made that
that I know there's a backlash
against really hard work
in a lot of cases
and I get into online arguments
about this all the time
but it was basically saying
yeah 40 hours a week
that's kind of a part-time job
and if you were really in it
you're doing what you think is important
what you're passionate about
working more gets more done
and it's just really not
possible to argue with that
if you've been around the people
that work with that level of intensity
and just say
it's like no
they should just stop
and we had
I kind of came back around to that
a couple years ago
where I was using the fictional example of
alright
some people say
they'll say with a straight face
they think no
you are less productive
if you work more than 40 hours a week
and they're generally misinterpreting things
where your marginal productivity
for an hour after eight hours
is less than in one of your peak hours
but you're not literally getting less done
there is a point where you start breaking things
and getting worse
worse behavior and everything out of it
where you're literally going backwards
but it's not at eight or ten or twelve hours
and the fictional example I would use was
imagine there's an asteroid
coming to impact
to crash into earth
destroy all of human life
do you want
Elon Musk
or the people working at SpaceX
that are building the interceptor
that's going to deflect the asteroid
do you want them to clock out at five
because damn it
they're just going to do worse work
if they work another couple hours
and you know it seems absurd
and that's a hypothetical though
and everyone can dismiss that
but then when coronavirus was hitting
and you have all of these medical personnel
that are clearly pushing themselves
really really hard
and I'd say it's like
okay
do you want all of these scientists
working on treatments and vaccines
and caring for all of these people
are they really screwing everything up
by working more than eight hours a day
and of course people say
I'm just an asshole to say something like that
but it's the truth
working longer gets more done
so that's kind of
the layer one
but I'd like to also say that
at least I believe
depending on the person, depending on the task
working more
and harder
will make
you better for the next week
in those peak hours
so there's something about
a deep dedication to a thing
that
kind of gets deep in you
so the hard work isn't just about
the raw hours of productivity
it's the
it's the thing it does to you
in the weeks
and months after too
you're tempering yourself in some ways
and I think you know it's like
you know dreams of sushi
if you really dedicate yourself completely
to making the sushi
to really putting in the long hours
day after day after day
you become a true craftsman
of the thing you're doing
now there's of course discussions about
are you sacrificing a lot of personal relationships
are you sacrificing a lot of other possible
things you could do with that time
but if you're talking about purely
being
a master
of your art
that more hours isn't just about
doing more
it's about becoming better at the thing you're doing
and I don't gain say anybody that
wants to work the minimum amount
they've got other priorities in their life
my only argument that I'm making
it's not that everybody should work hard
it's that if you want to accomplish something
working longer and harder
is the path to getting it accomplished
well let me ask you about this then
why the mythical
work-life balance
for an engineer it seems like
that's one of the professions
for a programmer
where
working hard does lead to
greater productivity in it
but it also raises the question
of
personal relationships
and all that kind of stuff family
how are you able to
find work-life balance
you can give maybe even outside yourself
have you been able to arrive
at any wisdom on this
part in your years of life
I do think that there's a wide range of people
where different people have different needs
it's not a one size fits all
certainly what works for me
I can tell enough
that I'm
different than a typical average person
in the way things impact me
the things that I want to do
my goals are different
my endeavors to impact things
are different where
I have literally never
felt burnout and I know
there's lots of brilliant smart people
that do world-leading work
that get burned out and
it's never hit me
I've never been at a point where
I'm like
I just don't care about this
I don't want to do this anymore
but I've always had the flexibility
to work on lots of interesting things
and have a great time working on that
and so much of that
so much of the ability to actually work hard
is the ability to have multiple things
to choose from and to use
your time on the most appropriate thing
there are time periods
where it's the best time
for me to read a new research paper
that I need to really be thinking hard about it
then there's a time that maybe I should just
scan and organize my old notes
because I'm just not on top of things
then there's the time that
let's go bang out a few hundred lines
of code for something
so switching between them
has been real valuable
so you always have kind of joined
your heart for all the things you're doing
and that is the kind of work-life
balance as a first step
so you're always happy
well happy
a lot of people would say that often
I look like kind of a grim person
with just sitting there with a neutral expression
or even like knitted brows and a frown
on my face as I'm staring at something
that's what happiness looks like for you
yeah it's kind of true
where that's like okay I'm pushing
through this I'm making progress here
I am you know
I know that doesn't work for everyone
I know it doesn't work for most people
but what I am always trying to do
in those cases is I don't want to let
somebody that might be a person like that
be told by someone else that
no don't try it don't even try
that out as an option where
I you know work-life balance
versus kind of your life's work
where there's a small subset
of the people that can be very happy
being obsessive about things
and you know obsession
can often get things done
that just practical, prudent
pedestrian work won't
or at least won't for a very long time
there's legends of
your nutritional intake
in the early days
what can you say about
being a program
as a kind of athlete
so what
what was the nutrition that fueled
I have never been that great
on really
paying attention to it where
I'm good enough that I don't eat a lot
you know I've never been like a big heavy guy
but it was
interesting where one of the things that I can remember
being an unhappy teenager not having
enough money and like one of the things
that bothered me about not having enough money
is I couldn't buy pizza whenever I wanted to
so I got rich and then
I bought a whole lot of pizza
that was the defining like that's what being rich felt like
there was a lot of little things
like I could buy all the pizza and comic books
and video games that I wanted to
and it really
didn't take that much
but the pizza was one of those things
and it's absolutely true that for a long time
it did software I had a pizza
delivered every single day you know the delivery guy
knew me my name
and I didn't find out until years later
that apparently I was such a good
customer that they just never raised
the price on me and I was using this
six year old price for the pizzas that they
were still kind of sending my way every day
so you were doing
eating once a day
or were you... it would be spread out
you know you have a few pieces of pizza you have some more later on
and I'd maybe have something at home
it was one of the nice things
that Facebook meta is
they do they feed you quite well you get
a different
I guess now it's doordash sorts of things delivered
but they take care of making sure that everybody
does get well fed
and I probably had better food those
six years that I was working in the meta office
there than I used to before
but I
it's worked out okay for me my health has always been good
I get a pretty good amount of exercise
and I don't
eat to excess and I avoid a lot of other
kind of not so good for you
things so I'm still doing quite well
did you have
a kind of
I don't know
spiritual experience with food
or coffee or any of that kind of stuff
I mean
the programming experience with music
or
like I listen to brown noise on a program
or like creating an environment
and the things you take into your body
just everything you construct
can become a kind of ritual that
empowers the whole process the program
relationship with pizza or
it would really be with Diet Coke
there still is that sense of
drop the can down crack open the can
of Diet Coke alright now I mean business
we're getting to work here
still to this day
is Diet Coke a still partner
yeah probably 8 or 9 a day
nice okay
what about your setup
how many screens
what kind of keyboard is there something interesting
what kind of IDE
Linux what operating system
laptop or any interesting
thing that brings you joy
so I kind of migrated cultures
where early on through all of game dev
there was sort of one culture there
which was really quite distinct from the more
the Silicon Valley venture
you know culture for things
it's their different groups and they have
pretty different mores and the way they think about things
where and I still do
think a lot of the big companies can learn
can learn things from
the hardcore game development side of things
where it still boggles my mind
how hostile
to debuggers and IDEs
that so much of them
the kind of big money get billions of dollars
Silicon Valley venture backed
funds are
sorry so you're saying like
big companies like Google and Meta are hostile
to they are not big on
debuggers and IDEs like
so much of it is like emacs BIM
for things and we just assume
that debuggers don't work
most of the time for the systems
and a lot of this comes from a sort of
Linux bias on a lot of things
where I did come up through
the personal computers and then the DOS
and then I am windows
and it was
Borland tools and then visual studio
and
you appreciate the buggers
very much so I mean a debugger is how you
get a view into a system that's too complicated
to understand I mean anybody that thinks
just read the code and think about it
that's an insane statement in the
you can't even read all the code on a big system
you have to do experiments
on the system and doing that
by adding log statements
recompiling and rerunning it
is an incredibly inefficient way of doing it
I mean yes you can always
get things done even if you're working with stone
knives and bear skins that's
that is the mark of a good programmer is
that given any tools you will figure
out a way to get it done but
it's amazing what you can do with
sometimes much much better tools
where instead of just going through this
iterative compile run
debug cycle and you have the
you have the old Lisp direction of like
you've got a REPL and you're working interactively
and doing amazing things there but
in many cases a debugger as a very powerful
user interface that can
stop examine all the different things in your
program set all these different breakpoints
and of course you can do that with GDB
or whatever there but
this is one of the user interface fundamental
principles where when something is
complicated to do you won't
use it very often there's people
that will break out GDB when they're at
their wits end and they just have beat
their head against a problem for so long
but for somebody that kind of grew
up in game dev it's like they were running into
the debugger anyways before they even knew
there was a problem and you would just
stop and see you know what was happening
and sometimes you could fix things even before
you you know even
before you did one compile cycle you could
be in the debugger and you'd say well I'm just
going to change this right here and yep
that did the job and fix it and go on
and for people that don't know GDB is
sort of popular I guess Linux
debugger
primarily for C++
they handle most of the languages but
it's you know it's based on C as the
original kind of Unix heritage
and it's kind of like command line it's not user friendly
it's not it doesn't allow for clean
visualizations and you're exactly right
so that you're using this kind of debugger
usually when you're at what's end
and there's a problem that you can't figure out
why by just looking at the codes if to
find it that's how I guess
normal programmers use it but you're
saying there should be tools that kind of
visualize and help you as
part of the programming process
just the normal programming process
to understand the
code deeper. Yeah when I'm working on
like my CC++ code
I'm always running it from the debugger
you know just I type in the code
I run it many times the first thing I
do after writing code is
set a breakpoint and step through the function
now other people will say it's like oh I do that in my head
well your head is a faulty
interpreter of all those things there
and I've written brand new code
I want to step in there and I'm going to single
step through that examine lots of things
and see if it's actually doing what I expected
it to. It is
a kind of companion
the debugger like
you're now coding in an interactive way with another
being
the debugger is a kind of dumb
being but it's a reliable being
that is an interesting question of what role
does AI play in that kind of
with codex and these kind of
ability to generate
code might be you might
start having tools that
understand the code in interesting
deep ways that can work with you.
I mean there's a whole spectrum there
from static code analyzers
and various kind of dynamic tools
they're up to AI that can
conceivably grok these programs that
literally no human can understand
they're too big, too intertwined, too
interconnected but it's not beyond
the possibility of understanding
it's just beyond what we can hold
in our heads as kind of mutable state
while we're working on things
and I'm a big proponent
again of things like static analyzers
and some of that stuff where
you'll find some people that don't like
being scolded by a program
for how they've written something where
it's like oh I know better and sometimes
you do but that was something that
I was it was very
very valuable for me when
not too many people get an opportunity
like this to have this is almost one of those
spiritual experiences as a programmer and
awakening to
the id software code bases were a couple
million lines of code and
at one point I had used a few of the
different analysis tools but
I made a point to really
go through and scrub the code base
using every tool that I could find
and it was eye-opening where we had
a reputation for having some of the
most robust strongest code
where there were some great things
that I remember hearing from
Microsoft telling us about crashes on XBox
and we had this tiny number that they said
were probably literally hardware
errors and then you have other
significant titles that just have
millions of faults that are getting recorded
so I was proud of our code on a lot
of levels but when I took this
code analysis squeegee through
everything it was
it was shocking how many
errors there were in there things
that you can say okay this was this was
a copy paste not changing something right
here lots of things that were
the most the most common problem
was something in a printf
format string that was the wrong data type
that could cause crashes there and
you really want the warnings for things like
that then the next most common was
missing a check for null that could actually
happen that could blow things up and
those are obviously like top CC
plus plus things everybody has those problems
but the long tail of all
of the different little things that could go wrong
there and we had good programmers
and my own code so that I'd be looking at
it's like oh I wrote that code that's definitely
wrong we've been using this for
a year and
it's this somewhere you know this
mine sitting there waiting for us to step on
and
it was humbling it was and I
reached the conclusion that
anything that can be syntactically
allowed in your language
if I'm it's going to show up
eventually in a large enough code base
I you're not going to good intentions
aren't going to keep it from happening
you need automated tools and guard
rails for things and those start with
things like static types and or even
type hints in the more dynamic languages
but the people that
rebel against that that basically
say that slows me down
doing that there's something to that I get
that I've written you know I cobbled things
together in a notebook I
like wow this is great that it just happened
but yeah that's kind of sketchy but it's working
fine I don't care it does come back to
that that value analysis
where sometimes it's right to not care
but when you do care
if it's going to be something that's going to
live for years and it's going to have other people
working on it I and it's going to be
deployed to millions of people
then you want to use all of these tools
you want to be told it's like no you
screwed up here here and here and that does
require kind of an ego check about
things where you have
to to be open to the fact
that everything that you're doing is just littered
with flaws it's not that oh you
occasionally have a bad day it's just
whatever stream of code you output
there's going to be a statistical regularity
of things that you just make mistakes
on and I
and I do think there's the whole
argument about test-driven design
and unit testing versus kind
of analysis and different things
I am more in favor of the analysis
and the stuff that just like you can't run
your program until you fix this rather
than you can run it and hopefully
a unit test will catch it in some way
yeah in my private code
I have asserts everywhere
just there's something
pleasant to me
pleasurable to me about sort of the
dictatorial rule of like
this should be true at this point
in too many
times
I've made mistakes
that shouldn't have been made
and I would assume
I wouldn't be the kind of person that would make that mistake
but I keep making that mistake therefore
an assert really catches me
really helps all the time
so my code I would say like
10 to 20 percent of my private code
just for personal use is probably
and there are active comments
one of those things that in theory
they don't make any difference to the program
and if it was all operating the way
you expected it would be then
they will never fire
but even if you have it right
and you wrote the code right initially
then circumstances change
the world outside your program changes
and in fact that's one of the things where
I'm kind of fond
in a lot of cases of static array size
declarations where I went through this
period where it's like okay now we have general
collection classes we should just make everything
variable because
I had this history of in the early days
you get doom which had
some fixed limits on it then everybody started
making crazier and crazier things and they kept bumping
up the different limits this many lines
this many sectors
and it seemed like a good idea
well we should just make this completely generic
it can go kind of go up to whatever
and
there's cases where that's the right thing to do
but it also the other
aspect of the world changing around you
is it's good to be informed
when the world has changed more than you thought
it would and if you've got a continuously
growing collection you're never going to
find out you might have this quadratic
slowdown on something where you thought
oh I'm only ever going to have a handful
of these but something changes
and there's a new design style and all of a sudden
you've got 10,000 of them
so I kind of like in many cases
picking a number
of some nice brown power of 2 number
and setting it up in there
and having an assert saying it's like hey
you hit this limit
you should probably think are the choices that you've
made around all of this still relevant
if somebody's using 10 times
more than you thought they would
yeah this code was originally written
with this kind of world view
with this kind of set of constraints
you were thinking of the world in this way
if something breaks
that means you got to rethink the initial stuff
and it's nice for it to
for it to do that
is there any stuff like keyboard
or monitors
I'm fairly pedestrian on
a lot of that where I did move
to triple monitors like in the last several
years though I had been dual monitor
for a very long time and
and it was one of those things where
probably years later than
I should have I'm just like well the video cards now
generally have three output ports
I should just put the third monitor up there
that's been a pure win I've been very happy with that
but no
I don't have fancy keyboard or mouse
or anything
the key things is an IDE that has
helpful debuggers has helpful tools
so it's not the emacs
vim route and then die coke
yeah so I did spend you know I
spent one of my week long retreats
where I'm like okay I'm going to make myself
use it was actually
classic vi which I know people will say you should never
have done that you should have just used vim
but you know I gave it the good try
it's like okay I'm being in
kind of classic Unix developer mode
here and I worked
for a week on it I used
Anki to like teach myself the
the different little key combinations for
things like that and in the end it was just like
alright this was kind of like my
Civil War reenactment phase you know it's
like I'm going out there doing it like they used to
in the old days and it was kind of fun
in that regard so many people right now
screaming
as they're listening to this so again the
out is that this was not modern vim
but still I yes
I was very happy to get back to
my visual studio at the end
yeah I'm actually I struggle with this a lot
because
so use a kinesis keyboard and
I use emacs primarily
and I feel like
I can exactly as you said
I can understand the code I can navigate the
code there's a lot of stuff you could build
within emacs with using lisp
you can customize a lot of things for yourself
to help you
introspect the code like to help
you understand the code and visualize different
aspects of the code you can even run the buggers
but it's work
and the world moves past you
and the better and better ideas that constantly
being built and that
puts a kind of
I need to take the same kind of
retreat as you're talking about but now
I'm still fighting the Civil War
I need to kind of move into the 21st century
and it does seem like the world is
or a large chunk of the world is moving
towards visual studio code which is
kind of interesting to me against the javascript
ecosystem on the one hand
and IDs are one of those
things that you want to be infinitely
fast you want them to just kind of
immediately respond
and like I mean heck I've got there's someone
I know I'm an old school game dev guy
that still uses visual studio 6
and on a modern computer
everything is just absolutely
instant on something like that
because it was made to work on a computer that's
10,000 or 100,000
times slower so just everything happens
immediately and all the
modern systems just feel
you know they feel so crufty when
it's like oh why is this refreshing the screen
and moving around and updating over here
and something blinks down there and you should
update this and there's
you know there are things that
we've lost with that incredible flexibility
but
lots of people get tons of value from it
and I am super happy that that seems
to be winning over even a lot of the old
Vim and Emacs people that they're kind of like
hey visual studio codes maybe you know
not so bad I am
that may be the final peacekeeping solution
where everybody is reasonably
happy with something like
that. So can you explain
what a .plan file is and
what role that played in your life
does it still continue to play a role?
Back in the early early days of
grid software one of
our big things that was unique with what we
did is I had adopted
next stations or kind of next
step systems from Steve Jobs's
out in the
out in the woods away from Apple company
and
they were basically it was kind of
interesting because I did not really have a background
with the Unix system so many of the people
they get immersed in that
in college and
you know and that's you know that
a lot of cultural expectations for them
and I didn't have any of that
but I knew that
my background was I was a huge Apple 2
fanboy I was always
a little suspicious of the Mac I was
not really what I what kind of I wanted
to go with
but when Steve Jobs left Apple
and started next this computer
did just seem like one of those amazing things
from the future where it had all of this cool
stuff in it and we were still
back in those days working on DOS
everything blew up you had reset buttons
because your computer would just freeze
if you're doing development work literally
dozens of times a day your computer was just
rebooting constantly and so this idea
of yes any of the
the Unix workstations would have given a
stable development platform where
you don't crash and reboot all the time
but next also had
this really amazing graphical
interface and it was great for building
tools and it used
Objective-C as the kind of an interesting
oh wow
the next was Unix based
it's that Objective-C so it has a lot of the
elements that became Mac
I mean the kind of reverse acquisition of Apple
by next where that took over
and became what the modern Mac
system is and defined some of the developer
like
the tools and the whole community
yeah you've still got if you're programming
on Apple stuff now there's still all these NS
somethings which was originally next
step objects of different kinds of things
but one of the aspects
of those Unix systems
was they had this notion of
a dot plan file where
a dot file is an invisible
file usually in your home
directory or something and there was a trivial
server running on most Unix systems
at the time that
when somebody ran a trivial
little command called finger
you could do finger and then somebody's
address it could be anywhere on the internet
if you were connected correctly
and all that server would do was
read the dot plan file
in that user's home directory
and then just spit it out to you
and originally the idea was that could be
whether you're on vacation what your current
project was it's supposed to be like
the plan of what you're doing
and people would use it for
various purposes but all it did
was dump that file
to the terminal of whoever issued
the finger command
and at one point
I started just keeping a list
of what I was doing in there
which would be what I was working on in the day
and I would have this little
syntax I kind of got to myself about
here's something that I'm working on
I put a star when I finish it
I could have a few other little bits of punctuation
and at the time it was
it started off as being just like my to-do list
and it would be these
trivial obscure little things like
I fixed something
with collision detection code
and the fireball do something different
and just little one-liners
that people that were following the games
could kind of decipher
but I did wind up
starting to write much more in-depth things
I would have little notes
of thoughts and insights
and then I would eventually start having little essays
I would sometimes dump into the .plan files
interspersed with the work logs
of things that I was doing
so in some ways it was like a super early
protoblog where
I was kind of dumping out what I was working on
but it was interesting enough that
there were a lot of people
that were interested in this
so most of the people didn't have Unix workstation
so there were the websites
back in the day that would follow the doom and quake development
that would
basically make a little service that would go grab
all the changes and then people could just get it
with a web browser and there was a period
where like all of the little
kind of Dallas gaming diaspora
of people that were at all in that orbit
there were a couple dozen
.plan files going on which was
and this was some years before
blogging really became kind of a thing
and it was kind of a
a premonition of
sort of the way things would go and there was
it's all been collected
it's available online in different places
and it's kind of fun to go back and look through
what I was thinking
what I was doing in the different areas
Have you had a chance to look back? Is there some interesting
very low level specific
to do items
maybe things you've never completed
all that kind of stuff and high level
philosophical essay type of stuff
there's some good stuff
on both where
a lot of it was low level nitpicky
details about game dev
and I've learned
enough things where there's no project
that I worked on that I couldn't go back
and do a better job on now
I mean you just you learn things hopefully
if you're doing it right you learn things as you get older
and you should be able to do a better job
at all of the early things
and there's stuff in
Wolfenstein Doomquake that's like oh clearly
I could go back and do a better job
at this whether it's something in the rendering
engine side or how I implemented
the monster behaviors
or managed resources or anything like that
Do you see the flaws in your thinking now?
Yeah I do
I mean sometimes I'll get the
I'll look at it and say yeah I had a pretty clear
view of I was doing good work there
and I haven't really
hit the point where
there was another programmer, Graham Divine
he had worked at id and
7th guest and he made some
comment one time where he said he looked back at some of his
old notes and he was like wow I was
really smart back then
and I don't hit
that so much where I mean I look at it
and I always know that yeah
there's all the you know with aging you get
certain changes in how you're
able to work problems but all of the
problems that I've worked I
you know I'm sure that I could do a better
job on all of them. Oh wow
so you can still step right in if you could travel
back in time and talk to that guy
you would teach him a few things. Yeah absolutely
that's awesome
What about the high level philosophical stuff?
Is there some insights that
stand out that you remember?
There's things that
I was understanding about
development and I
in the industry and so on that were
in a more primitive
stage where
I definitely learned a lot
more in the later years about
business and organization
and team structure
there were
I mean there were definitely things that I was
not the best person
or even a very good person about managing
like how a team should
operate internally, how people should work together
I was just
you know just get out
of my way and let me work on the code
and do this and more and more
I've learned how
in the larger scheme of things
how sometimes relatively
unimportant some of those things are where it is
this user value generation
that's the overarching
importance for all of that and I
didn't necessarily have my eye on that ball
correctly through a lot of my
you know my earlier years
and there's things that
you know I could have gotten more
out of people handling things in different ways
I am you know I could have made
you know in some ways more
successful products by following things
in different ways there's mistakes that we
made that we couldn't really have
known how things would have worked out but
it was interesting to see in later years companies
like Activision showing that hey you really
can just do the same game
make it better every year and you can
look at that from a negative standpoint and say
it's like oh that's just being derivative and all that
but if you step back again
and say it's like no are the people buying it
still enjoying it are they enjoying it more
than what they might have bought otherwise
and you can say no that's
that's actually a great value creation
engine to do that if you're in a position
where you can
you know don't be forced into reinventing
everything just because you think that you need
to
you know lots of things about
business and team stuff that could be done
better but the technical work
the kind of technical visionary type stuff
that I laid out I still feel pretty good
about there are some classic old
ones about my defending of OpenGL
versus D3D
which turned out
to be one of the more probably important
momentous things there where
it never it was always
a rearguard action on Windows where
Microsoft was just not going to let
that win but when I look back
on it now that fight
to keep OpenGL relevant for
a number of years there meant
that OpenGL was there when
mobile started happening and
OpenGL ES was the thing that
drove all of the acceleration
of the mobile industry and it's
really only in the last few years
as apples moved to metal and some of
the other companies have moved to Vulcan
that that's moved away but
really stepping back and
looking at it's like yeah I sold tens
of millions of games for different things
but billions
and billions of devices wound up
with an appropriate
capable graphics API
do in no small part
to me thinking that that was really important
that we not just
give up and use Microsoft's
at that time
really terrible API.
The thing about Microsoft is the APIs don't stay
terrible. They were terrible at the start
but a few versions on
they were actually quite good and there was a completely
fair argument to be made that
by the time DX9 was out
it was probably a better programming environment
than OpenGL but it was still
a wonderful good thing
that we had an open standard that could
show up on Linux and Android
and iOS and eventually WebGL
still to this day so
that was one
that would be on my greatest hits list of things
that I kind of pushed with. The impact it had
on billions of devices yes
so let's talk about it
can you tell the origin story of idsoftware?
Again
one of the greatest game developer companies
ever it created
Wolfenstein 3D
games that define
my life also in many ways
as a thing that made me realize what computers are capable
of in terms of graphics
in terms of performance
it just unlocked something deep
in me in understanding
what these machines are all about as games can do that
so Wolfenstein 3D, Doom, Quake
and just all the
incredible engineering innovation that went into
that. So how did it all
start?
So I'll caveat up front that I usually
don't consider myself the
historian of the software side of
things. I usually do
kind of point people at John Romero
for stories about the early days
where
I've never been like I've commented that
I'm a remarkably unsentimental person
in some ways where I don't really
spend a lot of time unless I'm explicitly
prodded to go back and think about the
early days of things and
I didn't
necessarily make the effort to
archive everything exactly in my brain
and the more that I work on machine learning
and AI and the aspects of memory
and how when you go back and polish certain
things it's not necessarily exactly
the way it happened but
having said all of that from
my view the way everything happened
that led up to that was
after I was
an adult and kind of taking
a few college classes deciding to drop
out I was doing
hardscrabble contract
programming work really struggling to
kind of keep groceries and pay my rent
and things and the company
that I was doing the most work for was
a company called Softdisk Publishing
which had the
Sounds Bizarre Now business model
of monthly subscription software.
Before there was an internet
that people could connect to and get software
you would pay
a certain amount and every month they would send
you a disk that had some random software
on it and people that were into
computers thought this was kind of cool
and they had different ones for the Apple 2
the 2GS, the PC, the Mac,
the Amiga
lots of different things here so quirky little
business but I was doing a lot
of contract programming for them where
I'd write tiny little games and
sell them for $300, $500
and one of the things
that I was doing again
to keep my head above water here was
I decided that I could make
one program and I could
port it to multiple systems
so I would write a game like
Dark Designs or Catacombs
and I would develop it on the Apple 2
the 2GS and the IBM PC
which apparently
was the thing that really kind of
piqued the attention of the
people working down there like Jay Wilbur
was my primary editor and Tom Hall
was a secondary editor
and they kept asking me it's like hey
you should come down and work for us here
and I
pushed it off a couple times because I was
really enjoying my freedom of kind of being
off on my own even if I was barely
getting by I loved it I was
doing nothing but programming all day
but I did have enough
close scrapes with like damn I'm just
really out of money that maybe I should
get an actual job
rather than contracting these kind of one at
a time things and Jay Wilbur
was great he was like fed exing me the checks
when I would need them to kind of
get over whatever hump I was at
so I took the
I finally took them up on their offer to come
down to Shreveport Louisiana
I was in Kansas City at the time
drove down
to through the Ozarks and everything
down to Louisiana
and saw the soft disk
offices went through talked to a bunch of
people met the people I had been working
with remotely at that time
but the most important thing for me was
I met two programmers
there John Romero and Lane Roth
that for the first time ever I had met
programmers that knew more
cool stuff than I did where
the world was just different back then I
was in Kansas City it was one of those
smartest kid in the school does all the
computer stuff the teachers don't have anything
to teach him but all I had to learn from
was these few books at the library
it was not much at all
and there were some aspects of programming
that were kind of black magic to me
like it's like oh he knows how to format
a track on I am you know on a
low-level drive programming
interface and this was
I was still not at all
sure I was going to take the job but I met
these awesome programmers that
were doing cool stuff and my Romero had
worked at Origin Systems and he had done
like you know so many different games
ahead of time
that I did kind of quickly decide like yeah
I'll go take the job down there
and I
settled down there moved in
and started working on more little projects
and the first kind of
big change that happened down there
was the company wanted to make a gaming
focused a PC gaming focused
subscription just like all their other
was the same formula that they used for
everything pay a monthly fee
and you'll get a disc with
one or two games just every month
and no choice in what you get but we think
it'll be fun and that was the model they
were comfortable with and said all right
we're going to start this gamers edge department
and all of us that were
interested in that like me Romero
I Tom Hall was kind of helping
us from from his side of things
Jay would peak in and we had a few other
programmers
working with us at the time and we were going
to to just start making games
just the same model
and we dived in and it was
fantastic you know you have to make new games
every month every month
yeah and this
in retrospect looking back at it
that sense that I had done all this contract
programming and John Romero had done
like far more of this where he had done
one of his teaching himself efforts
was he made a game for every letter of the alphabet
that sense of like I'm just going to go make
26 different games give him a different
theme and you learn
so much when you go through and you
crank these things out like on a
bi-weekly monthly basis something like that
start to finish it's not like an
idea it's not just
from the very beginning to the very end
it's done
it has to be done there's no delaying
it's done and you've got deadlines
and that kind of
rapid iteration pressure cooker
environment was super important
for all of us developing the skills
that I you know that brought us
to where we eventually went to I mean
people would say like in the history of the Beatles
like it wasn't them being the Beatles
it was them playing all of these other
you know early works that that opportunity
to craft all of their skills before they were
famous that was very
critical to their later successes
and I think there's a lot of that here
where we did these games that
nobody remembers lots
of little things that contributed
to building up the skill set for the things that
eventually did make us famous
and just to ask you wrote the
gambler I had to
write it in a month just
make money and nobody
remembers that probably because he had to
figure out because it's literally
he didn't have enough
time to write it fast enough
to come up with hacks
literally
pressure and limitation of resources
is surprisingly
important and it's
counterintuitive in a lot of ways where you just think
that if you've got all the time in the world
and you've got all the resources in the world
of course you're going to get something better
but sometimes it really does work out that
you know innovations
and other necessity and you know where you can
resource constraints and you have to do
things when you don't have a choice
it's surprising what you can do.
Is there any good games written in that time
would you say? Some of them are still fun to go back
and play where you get the
they were
all about kind of the more modern term is
game feel about how just the exact
feel that things it's not the grand
strategy of the design but how
running and jumping and shooting
those things I feel in the
in the moment and some of those are still
if you sat down on them you kind of go
it's a little bit different it doesn't have the same
movement feel but you move over and you're like
bang jump bang it's like
hey that's kind of cool still
so you can get lost in the rhythm of the game
like is that what you mean by feel
just like
there's something about it that pulls you in
nowadays again people talk about
compulsion loops and things where it's that
that sense of exactly
what you're doing what your fingers are doing on
the keyboard what your eyes are seeing
and they're going to be the sequences of things
grab the loot shoot the monster jump
over the obstacle get to the end of the level
these are eternal aspects of game design
in a lot of ways but
there are better and worse ways to do all of
them and we did so many of these
games that it was I we got
a lot of practice with it
so one of the kind of weird things
that was happening at this time is John
Romero was getting some
some strange fan mail and back
in the days this was before email
so we literally got letters sometimes
and telling him it's like oh I want
to talk to you about your games I want to
reach out different things
and I eventually
turned out that these were all coming from
Scott Miller at Apigee Software
and he was
reaching out through he didn't think he could
contact John directly that he would get
intercepted so he was trying to get him to
contact him through like back channel
fan mail because he basically was
saying hey I'm making all this money
on shareware games I want
you to make shareware games because
he had seen some of the games that Romero
had done and
you know we looked at Scott Miller's
games and we didn't think they were
very good I am we're like
that can't be making the kind of money
that he's saying he's making ten grand or something
I am off of this game
and we really thought that he was full of
shit that it was a lie trying to get
I had to get him into this
but so that was kind of going on at
I am you know at one level
he was and it was funny the moment
when Romero realized that he had some of
these letters pinned up on his wall like all of his
fans and then we noticed that they all had the same
return address with different names on them
which was a little bit of a two-edged sword
there trying to
figure out the puzzle laid out before
him yeah what happened after I kind
of coincident with that was
I was working on a lot of the new technologies
where
I was now full on the IBM PC
for the first time where I was really
a long hold out on Apple II forever
and I you know I loved my Apple II
it was the computer I was wished I had when I was
growing up and when I finally did have one
I was I was kind of clinging on
to that well-passed it's sort of good use
by the best computer ever made you would you say
I wouldn't
make judgments like that about it
but it was positioned in such a way especially
in the school systems that it impacted
a whole lot of American
programmers at least where
there was programs that the Apple II's got
into the schools and they had enough
capability that lots of interesting things
happened with them you know in Europe
it was different you had your Amiga's and
Atari's and you know I'm
acorns in the UK and things that
that had different things but in the United States
it was probably the Apple II made the most
impact for a lot
of programmers of my generation
but so I was really digging into
the IBM and this was
even more so with the total focus
because I had moved to another city where I
didn't know anybody that I wasn't working with
I had a little apartment
and then at Softisk again the things
that that drew me to it I had
a couple programmers that knew more than I
did and they had a library
they had a set of books and
a set of magazines they had a couple years of
magazines the old Dr. Dobbs Journal
and all of these magazines that had
information about things
and so I was just
in total immersion mode it was
eat, breathe, sleep, computer programming
particularly the IBM for
everything that I was doing
and I was digging into a lot of these
low-level hardware details that people
weren't usually paying attention to
the way the IBM EGA
cards worked
which was fun for me I hadn't had experience
with things at that level
and back then you could get
hardware documentation just down at the register
levels this is where the CRTC
register is this is how the color
registers work and how the different things
are applied and they were designed for
a certain reason they were designed
for an application they were had an intended
use in mind but I was
starting to look at other ways
that they could perhaps be exploited that they weren't
initially intended for.
Could you comment on like first of all
what operating system was there what what
instructions that was like what
what are the what are we talking about?
DOS and x86 so 16-bit
8086 the two
86's were there and three 86's
existed they were rare
we had a couple for our development systems
but we were still targeting
the more broad I
it was all DOS 16-bit
none of this was kind of DOS extenders
and things. How different is it from the systems
of today's it's kind of the precursor
that's similar? Very little
if you open up command.exe
on or com on
windows you see some of the remnants
of all of that but it was a different world
it was the 640k is enough
world and nothing was protected
it crashed all the time you had
TSR's or terminate and stay
resident hacks on top of things
that would cause configuration problems
all the hardware was manually
configured in your auto-exec
so it was a very different world
but the code is still the same similar
you would still write it my earliest
code there was written in Pascal that was
what I had learned
between basic
and C++ there was Pascal
when basic assembly language
some of my intermediate
stuff was well you had to for performance
basic was just too slow
most of the work that I was doing as a contract
programmer in my teenage years
was assembly language
you wrote games in assembly?
yeah complete games
in assembly language
and it's thousands and thousands of lines
every letter acronyms for the
instructions
you don't earn the once again
greatest programmer ever labeled
without being able to write a game in assembly
but that's again everybody wrote there
everybody serious wrote their games in assembly language
it was kind of a
everybody serious
it was an outlier to use Pascal
a little bit where there was one famous
program called wizardry
it was one of the great early role playing games
that was written in Pascal
but it was almost nothing
used Pascal there but I did learn Pascal
and I remember doing all of my
like to this day I sketch in data structures
when I'm thinking about something
I'll open up a file
and I'll start writing struct definitions
for how data is going to be laid out
and Pascal was kind of formative to that
because I remember designing my RPGs
in Pascal record structures
and things like that
and so I had gotten a Pascal compiler
for the Apple 2GS that I could work on
the first IBM game that I developed
I did in Pascal
and that's actually kind of an interesting story
again talking about the constraints
and resources where
I had an Apple 2GS I didn't have an IBM PC
I wanted to port my
applications to IBM
because I thought I could make more money on it
so what I wound up doing
is I rented a PC for a week
and bought a copy of
Turbo Pascal and so I had
a hard one week and this was cutting into
a minimal profit margin I had there
but I had this computer for a week
I had to get my program ported
before I had to return the PC
and that was kind of the first thing
that I had done on the IBM PC
and what led me to taking the job at Softisk
and Turbo Pascal
how's that different from regular Pascal
is it different compiler or something like that
so it was a product of Borland
which before Microsoft kind of killed them
they were the hot stuff
developer tools company
Turbo Pascal and Turbo C
and Turbo Prologue I mean all the different things
but what they did was
they took a supremely pragmatic approach
of making something useful it was
one of these great examples where
Pascal was an academic language
and you had things like the UCSDP
system that Wizardry was actually
written in that they did
they did manage to make a game with that
but it was
not a super practical system
while Turbo Pascal was
called Turbo because it was blazingly fast
to compile I mean really
ridiculously 10 to 20 times
faster than most other compilers at the
time but it also had very
pragmatic access to look you can just
poke at the hardware in these different ways
and we have libraries that let you do things
and it was a pretty good
it was a perfectly good way to write games
and this is one of those things where people have talked
about different paths that computer
development could have taken
where C took over the world
reasons that came out of UNIX
and eventually Linux
and that was not a foregone conclusion at all
and people can make
real reasoned rational arguments
that the world might have been better
if it had gone a Pascal route
I'm somewhat agnostic on that
where I do know from experience
it was perfectly good enough to do
that and it had some fundamental
improvements like it had range checked
arrays as an option there which could
avoid many of C's
as well as some kind of
experimental hazards that happened in a security
space but C1
they were basically operating at about the same
level of abstraction it was
a systems programming language
but you said Pascal had more
emphasis on data structures
actually
in the tree of languages did Pascal
come before C
they were pretty contemporaneous
so Pascal's lineage went to
Modula 2 and eventually Oberon
of experimental language
but they were all good enough at that level
now some of the classic
academic oriented Pascal's were just missing
fundamental things like oh you can't access
this core system thing because we're just using
it to teach students but
Turbo Pascal showed that only modest changes
to it really did make it
a completely capable language
and it had some reasons why
you could implement it as a single pass compiler
so it could be way way faster although
less scope for optimizations if you do it
that way and it did have
some range checking options it had a little bit
better typing capability
properly typed enum sorts of things
and other stuff that C lacked
but you know C was also clearly
good enough and it wound up with a huge
inertia from the Unix ecosystem
and Pascal didn't have garbage collection
no it was not garbage
collected the same kind of thing the same manual
so you could still have your use after freeze
and all those other problems but
just getting rid of array overruns
at least if you were compiled with that
debugging option certainly would have avoided
a lot of problems and could have a lot
of benefits but so anyways that was the next
thing I had to learn C because C
was where it seemed like most
of the things were going
so I abandoned Pascal and I started working
in C I started hacking on these hardware
things dealing with
the graphics controllers and the EGA
systems and what we
most wanted to do so at that time
we had
sitting in our darkened office playing
all the different console video games
we were figuring out what do we want to
what games do we want to make for our
gamers edge product there
and so we had one of the first
Super Nintendo's sitting there and we had
an older Nintendo looking at all those
games and the core thing that those
consoles did that you just didn't get on
the PC games was this ability
to have a massive scrolling world
where most of the games that you would make
on the PC and earlier
personal computers would be a static
screen you move little things around on
it and you interact like that maybe
you go to additional screens as
you move but arcade
games and consoles had this
wonderful ability to just have a big
world that you're slowly moving your
window through and that was
for those types of games the kind of
action exploration adventure games that
was a super super important thing
and PC games just didn't do
that and what I
had come across was a couple different
techniques for implementing
that on the PC and they're not
hard complicated things
when I explain them now they're
they're pretty straightforward but just nobody was doing
you sound like Einstein describing his
five papers is pretty straightforward
I understand but they're
nevertheless revolutions so side-scrolling
is a game-changer
it's a genius invention
and some of the consoles had different
limitations about you could do one but not the
other and I and there were similar things
going on as advancements even in the console
space where you'd have like the original
Mario game was
like just horizontal scrolling and then later
Mario games added vertical aspects to
it different things that
you were doing to explore
you know kind of expand the capabilities there
and so much of the early game design for
decades was removing limitations
letting you do things that you envisioned
as a designer you wanted the player to
experience but the hardware just
couldn't really or you didn't know how
to make it happen it felt
impossible you can imagine
that you want to create like this
big world through which you can
side-scroll like through which you can
walk and then
you ask yourself a question how do I
actually build that in a way that's
like the the latency
is low enough the
hardware can actually deliver that
in such a way there's a compelling
yeah and we knew what we wanted to do because
we were playing all of these console games playing
all these Nintendo games and arcade games
clearly there is a whole world of awesome
things there that we just couldn't do on the
PC at least initially
because every programmer can tell it's
like if you want to scroll you can just redraw the whole
screen but then it turns out well you're going
five frames per second I view that's
not an interactive fun experience
you want to be going 30 or 60
frames per second or something and
it just didn't feel like that was possible it
felt like the PCs had to get five
times faster for you to make a playable
game there and
interestingly I wound up with two
completely different solutions
for the scrolling problem
and this is
this is a theme that runs through everything
where all of these big technical advancements
it turns out there's always a couple different
ways of doing them and it's not
like you found the one true way
of doing it and we'll see this as we
go into 3d games and things later
but so the scrolling
the first set of scrolling tricks that I got
was
the hardware had this ability
to you could shift
like inside the window of memory
so the EGA cards at the time
had 256 kilobytes
of memory and it was
awkwardly set up in this planer
format where instead of
having 256 or
24 million colors
you had 16 colors which is 4 bits
so you had 4 bit planes
64k a piece of course
64k is a nice round number
for 16 bit addressing
so your graphics card had
a 16 bit window that you could
look at and you could tell it to start
the video scan out anywhere inside there
so there were a couple games
that had taken this approach if you could make
a 2x2 screen or a 1x4 screen
and you could do scrolling really
easily like that you could just lay it
all out and just pan around there
but you just couldn't make it any bigger
because that's all the memory that was there
the first insight to the scrolling
that I had was well
if we make a screen that's just
one tile larger you know
we usually had tiles that were 16 pixels
by 16 pixels the little classic
Mario block that you run into
lots of art gets drawn that way
and your screen is a certain number of tiles
but if you had one little buffer region
outside of that
you could easily pan around inside that
16 pixel region that could be perfectly
smooth but then what happens
if you get to the edge and you want to keep going
the first way we did
scrolling was what I called
adaptive tile refresh
which was really just a matter of
you get to the edge and then
you go back to the original point and then
only change the tiles that have actually
that are different between where it
was in most of the games at the time
if you think about sort of your
classic Super Mario Brothers game
you've got big fields of blue sky
long rows of
the same brick texture
and there's a lot of commonality
it's kind of like a data compression thing
if you take the screen and you set it down
on top of each other in general
only about 10% of the tiles
were actually different there
so this was a way to
go ahead and say well I'm going to move it back
and then I'm only going to change those
10, 20 whatever percent
tiles there and that meant
that it was essentially five times
faster than if you were redrawing all of the
tiles and that worked well enough
for us to do a bunch of these games
for Gamers Edge
we had a lot of these scrolling games like
Slurnax and Shadow Knights and things like
that that we were cranking out at this high
rate that had this scrolling effect on it
and it worked well enough there were
design challenges there where
if you made the worst case, if you made a
checkerboard over the entire screen
you scroll over one and every single tile
changes and your frame rates now five frames
and because it had to redraw everything
so the designers had a little bit that they
had to worry about they had to make these
relatively plain looking levels
but it was still pretty magical
it was something that we hadn't seen before
and
the first thing that we wound up doing
with that was I had just gotten this
working and Tom Hall was
sitting there with me and
we were looking over at our Super Nintendo
on the side there with Super Mario 3
running and we had
the technology, we had the tools
set up there and we stayed up
all night and we basically cloned
the first level of Super Mario Brothers
Performance wise as well? Yeah
and so it and we had our little character running
and jumping in there it wasn't
it was close to pixel accurate as far as
all the backgrounds and everything
but the gaming was just stuff that we cobbled
together from previous games that I had
written I just kind of like really kit bash
the whole thing together to make this demo
and that was one of the rare cases
when I said I don't usually do these
all night programming things
there's probably only two memorable ones
that I can think about you know one was
the all nighter to go ahead and get
to get our dangerous Dave
in copyright infringement is how we titled it
because we had a game called dangerous Dave
was you know running around with the shotgun shooting
things and we were
just taking our most beloved game at the time
there the Super Mario 3
and sort of sticking Dave inside that with
this new scrolling technology that was
going perfectly smooth for
I am you know for them
as it ran and Tom
and I just kind of blurrily the next morning
you know kind of left and we left a disc
on I you know on the desk
for John Romero and J Wilbur
to see and just said run this
and we eventually made it back in
later in the day and it
was you know like they grabbed us
and pulled us in you know pulled us into the room
and that was the point where they were
like we got to do something with this
you know we're going to make a company
we're going to go make our own games
where this was something that
we were able to just kind of hit them
with a hammer of an experience like wow
this is just like so much cooler than
what we thought was possible there
and initially we tried to
get Nintendo to let us make
Super Mario 3 on the PC
that's really what we wanted to do we're like hey
we can finish this it's line of sight
for this will be great and
we sent something to Nintendo
and we heard that it did get looked at
in Japan and they just
weren't interested in that
but that's another one of those life could have gone
a very different way where we could have been
like Nintendo's house PC team
you know at that point
and to find the direction of
you know
Wolfenstein and
Doom and Quake
could have been a Nintendo creation
yeah so at the same time
that we were just doing our first scrolling
demos
we reached out to Scott Miller at Apogee
and said it's like hey we do want to
make some games you know these things that you
think you want those are those are nothing
what do you see what we can actually do now
this is going to be amazing and
he just like popped right up and sent a check
to us where we at that point
we still thought he might be a fraud that
he was just lying about all of this but he
was totally correct on how much money
he was making with his shareware titles
and this was his
kind of real brainstorm about this
where shareware was this idea that
software doesn't have a fixed price
if you use it you send out of the goodness
of your heart some money to the creator
and there were a couple utilities
that did make some significant success
like that but for the most part
it didn't really work you know there wasn't
much software in a pure shareware
model that that was successful
the Apogee innovation
was to
take something call it shareware split
it into three pieces you always made a
trilogy and you would put
the first piece out but then you buy
the whole trilogy for some
shareware amount which in reality
it meant that the first part was a demo
where you kind of like the demo went
everywhere for free and you paid money to
to get the whole set but
it was still played as shareware and we were
happy to have the first one go everywhere
and it wasn't a crippled demo where the
first episode of all these trilogies it
was a real complete game and probably
20 times as many people played
that part of it thought they had a great game
had found memories of
it but never paid us a dime
but enough people were
happy with that where
it was really quite successful at these
early games that we didn't think very much
of compared to commercial quality
games but they were doing really good
business some fairly crude things
and people it was good
business people enjoyed it and
it wasn't like you were taking a crap shoot on what
you were getting you just played a third of the
experience and you loved it enough
to hand write out a check
and put it in an envelope and address it
and send it out to Apigee
to get the rest of them so
it was a really pretty feel good
business prospect there because
everybody was happy
they knew what they were getting
when they send it in and they would send in fan mail
if you're going to the trouble of addressing
a letter and I am filling out
an envelope you write something in it and
there were just the literal bags of fan mail
for the shareware
games so people loved them
I should mention that for you
the definition of wealth is being
able to have
pizza whenever you want
for me there was a dream
because I would play shareware games over
and over the part that's free
over and over and it was very
deeply fulfilling experience but
I dreamed of a time when I
could actually afford
the full experience and this is kind of this
dream land beyond
the horizon
you could find out what else is there
in some sense
even just playing the shareware
was
the limitation of that
you know life is
limited eventually we all
die in that way shareware was like
somehow really fulfilling
to have this kind of mysterious thing
beyond what's free
always there it's kind of
I don't know that maybe
it's because a part of my childhood is playing
shareware games that was a really fulfilling
experience it's so interesting how that model
still brought joy
to so many people the 20x
people that played it I felt very good about
that I would run into people
that would say oh I loved that game
that you had early on Commander Keen
whatever and
they meant just the first episode
that they got to see everywhere
the crap out of Commander Keen
and that was all good
but so we were
in this position where Scott Miller was
just fronting us cash and saying yeah make
you know make a game but
we did not properly
pull the trigger and say alright we're going to
we're quitting our jobs we were like we're gonna
do both we're gonna keep working
at soft disk working on this
and then we're going to go ahead
and make a new game for
Apogee at the same time
and this eventually did lead to some legal
problems and we had trouble
it all got worked out in the end
but it was not a good call at the time
there and your legal mind at the time
was not stellar
you were not thinking
in terms of the illegal term no
I definitely wasn't none of us were
and in hindsight
yeah it's like how did we think we were going to get away
with like even using our work computers
to write software for
you know our breakaway
new company
it was not a good plan
how did Commander Keane come to be
so the design process
we would start from we had some idea
what we wanted to do we wanted to do a
Mario like game it was going to be a
side scroller it was going to use the
technology we had some
sense of what it would have to look like because of the limitations
of this adaptive tile refresh
technology it had to have
fields of relatively constant tiles
you couldn't just paint up a background
and then move that around
the early design
or all the design for Commander Keane really came
from Tom Hall where
he was
kind of the main creative mind
for the early in software stuff
where we had an interesting division of things
where Tom was
all creative in design I was
all programming John Romero was an interesting bridge
where he was both a very good
programmer and also a very good designer
and artist and kind of straddled
between the areas but Commander
Keane was very much Tom Hall's baby
and he came up
with all the design and backstory
for the different things of kind of a
mad scientist little kid with
I am you know
building a rocket ship and a zap gun
and visiting alien worlds
and doing all this that the background
that we lay the game inside of
and there's not a whole lot
to any of these things you know design
for us was always just what we needed
to do to make the game that was going
to be so much fun to play
and we made our we laid out
our first trilogy of games you know the
shareware formula it's going to be three
pieces we make Commander Keane one two
and three and we just really
started
busting on all that work and it went together
really quickly it was like three months or
something that while we were still making
games every month for
for Gamers Edge we were sharing technology
between that I'd write a bunch of code for this
and we just kind of use it for both
again not a particularly good idea there
that had consequences for us
but in three months
we got our first our first game
out and all of a sudden it was
three times as successful as
the most successful thing Apogee had had before
and we were making like thirty thousand dollars
a month immediately
from the Commander Keane stuff
and that was again
a surprise to us it was more than we thought
that was going to that was going to make
and we said well we're going to
certainly roll into another set of titles
from this and in that three months
I had come up with a much better way
of doing the scrolling technology that
was not the adaptive tile refresh
which in some ways was even simpler
and these things
so many of the great ideas of technology
are things that are back at the envelope
designs I make this comment
about modern machine learning where
all the things that are really important practically
in the last decade are each of them
fits on the back of an envelope there are these
simple little things they're not
super dense hard to understand
technologies
and so the the second scrolling
trick was just a matter of like
okay we know we've got this 64k
window and
the question was always like well you could make
a two by two but you can't go
off the edge
but I finally asked well what actually
happens if you just go off the
edge if you take your start
and you say it's like okay
I can move over I'm scrolling I can move over
I can move down I'm scrolling
I get to what should be the bottom of the memory
window like well what if I just
keep going and I say I'm going to start
at you know what happens if I start
at FFFE at the very
end of the 64k block
and it turns out it just
wraps back around to the top of the block
and I'm like oh well this makes
everything easy you can just scroll the
screen everywhere and all you have to draw is just
one new line of tiles which everything
you expose it might be
unaligned off various parts of
the of the screen memory
but it just works that no longer had
the problem of you had to have fields of
the similar colors because
it doesn't matter what you're doing you could be having
a completely unique world
and you're just drawing the new strip as it comes
on but it might be like you said
unaligned so it can be all over
the place and it turns out it doesn't matter
I would have two page flipped screens as long
as they didn't overlap they moved in series
through this two-dimensional
window of graphics
and that was one of those like well this is
so simple this just
this just works it's faster
there it seemed like there was no downside
funny thing was
it turned out after we shipped
titles with this there were
what they called super VGA
cards the cards that would allow higher
resolutions and
different features that the standard ones didn't
and on some of those
cards this was a weird
compatibility quirk again because nobody
thought this was not what it was designed to do
and some of those cards had more
memory they had more than just
256k in four planes they
had 512k or a megabyte
and on some of those cards
I scroll my window
down and then it goes into uninitialized
memory that actually exists there
rather than wrapping back around at the top
and
then I was in the tough position of do I have to track
every single one of these and it was a mad
house back then with there were
20 different video card vendors
with all slightly different implementations
of their non-standard functionality
so either I needed to natively
program all of the
the VGA cards there to
map in that memory and keep
scrolling down through all of that
or I kind of punted and took the easy
solution of when you finally did run
the edge of the screen I accepted
a hitch and just copied the whole screen up
there so on some of those
those cards it was
a compatibility mode in the normal
ones when it all worked fine everything was just
beautifully smooth but if you had one of those
cards where it did not wrap
the way I wanted it to you'd be
scrolling around scrolling around and
then eventually you'd have a little hitch where
200 milliseconds or something
that was not super smooth as it
froze a little bit and this was the binary
thing is it one of the standard
screens or is it one of the weird ones
the super VGA ones yeah okay
and so we would default to and I think
that was one of those that changed over
the kind of course of deployment
where early on we would have a normal mode
and then you would have you would enable the compatibility
flag if your screen did this crazy
flickery thing when you got to a certain
point in the game and then
later I think it probably got enabled by
default as just more and more of the cards
I kind of did not do exactly
the right thing and that's the two-edged
sword of doing unconventional
things with technology where
you can find something that nobody thought about
doing that kind of scrolling trick when they set
up those cards but the
fact that nobody thought that was the primary reason
when I was relying on that then
I wound up being broken on some of the later
cards let me take a bit
of a tangent but
ask about the hacker
ethic because you mentioned share
where it says it's an interesting world
the world of
people that make money
business and the people
that build systems the engineers
and
what is the
hacker ethic you've been a man
of the people and you've
embodied at least the part of that
ethic what does it mean
what did it mean to you at the time what does it mean
to you today so Stephen Levy's
book Hackers was a really
formative book for me as a teenager
I mean I read it several times
and there was all
of the great lore of the early
MIT era of hackers
ending up at the end with
it kind of went through the early
MIT hackers and the Silicon Valley
hardware hackers and then
the game hackers in part 3
and at that time as a teenager
I really
was kind of bitter in some ways like I
thought I was born too late I thought I missed
the window there
and I really thought I belonged
in that third section of that book with the
game hackers and they were talking about
the Williams at Sierra
and Origin Systems with Richard Garriott
and it's like I
really wanted to be there and
I knew that was now a few years
in the past it was
it was not to be
but the early days especially
the early MIT hacker days talking
a lot about this sense of
the hacker ethic that there was this sense
that it was about
sharing information being good
not keeping it to yourself
and that it's not a zero sum game
that you can share something
with another programmer and it doesn't
take it away from you
you then have somebody else doing something
and I also think that there's
an aspect of it where it's this
ability to take
joy in other people's accomplishments
where it's not the cutthroat bit of
I have to be first I have to be
recognized as the one that did
this in some way but
being able to see somebody else
do something and say holy shit that's amazing
you know and just taking joy
in the ability of something amazing
that somebody else does
and the
big thing that I was able to do
through in software was
this ability to eventually release the source code
for most of our like all of our
really seminal game titles
and that was a stepping stone
process where we were kind
of surprised early on where
people were able to
hack the existing games and of course I had
experience with that I remember hacking my copies
of Ultima so I give myself
9999 gold and raise my levels
and you know break out the sector editor
and so I was familiar with all of that
so it was just it was with a smile
when I started to see people doing that to our
games I am you know making
level editors for Commander Keen
or hacking up Wolfenstein 3D
but I made the pitch
internally that
we should actually release our own
tools for like what we did
what we used to create the games
and that was you know that was
a little bit debatable about
well you know we'll this let other
we'll give people a leg up it's always like
what's that going to mean for the competition
but the really hard
pitch was to actually release
the full source code for the games
and it was a balancing act with
the other people inside the company
where it's interesting
how the programmers
generally did get
certainly I am the people
that I worked closely with they did kind
of get that hacker ethic bit where
you wanted to share your code you were
you were proud of it you wanted other people to take it
do cool things with it
but interestingly
the broader game
industry is a little more
hesitant to embrace that than
like the group of people that we happen to have
at id software where it was
always a little interesting to me seeing how
a lot of people in the game modding
community were very possessive
of their code they did not want to share their
code they wanted it to be theirs it was
their you know claim to fame and
that was much more like what we
tended to see with artists where
you know the artists understand something about
credit and I you know wanting it to be
known as their work and a lot of
the game programmers
felt a little bit more like artists
than like hacker programmers in that
it was about building something
that maybe felt more like art to them
than the more tool based
and exploration based kind
of hacking culture side of things
yes so it's so interesting that this
kind of
fear that credit will not
be sufficiently attributed to you
and that's one of the things that I
do bump into a lot because
I try not
to go clean I mean it's easy for me
to say because so much credit is heaped on
me for the the software side of
things but when people come up and
they want to pick a fight and say no it's
like that wasn't where first person gaming
came from and you can point to
you know you can point to some of like things
on obscure titles that I was never aware
of or like the old play-doh systems
or you know each personal computer
had something that was 3d-ish
and moving around and I'm
you know and I'm happy to say it's like no
I mean I saw battle zone and star wars
in the arcades I had seen 3D graphics
I had seen all these things there
standing on the shoulders of lots of other people
but sometimes these examples they pull out
like I didn't know that existed I mean
there I had never heard of that before
then that didn't contribute to
what I made but there's plenty of stuff
that did and you know I
I think there's good cases to be made
that obviously doom
and quake and Wolfenstein were formative
examples for what
everything that came after
that but I don't
feel the need to go fight and say
claim primacy or initial
invention of anything like that
but a lot of people do want to
I think when you fight for the credit in that way
and it does go against the hacker ethic
you destroy
something fundamental about the culture
about the community that builds cool stuff
I think credit ultimately
so I had this
sort of
there's a famous wrestler and freestyle
wrestler called
and he always
preached that you should just
focus on the art of the wrestling
and let people
write your
story however they want
the
the highest form of the art is just
focusing on the art and that's something
that is something about the
hacker ethic is just
on building cool stuff
sharing it with other cool people
and credit will get
assigned correctly
in the long arc of history
and I generally think that's true
and you've got
there's some things
there's a graphics technique that got labeled
car max reverse
literally named it and it turned out
that I wasn't the first person to
figure that out like most scientific
things or mathematical things you wind up like
oh this other person had actually done that
somewhat before and then
there's things that get attributed to me like the inverse
square root hack that I actually didn't
do I flat out that wasn't me and it's
like it's weird how the memetic power
of the internet I cannot
you're like the marked point of programming
yes it's just everything just gets attributed
to you now even though you've never
sought that the credit of things
I mean but
part of the fact that the humility behind
that is what attracts the
attributions
let's talk about a game
you mean one of the greatest games
ever made I know you could talk about doing quake
and so on but to me Wolfenstein 3D
was like wow
it blew my mind
that a world like this could exist so
how did Wolfenstein 3D come to be
in terms of the programming
in terms of the design in terms of some
of the memorable technical challenges
and also
actually just something you haven't mentioned
you know
how did these ideas
come to be
inside your mind the adaptive
side-scrolling
the solutions to these technical challenges
so I usually can
introspectively pull back
pretty detailed
accounts of how technology
solutions and design choices on my
part came to be where
technically we had done two games
3D games like that before
where hover tank was the first one which
had flat shaded walls
but did have the scaled enemies inside it
and then catacombs 3D
which had textured walls
scaled enemies and
some more
some more functionality like the disappearing
walls and some other stuff
but what's really interesting from a game
development standpoint is
those games catacombs 3D
hover tank and Wolfenstein
they literally used
the same code for
a lot of the character behavior that a 2D
game that I had made earlier called catacombs
did where
it was an overhead view game kind of like gauntlet
you're running around and you can open up doors
pick up items basic game stuff
and the thought was that
this exact same
game experience just
presented in a different perspective
it could be literally the same game
just with a different view into it
would have a dramatically different impact
on the players
so it wasn't
a true 3D you're saying that
you can kind of fake it you can
scale enemies meaning things that are
farther away you can make them smaller
so from the game was
a 2D map like all of our games
use the same tool for creation
we use the same map editor for creating
Keen as Wolfenstein and
Hevertank and catacombs and all this stuff
so the game was a 2D grid
made out of blocks and you could say
well these are walls these are where the enemies
start then they start moving around
and these early games like catacombs
you played it strictly in a 2D view
it was a scrolling 2D view
and that was kind of using an adaptive tile refresh
at the time to be able to do something like
that and then
the thought that these early games
all it did was take the same
basic enemy logic but instead of
seeing it from the god's eye view on top
you were inside it and turning
from side to side yawing your view
and moving forwards and backwards and side to
side and
it's a striking thing where you always talk
about wanting to isolate and factor changes
in values and this was one of those
most pure cases there where
the rest of the game changed very little
it was our normal kind of change the colors
on something and draw a different picture for
it but it's kind of the same thing
but the perspective changed in a really
fundamental way and it was
dramatically different I can remember
the reactions where
the artist Adrian that had been
drawing the pictures for it we had a cool
big troll thing in Catacombs 3D
and we had these walls that
you could get a key and you could make the blocks
disappear and really simple stuff
blocks could either be there or not there
so our idea of a door was being able to
make a set of blocks just disappear
and I remember the reaction where he
had drawn these characters and he was slowly
moving around and like people had no
experience with 3D navigation it was all still
keyboard we didn't even have mice
set up at that time but
slowly moving going up picked up a
key go to a wall the wall disappears
in a little animation and there's a monster
like right there and he practically
fell out of his chair it was just like
and games just
didn't do that you know the games were
the gods eye view you were a little invested
in your little guy you can be like
you know happy or sad when things
happen but you just did not get that kind
of startle reaction you weren't inside
your face something in the back of your
brain some reptile brain thing is just
going oh shit something just happened
and that was one of those
early points where it's like yeah this
is going to make a difference this is
going to be powerful and it's going to matter
were you able to imagine that in the
idea stage or no so
not that exact
thing so again we had cases
like the arcade games battle zone
and star wars that you could kind of see
a 3D world and things coming at you
and you get some sense of it
but nothing had done the kind
of worlds that we were doing and the sort
of action based things 3D
at the time was really
largely about the simulation
thoughts and this is something
that really might have
trended differently if not for
the software approach in the games where
there were flight simulators
there were driving simulators you had
like hard drive in and
Microsoft flight simulator and these were
doing 3D and general purpose
3D and ways that were
more flexible than what we were doing with
our games but they were looked at
as simulations they weren't trying
to necessarily be fast or responsive
or letting you do
kind of exciting maneuvers
because they were trying to simulate reality
and they were taking their cues from the big
systems the Evans in Sutherland and the silicon
graphics that were doing things
but we were taking our cues from
the console and arcade games you know we
had things that were
sort of quarter eaters that were doing
fast paced things that you could smack
you around rather than just smoothly
gliding you from place to place
so quarter
yeah and you know a funny thing is
so much that that built into us that
Wolfenstein still had
lives and you had like one of the biggest
power-ups in all these games like was an
extra life because you started off with
three lives and you lose your lives and
then it's game over and there weren't
any other games in most of this stuff
it was and it sounds almost crazy
to say this but it was an innovation
in doom to not have lives
you know you could just play doom as long as you wanted
you just restart at the start of the level
and why not this is like
we aren't trying to take people's quarters
they've already paid for the entire game
we want them to have a good time
and you would have some
you know some old-timer purists that might think
that there's something to the epic journey
of making it to the end having to restart
tries but now more fun is had
when you just let people kind of keep trying
when they're stuck rather than having to go
all the way back and and learn different
things so you recommended the
game engine black book Wolfenstein 3D
for technical exploration
of the game so looking back
30 years what are some
memorable technical innovations
that made this perspective
shift into this world that's
so immersive that scares you when a monster appears
or some things you have to solve
so one of the interesting things
that come back to the theme of
deadlines and resource constraints
the game catacombs 3D
we shipped
we were supposed to be shipping this for gamers edge
on a monthly cadence and
I had slipped I was actually
late it slipped like six weeks because
this was texture mapped walls
doing stuff that I hadn't done before
and
at the six-week point it was still
kind of glitchy and buggy there were things
that I knew that if you had
a wall that was like almost edge on
you could slide over to it you could see
some things freak out or vanish or not
work and I hated that
I but I was up against
the wall we had to ship the game
it was still a lot of fun to play it was novel
nobody had seen it it gave you that startle
reflex I reaction so
it was worth shipping
but it had these things that I knew
were kind of flaky and janky and not
not what I was really proud of
so one of the
things that I did very differently in Wolfenstein
I was
I went catacombs used
almost a conventional
thing where you had segments that were
one-dimensional polygons basically that were
clipped and back faced
and done kind of like a very crude
3D engine from the professionals
but I wasn't getting it done
right I was not doing a good
enough job I didn't really have line of sight
to fix it
right there's stuff that of course I look back
it's like oh it's obvious how to do this
do the math right do your clipping right
check all of this how you handle the precision
but I did not know how to do that
at that time the first 3D
engine you wrote catacombs 3D
you know hover tank had been a little bit before that
but that had the flat shaded walls so
the texture mapping on the walls was what
was bringing in some of these challenges
that was hard for me
and I couldn't solve it right at the time
can you describe what flat shading is in texture mapping
so in the the walls were
solid color one of 16 colors
I am in hover tank
so that's easy it's fast you just
draw the solid color for everything
texture mapping is what we all see today
where you have an image that is stretched
and distorted onto the walls
or the surfaces that you're working with
and it was
you know it was a long time for me to just figure out
how to do that without it
distorting in the wrong ways and
and I did not get it all
exactly right in catacombs and I had
these flaws
so that was important enough to me
that rather than continuing to bang my head
on that when I wasn't positive I was
going to get it I went with a completely
different approach for drawing for
figuring out where the walls were which was
a ray casting approach
which I had done in catacombs 3D
I had a bunch of C code
trying to make this work right and it wasn't
working right in Wolfenstein
I wound up going to a very
small amount of assembly code
so in some ways they should be a slower
way of doing it but by
making it a smaller amount of work that I could
more tightly optimize it worked
out and Wolfenstein 3D was just
absolutely rock solid you know it was
you know nothing glitched
in there the game just was pretty much
flawless through all of that and I was super
proud of that
but eventually like in the later games
I went back to the more span
based things where I could get more total efficiency
once I really did figure out how
to do it so there were two
sort of key technical things to Wolfenstein
one was this ray casting
approach which you still to this
day you see people go and say let's
write a ray casting engine because
it's an understandable way of doing things
that let you make games very much
like that so you see raycasters in
javascript raycasters in python people
that are are basically going and
re-implementing that that approach
to taking a tiled world
and casting out into it it works
pretty well but it's not the fastest way
of doing it can you describe what ray casting is
so you start off and you got
your screen which is 320 pixels
across at the time if you haven't sized down
in the window for for greater
speed and at every pixel
there's going to be an angle from you got
your position in the world and you're going
to just run along that angle
and keep going until you hit a block
so up to 320
times across there it's going to throw
cast array out into the world
from wherever your origin is
until it runs into a wall and then it
can figure out exactly where on the wall
it hits the performance challenge
of that is as it's going out
every block it's crossing it checks
is this a solid wall
so that means that in like
the early Wolfenstein levels you're in a
small jail cell going out into a small
hallway it's super efficient for that
because you're only stepping across three
or four blocks but then if somebody
makes a room that covers our maps
we're limited to 64 by 64 blocks
if you made one room
that was nothing but walls at the far
space it would go pretty slow
because it would be stepping across
80 tile tests or something
along the way by the way the physics of our
universe seems to be computing this very thing
so this maps nicely to the
actual physics of our world
yeah you get like I follow a little bit
of something like Stephen Wolfram's work on
you know interconnected network
information states of that and
that's it's beyond what I can
have an informed opinion on
but it's interesting that people are
considering things like that and have
and have things that can back
it up yeah that's yeah
there's whole different sets of interesting stuff
there so Wolfenstein 3D
had ray casting so the ray casting
and then the other kind of key aspect
was what I called compiled
scalers where the idea of
you saw this in the
earlier classic arcade games
like space harrier and stuff where
you would take a picture which is
normally drawn directly on the screen
and then if you have the ability to make it
bigger or smaller big chunky pixels
or physically small drop sampled pixels
that's the fundamental
aspect of what our characters were doing
in these 3D games you would have
it's just like you might have drawn a tiny little character
but now we can make them really big
and make them really small move it around
that was the limited kind of 3D
that we had for characters to make them turn
there were literally eight different views
of them you didn't actually have a 3D model
that would rotate you just had these cardboard
cutouts but that was good enough for that
startle fight reaction and
it was kind of what we had to deal
with there so a straight
forward approach to do that you could just
write out your doubly nested loop of
you've got your stretch factor
and it's like you've got a point you stretch by a little
bit it might be on the same pixel it might
have skipped a pixel
you can write that out but it's not
going to be fast enough where especially
you get a character for that right in your
face monster covering almost the entire
screen doing that with a general
purpose scaling routine would have just
been much too slow it would have worked
when they're small characters but then it would get
slower and slower as they got closer to you
until right at the time when you most care
about having a fast reaction time
the game would be chunking down
so the fastest possible way
to draw pixels
at that time was
to I am
instead of saying I've got a general
purpose I am
version that can handle any scale
I made I used
a program to make essentially
a hundred or more separate little
programs that was optimized for
I will take an image and I will draw it
12 pixels tall I'll take an image
I'll draw it 14 pixels tall up
by every two pixels even
for that so you would have the most
optimized code so that
in the normal case where
most of the world is fairly large
I like the pixels are big
we did not have a lot of memory
so in most cases that meant that you would
load a pixel color
and then you would store it multiple times
so that was faster
than even copying an image
in a normal conventional case
because most of the time the image is expanded
so instead of doing one read one
write for a simple copy you might
be doing one read and three or four writes
as it got really big and that
had the beneficial aspect of just when you
needed the performance most when things are
covering the screen it was giving you the most
acceleration for that by the way
were you able to
understand this through
thinking about it or were you testing
like the right speed and like this again
comes back to I can
find the antecedents for things like this
so in I am
back in the Apple two days
the graphics were
essentially single bits at a time
and if you wanted to make your little
spaceship if you wanted to make it
smoothly go across the world
if you just took the image and you drew it out at the next
location you would move by seven pixels
at a time so it would go chunk chunk chunk
if you wanted to make it move smoothly
you actually had to make seven versions
of the ship that were pre-shifted
you could write a program that would shift it
dynamically but on a one megahertz
processor that's not going anywhere fast
so if you wanted to do a smooth
moving fast action game
you made separate versions of each of these
sprites now there were
a few more tricks you could pull that if it
still wasn't fast enough you could make
a compiled shape
where instead of
this program that normally copies
an image and it says like get this byte
from here stored here get this byte store this
byte if you've got the memory
space you could say I'm going
to write the program that does nothing but draw
this shape it's going to be like
I'm going to load the immediate value
25 you know which is
some bit pattern and then I'm going to store
that at this location
rather than loading something from memory
that involved indexing registers
and this other slow stuff
you could go ahead and say no I'm going to hard
code the exact values of all of the image
right into the program and this was always
a horrible trade off there but you didn't have much
memory and you didn't have much speed
but if you had something that you wanted to go really
fast you could turn it into a program
and that was
you know knowing about that technique is what
made me think about some of these unwinding
it for the PC where people
that didn't come from that background were less
likely to think about that
I mean there's some deep parallels
probably to human cognition as well
there's something about
optimizing and compressing
the processing
of a new information that requires
you to predict the possible
ways in which
the game or the world
might unroll and you have
something like compiled scalars always
there so you have like
optimum like you have a
prediction of how the world will unroll and you have
some kind of optimized
data structure
for that prediction and then you can modify
if the world turns out to be different
you can modify in a slight way
and as far as building out techniques
so much of the brain is about the associative context
you know there just when you learn
something it's in the context of something else
and you can have faint tiny little
hints of things and I do think
there are some deep things around
like sparse distributed memories and boosting
that's like if you can just be slightly above
the noise floor of having some hint
of something you can have things refined
into pulling the memory back up so
having a being a programmer
a tool box of like all of these things
that things that I did in all of these
previous lives of programming tasks
that still matters to me about how
I'm able to pull up some of these things
like in that case it was something I did on the
Apple too then being relevant for the PC
and I have still cases
when I would when I would work on
mobile development then be like okay
I did something like this back in the
doom days but now it's a different
environment but I still had that tie
I can bring it in and I can transform it
into what the world needs right now
and I do think that's actually one of the
very core things with human
cognition and brain like
you know brain like functioning is
finding these ways about you've got
your brain is kind of everything everywhere all at once
you know it's it is just a set of all of
this stuff that is just fetched back by
these queries that go into it
and they can just be slightly above the noise
floor with random noise in your neurons
and synapses that are affecting exactly
what gets pulled up. So you're saying
there's very specific solutions for different
games you find
that there's a kernel of
a deep idea that's generalizable to
other to other things. Yeah you
can't predict what it's going to be but
that idea of like I called out that compiled
shaders in the forward that I wrote
for that the game engine black book
as you know this is
it's kind of an endpoint of unrolling
code but that's one of those
things that thinking about that and having that
in your mind and I'm sure there are some programmers
that you know hear about that think about
it a little bit it's kind of the mind blown moment
it's like oh you can just turn all of that
data into code and
nowadays you know you have instruction cache
issues and that's not necessarily the best idea
but there are different
it's an idea that has power
and has probably relevance in some other
areas maybe it's in a hardware point of view
that there's a way you approach building hardware
that has that same you don't
even have to think about iterating you just bake
everything all the way into it in one
place what is the story
of how you came to program doom
what is some memorable technical
challenges or innovations within that game
so the path that we went
after after Wolfenstein
got out and we were on this crazy
arc where keen one through three
more success than we thought keen
four through six even more success
Wolfenstein even more success so we were
on this this crazy trajectory
for things so actually our first
box commercial project was a commander keen
I am game but then
Wolfenstein was going to have a game called
spear of destiny which was
a commercial version 60 new levels
so the rest of the team took the game
engine pretty much as it was
and started working on that we got
new monsters but it's
basically reskins of the things
there there's a really interesting aspect
about that that I didn't appreciate until much
much later about how
Wolfenstein clearly did
tap out its limit about what
you want to play and all
the levels and a couple of our license things
there was a hard
creative wall that you did not really
benefit much by continuing to beat on it
but a game like
doom and other more modern
games like minecraft or something
there's kind of a turing completeness level
of design freedom that you get in games
that Wolfenstein really sat on one
side of you know all the creative
people in the world could not go and do
a masterpiece just with the technology
that Wolfenstein had Wolfenstein
could do Wolfenstein but you really couldn't do
something crazy and different but it
didn't take that much more capability
to get to Wolfenstein with
the freeform lines and a little
bit more artistic freedom to get to the
point where people still announced
new doom levels today all these years
after without having completely
tapped out the creativity how did you
put it turing complete
design space design space like
you know we have the kind of computational
universality
on a lot of things but for creativity
but yeah there's things where
a box can be too small
but above a certain point
you kind of are at the point where
you really have almost
unbounded creative ability there and doom
was the first time you crossed that
line yeah where there were
thousands of doom levels created
and some of them still have something new
and interesting to say to the world about it
is that line
do you introspect what that line was
is in the design space
is it something about the programming
capabilities that you were able
to add to the game
so the graphics fidelity
was a necessary part because the block
limitations in Wolfenstein
what we had right there
was not enough
the full scale blocks although
Minecraft I really did show
that perhaps blocks stacked
in 3D and at one quarter
scale of that one eighth in volume
is then sufficient to have all of that
but the wall
sized blocks that we had in Wolfenstein
was too much of a creative limitation
we licensed the technology to a few other teams
none of them made
too much of a dent with that
it just wasn't enough creative ability
but a little bit more whether it was
the variable floors and ceilings
and arbitrary angles in doom
or the smaller
box blocks in Minecraft
is then enough to open it up to
just worlds and worlds of new capabilities
what is binary
space partitioning
which is one of the technologies
jump around a little bit
on the story path there
so while the team was working on Spirit Destiny
for Wolfenstein
we had met another development team
Raven Software while we were in Wisconsin
and
they had RPG background
and I still kind of love that
they offered to do a game engine
for them to let them do a
3D rendered RPG
instead of the like most RPG games
were kind of hand drawn they made it look
kind of 3D but it was done just all with
artist work rather than a real engine
and
after Wolfenstein this was still a tile
based world but I added floors and ceilings
and some lighting and the ability to have
some sloped floors in different areas
and that was my intermediate step for a game called
Shadowcaster
it had slowed down enough it was not
fast enough to do our type of action
things so that they had the screen
cropped down a little bit so you couldn't
go the full screen width like we would try to
do in Wolfenstein
but I learned a lot I got the floors
and ceilings and lightings and it looked great
they were great artists up there and it was
it was an inspiration for us to look at some
of that stuff
but I had learned enough from that
that I had the plan for I knew
faster ways to do the the lighting
shadowing and I wanted to do this free form
geometry I wanted to break out of this tile
based 90 degree
world limitations
so we had that was when
we got our next stations and we were working
with these higher powered systems
and we built
an editor that let us draw kind of arbitrary
line segments and I was working
hard to try to make something that could
render this fast enough
I was pushing myself
pretty hard and
we were we were at a point where
we could see some things that looked amazingly
cool but it wasn't really fast enough
for the way I was doing it
I for this flexibility it was no longer
I couldn't just ray cast into it
and I had these very complex sets of lines
and simple little worlds were okay
but the cool things that we wanted to do
just weren't quite fast enough
and I wound up taking
a break at that point and I
did the the port I did two
ports of our games
I Wolfenstein to
the I to the Super Nintendo
it was I it was a crazy
difficult thing to do which was an even
slower processors like 2
I a couple megahertz
processor and it had
been this whole thing where we had farmed out
the I
the work and it wasn't it wasn't going
well and I took it back over
and trying to make it go
fast on there where it really
did not have much processing power
the pixels were stretched up hugely and it's
you know it's pretty ugly when you looked at it
but in the end it did come out fast enough
to play and still be kind of fun from that
but that was where I started
using BSP trees or binary
space partitioning trees it was one of those
things I had to make it faster there
it was a stepping stone where
it was reasonably easy to understand
in the grid world of Wolfenstein where
it was all still 90 degree angles
I'm BSP trees were
I eased myself into it
with that and it was a big success
I am then when I came
back to working on doom I had
this new tool in my toolbox it was going
to be a lot harder with the arbitrary
angles of doom this was where
I really started grappling with epsilon
problems and just you know up
until that point I hadn't really had to deal with
the fact that I am so
many numeric things this almost felt like a betrayal
to me where people had told me that I had
mathematicians up on a bit of a pedestal
where I was people
think I'm a math wizard and I'm not I really
everything that I did
was really done with a solid
high school math understanding
you know algebra 2 trigonometry
and I am that was
what got me all the way through doom and quake
and all of that of just understanding
basics of matrices and
knowing it well enough to do something with it
what's the epsilon problems you ran into
so I when you wind up taking
a like a sloped line
and you say I'm going to intersect it with another
sloped line I am
then you wind up with something that's not going
to be on these nice grid boundaries
with the Wolfenstein tile maps
where all you've got is horizontal and vertical lines
looking at it from above and if you cut
one of them it's just obvious the other one gets
cut exactly at that point
but when you have angled lines you're doing
a kind of a slope intercept problem
and you wind up with rational numbers there
where things that are not going
to evenly land on an integer
or even on any fixed point value that you've got
so everything winds up having
to snap to some fixed point value
so the lines slightly change their
angle you wind up if you cut something
here this one's going to bend a little this way
and it's not going to be completely straight
and then you come down to all these questions of
well this one is
is a point on an angled line
you can't answer that in finite precision
unless you're doing something
with actual rational numbers
and later on I did waste far too much time
chasing things like that how do you do
base arithmetic with rational numbers
and it always blows up eventually
exponentially as you do an update
so these kind of things aren't possible with computers
so they're possible
again there are paths to do
doing it but you can't fit them conveniently
and any of the numbers you need to start using
big nums and different
factor trackings and different things
so you have to if you have any
elements of OCD and you want to do something
perfectly you're screwed if you're working
with floating point
so you had to deal with this for the first time
and there were lots of challenges
there about okay
they build this cool thing and the way the BSP
trees work is it basically
takes the walls and it carves other
walls by those walls in this
clever way that you can then take
all of these fragments and then you can
for sure from any given point
get an ordering of everything in the world
and you can say this goes in front of this
goes in front of this all the way back to
the last thing and that's super
valuable for graphics where
kind of a classic graphics algorithm
would be painter's algorithm
you paint the furthest thing first and then the next thing
and then the next thing and then it comes up
and it's all perfect for you that's
slow because you don't want to have to have drawn
everything like that but you can also flip
it around and draw the closest thing to
you and then if you're clever
about it you can figure out what you need to
draw that's visible beyond
that and that's what BSP trees allow you to do
yeah so it's combined with
a bunch of other things but it gives
you that ordering it's a clever way
of doing things and I remember
I had learned this from one of
my graphics bible at the time
a book called folian van dam
it was a different world back there
there was a small integer number of books
and this book
this book that was a big fat college
textbook that I had read
through many times I didn't
understand everything in it some of it wasn't
useful to me but they had the little
thing about
finite orderings of you draw a little
t-shaped thing and you can say you
can make a fixed ahead of time order from
this and you can generalize this with
the BSP trees and
I got a little bit more information about that
and it was kind of fun later while I was working on Quake
I got to meet Bruce Naylor
who was one of the original researchers that
developed those technologies
for academic literature
and that was kind of fun but I was very much
just finding a tool that can help me solve
what I was doing and I was using it in this very
crude way in a two-dimensional fashion
rather than the general 3d the epsilon
problems got much worse in quake in
three-dimensionals when things angle in every
way but eventually I did sort
out the sort out how to do it reliably
on doom there were still a few
edge cases in doom that were not
absolutely perfect where
they even got terminologies in the
communities like when you got to something where it was
messed up it was a hall of mirrors effect
because you'd sweep by and it wouldn't draw
something there and you would just wind up with
the leftover remnants as you flipped between
the the two pages
but BSP trees were important
for it but it's again worth noting
that after we did
doom our major competition
came from Ken Silverman
in his build engine which was used for Duke
Nukem 3d and some of the other games for
3d realms and he used a completely
different technology nothing to do with
I'm with BSP
trees so there's not just a one
true way of doing things
I'm there were critical things
about to make any of those games fast
you had to you had to separate your
drawing into you drew vertical lines
and you drew horizontal lines just kind
of changing exactly what you would
draw with them that was critical for the
technologies at that time
and like all the games that were kind
of like that wound up doing something similar
but there were still a bunch of other
decisions that could be made
and we made good enough decisions
on everything on doom we
we brought in multiplayer
significantly and it was our first game that was
designed to be modified by the user
community where we had this whole
setup of our wad files and pwads
and things that people could could build
with tools that we released to them and they
eventually rewrote to be better than what we
released but they could build things
and you could add it to your game without
destructively modifying it which is what you
had to do in all the early games you literally
hacked the data files
executable before while doom was
set up in this flexible way so that
you could just say run the normal
game with this added on on top
and it would overlay just the things that
you wanted to there
would you say that doom was kind of the first
true 3d game
that you created so no it's still
doom would usually be called a 2
and a half d game where it had
three-dimensional points on it and this is
another one of these kind of pedantic things that people
love to argue about about what was the first
3d game I still like
like every month probably I hear from
somebody about well was doom really a
3d game or something
and you know I give the
the point where characters
had three coordinates so you had
like an x y and z the cacodammon
could be coming in very high and come
you know and come down towards you
the walls had three coordinates
on them so on some sense
it's a 3d game engine but it was
not a fully general 3d game engine
you could not
build a pyramid in doom because you
couldn't make a sloped wall
which was slightly different where in that
previous shadow caster game I couldn't
have vertexes and have a sloped floor there
but the changes that I made for doom
to get higher speed and a different
set of flexibility traded away that ability
but you literally couldn't make that
you could not
make different heights of
passages but you could not make a bridge
over another area you could not go over
and above it so it still had
some 2d limitations to it
that's more about the building versus the actual experience
because the experience is
it felt like things would come at you but again
you couldn't look up either
you could only pitch
it was 4 degrees of freedom rather than
6 degrees of freedom you did not
have the ability to tilt your head this way
or pitch up and down
so that takes us to quake
what was the leap there
what was some fascinating
technical challenges and there were a lot
or not challenges but innovations
that you've come up with so quake
was kind of the first thing where
I did have to kind of come face
to face with my limitations
where it was the first thing where
I really did kind of
give it my all and still come up
you know come up a little bit short in terms
of what and when I wanted to
to get it done and
the company brand had some serious stresses
through the whole project
and we bit off a lot
so the things that we set out
to do was it was going to be
really a true 3D engine
where it could do 6 degree of freedom
you could have all the viewpoints
you could model anything
it had
a really remarkable new lighting model
with the surface cashing and things
that was one of those where it was starting to
do some things that they weren't doing
even on the very high end systems
and it was going to be
completely programmable
in the modding standpoint where
the thing that you couldn't do and do
you could replace almost all of the media
but you couldn't really change the game
there were still some people
that were doing the hex setting of the executable
the de-hacked things where you could change
a few things about rules and people made
some early capture the flag type things
by hacking the executable but
it wasn't really set out to do that
quake was going to have its own
programming language that the game was going to be implemented
and that would be able to be overwritten
just like any of the media
code was going to be data for that
and you would be able to have expansion
packs that changed fundamental things
and mods and so on
and the multiplayer
was going to be playable over the internet
it was going to support a client
server rather than peer to peer
so we had the possibility of supporting
larger numbers of players in disparate locations
with this full flexibility
of the programming overrides
with full six-degree of freedom
modeling and viewing
and with this fancy new light
mapped kind of surface caching
side it was a lot
and this was one of those things that
if I could go back and tell
younger me to do something differently
it would have been to split those
innovations up into two phases
in two separate games
so it probably would have been taking
the doom rendering engine
and bringing in the TCPIP
client server
focusing on the multiplayer
and the Quake C
or would have been Doom C programming language
there so I would have split that into
programming language and networking
with the same doom engine
rather than forcing everybody to go towards
the Quake engine which really
meant getting a Pentium
while it ran on a 486 it was not a great
experience there we could have made more
people happier and gotten two games done
in 50% more time
so speaking of people happier
or
mutual friend Joe Rogan
it seems like the most
important moment of his life
is centered around Quake
so it was a definitive
part of his life
so would he agree with
your thinking that
they should split
so he is a person who loves Quake
and played Quake a lot
would he agree that you should have done
the doom engine
and focus on the multiplayer for phase one
or
in your looking back
is the 3D world that
Quake created was also
fundamental to the
the enriched experience I would say that
what would have happened is
you would have had a
a doom looking but Quake feeling
game
8 months earlier and then maybe
6 months after Quake actually
then there would have been the full running on a pentium
6 degree of freedom
graphics engine type things there so it's not
that it wouldn't have
been there it would have been
something amazingly cool earlier
and then something even cooler somewhat later
where I would much
rather have gone and done
two one year development efforts
I've cycled them through
I've been a little more pragmatic about that
rather than killing us
ourselves on the whole Quake development
but I would say it's obviously
things worked out well in the end
but looking back and saying how would I
optimize and do things differently
that did seem to be a clear case where
I
going ahead and we had enormous momentum
on doom you know we did doom too as
the kind of commercial boxed version
after our shareware success
with the original but we could have
just made another doom game
adding those new features
in it would have been huge we would
have learned all the same lessons but faster
and it would have given
6 degree of freedom and pentium
class systems a little bit more time
to get mainstream because we did
cut out a lot of people with the hardware
requirements for Quake
was there any dark moments for you personally
psychologically in having
in
having such harsh deadlines
and having this also made
difficult technical challenges
so I've never really
had
really dark black places
I can't necessarily put myself in
anyone else's shoes but I understand
a lot of people
have significant
challenges with their
mental health and well-being
and I've been super stressed
I've been unhappy as a teenager
in various ways
but I've never really
gone to a very dark
place I just seem to be
largely
immune to what really
wrecks people I mean I've had plenty of time
when I'm very unhappy and miserable about
something but it's never
hit me like I believe
it winds up hitting some other people
I've borne up well under whatever
stresses have
kind of fallen on me and I've always
coped best on that
when all I need to do is
usually just kind of bear down on my work
I pull myself out of
whatever hole I might be slipping into
by actually making progress
I mean maybe if I was in a
position where I was never able to make
that progress I could have slid down further
but I've always been in a
place where okay a little bit
more work maybe I'm in a tough spot here
but I always know
if I just keep pushing eventually
I break through and I make progress
I feel good about what I'm doing
and that's been enough for me
so far in my life
I've seen in the distance
like
ideas of depression
or contemplating suicide
have you seen those things far?
So it was interesting when I was a teenager
I was
probably at some level a troubled youth
I was unhappy most of my teenage
years
I wanted to be on my own
doing programming all the time
as soon as I was 18, 19
even though I was poor I was doing exactly
what I wanted and I was very happy
but high school was not a great time for me
and
I had a conversation with like the school counselor
and they're kind of running their script
it's like okay it's kind of a weird kid here
let's carefully probe around
it's like do you ever think about
ending it all? I'm like no of course not
never not at all
this is temporary things are going to be better
and that's always been kind of the case
for me and obviously
it's not that way for everyone
and other people do react differently
what was your
escape from the troubled youth
like
you know
music
video games
books
how did you escape from a world that's full of cruelty
and suffering and that's absurd
I was not victim of cruelty
and suffering it's like I was an unhappy
somewhat petulant youth
where I'm not
putting myself up with anybody else's
suffering but I was unhappy
objectively and
the things that I did that
very much characterized my childhood
were I had
books, comic books, dungeons and dragons
arcade games, video games
like some of my fondest
childhood memories are the convenience stores
the 7-Elevens and Quick Trips
because they had a spinner rack of comic books
and they had a little side room with
two or three video games, arcade games
in it and that was
very much my happy place
I get my comic books
and if I could go to a library
and go through those little
0-0-0 section where computer books were supposed
to be and there are a few sad little books there
but still just being able to sit down
and go through that and I read
I read a ridiculous number
of books both fiction and non-fiction
as a teenager
and
my rebelling in high school was just
sitting there with my nose in a book ignoring the
class through lots of it
and teachers had a range of reactions
to that some more accepting
of it than others
I'm with you on that so let us
return to quake for a bit with the technical
challenges what
everything together
from the networking
to the graphics
what are some things you remember
that were innovations
you had to come up with in order to
make it all happen
there were a bunch of things on quake
where on the one hand the idea
that I built my own programming language
to implement the game in
looking back and I try to tell people
every high-level programmer
sometime in their career goes through and they
invent their own language it just seems to be a thing
that's pretty broadly done
I'm going to go write a computer programming language
and
I don't regret having done it
but after that
I switched from quake c my quirky
little pseudo-object
or entity-oriented language there
quake 2 went back to using
DLLs with C and then quake 3
I implemented my own C interpreter or compiler
which was a much smarter thing
to do that I should have done originally for quake
but building my own language
was an experience I learned a lot from that
and then there was a generation
of game programmers that
learned programming with quake c which I feel kind
of bad about because
we give javascript a lot of crap but
quake c was nothing to
write home about there
but it allowed people to do
magical things you get into programming
not because you love the
BNF syntax of a language
it's because the language lets you do
something that you cared about
and here's very much you could do something
in a whole beautiful three-dimensional
world and the idea and the fact that the
code for the game was out there you could say
I like the shotgun but I want
it to be more badass you go in there and say
okay now it does 200 points damage
and then you go around with a big grin
on your face blowing up monsters all over
the game so yeah it's
I you know it is not
what I would do today going back with that
language but that was a big part of it
learning about the networking stuff
I because it's
interesting where I learn these things by
reading books so I would get a book on networking
find something I read
all about and learn okay packets they can
be you know out of order lost
or duplicated these are all the
things that can theoretically happen to packets
so I wind up spending all this time
thinking about how do we deal about all that
and it turns out of course in the real world
those are things that yes theoretically can happen
with multiple routes but they really
aren't things that your 99.999
percent of your packets
have to deal with
so there was learning experiences about
lots of that like why
when TCP is appropriate
versus UDP and and how
if you do things in UDP you wind up reinventing
TCP badly in almost all
cases so you know there's
there's good arguments for using
both for different game technology
different parts of the game process transitioning
from level to level and all but the the
graphics were the showcase
of what what quake
was all about it was this graphics technology
that nobody had seen there
and it was a while before
you know there were competitive things out there
and it went a long
time internally really not working
where we were even building
levels where the game
just was not at all
shippable with large fractions of the world
like disappearing not being there
I or being really
slow in various parts of it and it
was this act of faith it's like I think
I'm going to be able to fix this I think
I'm going to be able to make this work
and lots of stuff
changed where the level designers
would build something then have to throw it away
as something fundamental in the kind of graphics
or level technology change
and the I
so there were two big things that
contributed to making it possible
at that time frame I am
two new things there was certainly
hardcore optimized low level assembly
language and this is where I had hired
Michael A. Brash away from
Microsoft and he had been one of my
early inspirations where that
back in the soft disk days the library
of magazines that they had
some of my most treasured ones were
Michael A. Brash's articles
in Dr. Dobbs Journal and
it was it was amazing after
all of our success in Doom we were able to
kind of hit him up and say hey we'd like
you to come work at id software and he was
in the senior technical role at Microsoft
and I am you know and
he was on track for and this was right when
Microsoft was starting to take off and I
did eventually you know
convince him that what we were doing was
going to be really amazing with quake it was
going to it was going to be something nobody
had seen before it had
these aspects of what we were talking
about we had metaverse talk back then
we you know we had read snow crash and
we were we knew about this and
Michael was I was big
into the science fiction and we would talk
about all that and kind of spin this tail
and it was some of the same conversations
that we have today about the metaverse
about how you could have different areas
linked together by portals and you could have
user-generated content and changing
out all of these things so you really
were creating the metaverse with quaking
and we we talked about things like
philosophically used to be advertised as a
virtual reality experience you know that
was the first wave of virtual reality
was in the late 80s and early
90s you had like the lawnmower man
I'm you know movie and you had
time in newsweek talking about the early
VPL headsets and
of course that cratered so hard that
people didn't want to look at virtual reality
for decades afterwards where
it was just it was spoken
mirrors it was not real in the sense
that you could actually do something
real and valuable with it but
but still we had that kind of common
set of talking points and we were talking
about what these games could
I could become and how you'd
like to see people building all of these
creative things because we were seeing an
explosion of work with doom at that time
where people were doing amazingly
cool things like we saw cooler
levels that we had built coming out of the user
community and then people finding
ways to you know change that the characters
in different ways and it was great and we
knew what we were doing in quake was
removing those last things there was
some quirky things with a couple of
the data types that didn't work right
for overriding and that and then the core
thing about the programming model
and I was definitely going to hit all of those
in quake I'm but
the the graphic side of it was
I was still
I knew what I wanted to do
and it was one of these
hubris things where it's like well
so far I've been able to kind of
kick everything that I set out
to go do but quake
was definitely a little bit
more than could be comfortably chewed at
that point and I
but Michael was one of the
one of the strongest programmers and
graphics programmers that I knew
and he was one of the people that I trusted
to to write assembly code
you know better than I could and there's
there's a few people that I can point to
about things like this where I'm a world
class optimizer I mean I make things
go fast but I recognize
there's a number of people that
can write tighter assembly code
tighter SIMD code or tighter CUDA
code then you know then I can write
I'm you know my best strengths
are a little bit more at the system
level I mean I'm good at all of that
but the most leverage
comes from making the decisions that are a little
bit higher up where you figure out
how to change your large scale problems
so that these lower level problems
are easier to do or it makes it possible
to do them in a
in a uniquely fast way
so most of my
you know my big wins in a lot of ways
from all the way from the early games through
you know through VR and the aerospace
work that I'm doing and or did
and hopefully the AI work that I'm working on
now is finding an angle on
something that means you trade
off something that you maybe think
you need but it turns out you don't need
and by making a sacrifice in one
place you can get big advantages
in another place is it
clear at which level of the system
those big advantages
can be gained it's not always
clear and that's why the thing
that that I try to make one of my
core values and I
proselytize to a lot of people is
trying to know the entire stack
no trying to see through
everything that happens and it's almost
impossible on like the web browser
level of things where there's so many levels
to it but you should at least understand
what they all are even if you can't understand
all the performance characteristics at
each level but it goes all the
way down to literally the hardware
so what does the what is this
chip capable of and
what is this software that you're writing capable
of and then with this architecture you put
on top of that than the ecosystem around
it all the people that are
working on it so there are
all these decisions and
they're never made in a globally optimal way
but sometimes you can drive a thread
of global optimality through it
you can't look at everything it's too complicated
but sometimes you can step
back up and make a different
decision and we kind of went through this on the graphics
side on quake where
in some ways it was kind of bad where Michael
would spend his time writing
like I'd rough out the basic
routines like okay here's our span
rasterizer and he would spend a month
writing this you know beautiful
cycle optimized
piece of assembly language that does
you know does what I asked it to do
and he did it faster than like my
original code would do or probably what
I would be able to do even if I had spent that month
on it but then we'd have
some cases when I'd be like okay
well I figured out at this higher
level instead of drawing these in a
painter's order here I do a span buffer
and it cuts out
30% or 40% of all of these
pixels but it means you need to
rewrite kind of this interface of all of that
and I could tell that wore on him a little
bit but in the end it was
the right thing to do where we wound up
changing that rasterization approach
and we wound up with a super optimized
assembly language
core loop and then a good
system around it which minimized how much that had
to be called. And so in order
to be able to do this kind of system level
thinking whether we're talking about
game development
aerospace
nuclear energy
AI
VR you have to be able to understand
the hardware the low level
software the high level
software the design decisions
the whole thing the full stack
of it. Yeah and that's where
a lot of these things become possible
when you're really when you're bringing the future
forward I mean there's a pace that everything
just kind of glides towards where we have a
lot of progress that's happening at such a
different so many different ways you kind of slide
towards progress just left to your own
programs just get faster for
a while it wasn't clear if they were going to get
fatter more than they get quicker than they get
faster and it cancels out but it is
clear now in retrospect now programs just
get faster and have gotten faster
for a long time but if you want
to do something like back at that original
talking about
scrolling games say what this needs to be
five times faster well
we can wait six years
and just it'll naturally get that much
faster at that time
or you come up with some really clever way of
doing it so there are those
opportunities like that in a whole bunch
of different areas now
most programmers don't need to be
thinking about that there's not that many
you know there's a lot of opportunities for
this but it's not everyone's work a day type
stuff so everyone doesn't have to know
how all these things work they don't have
to know how their compiler works
how you know the processor chip manages
cache eviction and all these
low-level things but
sometimes there are powerful opportunities
that you can look at and say
we can bring the future
five years faster
you know we can do something that wouldn't it be
great if we could do this well we can do
it today if we make a certain
set of decisions and
it is in some ways smoke and mirrors
where you say it's like doom was
a lot of smoke and mirrors where people
thought it was more capable than it actually was
but we picked the right
smoke and mirrors to deploy in the game
where by doing this
people will think that it's more general
if we are going to amaze them with what they've got here
and they won't notice
that it doesn't do these other things
so smart decision making
at that point that's where that
that kind of global
holistic top-down view
can work and
I'm
really a strong believer that technology
should be
sitting at that table having those discussions
because you do have cases where you say well
you want to be the Jonathan Ivy or whatever
where it's a pure design
solution
and that's in some cases
now where you truly have almost infinite
resources like if you're trying to do
a scrolling game on the PC
now you don't even have to talk to a technology
person you can just have
any intern can make that go run
as fast as it needs to there and it can be
completely design based
but if you're trying to do something that's hard
either that can't be done
for resources like VR on a mobile
chipset or that we don't even know
how to do yet like artificial general intelligence
it's probably going to be a matter of
coming at it from an angle
like I mean for AGI we have some of
like some of the Hutter principles
about how you can
some of that there are theoretical ways
you can say this is the optimal learning
algorithm that can solve everything
but it's completely impractical
you just can't do that
so clearly you have to make some
concessions for general intelligence
and nobody knows what the right ones are
yet so people are taking different
angles of attack I hope I've got something
clever to come up with in that space
it's been surprising to me
and I think perhaps it is
a principle of progress
that smoking mirrors somehow
you build the future
you kind of
fake it till you make it
and you almost always make it and I think
that's going to be the way we achieve AGI
that's going to be the way we build
consciousness into our machines
is there's
you know philosophers debate about
the Turing test is essentially about
faking it till you make it
you start by faking it
and I think that always leads
to making it
because if you look at history
arguments when as soon as people start talking
about qualia and consciousness
and Chinese rooms and things it's like
I just check out I just don't think there's any value
in those conversations it's just like
go ahead tell me it's not going to work
I'm going to do my best to try to make it work anyways
I don't know if you work with legged robots
there's a bunch of these
they make
they sure as heck make me feel like they're conscious
in a certain
way that's not here today
but is
you could see the kernel
it's like
the flame
the beginnings of a flame
we don't have line of sight but there's
glimmerings of light in the distance
for all of these things
I'm hearing murmuring in a distant room
well let me ask you a human question here
you've
in the game design space
you've done a lot of incredible work throughout
but in terms of game design
you've changed the world and there's a few people
around you that did the same
so famously there's some animosity
there's much love
but there's some animosity between you
and John Romero
what is at the core of that animosity
and human tension
so there really hasn't been
I for a long time
and even at the beginning it's like yes
I did push Romero out of the company
and
this is one of the things that I look back
when I was filing my younger self
some
advice about things
the original
founding kind of corporate structure
of id software
really led to a bunch of problems
we started off with us as equal partners
and we had a buy-sell agreement
because we didn't want outsiders to be telling us
what to do inside the company
and that did lead to
a bunch of the problems where I was sitting here
going
I'm working harder than anyone
I'm doing these technologies
nobody's done before
but we're all equal partners
and then I see somebody that's
not working as hard
and it's
I can't say I was the most mature about that
I was 20-something years old
and it did
bother me when I'm like everybody
okay we need all pulled together
and we've done it before everybody
we know we can do this if we get together
but not everybody wanted to do that
for all time
and I was the youngest one of the crowd
there I had different
sets of kind of backgrounds
and motivations and left
at that point where
it was
everybody has to be contributing
up to this level or
they need to get pushed out
that was not a great
situation and I look back on it
and no
I pushed people out of the company
that could have contributed
if there was a different framework for them
and the modern kind of Silicon Valley
let your stock vest over a time period
and maybe it's non-voting stock
and all those different things
we knew nothing about any of that
we didn't know what we were doing
in terms of corporate structure
so if you think the framework was different
some of the human tension
it almost certainly would have
I look back at that
and it's like even trying to summon up
in my mind it's like I know
I was really really angry
about I am
Romero not working as hard as I wanted him
to work or not carrying
his load on the design for Quake
and coming up with things there
but he was definitely doing things
he made some of the best levels there
he was working with our
external teams like Raven on the licensing
side of things
but there were differences
of opinion about it
but he landed right on his feet
he got 20 million dollars
from Eidos to go do Ion Storm
and he got to do things his way
and spun up three teams simultaneously
because that was always one of the
challenging things in it
where we were doing these single string
one project after another
and I think some of them
wanted to grow the company more
and I didn't because I knew people
that were saying that oh companies turned to shit
they were like the employees
it's just a different world there
and I loved our little dozen people
working on the projects
but you can look at it and say
well business realities matter
it's like you're super successful here
and we could take a swing and a miss
on something but you do it a couple times
and you're out of luck
there's a reason companies try to have
multiple teams running at one time
I am
and so I was doing something I didn't
so if you look past all that
you did create some amazing things together
what did you love about John Romero
what did you respect and appreciate about him
what did you admire about him
what did you learn from him
when I met him he was the coolest programmer I had ever met
he had done all of this stuff
he had made all of these games
he had worked at
one of the companies that I thought was the coolest
at Origin Systems
and he knew all this stuff
he made things happen fast
he was also kind of a polymath about this
where he could do, he made his own
he drew his own art, he made his own levels
as well as
we worked on sound design systems
on top of actually being a really good programmer
and we had
we went through a little
it was kind of fun where one of the early things that we did
where there was kind of the young buck bit
going in where I was
the new guy and he was the
he was the top man programmer
at the soft disk area
eventually we had sort of a challenge over the weekend
that we were going to like race to
implement this game to port one of our PC games
back down to the Apple too
and that was where we finally kind of became clear
it's like, okay, Carmack stands
a little bit apart on the programming side of things
but Romero then
very gracefully moved into
well, he'll work on the tools
he'll work on the systems
do some of the game design stuff as well as
contributing on starting to lead the design
aspects of a lot of things
so he was
enormously valuable in the early stuff
and so much of Doom and even Quake
have his stamp on it in a lot of ways
but
he wasn't at the same level of
focus that I brought to
the work that we were doing there
and he really did
we hit such a degree of success
it was all in the
press about that, the Rockstar game
programmers
I mean it's the Beatles problem
he aided up and he did personify
there was the whole game developers
with Ferraris
that we had there
and I thought that led to
some challenges there
but so much of
the stuff that
was great in the games did come from him
and I would certainly not take that away
from him and even after
we parted ways and he took his swing
with Eidos
in some ways he was ahead of the curve
with mobile gaming as well
where one of his companies after
Eidos was working on
feature phone game development
and I wound up doing some of that
just before the iPhone crossing
over into the iPhone phase there
and that was something that clearly
did turn out to be a huge thing although
he was too early for
what he was working on at that time
you know we've had
pretty cordial relationships where I was happy
to talk with him anytime I'd run into him
at a conference I haven't actually had
some other people just say it's like
you shouldn't go over there
and give him the time of day
or felt that Masters of Doom
was I
played things up in a way
that I shouldn't be too happy with
but I'm okay with all of that
he's still got love in your heart
I just talked with him like
last year I guess it was even this year
about mentioning that I'm going off doing this
AI stuff I'm going big
into artificial intelligence and
he had a bunch of ideas for
how AI is going to play into gaming
and you know asked if I was interested in collaborating
and it's not in line with what
with what I'm doing but I do
you know I wish almost everyone
the best I mean I know I may
not have parted on the best of terms with
I you know with some people but
I was thrilled to see Tom Hall
I'm writing VR games now
we wrote working on a game called Demio
which is really an awesome
VR game it's like Dungeons and Dragons
we all used to play Dungeons and Dragons together
that was one of the things that was what we did on Sundays
in the early days I would
Dungeon Master and they'd all play and
I you know so it really made me smile
seeing Tom involved with an RPG game
in virtual reality
you were the CTO
of Oculus VR since
2013 and maybe
less than a year involved in a bit
in 2019
Oculus was acquired
by Facebook now meta in
2014
you've spoken brilliantly about both the low level
details the experimental design
and the big picture vision of virtual reality
let me ask you about
the metaverse the big question here
both philosophically and technically
how hard is it to
build the metaverse what is the metaverse
in your view you started
with discussing and thinking about Quake
as a kind of metaverse
as you think about it today
what is the metaverse
the thing that could create this
compelling user value this experience
that will change the world
and how hard is it to build it
so the term comes from Neil Stevenson's
book Snow Crash which many
of us had read back in the 90s
it was one of those kind of formative books
and there was this
sense that the
the possibilities
and kind of the freedom and
unlimited capabilities to build a virtual
world that that does whatever
you want whatever you ask of it
has been a powerful draw for generations
of developers you know game developers
specifically and people that are thinking
about more more general purpose
applications so we were
talking about that back in the doom
and quake days about how do you wind
up with an interconnected set of worlds
that you kind of visit from one to another
and as web pages were becoming
a thing you start thinking about how
what is the interactive
kind of 3D based equivalent of this
and there were a lot of really
bad takes you had like
vermal then virtual reality
markup languages and there's
aspects like that that
that came from people saying well what
what kind of capabilities should we develop
to to enable this
and that kind of capability first
work has usually not panned
out very well
on the other hand we have successful
games that started with things like doom
and quake and communities that formed
around those and whether
it was server lists in the early days
or literal portaling between different
games and then modern
things that are on completely different
order of magnitude like Minecraft and
Fortnite that have 100 million
plus users
you know I still think that
that's the right way to go to build the
metaverse is you build something
that's amazing that people love and people
wind up spending all their time in
because it's awesome and you expand the
capabilities of that
even if it's a very basic experience
Minecraft
is an amazing case study in so many
things where what's been able
to be done with that is
really enlightening
and there are other cases where
like right now Roblox is
basically a game construction kit aimed at
kids and that was capability first play
and it's achieving scale that's on
the same order of those things
so it's not impossible
but my preferred bet would be
you make something amazing that people love
and you make it better and better
and that's where I could say we could
have gone back and followed a path kind of
like that in the early days
if you just kind of take the same game
whether it's when Activision demonstrated
that you could make Call of Duty every year
and not only is it not bad
people kind of love it and it's
very profitable the idea
that you could have taken something like that
and take a great game
release a new version every year that
lets the capabilities grow and expand
to start saying it's like okay it's a game
about running around and shooting things
but now you can have
bring your media into it
you can add persistence of
social sense signs of life
or whatever you want to add to it
I still think that's
you know quite a good
position to take and I think that
while Meta is doing a
comes up capability approach with
Horizon Worlds where
it's a fairly general purpose
creators can build whatever they want
in their sort of thing
you know it's hard to
compare and compete with something like Fortnight
which also has enormous amounts
of creativity even though it was not
designed originally as a general purpose
sort of thing so there's
we have examples on both sides
me personally I would have bet on
I'm trying to do
an achievement valuable destination
first and expanding from there
so
can you imagine the thing that
will be kind of if we
look back a couple centuries from now
and you think about
the experiences
that marked the singularity
the transition
where most of our
world moved into virtual reality
what do you think those experiences
will look like
do you think it's going to be kind of like the way the web
slowly took over
where you're the frog in the pot
of water that's slowly heating up
where having lived through all of that
I remember when it was
shocking to start seeing the first
website address on a billboard
when you're like hey my computer world is
infecting the real world
this is spreading out in some way
but there's still when you look back
and say well what made
the web take off and
it wasn't a big bang sort of
moment there it was
a bunch of little things that turned out
not to even be the things that are relevant now
that brought them into it
well I wonder from
like you said you're not a historian
so maybe there's a historian
out there that could
really identify that moment
data driven way
it could be like MySpace or something like that
maybe the first major
social network that really reached
into
non-geek world
or something like that
I think that's kind of the fallacy of historians though
looking for some of those
kind of primary dominant causes
where so many of these things are
like we see an exponential curve
but it's not because like one thing
is going exponential it's because
we have hundreds of little sigmoid curves
overlapped on top of each other
and they just happen to keep adding up
so that you've got something kind of going
to be exponential at any given point
but no single one of them
was the critical thing
there were dozens and dozens of things
I mean seeing the transitions of stuff
like as obviously MySpace giving way
to other things but even like blogging
giving way to social media
and getting resurrected in other guys'
and things that happened there
dancing baby gift or whatever
all your base now belong to us
whatever those early memes
that led to the modern memes
the humor on the different
evolution of humor on the internet
that I'm sure the historians will also
write books about
from the different website that support
to create the infrastructure for that humor
like Reddit and all that kind of stuff
so people will go back and they will name
firsts and critical moments but
it's probably going to be a poor approximation
of what actually happens
and we've already seen like in the VR
space where
it didn't play out the way we thought
in terms of what was going to be like
the modern era of VR basically
started with my E3 demo of Doom 3
on the Rift prototype so we're like
first person shooters in VR
match made in heaven right
and that didn't work out that way at all
they have you know they have the most
comfort problems with it and then
the most popular virtual reality app
is Beat Saber which nobody
predicted back then
what's that make you like
from the first principles if you were to
reverse engineer that
why are these like
silly fun games the most
it actually makes very clear
sense when you when you analyze it
from hindsight and look at the
engineering reasons where it's not
just that it was a magical quirky idea
it was something that played
almost perfectly to what turned out to be
the real strengths of VR where
the one thing that I really underestimated
importance in VR was the importance of
the controllers you know I was still thinking
about what to do a lot more with
with the game pad and just the
amazingness of taking any existing game
being able to move your head around
and look around that that was
you know that was really amazing but
the controllers were super important
but the problem is so many things that you
do with the controllers just
suck it feels like it breaks the illusion
like trying to pick up glasses with the
controllers where you're like oh use the grip
button when you're kind of close and it'll
snap into your hand all of those
and you do them and it's still part of the VR
experience but
Beat Saber winds up
playing only to the strengths it
completely hides all the weaknesses of it
because you are holding something
in your hand you keep a solid grip on it
the whole time it slices through things
without ever bumping into things you
never get into the point where you know
I'm knocking on this table but in VR
my hand just goes right through it so
you've got something that slices
through so it's never your brain
oh I should have hit something you've got a
lightsaber here it's just you expect it to
slice through everything
audio and music turned out to be
a really powerful aspect of virtual
reality where you're blocking the world off
and constructing the world around you
and
being something that can run efficiently on
even this relatively low powered hardware
and can have
a valuable loop in a small
amount of time where a lot of modern games
you're supposed to sit down and play it for
an hour just to get anywhere sometimes a new
game takes an hour to get through the tutorial level
and that's not good for VR for
a couple reasons you do still have the comfort
issues if you're moving around at all
but you've also got just
discomfort from the headset battery
lifespan on the mobile versions
so having things that do break down
into three and four minute
windows of play that turns out to be very
valuable from a gameplay standpoint
so it winds up being
kind of a perfect storm of all of these things
that are really good it doesn't have any
of the comfort problems you're not navigating
around you're standing still all the
stuff flies at you it has
placed audio strengths
it adds the whole fitness in
VR nobody was thinking about that
back in the at the beginning and it turns
out that that is an excellent
daily fitness thing to be doing
if you go play an hour
of beat saver or supernatural or something
that is legit solid
exercise and it's
more fun than doing it just about any other way
there so that's kind of the
arcade stage of things
if I were to say with my
experience with VR
the thing that I think is powerful is
the
maybe it's not here yet
but the degree to which it is immersive
in the way
that quake is immersive it takes you to
another world for me
because I'm a fan of role-playing games
the
Elder Scrolls series
like Skyrim
or even Daggerfall it just takes
you to another world and when you're
not in that world you miss not being
there and then you just
you kind of want to stay there forever
because life is shitty
and you just want to go to this
place is that
I there was a
time when I we were
kind of asked to come up with like what's your view
about VR and
you know my pitch was that it should
be better inside the headset than outside
it's the world as you want it
and everybody thought that was dystopian
and like that's like
oh you're just going to forget about the world outside
and I don't
get that mindset where the
idea that if you can make the world
better inside the headset than
outside you've just improved
the person's life that has a headset
that can wear it and
there are plenty of things that we just can't do
for everyone in the real world everybody can't
have Richard Branson's private island
but everyone can have a private VR island
and it can have the things that they want on it
and there's a lot of these kind of rival
risk goods in the real world
that VR can just be better
at we can do a lot of
things like that that can be very very rich
so yeah I want the
I think it's going to be a positive thing this world where
people want to go back into their headset
where it can be better than
somebody that's living in a tiny apartment
can have a palatial estate
in virtual reality that can have all their friends
from all over the world come over
and visit them without everybody getting on a plane
and meeting in some
place and dealing with all the other logistics hassles
there is real value
in the presence that
you can get for remote meetings
it's all the little things
that we need to sort out but those are things
that we have line of sight on
people that have been in
a good VR meeting using work rooms
where you can say oh that was better
than a zoom meeting but of course
it's more of a hassle to get into it
not everyone has a headset interoperability
is worse you can't have
you cap out at a certain number there's all
these things that need to be fixed but that's
one of those things you can look at and say we know
there's value there we just need to
really grind hard file off all
the rough edges and make that possible
so you do think we have line of sight
because
there's a
reason like
I do this podcast in person for example
doing it remotely it's
not the same and if you're somebody
were to ask me why it's not the same I
wouldn't be able to write down exactly why
but you're
saying that it's possible
whatever the magic is for in person
interaction
that immersiveness of the experience
we are
almost there yes so
the idea of like I
doing a VR interview with
someone I'm not saying it's here right
now but you can see
glimmers of what it should be and
we largely know what would need
to be fixed and improved
to like you say there's a difference between
at remote interview doing a
podcast over zoom or something and face
to face there's that sense of
presence that immediacy the super
low latency responsiveness
being able to see all the subtle things there
just occupying the same field
of view and all of those are things that
we absolutely can do in
VR and that simple case
of a small meeting with a couple
people that's the much easier case
than everybody thinks the ready player one multiverse
with a thousand people going across
that you know a huge bridge to amazing
places that's harder in a lot
of other technical ways not to say we
can't also do that but that's further away
and has more challenges but this small
thing about being able to have a
meeting with one or
a few people and have it feel
real feel like you're there
I think you have the same interactions
and talking with them you get subtle cues
as we start getting eye and face tracking
and some of the other things on high end
headsets a lot of that is
going to come over and it
doesn't have to be as good
this is an important thing that people miss
where there was a lot
of people that especially rich
people that would look at VR and say
it's like oh this just isn't
that good and I'd say it's like well
you've already been court side
backstage and you know on pit row
and you've done all of these experiences
because you get to do them in real life
but most people don't get to and
even if the experience is only half as good
if it's something that they never would have gotten
to do before it's still a very good
thing and as we can just we can
push that number up over time
it has a minimum viable
value level when it
does something that is valuable enough to people
as long as it's better inside the headset
on any metric than it is outside
and people choose to go there we're on the
right path and we have a value
gradient that I'm just always hammering
on we can just follow this value gradient
just keep making things better
rather than going for that
one close your eyes swing for the
fences I kind of
silver bullet approach
I wonder if there's a value gradient for in-person
meetings because if you get that right
I mean that would change the world
it doesn't need to
I mean you don't need a ready player one
but I wonder
if there's that value gradient you can
follow along
because if there is
and you follow it then
there'll be a certain like
phase shift at a certain point
where people will shift from
from zoom
to this
I wonder
what are the bottlenecks
is it software is it hardware
like is it all about latency
so I have
big arguments internally about
strategic things like that where
I like the next headset
that's coming out that
we've made various announcements about is going to be a
higher-end headset more expensive
more features lots of people want to make
those trade-offs I
you know we'll see what the market has to say
about the exact trade-offs we've made
here but if you want to replace zoom
you need to have something that everybody
has
so you like cheaper
I like cheaper because also
lighter and cheaper wind up being
a virtuous cycle there
where expensive and more
features tends to also lead towards heavier
and it just kind of goes it's like let's add more
features the features are not
you know they have physical
presence and weight and draw from batteries
and all of those things so I've always
favored a lower-end
cheaper faster approach
that's why I was always behind the
mobile side of VR rather than the higher-end
PC headsets and I think that's
you know that's proven out well
but there's I you always
ideally we have a whole range of things but
if you've only got one or two things
it's important that those two things cover
the you know the scope that
you think is most important when we're in a
world when it's like cell phones and there's 50
of them on the market covering every conceivable
ecological niche you want
that's going to be great but we're not going to be there
for a while. Where are the bottlenecks?
Is it the hardware or the software?
Yeah so right now
you can play you can get
work rooms on Quest and
you can set up these things and it's a pretty
good experience it's surprisingly good. I haven't
tried it it's surprisingly good
yeah the voice latency is better
on that than a lot
better than a zoom meeting so you've got
a more a better sense of immediacy there
the expressions that you
get from the current hardware
with just kind of your controllers
and your head is pretty realistic
feeling you've got a pretty good sense of being
there with someone. Are these like
avatars
of people? Do you get
to see their body and
they're sitting around a table? Yeah
and it feels
better than zoom? Yeah better than you'd
expect for that it is definitely
yeah I'd say
it's quite a bit better than zoom when everything
is working right but there's still
all the rough edges of the reason zoom
became so successful is because they just
nailed the usability of everything
it's high quality with a absolutely
first-rate experience
and we are not there yet with
any of the VR stuff I'm trying to
to push hard to get
I keep talking about it's like it needs to just
be one click to make everything happen
and we're getting there in our home
environment not the whole work rooms application
but the main home where you can now
kind of go over and click and invite and
still winds up taking five times longer
than it should but we're getting
close to that where you click there
they click on their button and then
they're sitting there in this good presence
with you but latencies need
to get a lot better user interface needs
to get a lot better I'm
ubiquity of the headsets needs to get better
we need to have a hundred million of them
out there just so that everybody knows
somebody that uses this all the time
well I think it's a virtual cycle because I do
think
the interface
is the thing that makes
or breaks this kind
of revolution it's so interesting how
like you said one click but it's also
like how you achieve that one click
I don't know what is
can I ask a dark question maybe let's
keep it outside of meta but
this is about meta but also
Google and big company
are they able to do this kind
of thing it seems like
let me put on my cranky old
man hat is they
seem to not do a good
job of
creating these user
friendly interfaces as they get
bigger and bigger as a company like
Google has created some of the greatest interfaces
ever
early on and it's I mean creating Gmail
just so
many brilliant
interfaces and she seems to be getting
crappier and crappier at that
same with meta same
with
Microsoft it's just it
seems to get worse and worse at that
I don't know what is it because you become
more conservative careful risk
averse is that why
can you speak to that? So it's been really eye
opening to me working inside a tech
Titan where I
you know I had my small
companies and then we're acquired by
a you know a midsize game publisher
and then
Oculus getting acquired by meta
and meta has grown by a factor of many
just in the eight years
since the acquisition
so I did not have
experience with this and it's
it was interesting because I remember
like previously my benchmark for
kind of use of resources
was some of the government programs I interacted
with on the aerospace side
and I remember thinking there was
an Air Force program and they spent 50
million dollars and they didn't
they didn't launch anything they didn't even build
anything it was just kind of like they
you know they made a bunch of papers
and had some parts in a warehouse
and nothing came of it it's like 50 million
dollars
and I have I've had to radically
recalibrate my sense of
like how much money can be spent with
without a product at the end resources
where
on the plus side VR
has turned out we've built
pretty much exactly
what you know we just passed
the 10-year mark then from my I like
my first demo of the Rift
and if I could have said what I wanted
to have it would have been
a standalone inside out tracked
4k resolution headset
that I that could still plug into
a PC for high-end rendering and that's
exactly what we've got on Quest 2
first of all let's pause on that with me
being cranky and everything
it's what meta achieved
with Oculus and so on is incredible
I mean this is
this what when I thought
about the future of VR this is what I imagine
in terms of hardware I would say
and maybe in terms of the experience as well
but it's still not there somehow
on the one hand
we did kind of achieve it and win and we've got
we've sold you know we're a success
right now but
the amount of resources that have gone into
it it winds up getting cluttered up in
accounting where last mark
did announce that they spent
ten billion dollars a year like on
reality labs now reality labs
covers a lot it was VR
was not the large part of it also had
portal and spark and the big AR
research efforts and
it's been expanding out to include AI
and other things there where
I there's a lot going on there
but ten billion
dollars was just a number that I had
trouble processing it just
I feel sick to my stomach thinking about
that much money being spent
but that's how they demonstrate commitment
to this where it's not
I'm more so than
like yeah Google goes and cancels all of these
projects I had different things I
like that while meta is
really sticking with the funding of
VR and AR is still
further out with it so there's something to be said
for that I
it's not just going to vanish the works going in
I just wish it could be
those resources could be applied more
effectively because I see
all these cases I point out these examples
of how a third party
that we're kind of competing with in various ways
there's a number of these examples and they
do work with a tenth
of the people that we do internally
and a lot of it comes from
yes there's the small company
can just go do it while in a big
company you do have to worry about
I you know is there some
SDK internally that you should be using
other teams making it you have to have your
cross functional group meetups
for different things you do have more
concerns about you know about privacy
or diversity and equity and
I'm safety of different things
parental issues and things that a small
startup company can just kind of you know
cowboy off and do
something interesting and there's a lot
more that is a problem
that you have to pay attention to in the big
companies but I'm not willing to believe that
we are within even a factor
of two or four of what the
efficiency could be you know I
am constantly kind of
crying out for it's like we can do better than
this and you wonder what the mechanisms
to unlock that efficiency
are you know I don't
there is some sense in a large company
that
like an individual engineer might not
believe that they can change the world
maybe you delegate a little bit
of the responsibility
to be the one who changes the world
in a big company I think
but the reality is
like the world will get changed
by a single engineer anyway
so if whether inside google
or inside a startup it doesn't matter
it's just like google and
meta needs to help those engineers believe
they're the ones that are going to decrease
that latency is it'll
take one John Carmack like the
20 year old Carmack
that's inside meta right now
to change everything and I try to
point that out and push people
it's like try to go ahead
and when you see some because there is
you get the silo mentality where you're like
okay I know something's not right over there
but that's I'm staying in my lane here
and there's there's a couple people
that I can you know I can
think about that are willing to just like hop
all over the place and man I treasure them
the people that are just willing to
they're fearless you know they will go over
and they will go rebuild the kernel and change
this distribution and go in and hack
firmware over here to to get something
done right and that is
relatively rare you know there's thousands
of developers and you've got a small handful
that are willing to operate at that level
and you know and it's
potentially risky for them the the politics
are you know are real in a lot of that and
I'm in the you know very much the privileged
position of I am
you know I'm more or less untouchable
there where I've been dinged like
twice for it's like you said something insensitive
in that post and I and you should probably
not say that I am
but for the most part yes I you know I get
away with I every week I'm
posting something you know pretty loud
and opinionated in you know internally
and I think that's useful for
the company but
I am yeah it's not
it's rare to have a position like that and I
can't necessarily offer advice for how
someone can do that I
well you could offer advice to a company
in general to give a little bit
of freedom for the
young wild the wildest ideas come
from the young minds
and so
you need to give the young minds freedom
to think big and wild
and crazy and for that
they have to be opinionated they have to
be
they have to think crazy ideas
and thoughts and pursue
them with a full passion without being slowed
down by bureaucracy or managers
and all that kind of stuff
obviously startups really empower that but
big companies could too and that's
that's a design challenge for company
for big companies to see how can you
enable that how can you
there are so many resources
and they do you know amazing
things do get accomplished but
there's so much more that could come out
of that and you know I'm hope I'm always
hopeful I'm an optimist in almost everything
you know I think things can get better I
think that they can improve things that
you go through a path and you're learning
kind of what does and doesn't work
and I'm not I'm not ready to be fatalistic
about the kind of the outcome
of any of that
me neither I know too many good people
inside of those large companies that are incredible
you have a
friendship with Elon Musk
often when I talk to him
he'll bring up how incredible of an engineer
and just a big picture
thinker you are his huge
amount of respect for you
I just
I've never been a fly in the wall between
the discussion between the two of you I just wonder
is there something you guys
debate
argue about discuss is there
some interesting problems that the two of you
think about
you come from different worlds maybe there's
some intersection
in aerospace maybe there's some intersection
in your
new efforts in artificial intelligence
in terms of thinking
is there something interesting you could say about
sort of the debates the two of you have
so I think in some ways
we do have a kind of similar background
where we're almost exactly the same age
and we had kind of similar
programming backgrounds on the personal computers
and
even some of the books that we would read and things
that would kind of turn us into the people
that we are today
and I think there is a
degree of
sensibility similarities where
we kind of call bullshit on the same things
and kind of see the same opportunities
in different technology
and there's that sense of
I always talk about the speed of light solutions
for things and he's thinking about
kind of minimum manufacturing
and engineering and operational
standpoints for things
and
so I mean I first met Elon
right at the start of the aerospace era
where I wasn't familiar with
I was still in my game dev bubble
I really wasn't familiar with all the startups
that were going and being successful
with PayPal and all of his different companies
but I met him as I was starting
to do Armadillo Aerospace
and he came down with
kind of his right hand propulsion guy
and we talked about rockets
what can we do with this
and it was kind of specific things
about like how are our flight
computers set up, what are different propellant
options, what
can happen with different
ways of putting things together
and then in some
ways he was certainly the biggest player
in the sort of alt space community
that was going on in the early 2000s
he was
the most well funded although
you know his funding in the larger scheme of things
compared to a
like a NASA or something like that
was really tiny, it was a lot more
than I had at the time
but it was interesting
I had a point years later when I realized
okay my
my financial resources at this point
were basically what Elon's was
when he went all in on
SpaceX and Tesla
and there's
I think in many corners he does not
get the respect that he should
about being a wealthy person
that could just retire
and he went all in where
he was really going to
you know he could have gone bust
and there's plenty of people
you look at the you know the sad
athletes or entertainers
that had all the money in the world and blew it
he could have been the business case
example of that
but you know the things
that he was doing space exploration
electrification of transportation
on solar city type things
these are big
world level things
and I have a great deal of admiration
that he was willing to throw himself
so completely into that
because in contrast with myself
I was doing armadillo aerospace
with this tightly bounded
it was John's crazy money
at the time that had a finite limit
on it it was never going to impact
me or my family
if it completely failed
and I was still hedging my bets
working at idsoftware at the time
when he had been
really all in there
and I have a huge amount of respect
for that and people do not
the other thing I get irritated with
is people would say it's like oh Elon's
business guy
he was gifted the money
and he's just kind of investing
in all of this when
he was really deeply involved
in a lot of the decisions
not all of them were perfect
but he cared very much about
engine material selection
propellant selection
for years he'd be kind of telling me
it's like get off that hydrogen peroxide stuff
it's like liquid oxygen
is the only proper oxidizer
for this
and like the times
that I've gone through the factories with him
we're talking
very detailed things about
how this weld is made
how this sub-assembly goes together
what are start up shut down
behaviors of the different things
so he is really
in there at a very detailed
level and I think that he is
the best modern example
now of someone that tries to
effectively micromanage some decisions
on things on both Tesla
you know and SpaceX to some degree
where he cares enough about it
I worry a lot that he stretched too thin
that you get boring company
in Neuralink and Twitter
all the other possible things there
where I know I've got
I've got limits on how much
I can pay attention to
that I have to kind of box off different amounts
of time and I look back at
my aerospace side of things it's like I did
not go all in on that I did not
commit myself at a level that it would
have taken to be successful there
and I
and it's kind of a weird thing just
like having a discussion with
he's the richest man in the world right now
but he operates on
you know on a level that is still
very much
in my wheelhouse on a technical side of
things so
doing that systems level type of thinking where you can go to
the low level details
and go up high to the big picture
do you think
in the aerospace
arena in the next
5, 10 years do you think
we're going to put a human on Mars like what do you think
is the interesting
no I do in fact
I made a bet with someone
with a group of people kind of this
about whether boots on Mars by
2030 and
this was kind of a fun
story because I was at an Intel
sponsored event and we had a bunch of
just world-class brilliant people
and we were talking about computing stuff
but the after dinner conversation was
like what are some other things how they're going to go in the
future and one of the ones tossed
up on the whiteboard was like boots on Mars
by 2030
and most of the people in the room
thought yes you know they thought that like
SpaceX is kicking ass we've got
all this possible stuff
seems likely that it's going to go that way
and I said
no I think less than 50% chance
that it's going to make it there
and people
were kind of like why the pessimism or whatever
and of course I'm an optimist at almost
everything but for me to be
the one kind of outlier saying no I
don't think so
then I started saying some of the things
I said well let's be concrete about it
let's bet $10,000
that it's not going to happen
and this was really
a startling thing to see that
again, room full of brilliant people
but as soon as like
money came on the line and they were like
I want to put $10,000 and I was
not the richest person in the room
there are people much better off than
there's a spectrum but
you know as soon as they started
to think it's like oh I could lose money
by keeping
my position right now
and all these engineers they engage
their brain they started thinking it's like okay
launch windows
delays like how many times
would it take to get this right what historical
precedence do we have
and then it mostly came down
to it's like well what about in transit
by 2030 and then
what about
different things or would you go for 2032
but one of the people
did go ahead and was optimistic
enough to make a bet with me so I have
a $10,000 bet that
by 2030 I think it's going to happen
shortly thereafter I think there will
probably be infrastructure on Mars by 2030
but I don't think that we'll have
humans on Mars on 23rd
I think it's possible but I think it's
less than a 50% chance so I felt
safe making that bet
well I think you had an interesting
point correct me if I'm wrong
that's a dark one that's
um that should
perhaps help people
appreciate Elon Musk
which is
in this particular effort
Elon is a critical
it's critical to success
SpaceX seems to be
critical to
humans on Mars by 2030
or thereabouts
so if something happens to Elon
then all of this collapses
and this is in contrast to
the other $10,000
bet I made kind of recently and that was
self-driving cars at
like a level 5 running around
cities and people have kind of nitpicked
that that we probably don't mean exactly
level 5 but the guy I'm having the bet with
is we're going to be
we know what we mean about this
Jeff Atwood yeah coding horror
and stack over flow and all
but I
he doesn't think that people
are going to be riding around in Robo Taxis
in 2030 in major cities
just like you take an Uber now
and I think it will
and I think and the difference is everybody
looks at this it's like oh but Tesla's been wrong
for you they've been promising it for years
and it's not here yet and
the reason this is different than
the bet with Mars is
Mars really is
more than is comfortable a bet on
Elon Musk I am you know that is
you know that is his thing
and he is really going to
move heaven and earth to try to make that
happen and perhaps not even SpaceX
yeah perhaps just Elon
yeah because if
if Elon went away and SpaceX
went public and got a board of directors
I there are more profitable
things they could be doing than focusing
on human presence on Mars
so this really is a sort
of personal thing there and
in contrast with that
self-driving cars have
a dozen credible companies
working really hard and while
yes it's going
slower than most people thought it would
betting against that is a bet
against almost the entire world
in terms of all of these companies
that have all of these incentives
it's not just you know one
guys passion project
and I do think that it is solvable
I although there's I recognize
it's not a hundred percent chance because
it's possible the long tail of self-driving
problems winds up being an AGI
complete problem I think
there's plenty of value to mine out of it with
narrow AI and I think that it's
you know it's going to happen probably more
so than people expect but it's that
whole sigmoid curve where you
over you know you overestimate the near
term progress you underestimate the long
term progress and I think self-driving
is going to be like that and I think
2030 still a pretty good bet
yeah unfortunately
self-driving is a problem
that is
safety critical meaning that
if you don't do it well
people get hurt
but the other side of that is people
are terrible drivers so
it is not going to be that's probably going to be
the argument that gets it through is like
we can save 10,000 lives
a year by taking
imperfect self-driving cars
and letting them take over a lot of driving responsibilities
it's like was it 30,000
people a year die in auto accidents
right now in America
and a lot of those are preventable
and the problem is you'll have people that
every time a Tesla crashes into something
you've got a bunch of people that
literally have vested interests shorting Tesla
to come out and make it the worst thing in the world
and people will be fighting against
that but optimist in me again
I think that we will have systems
that are statistically safer
than human drivers and we will be saving
thousands and thousands
of lives every year
when we can hand over more of those responsibilities
to it I do still think
as a person who studied this problem
very deeply from a human side
as well
it's still an open problem how
good slash bad humans
are driving it's a kind
of funny thing we say about each other
oh humans suck at driving
everybody except
you of course
we think we're good at driving
but after really
studying it I think
you start to notice
because I've watched hundreds
of hours of humans driving
the projects of this kind of thing
you've noticed that even with
the distraction, even with everything else
humans are able
to do some incredible things
with the
attention even when you're just looking at the smartphone
just to get cues from the environment
to make less seconds
decisions
to use instinctual type of decisions
that actually save your ass
time and time and time again
and are able to do that
with so much uncertainty
around you in such tricky
dynamic environments
I don't know
I don't know exactly
how hard is it to beat
that kind of
skill of common sense reasoning
this is one of those interesting things
that there have been a lot of studies about how
experts in their field usually
underestimate the progress
that's going to happen because
it thinks about all the problems they deal with
and they're like, damn, I'm going to have a hard time
solving all of this
and they filter out the fact that they are one expert
in a field of thousands
and you think about, yeah, I can't do
all of that and you sometimes forget about
the scope of the ecosystem
that you're embedded in and if you think back
eight years very specifically
the state of AI and machine learning
where we had just gotten
Resnets probably at that point
and you look at all the amazing
magical things that have happened in eight years
and they do kind of seem to be
happening a little faster in recent years also
and you project that
eight more years into the future
where again, I think there's a 50% chance
we're going to have signs of life of AGI
which we can put through
Driver's Ed if we need to
to actually build self-driving cars
and I think that the narrow systems are going to
have real value demonstrated
well before then
So signs of life
in AGI, you've
mentioned that
okay, first of all
you're one of the most brilliant people on this earth
you could be solving
a number of different problems as you've mentioned
your mind was attracted to
nuclear energy
obviously virtual reality with the metaverse
is something you could have a tremendous impact on
I do want to say a quick thing about nuclear energy
where I
this is something that
this so precisely
feels like aerospace before SpaceX
where from everything that I know
about all of these
the physics of this stuff hasn't changed
and the reasons why
things are expensive now are not
fundamental
somebody should be going into
a really hard
Elon Musk style at
fission, economical fission
not fusion
where the fusion is
kind of the darling of people
that want to go and do nuclear
because it doesn't have the taint that fission
has in a lot of people's minds
but it's an almost absurdly
complex thing where
nuclear fusion is you look at the
the Tokamax or any of the things that people are
building and it's doing all of this
infrastructure just at the end of the day
to make something hot
to that you can then turn into energy through
a conventional power plant
and all of that work which we think
we've got line of sight on
if it comes out then you have to do
all of that immensely complex
expensive stuff just to make something hot
where nuclear fission is
basically you put these two rocks together
and they get hot all by themselves
that is just that much simpler
it's just orders of magnitude
simpler and the actual
rocks the refined uranium is not very
expensive it's a couple percent
of the cost of electricity
that's why I made that point where you could
have something which was five
times less efficient than
current systems and if the rest
of the plant was a whole bunch cheaper you could still be
super super valuable
so how much of the pie
do you think
could be solved by nuclear energy
by fission so
how much could it become the primary
source of energy on earth
it could be most of it like the reserves of uranium
as it stands now could not power the whole
earth but I am you know
you get into breeder reactors and thorium
things like that that you do for conventional fission
there is enough
for everything now I mean solar
photovoltaic has been amazing
you know it's I
one of my current projects is working on an
off-grid system and it's been fun just kind of
again putting my hands on all the
stripping the wires and wiring things together
and doing all of that and just having followed
that a little bit from the outside
over the last couple decades
there's been semiconductor like magical
progress in what's going
on there so I'm all for
all of that but it doesn't solve
everything and nuclear really
still does seem like the smart money
bet for what you should be getting for base
band on a lot of things
and solar may be cheaper for
you know peaking over air conditioning loads
during the summer and things that you
can push around in different ways
but it's one of those things that's
it's just strange
how we've had the technology sitting there
but these non-technical reasons on the social
optics of it has been
this major forcing function
for something that
you know really should be at the corner
stone of all of the world's concerns
with energy it's interesting
how the non-technical factors
have really dominated something that is
so fundamental to
kind of the existence of the human race as we
know it today.
And much of the troubles of the world including
wars in different
parts of the world like Ukraine is energy
based and
yeah it's just sitting right there to be solved
that said
I mean to me personally I think
it's clear that if AGI were to be
achieved that would change the course
of human history. So AGI
wise I was
making this decision about what do I want
to focus on after
VR and I'm still working on VR
regularly I spend a day
a week kind of consulting with meta
and you know Bos
styles me the consulting
CTO is kind of like the Sherlock Holmes
that comes in and consults on
some of the specific tough issues
and I'm still pretty passionate about all of
that but I have been
figuring out how to compartmentalize
and force that into a smaller
box to work on some other things
and I did come down to this decision between
working on
economical nuclear fission or artificial
general intelligence
and the fission side of things
I've got a bunch of interesting things
going that way but
it would take that would be a fairly big
project thing to do I don't think
it needs to be as big as people expect
I do think something original space
excised
you build it power your building off of it
and then the government I think will come
around to what you need to
everybody loves an existence proof
I think it's possible somebody should be doing
this but it's going to involve
some politics it's going to involve
decent size teams and a bunch of this
cross functional stuff that I don't love
while
the artificial general intelligence side of things
um
it seems to me like this is
the highest leverage
moment for
potentially a single individual
potentially in the history of the world
where the things that we know
about the brain about what we
can do with artificial intelligence
uh nobody can say absolutely
on any of these things but
I am not a madman
for saying that it is likely
that the code for artificial general
intelligence is going to be
tens of thousands of lines
of code not millions of lines
of code this is code that conceivably
one individual could
write unlike writing a new web browser
operating system
and based on the
progress that AI has machine
learning has made in the recent decade
it's likely that the
important things that we don't know
are relatively simple there's
probably a handful of things and
my bet is that
I think there's less than
six key insights that need
to be made each one of them can probably
be written on the back of an envelope
we don't know what they are but when they're
put together in concert with
GPUs at scale and the data
that we all have access to that
we can make something that behaves
like a human being
or like a living creature
and that can then be educated
in whatever ways that we need to get to the
point where we can have
universal remote workers where
anything that somebody does
mediated by a computer and doesn't require
physical interaction
that an AGI will be able to do
we can already simulate the
equivalent of the zoom meetings
with avatars and
synthetic deepfakes and whatnot
we can definitely do that
we have superhuman capabilities
on any narrow thing that we can
that we can formalize and make a loss
function for but there's things we don't
know how to do now but I don't
think they are unapproachably
hard now that's incredibly hubristic
to say that it's like
but I think that what I said a couple
years ago is a 50% chance
that somewhere there will be signs of
life of AGI in
2030 and I've probably increased
that slightly I may be at
55-60% now because
I do think there's a little sense of
acceleration there
so I wonder what the and by the way you also
written that I
bet with hindsight we will find that
clear antecedents of all the critical
remaining steps for AGI
are already buried somewhere
in the vast literature of today so the
ideas are already there
I think that's likely the case one of the
things that appeals to so many people
including me about the promise of AGI
is we know that
we're only drinking from a straw from
the fire hose of all the information
out there I mean you look at
just in a very narrowly
bounded field like machine learning like
you can't read all the papers that come out
all the time you can't go back
and read all the clever things that people
did in the 90s or earlier that people
have forgotten about because they didn't pan out
at the time when they were trying to do them with 12 neurons
and
so that this idea that
yeah I think there are gems
buried in some of the older literature that
was not the path taken by everything
and you can see a kind of heard
mentality on the things that happen right now
it's almost funny to see
like oh Google does something and open AI
does something meta does something and
you know they're the same people that all talk
to each other and they all one up in each other
and they're all capable of implementing
each other's work given a month
or two after somebody has an announcement
of that but there's
a whole world of possible
approaches to machine learning
and I think that
we probably will in hindsight go back and see
it's like yeah that was kind of clearly
predicted by this early paper
here you know and this turns
out that if you do this and this and take this result
from animal training
and this thing from neuroscience over
here and put it together and set
up this curriculum for them to learn in
that that's kind of what it took
you don't have too many people
now that are still saying it's not
possible or it's going to take hundreds of years
and ten years ago you would get
you would collect get a collection of experts
and you would have a decent chunk on the margin
that either say not possible
or couple hundred
years might be centuries and the median
estimate would be like
fifty seventy years and it's been
coming down and I know with me saying
eight years for something that still puts me on
the optimistic side but it's not
crazy out in the fringes
and just being able to look at that at
a meta level about the
trend of the
predictions going down there
the idea that something could
be happening relatively soon
now
I do not believe in fast takeoffs
that's one of the safety issues that people say
it's like oh it's going to go fume and the AI
is going to take over the world there's a lot of reasons
I don't think that's a credible
position
and I think that we will go from a point
where we start seeing things
that credibly look like
look like animals behaviors
and I have a human voice box wired into them
it's like I tried to get Elon
to say it's like your your pig in neuro
link give it a human voice box and let it start
learning human words
I think that you know I think animal
intelligence is closer to human intelligence
than a lot of people like to think
and I think that culture and modalities
of IO are
make the Gulf seem a lot bigger than it
actually is there's just that smooth
spectrum of how the brain developed
and cortexes and
scaling of different things going on there
cultural modalities of IO
yes languages
um the
sort of loss in translation conceals a
lot of intelligence and
so your when you think about
signs of life for AGI you're
thinking about
human interpretable signs so the example
I give it if we get to the point where you've got
a learning disabled toddler
some some kind of real special needs
a child that can still
interact with their favorite TV show and
video game and can be
trained and learn in some
appreciably human like way
at that point you can deploy an army
of engineers
cognitive scientist education developmental
developmental education people
and you've got so many advantages
there unlike real education where you can
do rollbacks and a B testing and you
can find a golden path through a curriculum
of different things if you get to that
point learning disabled toddler
I think that it's
it's going to be a done deal but you
think we'll we'll know when we see
it so there's
there's been a lot of really interesting
general learning progress from
DeepMind open the eye a little bit
to I
tend to believe that
Tesla autopilot deserves a
lot more credit than it's getting
for making progress
on the general answer
on the doing the multitask learning
thing and increasing the number of tasks
and automating that
process of
sort of
learning from the edge could discover in the edge
cases and learn from the edge cases that is
it's really approaching
from a different angle the general learning
problem of AGI
but the more clear approach
comes from DeepMind where you have these
kind of game situations and
build systems there
but I don't know
people seem to be quite
there will always be people that
just won't believe it and I fundamentally
don't care I mean I don't care
if they don't believe it I
when it starts doing people's jobs
and I mean I don't care about the
philosophical zombie argument at all
absolutely but will you
do you think you will notice that something
special has happened here and or
because to me I've been noticing
a lot of special things
I think a lot of credit should go to
DeepMind for
AlphaZero
that was truly special
self-play mechanisms achieve
sort of solve problems that
used to be thought unsolvable
like the game of go
so I mean protein folding
starting to get into that space where
learning is doing
at first it wasn't
end-to-end learning now it's
end-to-end learning of a
very difficult previously thought
unsolvable problem of protein folding
and so
yeah
where do you think
would be a really magical
moment for you?
there have been incredible things happening
in years like you say all of the things
from DeepMind and OpenAI that have been
huge showpiece things
but when you really get down to it
and you read the papers and you look at the way
the models are going
it's still like a feed forward
you push something in something comes out
on the end I mean maybe there's
diffusion models or Monte Carlo tree
rollouts and different things going on
but it's not a being
it's not close to a being
that's going through
a lifelong learning process
so you want something that kind of
gives signs of a being
what's the difference
between
a neural network
a feed forward neural network and a being
so where's the...
fundamentally the brain is a recurrent neural
network generating an action policy
I mean it's implemented on a biological
substrate and it's interesting thinking about
things like that where we know
fundamentally the brain is not
an additional neural network or a transformer
those are specialized things
that are very valuable for what we're doing
but it's not the way the brain is doing
now I do think consciousness and
AI in general is a
substrate independent mechanism
where it doesn't have to be implemented the way
the brain is but if you've only got
one existence proof there's certainly
some value in caring about what it says
and does
and so the idea
that anything that can be done with a
low AI that you can quantify up a
loss function for a reward mechanism
you're almost certainly going to be
able to produce something that's more
resource effective to train and
deploy and use in an inference mode
you know train a whole lot using an inference
but a living being
is going to be something that's a continuous
lifelong learned task
agnostic thing
and while a lot of...
So the lifelong learning is really important too
and the long term memory
is a big weird part of that
and we've got
again I have all the respect in the world
for the amazing things that are being done
now but sometimes they can be taken
a little bit out of context with things
like there's some smoking
mirrors going on like the GATO
the recent work the multi-task learning stuff
you know it's amazing that it's the one
it's one model that plays all the
Atari games I am as well
as doing all these other things
but of course it didn't learn to do all
of those it was instructed in doing
that by other reinforcement learners
going through and doing that
and even in the case of all the games
it's still going with a specific
hand-coded reward function
in each of those Atari games
where it's not that you know how does it
just wants to spend its summer afternoon playing
Atari because that's the most interesting
thing for it so it's again not
a general it's not learning the way humans
learn and there's
I believe a lot of things that are
challenging to make a loss function
for that you can train
through these existing conventional things
we're going to chip away at all the things
that people do
that we can turn into narrow
AI problems
and billions of probably trillions
of dollars of value are going to be created
by that but there's still going
to be a set of things and we've got questionable
cases like the self-driving car
where it's possible
it's not my bet but it's plausible
that the long tail could be problematic
enough that that really does require
a full-on artificial general intelligence
the counter argument
is that data solves almost everything
is an interpolation problem if you have enough data
and Tesla may be able to get enough
data from all of their
deployed stuff to be able to work like that
but maybe not and
there are all the other problems about like say
you want to have a strategy meeting
and you want to go ahead and bring in all of your
remote workers and your consultants
and you want a world where some of those could
be AIs that are
you know that are talking and interacting
with you in an area
that is too murky to have a crisp loss function
but they still have
things that on some level they're
rewarded on some internal level
for building a valuable to humans
kind of life
and ability to interact with things
see I still think that
self-driving car
solving that problem will take us very far
towards AGI you might not need AGI
but I am really
inspired by what
autopilot is doing
Waymo
so some of the other companies I think Waymo leads
the way there
is also really interesting but they don't have quite
as ambitious of an effort in terms of
learning based
sort of data hungry
approach to driving which I think
is very close to the kind of thing that would
take us far
and it's a funny thing
because as far as I can tell
Elon is completely serious about all of his concerns
about AGI
being an existential threat and
I tried to draw him out to talk about AI
and he just didn't want to
and I think that
I get that little fatalistic sense from him
and it's weird because his company
could very well be the leading company
leading towards a lot of that
where Tesla being a super pragmatic company
that's doing things
because they really want to solve this actual problem
it's a different vibe than the
research-oriented companies
where it's a great time to be an AI researcher
you've got your pick of trillion-dollar companies
that will pay you to kind of work on the problems
you're interested in
but that's not necessarily driving hard
towards the core problem
of AGI as something that's going to produce
a lot of value by doing things
that people currently do
or would like to do
I mean I have a million questions to you
about your ideas about AGI
but do you think
it needs to be embodied
do you think it needs to have a body
to start to
notice the signs of life
to develop the kind of system that's able
to
perceive the world in the way that an AGI should
and act in the world
so should we be thinking about robots
or can this be achieved in a
purely digital system?
I have a clear opinion on that
no it does not need to be
embodied in the physical world where
you could say most of my career
is about making simulated virtual
worlds in games or virtual
reality and so
on a fundamental level I believe that you can
make a simulated environment that provides
much of the value of what the real environment
does and restricting yourself
to operating at
real-time in the physical world with physical
objects I think is an enormous handicap
I mean that's one of the real
lessons driven home by all my aerospace
work is that
reality is a bitch
in so many ways there we're dealing with all
the mechanical components like everything
fails Murphy's law even if you've done
it right before on your fifth one it might come
out differently so
I think that anybody
that is all in on the
embodied aspect of it they are
tying a huge weight to their ankles
and I think that
I would almost count
them out anybody that's making that a cornerstone
of their belief about it I would almost write
them off as being worried about them
getting to AGI first
I was very surprised that Elon's big on
the humanoid robots
I mean like the NASA Robonaut stuff was always
almost a gag line
like what are you doing people well that's
very interesting because he has a very pragmatic
view of that that's just
a
way to solve a particular problem in a factory
now I do think that once
you have an AGI robotic bodies
humanoid bodies are going to be enormously
valuable I just don't think they're helpful
getting to AGI
he has a very sort of practical view which
I disagree with and I argue with him
but it's a practical view that there's
you know you could transfer
the problem of driving
to the problem of
robotic manipulation
because so much of it is perception
it's perception and action
and it's just a different context
and so you can apply all the same kind
of data engine
learning processes to a different
environment and so why not
apply it to the humanoid robot environment
but
I think
I do think that there's a certain
magic to the body
robot
that may be the thing that finally convinces people
yes again I don't really care
that much about convincing people you know
the world that I'm looking towards is
you know you I
you go to the website and say
I want five Frank 1As to
work on my team today and they all spin up
and they start showing up in your zoom meetings
to push back but also
to agree with you but first to push back
I do think you need to convince people
for them to welcome that thing
into their life
I think there's enough businesses that operate
on an objective kind of profit
loss sort of basis that
I mean if you look at how many things
again talking about the world as an evolutionary
space there
when you do have free markets and you have
entrepreneurs
you're going to have people that are going to be willing to go out and try
whatever crazy things
and when it proves to be beneficial
you know there's fast followers in all sorts of places
yeah and
you're saying that I mean
Quake and VR
is a kind of embodiment but just in a
digital world and if you're able to
demonstrate if you're
able to do something productive in that kind of
digital
reality
then AGI
doesn't need to have a body.
It's like one of the really practical technical questions
that I kind of keep arguing with myself over
if you're
doing a training and learning and you've got
like you can watch Sesame Street and you can play
Master System games or something
is it enough to have just a video feed
that is that video coming in
or should it literally be
a virtual TV set in a virtual room
even if it's a simple room
just to have that sense of
you're looking at a 2D projection on a screen
versus having the screen beam directly
into your retinas
and I think it's possible
to maybe get past some of these
signs of life of things with the
just kind of projected directly into the
receptor fields but
eventually for more
kind of human emotional
connection for things
like having some VR room
with a lot of screens in it for the AI to be learning
in is likely helpful
and maybe a world of different AIs
interacting with each other.
Self play I do think is one of the critical things
where socialization wise, one of the other
limitations I set for myself
thinking about these is
I need something that
is at least potentially real time
because I want it's nice
you can always slow down time
you can run on a subscale system
at some lower level and if you've got
extra horsepower running it faster than real time
is a great thing but
I want to be able to
have the AIs
either socially interact with each other
or critically with actual
people you're sort of child development
psychiatrist that comes in and
interacts and does the good boy, bad boy
sort of thing
as they're going through and exploring different things
and it's nice to
I come back to the value of constraints
in a lot of ways and if I say
well one of my constraints is
real time operation I mean it might still be
a huge data center full of
computers but it should be
able to interact on a zoom meeting
with people and that's how you also
do start convincing people even if it's
not a robot body moving around which
eventually gets to irrefutable levels
but if you can go ahead and
not just type back and forth to a
GPT bot on something but
you're literally talking to them
embodied over zoom form
and working through problems
with them or exploring situations
having conversations that are
fully stateful and learned
I think that that's a
valuable thing so I do keep all
of my eyes on things that
can be implemented within sort of that 30
frames per second I
kind of work and I think that's feasible
Do you think the most compelling experiences
that first will be
for pleasure
or for business as they ask in airports
so
meaning is it
if it's interacting with
AI agents
will it be
sort of like friends
entertainment
almost like a therapist or whatever
that kind of interaction
or is it in the business setting
something like you said brainstorming
different ideas sort of
this is all a different formulation of
a kind of a touring test or the spirit
of the original touring test where do you think
the biggest benefit will first come
so it's going to start off hugely expensive
I mean you're going to
we're still all guessing about
what compute is going to be necessary
I fall on the side of I don't think
you run the numbers and you're like 86 billion neurons
100 trillion synapses
I don't think those all need to be weights
I don't think we need models that are quite that big
evaluated quite that often
we've got reasonable estimates
of what some parts of the brain do
we don't have the neocortex formula
but we kind of get some of the other sensory
processing and it doesn't feel like
we need to we can simulate that in computers
for less weights but still
it's probably going to be
thousands of GPUs
to be running a human level
AGI depending on how
it's implemented that might give you sort of a
clan of 128 and kind of run in batch
people depending
on whether they're sparsity in the way
the weights and things are set up
if it is a reasonably dense thing
then just the memory bandwidth trade
off means you get 128 of them at
the same time and either it's
all feeding together learning in parallel
or kind of all running together
I kind of talking to a bunch of people
but still if you've got thousands of GPUs
necessary to run these
things it's going to be kind of
expensive where it might start off
I am thousand dollars
an hour for your even post
development or something for that
which would be something that you would only use
for a business
where you think they're going to help you make
a strategic decision or point out something
super important but I also
am completely confident
that we will have another factor
of a thousand in cost
performance increase in AGI
type calculations
not in general computing necessarily
but there's so much more that we can do with
packaging, making those right tradeoffs
all those same types of things that
in the next couple decades
thousand X easy and then you're down to a dollar an hour
and then you're kind of like
well I should have an entourage
of AIs that are following me around
helping me out on anything that
I want them to do
that's one interesting trajectory
but I'll push back
because I have a
so in that case
if you want to pay thousands of dollars
it actually provides some value
I think it's easier
for cheaper to provide
to provide value via a dumb A.I
that will take us towards AGI
to just have a friend
I think there's an ocean of loneliness
in the world
and I think an effective friend
that doesn't have to be perfect
doesn't have to be intelligent
that has to be empathic
emotional intelligence
having ability to remember things
having ability to listen
most of us don't listen to each other
one of the things that love
and when you care about somebody
when you love somebody is when you listen
and that is something we treasure about each other
and
if an A.I can do that kind of thing
I think that provides
a huge amount of value
and very importantly
provides value in its ability
to listen
and understand
versus provide really good advice
I think providing really good advice
is another next level
step that would
I think it's just
easier to do companionship
I wouldn't disagree
I think that there's very few things
that I would argue can't be reduced
to A.I
some kind of a narrow A.I
I think we can do trillion dollars
all the things that can be done there
and a lot of it can be done with
smoke and mirrors without having to go the whole thing
I mean there's going to be the equivalent of
the doom
version for the A.G.I that's
not really A.G.I it's all smoke and mirrors
but it happens to do another valuable things
that it's enormously useful
and valuable to people
but at some point you do want to get to the point
where you have the fully general thing
and you stop making bespoke specialized systems
for each thing
and you stop start using the higher level
language instead of writing everything
in assembly language
what about consciousness
the C word
what do you think that's fundamental
to solving A.G.I
or is it a quirk of human
cognition
so I think most of the arguments
about consciousness don't have
a whole lot of merit
I think that consciousness
is kind of the way the brain feels
it's operating
and this idea that
I do generally
subscribe to sort of the pandemonium theories
of consciousness where there's all these things
bubbling around and I think of them
as kind of slightly randomized
sparse distributed memory bit strings
of things that are kind of happening
recalling different associative memories
and eventually you get some level of
consensus and it bubbles up to the point of
being a conscious thought there
and the little bits of stochasticity
on in this as it cycles
between different things and recalls different memory
that's largely our imagination
and creativity
so I don't think there's anything
deeply magical about it
certainly not symbolic I think it is generally
the flow of these
associations drawn up with
stochastic noise
overlaid on top of them
I think so much of that is like it depends
on what you happen to have in your field
of view as some other thought was occurring
to you that overlay and blend
into the next key that queries your memory
for things and that kind of determines
how you know how your chain of consciousness
goes so that's kind
of the quality of the subjective
experience of it is not
is not essential for intelligence
I don't think so I don't think there's anything really important
there what about some other
human qualities like fear of mortality
and stuff like that like
the fact that this ride ends
is that is that important
like you you know we
talk so much about this conversation
about the value of deadlines and constraints
do you think that's important
for intelligence that's actually a super
interesting angle that I don't usually
take on that about has death being
a deadline that forces you to make better
decisions because I have heard people
talk about how if you have immortality
people are going to stop stop trying
and working on things because they've got all the time
in the world I am
but I would say that
I don't expect it to be
a super critical thing
that a sense of mortality
and death impending death
is necessary there because those are things that
they do wind up providing reward signals
to us and we will be in control
of the reward signals and there will
have to be something fundamental that causes
that engenders curiosity and goal
setting and all of that
something is going to play in there
at the reward level
I am you know whether
positive or negative or both
I don't have any strong opinions
on exactly what it's going to be
but that's that type of thing
where I doubt
that might be one of those half dozen key
things that has to be sorted out on exactly
what the master reward
that's the meta reward overall of the
the local task specific
rewards have to be
that could be that big negative reward of death
maybe not death but
ability to walk away from an interaction
so it bothers me
when people treat AI systems like
servants
so it doesn't bother me but I mean
it really is drawing
the line
between what an AI system could be
it's limiting the possibility of what an AI system
could be treating them as justice tools
now that's of course
from a narrow AI perspective
there's so many
problems that narrow AI
could solve just like you said
as
in its form of a tool
but it could also be
a being
which is much more than a tool
and to become a being
you have to respect that thing for being a being
and
for that it has to be able to have
to make its own
decisions to walk away
to say I had enough of you
I would like to break up with you now
you've not treated me well
but you can move on
so I think that
actually that choice
to end things
so I
there are a couple of things on that
so on the one hand it is kind of disturbing
when you see people being like
people that are mean to robots
and mean to Alexa and whatever
and that seems to speak badly about
humanity but there's also the exact
opposite side of that where you have so many people
that imbue humanity
or inanimate objects or things that are toys
or that are relatively limited
so I think there may even be
more danger about people putting
more emotional investment into a lot
of these proto-AIs in different ways
and then the AI
would manipulate that
but as far as like the AI
and the sides of things
I really stay away
from any of those discussions
or even really thinking about it
it's similar with the safety things
just premature and there's a certain
class of people that enjoy
thinking about impractical things
things that are not in the world
of pragmatic effect around you
and I think that
again because I don't think
there's going to be a fast takeoff
I think we actually will have time to have these debates
when we know the shape of what we're debating
and some people do take a
principled approach that they think it's going to go too
fast that you really do need to get ahead of it
that you need to be thinking about this because
we have slow processes of coming
to any kind of consensus or even coming
up with ideas about this
and maybe
that's true
I wouldn't put any of my money or funding
into something like that because
I don't think it's a problem yet
and I think that we will have these signs
of life when we've got our learning
disabled toddler we should really start
talking about some of the safety and ethics
issues but probably not before then
Can you elaborate
briefly about why you don't think there will be
a fast takeoff?
Is there some deep intuition you have about it?
Does it because it's grounded in the physical
world or why?
Yeah so it is my belief that we're going to start
off with something that requires thousands
of GPUs
and I don't know if you've tried to go
get a thousand GPU instance on a cloud
anytime recently but these are not
things that you can just go spin up
hundreds of
there are real challenges to
I mean these things are going to take data centers
and data centers take years to build
you know and the last few years
we've seen a few of them kind of coming up
going in different places they're big engineering
efforts you can hear people
bemoan about the fact that I
know the network was wired
all wrong and it took them a month to go
unwire it and rewire it the right way
these aren't things that you can just magic
into existence and
the ideas of I am like the old
tropes about it's going to escape onto the internet
take over other systems
there's the fast take-off ones are clearly
nonsense because you just can't open TCP
connections above a certain rate no matter
how smart you are even if you have perfect
hacking ability that take over the world
in an instant sort of thing just
isn't plausible at all
and even if you had access to all of the resources
these are going to be
specialized systems where
you're going to wind up with something that is
architected around exactly
this chip with this interconnect
and it's not just going to be able to be
plopped somewhere else now interestingly
it is going to be something that the entire
the entire
code for all of it will easily fit on a thumb drive
that's total spy movie
thriller sorts of things where you could
have hey we crack the secret AGI
and it fits on this thumb drive and anyone
could steal it now they're still going to have to build the right
data center to deploy it
and have the right kind of life experience
curriculum to take it up to the point where
it's valuable but the real core of it
the magic that's going to happen there
is going to be very small
you know it's again tens of thousands of lines of
code not millions of lines of code
it is possible to imagine a world
as you mentioned this spy thriller
view if it's
if it's just a few lines of code
we can imagine a world where the surface
of computation is growing maybe growing
exponentially meaning
there's you know the
refrigerators start getting a GPU
and
just
first of all the smartphones the billions of smartphones
but maybe if
there
become highways
through which code can spread across
the entirety of the computation surface
then you don't
any longer have to
book AWS
GPUs. But there are real
fundamental issues there when you start getting down
to taking an actual problem and putting it on
an abstract machine like that
that has not worked out well
in practice and the idea
that there was always
like it's always been easy to come up with ways
to get compute faster
say more flops or more
giga ops or whatever there that's usually
the easy part but you then
have interconnect and then memory
for what goes into it and
when you talk about saying well cell phones
well you're limited to like a 5G connection
or something on that and
if you say how
if you take your calculation
you factor it across
a million cell phones instead of
a thousand GPUs in a warehouse
you might be able to have some kind of a
substrate like that but it could be operating
then at
one one thousandth the speed and so yes
you could get you could have an AGI working
there but it wouldn't be a real time AGI
it would be something that is operating
at really a snail's pace
much much slower than
human level thought for things
I'm not worried about that problem
you're transferring the problem into the
interconnect the communication
the shared memory
the collective intelligence aspect of it
which is extremely difficult as well
I mean it's back to the very earliest days of
supercomputers you still have the
the balance between bandwidth
storage and computation
and sometimes they're easier to get one
or the other but it's been remarkably
constant across all those years
you still need all three
what do your efforts
now
you mentioned to me that you're
really committing to AGI
at this stage what do you see
your life in the next few months, years look like
what do you hope to achieve
achieve here
so I literally
just this week signed a term sheet too
to take some investment money for
my company where the last two years
I had backed off
from the meta and I was still doing my consulting
CTO role there
but I had styled it as I was going to take
the Victorian gentleman
scientist route where I was going to be
the you know the wealthy person
that was going to go pursue science
and learn about this and do experiments
and honestly I'm surprised there aren't
more people like that
that are like me technical people
that made a bunch of money
and are interested in some of these
possibly the biggest leverage point
I mean I know of
I've heard of a couple organizations
that are basically led by one rich techie guy
that gets a few people around
him to try to work on this
but I'm surprised that there's not more
that there aren't like a dozen of them
I mean maybe people are still
think that it's an unapproachable problem
that it's kind of beyond their ability to
to get a wrench on and have some effect on
like whatever startups they've run before
but I
that was my kind of
stuff I've learned whether it's gaming
aerospace whatever I go through
a larval phase where I'm like okay
I'm sucking up all of this information
trying to see is this something
that I can actually do
is this something that's practical to
devote a large chunk of my life to
and I've gone through that with
the with the AI machine learning
space of things and
and I think I've got my arms
around it I've got the measure of it where
some of the most brilliant people in the
world are working on this problem
but nobody knows exactly
the path that it's going on
we're throwing a lot of things at the wall
and seeing what sticks I
but I have a
you know another interesting thing just learning about
all of this that the contingency of your path
to knowledge and talking about the associations
and the context that you have with them
where people that learn
in the same path will have similar
thought processes and I think it's useful
that I come at this from
a different history than
the people that have had the largely academic
backgrounds for this where
I have huge blind spots that
they could easily point out but I have
a different set of experiences
in history and approaches to problems
in systems engineering that
you know that might turn out to be useful
and I can afford to take that bet
where I'm not going to be
destitute I am I was
you know I've been I have enough money
to fund myself working on this for the rest of my life
but what I was finding is that
I was
I was still not committing
where I had a foot firmly
in the VR and meta side of things where
in theory I've got
I've got a very nice position there I only have
to work one day a week for my
my consulting role but
I was engaging every day I'd still be
like my computers there I'd be going and checking
the workplace and notes and testing different
things and communicating with people
but
I did make the the decision recently
that no I'm going to get serious
I'm still going to keep my ties
with meta but I am
seriously going for the AGI
side of things and it's actually
a really interesting point because a lot of
the machine learning the AI
community is quite large but
really
basically almost everybody has taken the same
trajectory through life
in that community and it's so
interesting to have somebody like you which
is the fundamentally different trajectory
and that's where the big solutions
can come because there is a kind of silo
and it is
a bunch of people kind of following the same kind
of set of ideas and I was really
worried that I didn't want to
come off as you know like
an arrogant outsider for things where I
have all the respect in the world for the work
that's you know it's been a miracle decade
it's we're in the midst of a scientific
revolution happening now and everybody
doing this is I you know these are
the Einstein's and Bohr's and whatever's
of our modern era
and I was really happy to see
that the people that I sat down and
talked with everybody does seem to really
be quite great about just happy
to talk about things willing to acknowledge
that we don't know what we're doing we're
figuring it out as we go along
and I mean I've got a huge
debt on this where
it's all really started for me because
Sam Altman basically tried to recruit me to open
AI and it was at
a point when I didn't know anything about
what was really going on in
machine learning and in fact
it's funny how the first time you reached out to
me it's like four years ago for your AI
podcast. Yeah for people
yeah for people
who
listening to this should know that
first of all obviously
I've been a huge fan of yours for the longest
time but we've agreed to talk like yeah
like four years ago back when this was
called the artificial intelligence podcast
we wanted to
do a thing and you said yes
and I said it's like I don't know anything about
modern AI. That's right. I said I could kind of
take an angle on machine perception because
you know I'm doing a lot of that with the
sensors and the virtual reality but
we could probably find something to talk about.
And then so I mean and that's where
when did Sam talk to you about open AI
around the same time? No it was
a little bit after that so
I had done the most basic work
I had kind of done the neural networks
from scratch where I had gone and written
it all in C just to make sure I understood
backpropagation at the lowest
level and my my nuts and bolts
approach but after Sam
approached me
I was flattering to think that he thought
that I could be useful at open
AI largely for kind of like
systems optimization sorts
of things. I am
without being an expert but
I asked you know Ilya Sutskover to give me
a reading list and he gave me
a binder full of
all the papers that like
okay these are the important things if you
really read and understand all of these
you'll know like 80% of what most of the
you know the machine language researchers
work on and I went through and I read
all those papers multiple times and highlighted
them and went through and kind of
figured the things out there and then started
branching out into my own
sets of research on things and
actually started writing my own experiments
and doing kind of figuring out
you know finding out what I don't know
what the limits of my knowledge are and starting
to get some of my angles of attack on
things the things that I think are a little
bit different from what people
are doing and
I've had a couple years now
like two years since I kind of left
the full-time position at Meta
and now I've kind
of pulled the trigger and said I'm going
to get serious about it but
some of my lessons all the way back to Armadillo Aerospace
about how I know I need to be
more committed to this where
there is that
it's both a freedom and a cost in some ways
when you know that you're wealthy enough to say
it's like this doesn't really mean anything
I can I can spend
I can spend a million dollars a year
for the rest of my life and it doesn't
mean anything it's fine
but that is an opportunity
to just kind of meander
and I could see that in myself
when I'm doing some things it's like oh this is
a kind of interesting curious thing
I've done this for a little while let's look at that
it's not really bearing down on the problem
so
there's a few things that
that I've done that are kind of tactics
for myself to make me more effective
like one thing I noticed I was not doing
well is
I had a Google Cloud account to get
GPUs there and I was finding I was very
rarely doing that for no good psychological
reasons where I'm like oh
I can always think of something to do other than
to spin up instances and run an experiment
and you know keep working on my local Titans
or something
but it was really stupid I mean it was not a
lot of money I should have been running more
experiments there so I thought to myself
well I'm going to go buy
a quarter million dollar DGX station
I'm going to just like sit it right there
and it's going to mock me if I'm not using it
if the fans aren't running on that thing
I'm not properly utilizing it
and that's been helpful you know I've done
a lot more experiments since then
it's been interesting where I thought
all this low-level envy link optimized
stuff but 90% of what I do is just spin
up four instances of an experiment with
different hyperparameters on it
you're doing
like really sort of building up intuition
by doing ML experiments of different kinds
but so
the next big thing though is
I am you know I decided
that I was going to take some
investor money because
I have an overactive sense of responsibility
about other people's money
I am and it's like
I don't want
I mean a lot of my push
and my passionate entreaties for things
at Meta are it's like I don't want
Zuck to have wasted his money investing in Oculus
I want it to work out I want it to change
the world I want it to be worth
all of this time money and effort
going into it and I
expect that it's going to be like
that with my company
where it's a huge forcing function
this investment investors
that are going to expect something
of me now we've all had the conversation
that this is a low probability
long-term bet it's not something
that there's a million things I could do
that I would have line of sight on the value
proposition for this isn't that I think
there are there are unknown unknowns
in the way but
it's one of these things that it's
you know it's hyperball but it's potentially
one of the most important things humans ever
do and it's something that I think is
within our lifetimes if not within
a decade
to happen so
yeah this is just now happening
like term sheet like the ink is barely
virtually dry off
I mean as I mentioned you're all flying
like somebody I admire
somebody you know Andre Capati
I think the two of you different trajectories
in life but approach problems
similarly in that he codes
stuff from scratch up all the time
and
he's created a bunch of little things
that have
even outside the course
at Stanford
that have been tremendously useful
to build up intuition about stuff
but also to help people and
they're all in the realm of AI
do you see yourself
potentially doing things like this
you know not necessarily solving a
gigantic problem but on the journey
on the path to that
building up intuitions
and
sharing code or ideas
or systems
that give
inklings of AGI
but also kind of are useful to people
in some way so yeah first of all Andre is awesome
I learned a lot when I was going through my
larval phase from his blog posts
and his Stanford course and you know
super valuable I got to meet him first
a couple years ago when I was first
kind of starting off on my
gentleman scientist bit
and just a
few months ago when he went out on his sabbatical
he stopped by in Dallas and we talked
for a while and I had
a great time with him and then when I heard he actually left
Tesla I did of course along with
100 other people say hey
if you ever want to work with me
it would be an honor so
he thinks that he's going to be doing this educational
work but I think someone's going to make him an offer
he can't refuse before
he gets too far along on it
oh his current interest is educational
so yeah
he's a special mind
is there something you could speak to what makes
him so special
you know like he did
he was very much a programmers programmer
that was doing machine learning work rather than
it's a different feel
than an academic where you can see it
in paper sometimes where somebody that's
really a mathematician or a statistician
at heart and they're doing
something with machine learning but
you know Andre is about getting something done
and you could see it in like all of his
earliest approaches to it's like okay
here's how reinforcement learning works
here's how recurrent neural networks work
here's how transformers work
here's how crypto works
and I am
and yeah it's just
one of his old posts was like
a hacker's guide to machine learning
he deprecated that and said don't really pay attention
to what's in here but it's that
thought that carries through
in a lot of it where it is that
back again to that hacker mentality
and the hacker ethic with what he's doing
and sharing all of it
yeah and a lot of his approach to a new thing
like you said larva stage
is let me code up
the simplest possible thing
to build up intuition about it
yeah like I say I sketch with structs and things
when I'm just thinking about a problem
I'm thinking in some degree of code
you are also
among many things a Marshall
artist both Judo and Jiu Jitsu
how has this helped
make you the person you are
so I mean I was a competent club player
in Judo and grappling
I mean I was you know by no means
any kind of a superstar but
it was I went through a few phases
with it where I did some
when I was quite young
a little bit more when I was 17
and then I got into it
kind of seriously in my mid 30s
and you know I went pretty far
with it and I was you know
pretty good at some of the things that I was doing
and I did appreciate it quite a bit
where
on the one hand it's always
if you're going to do exercise or something
it's a more motivating form of exercise
if someone is crushing you
you are motivated
to do something about that
to up your attributes and be better about
getting out of that
but there's also that sense that
I was not
I was not a sports guy
I did do wrestling in junior high
I think I would have
I would have been good for me if I'd carried that on
into high school and had a little bit more
of that I mean it's like I
you know felt a little bit of wrestling
vibe with always going on about embracing
the grind and like that push that I
associate with the wrestling team
that I in hindsight
I wish I had gone through that and pushed myself
that way
but even getting back into Judo and Jujitsu
in my mid 30s as usually
the old man on the mat with that
still the
sense that
working out with the group
and having the guys
that you're beating each other up with it
but you just feel
good coming out of it and I can remember
those driving home
aching in various ways and just thinking
it's like that was really great
and
it's mixing with a bunch of people that had nothing
to do with any of the things that
I worked with every once in a while
to be like oh you're the doom guy
and but for the most part
it was just different slice of life
you know a good thing
and I made the call when I was
40 that's like maybe I'm getting a little old
for this I had separated a rib
and tweaked a few things and I got out
without any really bad injuries
and was like
have I dodged enough bullets should I
hang it up I went back
I've gone a couple times
in the last decade trying to get my kids
into it a little bit I didn't really stick
with any of them but it was fun to get
back on the mats I really
hurts for a while when you haven't gone
I gone for a while but
I still debate this
pretty constantly my brother's only a year younger
than me and he's going kind of hard in jujitsu
right now and I you know he was
just he won a few medals at the last
tournament he was at competing
and I was thinking yeah I guess we're
in the executive division if you're over
50 or over 45
something and
it's not out of the question that
I go back at some point and do some of this
but again I'm just reorganizing
my life around more focus
probably not going to happen
I'm pushing my exercise around
to give me a longer uninterrupted intellectual
focus time pushing it to the beginning
or the end of the game like running and stuff like that
walking yeah yeah running
and calisthenics and some things like
that but it allows you to still think
about a problem and but if you're going to
do judo club or something you're you've got to fix
it's going to be seven o'clock or whatever
10 o'clock on Saturday
although I talked about this a little bit
when I was on Rogan and shortly after
that Carlos Machado did reach out
and I had trained with him for years
back in the day and he was like
hey we've got kind of a small private club
with a bunch of executive type
people and
it gets it does tempt me
yeah I don't know if you know him
but John Donahart
came here to Austin
with Gordon Ryan and a few other folks
and he has a very interesting way
very deep systematic way
of thinking about jiu-jitsu
that reveals the
the chest of it
the like the
the science of it
and I do think about that more as
kind of an older person considering the martial arts
where I can remember the very earliest
days getting back into judo and I'm like
teach me submissions right now
you know it's like learn the arm bar
learn the choke
but as you get older you start thinking more about
it's like okay I really do want to
learn the entire canon of judo
it's like all the different things there
and all the different approaches for it
not just the you know if you want to compete
there's just a handful of things you learn really really well
but sometimes there's interest
in learning a little bit more of the scope there
and figuring some things out from
at one point I had
wasn't exactly a spreadsheet but I did have
a big long text file with like here's the things
that I learned in here like ways you
chain this together and while
when I went back a few years
ago it was good to see that I
whipped myself back into reasonable shape
about doing the basic grappling but I know
there was a ton of the subtleties that were
just that were gone but could probably be
brought back reasonably quickly
and there's also the benefit I mean
you're exceptionally successful now
you're brilliant
and the problem the old problem
of the ego
I still pushed kind of
harder than I should I mean that was
I was one of those people that
I'm on the smaller side
for a lot of the people competing
and I would you know I'd go with
all the big guys and I'd go hard
and I'd push myself a lot
and that would be one of those where
I'd be
dangerous to anyone for the first five minutes
but then sometimes after that I'm already dead
and I knew it was terrible for me because
it made the you know it meant
I got less training time with all of that
when you go and you just gas out
relatively quickly there and I
like to think that I would be better
about that where after I gave
up judo I started doing the half marathons
and tough butters and things like that
and so when I did go back to the
local judo kai club I thought
oh I should have better cardio for this
because I'm a runner now and I do all of this
and didn't work out that way
and that's the same old thing where
just push really hard
strain really hard and
and of course when I worked with good guys
like Carlos it's like
just the whole flow like water
thing is real and he's just like
that's true with judo too some of the best
people like I've trained with
Olympic gold medalists and
for some reason with them
everything's easier
everything is you actually start to
feel the science of it
everything's effortless
you understand that there's an art
to it it's not just an exercise
it was interesting where I did
go to the Kodakon in Japan
the birthplace of judo and everything
and I remember I rolled with one old
guy I didn't
start standing just started on groundwork
and it was striking how
different it was from Carlos he was still
he was better than me and he got my arm
and I had to tap there but
it was a completely different style
where I just felt like I could do nothing
he was just enveloping me and just like slowly
ground it down put my arm and bent
it while with Carlos
you know he's just loose and free and you always
thought like oh you're just going to go grab something
but you never had any chance to do it but it was
very different feeling that's a good summary
of the difference between Jiu-Jitsu and Judo
and Jiu-Jitsu there's it is a dance
and you feel like there's a freedom
and actually
anybody I like
Gordon Ryan one of the best
grappler in the world Nogi grappler in the world
there's a feeling like you can do
anything but
when you actually try to do something
you can't just magically doesn't work but with
the best judo players in the world yeah it
does feel like there's
a blanket that weighs a thousand
pounds on top of you and there's
not a feeling like you can do anything
you just you're trapped and that's
a that's a style that's a difference
in the style of martial arts but it's also
once you start to study you
understand it all has to do with human
movement and the physics of it
and the leverage and all that kind of stuff
and that's like that's super fascinating
at the end of the day for me
the biggest benefit is in the humbling
aspect when another human being
kind of
tells you that
you know there's a hierarchy or there's
a
you're not that special
and in the most extreme case when you tap
to a choke you are basically
living because somebody let you live
and that's that is
one of those if you think about it that is a
closer brush with mortality than
than most people consider
and that
kind of humbling
act is good to take to your
work then where it's harder to get
humbled you know
yeah because nobody's nobody that does any
martial art is coming out thinking I'm the best
in the world at anything because
everybody loses
let me ask you for advice
what advice would you give to young
people today
about life about career
how they can have a job
how they can have an
impact how they can have a life
they could be proud of
so it was kind of fun I got
invited to give the commencement speech back
at the I went to college
for two semesters and
dropped out and went on to do my tech stuff
but they still wanted me to come back
and give a commencement speech
and I got that pinned on my twitter
account I still feel good about everything
that I said there
and my biggest point was
that the path
for me might not be the path for everyone
and in fact the advice
the path that I took and even the advice
that I would give based on my
experience and learnings probably
isn't the best advice for everyone
because what I did was all about
this knowledge in depth
about not just having this
surface level ability to make things
do what I want but to really understand
them through and through to let me
do the systems engineering work and
sometimes find these inefficiencies
that can be bypassed
and that the whole
world doesn't need that you know most
programmers don't need or engineers of any
kind don't necessarily need to do that
they need to do a little job that's been
parceled out to them be reliable
let people depend on you
and have quality work with all of that
but people that do
have an inclination
for wanting to know things deeper
and learn things deeper
you know the
there are just layers and layers of things
out there and it's amazing
if you're the right person that is
excited about that
the world's never been like this before
it's better than ever I mean everything
that was wonderful for me is still there
and there's whole new worlds
more on the different things that you
can do and that
you know it's hard work
embrace the grind with it
and understand as much as you can
and then be
prepared for opportunities to present
themselves where you can't just
say this is my golden life and just
push at that I mean you might be able
to do that but you're going to make more
total progress if you say I'm
preparing myself with this broad set
of tools and then I'm being aware
of all the way things are changing
as I move through the world and as the whole
world changes around me and then looking
for opportunities to deploy the tools
that you've built and
there's going to be more and more of those
types of things there where
an awareness of what's happening where
the inefficiencies are what things
can be done what's possible
versus what's current practice
and then finding those areas where
you can go and make an adjustment
and make something that may
affect millions or billions of people
in the world make it better
when maybe from your own example
how are you able to recognize
this about yourself that you saw
the layers in a particular thing
and you were drawn to
discovering deeper and deeper truths about it
is that something that was obvious
to you that you couldn't help or is there
some actions you had to take to actually
allow yourself to dig deep
so in the earliest days of personal computers
I remember the reference manuals
and the very early ones even had
schematics of computers
in the background in the back
of the books as well as firmware
listings and things and I could look at
that and at that time when I was a
younger teenager I didn't understand
a lot of that stuff how the
different things worked I was
pulling out the information that I could get
but I always wanted to know all of that
there was like kind of
magical information sitting down there
it's like the elder lore that some gray
nerd is the keeper of
and so I always felt that
pull for wanting to know more
wanting to explore
the mysterious areas there
and that
followed right in through all the things
that got the value exploring the video cards
leading to the
scrolling advantages
exploring some of the academic papers
and things learning about BSP trees
and the different things that I could do
with those systems
just that the huge larval phases
going through aerospace just
reading bookshelves full of books
again that point where I have enough money
I can buy all the books I want
it was so valuable
where I was terrible with my money
when I was a kid my mom thought I would always be
broke because I'd buy my
comic books and just be out of money
but it was like all the pizza I want
all the diet coke I want
video games and then books
and it didn't take that much
I think in 27k a year
I felt rich and I was just getting
all the things that I wanted
but that sense of
books have always been magical to me
and that was one of the things that really made me smile
is Andre had said
when he came over to my house he said
he found my library inspiring
and it was great to see
he's kind of a younger guy
I sometimes wonder if younger people these days
have the same relationship with books that I do
where they were such a cornerstone
in many ways but that sense that
yeah I always wanted to know it all
I know I can't and that was one of the last things
I said you can't know everything
but you should convince yourself that you can know
anything you know any one
particular thing it was created
and discovered by humans you can learn it
you can find out what you need on there
and you can learn it deeply
you can drive a nail down
through whatever layer cake problem
space you've got and learn
a cross section there
there's an impact doing that
you can attain happiness
doing that there's something so fulfilling
about becoming a craftsman of a thing
yeah and I don't want to tell people that
look this is a good career move
just grit your teeth and
and bear it
you want people
and I do think it is possible sometimes to find
the joy in something like it might not
immediately appeal to you but
I had told people early on
in software times
you know it a lot of game developers
are in it just because they are so passionate
about games but I was always
really more flexible
in what appealed to me where I said
I think I could be quite
engaged doing operating system
work or even database work
I would find the interest in that
because I think most things that are
significant in the world have
a lot of layers and complexity to them
and a lot of opportunities hidden within them
so
probably the most important thing to encourage
to people is that
you can weaponize curiosity
you can deploy your curiosity
to kind of make things
useful and valuable to you
even if they don't immediately appear that way
deploy your curiosity
yeah that's very true
we've mentioned this debate point
whether mortality or fear
of mortality is fundamental
to creating an AGI
but let's talk about whether it's fundamental
to human beings
do you think about your own mortality
I really don't
and
you probably always have to take with a grain of salt
anything somebody says about fundamental things
like that
but I don't think about
really aging
impending death, legacy
with my children
things like that
and clearly it seems most of the world does
a lot more than I do
so I think I'm an outlier
in that where
it doesn't
wind up being a real part of
my thinking and motivation
about things
so daily existence is about
the people you love
and the problems
before you
I'm very much focused on what I'm working on right now
I do take that back
there's one aspect where
the finiteness of the life does impact me
and that is about
thinking about the scope of the problems
that I'm working on
when I decided to work on
when I was like nuclear fission or AGI
these are big ticket things
that are impact
large fractions of the world
and I was thinking to myself at some level
that okay I may have
a couple more swings
at bat with me
at full capability but yes
my mental abilities will decay
with age
I don't think it's a 0% chance
that we will address some of that
before it becomes a problem for me
I think exciting medical stuff in the next couple decades
but I do have this
kind of vague plan that
when I'm not at the top of my game
and I don't feel that I'm in a position
to put a dent in the world some way
that I'll probably wind up doing some kind of
recreational retro programming
or I'll work on
something that I would not devote
my life to now but I can
while away my time as the old man
gardening in the code worlds
and then
to step back even bigger
let me ask you about why we're here
we human beings
what's the meaning of it all
what's the meaning of life John Carmack
so very similar with that last question
I know a lot of people
fret about this question a lot
and I just really don't
I really don't give a damn
we are biological creatures that
happenstance of evolution
you know we have innate drives
that evolution crafted for
survival and passing on of genetic
codes
I don't
find a lot of value in trying to go
much deeper than that I have my motivation
some of which are
some of which are probably genetically coded
many of which are contingent on my
upbringing and the path that I've had through my life
I don't run
into like spades of depression
or envy or anything
that winds up being
a challenge and forcing a
degree of soul searching with things like that
I seem to be okay
you know kind of without that
as a brilliant ant in the ant colony
without looking up to the sky wondering
why the hell am I here again
so the why
of it the incredible
mystery
of the fact that we started
first of all the origin of life on earth
and from that
from single cell organisms
the entirety of the evolutionary process
took us somehow to this incredibly intelligent
thing that is able to
build Wolfenstein 3D
and doom and quake
and take a crack at the problem
of AGI and create things that eventually
supersede human beings
that doesn't
the why of it
is um
it's been my experience that
people that focus on
that don't focus on the here and now
right in front of them tend to be less
effective I mean it's not 100%
you know vision matters to
some people but
it doesn't seem to be a necessary motivator
for me and I think that
the process of getting there is usually
done against like the magic of gradient descent
people just don't believe that
just looking locally gets you
to all of these spectacular things
that's been you know the decades
of looking at
really some of the smartest people
in the world that would just push back
forever against this idea that
it's not this grand sophisticated
vision of everything but
little tiny steps local information
winds up leading to all the best answers
so the meaning of life
is uh following
locally
wherever the gradient descent takes you
this was an incredible conversation
officially the longest conversation
I've ever done on the podcast
which means a lot to me because
I get to do it with one of my heroes
John I can't tell you how much it means to me
that you would sit down with me
you're an incredible human being
I can't wait what you do next but you've already
changed the world you're an inspiration
to so many people and again
we haven't covered like
most of what I was playing to talk about
so I hope we get a chance to talk
some day in the future and I can't wait
to see what you do next thank you so much
again for talking to me thank you very much
thanks for listening to this
conversation with John Carmack
to support this podcast please check out our
sponsors in the description
and now let me leave you with some words
from John Carmack himself
focused hard work
is the real key to success
keep your eyes on the goal
and just keep taking the next step towards completing it
if you aren't sure
which way to do something do it both ways
and see which works better
thank you for listening
and hope to see you next time
