The following is a conversation with Yosha Bach, his second time in the podcast.
Yosha is one of the most fascinating minds in the world exploring the nature of intelligence,
cognition, computation, and consciousness.
To support this podcast, please check out our sponsors, Coinbase, Codecademy, Linode,
Netsuite, and ExpressVPN.
Their links are in the description.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast, and here is my conversation with Yosha Bach.
Thank you for once again coming on to this particular Russian program and sticking to
the theme of a Russian program.
Let's start with the darkest of topics.
So this is inspired by one of your tweets.
You wrote that, quote, when life feels unbearable, I remind myself that I'm not a person.
I am a piece of software running on the brain for random ape for a few decades.
It's not the worst brain to run on.
Have you experienced low points in your life?
Have you experienced depression?
Of course, we all experience low points in our life, and we get appalled by the things,
by the ugliness of stuff around us.
We might get desperate about our lack of self-regulation, and sometimes life is hard.
And I suspect you don't get to your life nobody does to get to their life without low points
and without moments where they are despairing.
And I thought that let's capture this state and how to deal with that state.
And I found that very often you realize that when you stop taking things personally, when
you realize that this notion of a person is a fiction, similar as it is in Westworld where
the robots realize that their memories and desires are just stuff that keeps them in
the loop, and they don't have to act on those memories and desires, that our memories and
expectations is what make us unhappy.
And the present rarely does.
The day in which we are, for the most part, it's okay, right?
When we are sitting here, right here, right now, we can choose how we feel.
And the thing that affects us is the expectation that something is going to be different from
what we wanted to be or the memory that something was different from what we wanted it to be.
And once we basically zoom out from all this, what's left is not a person.
What's left is this state of being conscious, which is a software state.
And software doesn't have an identity.
It's a physical law.
And it's a law that acts in all of us, and it's embedded in a suitable substrate.
And we didn't pick that substrate, right?
We are mostly randomly instantiated on it.
And they're all these individuals, and everybody has to be one of them.
And eventually, you're stuck on one of them and have to deal with that.
So you're like a leaf floating down the river.
You just have to accept that there's a river, and you just float wherever there are.
The thing is that the illusion that you are an agent is a construct.
What part of that is actually under your control.
I think that our consciousness is largely a control model for our own attention.
So we notice where we are looking, and we can influence what we are looking,
how we are disambiguating things, how we put things together in our mind.
And the whole system that runs us is this big cybernetic motivational system.
So we're basically like a little monkey sitting on top of an elephant.
And we can prod this elephant here and there to go this way or that way.
And we might have the illusion that we are the elephant,
or that we are telling it what to do.
And sometimes we notice that it walks into a completely different direction.
And we didn't set this thing up.
It just is the situation that we find ourselves in.
How much prodding can we actually do of the elephant?
A lot. But I think that our consciousness cannot create the motive force.
Is the elephant consciousness in this metaphor?
No, the monkey is the consciousness.
The monkey is the attentional system that is observing things.
There is a large perceptual system combined with a motivational system
that is actually providing the interface to everything and our own consciousness,
I think, is the tool that directs the attention of that system,
which means it singles out features and performs conditional operations
for which it needs an index memory.
But this index memory is what we perceive as our stream of consciousness.
But the consciousness is not in charge. That's an illusion.
So everything outside of that consciousness is the elephant.
So it's the physics of the universe, but it's also society that's outside of your...
I would say the elephant is the agent.
So there is an environment in which the agent is stomping.
And you are influencing a little part of that agent.
So can you, is the agent a single human being?
What's, which object has agency?
That's an interesting question.
I think a way to think about an agent is that it's a controller with a set point generator.
The notion of a controller comes from cybernetics and control theory.
Control system consists out of a system that is regulating some value
and the deviation of that value from a set point.
And it has a sensor that measures the system's deviation from that set point
and an effector that can be parametrized by the controller.
So the controller tells the effector to do a certain thing.
And the goal is to reduce the distance between the set point and the current value of the system.
And there's an environment which disturbs the regulated system,
which brings it away from that set point.
So the simplest case is the thermostat.
And the thermostat is really simple because it doesn't have a model.
The thermostat is only trying to minimize the set point deviation in the next moment.
And if you want to minimize the set point deviation over a longer time span,
you need to integrate it. You need to model what is going to happen.
So for instance, when you think about that your set point is to be comfortable in life,
maybe you need to make yourself uncomfortable first.
Right? So you need to make a model of what's going to happen when.
And this is the task of the controller is to use its sensors to measure the state of the environment
and the system that is being regulated and figure out what to do.
And if the task is complex enough, the set points are complicated enough,
and if the controller has enough capacity and enough sensor feedback,
then the task of the controller is to make a model of the entire universe that it's in,
the conditions under which it exists and of itself.
And this is a very complex agent and we are in that category.
And an agent is not necessarily a thing in the universe.
It's a class of models that we use to interpret aspects of the universe.
And when we notice the environment around us, a lot of things only make sense at the level
that should be entangled with them, if we interpret them as control systems
that make models of the world and try to minimize their own set points.
So the models are the agents?
The agent is a class of model. And we notice that we are an agent ourselves.
We are the agent that is using our own control model to perform actions.
We notice we would use a change in the model and things in the world change.
And this is how we discover the idea that we have a body,
that we are a situated environment and that we have a first person perspective.
Still don't understand what's the best way to think of which object has agency with respect
to human beings. Is it the body? Is it the brain? Is it the contents of the brain that has agency?
Like what's the actuators that you're referring to?
What is the controller and where does it reside?
Or is it these impossible things? Because I keep trying to ground it to space time,
the three-dimensional space, and the one-dimension of time.
What's the agent in that for humans?
There is not just one. It depends on the way in which you're looking at this thing,
in which you're framing it. Imagine that you are, say, Angela Merkel,
and you are acting on behalf of Germany. And you could say that Germany is the agent.
And in the mind of Angela Merkel, she is Germany to some extent,
because in the way in which she acts, the destiny of Germany changes.
There are things that she can change that basically affect the behavior of that nation state.
Okay, so it's hierarchies to go to another one of your tweets with, I think, your
playfully mocking Jeff Hawkins with saying his brain's all the way down.
So it's agents all the way down. It's agents made up of agents made up of agents.
Like if Angela Merkel is Germany, and Germany's made up a bunch of people,
and the people are themselves agents in some kind of context.
And then people are made up of cells, each individual. So is it agents all the way down?
I suspect that has to be like this in a world where things are self-organizing.
Most of the complexity that we are looking at, everything in life is about self-organization.
So I think up from the level of life, you have agents. And below life, you rarely have agents,
because sometimes you have control systems that emerge randomly in nature and try to achieve
a set point. But they're not that interesting agents that make models. And because to make
an interesting model of the world, you typically need a system that is during complete.
Can I ask you a personal question? What's the line between life and non-life? It's personal
because you're a life form. So what do you think in this emerging complexity, at which point,
does the things that are being living and have agency?
Personally, I think that the simplest answer there is that life is cells, because...
Life is what? Cells, biological cells. So it's a particular kind of principle
that we have discovered to exist in nature. It's modular stuff that consists out of
basically this DNA tape with a redried head on top of it that is able to perform arbitrary
computations and state transitions within the cell. And it's combined with a membrane that
insulates the cell from its environment. And there are chemical reactions inside of the cell
that are in disequilibrium. And the cell is running in such a way that this disequilibrium
doesn't disappear. And the cell goes... If the cell goes into an equilibrium state, it dies.
And it requires some things like a neck entropy extractor to maintain this disequilibrium. So
it's able to harvest neck entropy from its environment and keep itself running.
Yeah, so there's information and there's a wall to protect, to maintain this disequilibrium.
But isn't this very earth-centric? Like what you're referring to...
I'm not making a normative notion. You could say that there are probably other things in the
universe that are cell-like and lifelike. And you could also call them life. But eventually,
it's just a willingness to find an agreement of how to use the terms. I like cells because
it's completely co-extensional. This is the way that we use the word even before we knew about
cells. So people were pointing at some stuff and saying, this is somehow animate. And this is very
different from the non-animate stuff. And what's the difference between the living and the dead
stuff? And it's mostly whether the cells are working or not. And also this boundary of life,
where we say that, for instance, a virus is basically an information packet that is subverting
the cell and not life by itself. That makes sense to me. And it's somewhat arbitrary. You could,
of course, say that systems that permanently maintain a disequilibrium and can self-replicate
are always life. And maybe that's a useful definition too. But this is eventually just
how you want to use the word. Is it so useful for conversation? But
is it somehow fundamental to the universe? Do you think there's an actual line to eventually
be drawn between life and non-life? Or is it all kind of continuum? I don't think it's a continuum,
but there's nothing magical that is happening. Living systems are a certain type of machine.
What about non-living systems? Is it also a machine? There are non-living machines. But
the question is at which point is a system able to perform arbitrary state transitions
in to make representations? And living things can do this. And of course, we can also build
non-living things that can do this. But we don't know anything in nature that is not a cell
and is not created by a stellar life that is able to do that.
Not only do we not know, I don't think we have the tools to see otherwise.
I always worry that we look at the world too narrowly. There could be life
of a very different kind right under our noses that we're just not seeing because we're not
either limitations of our cognitive capacity or we're just not open-minded enough.
Either with the tools of science or just the tools of our mind.
Yeah, that's possible. I find this thought very fascinating. And I suspect that many of us ask
ourselves since childhood, what are the things that we are missing? What kind of systems and
interconnections exist that are outside of our gaze? But we are looking for it and physics doesn't
have much room at the moment for opening up something that would not violate the conservation
of information as we know it. Yeah, but I wonder about timescale and spatial scale,
whether we just need to open up our idea of how life presents itself. It could be operating in a
much slower timescale, a much faster timescale. And it's almost sad to think that there's all this
life around us that we're not seeing because we're just not thinking in terms of the right
scale, both time and space. What is your definition of life? What do you understand as life?
Hmm. Entities of sufficiently high complexity that are full of surprises.
I don't know. I don't have a free will. So that just came out of my mouth. I'm not sure
that even makes sense. There's certain characteristics. So complexity seems to be a
necessary property of life. And I almost want to say it has ability to do something unexpected.
It seems to me that life is the main source of complexity on Earth.
Yes. And complexity is basically a bridgehead that order builds into chaos by modeling,
by processing information in such a way that you can perform reactions that would not be possible
for dump systems. And this means that you can harvest like entropy that dump systems cannot
harvest. And this is what complexity is mostly about. In some sense, the purpose of life is to
create complexity. Yeah. Increasing complexity. There seems to be some kind of universal drive
towards increasing pockets of complexity. I don't know what that is. That seems to be like a
fundamental, I don't know if it's a property of the universe, or it's just a consequence
of the way the universe works. But there seems to be this small pockets of emergent complexity
that builds on top of each other and starts having like greater and greater complexity by
having like a hierarchy of complexity, like little organisms building up a little society
that then operates almost as an individual organism itself. And all of a sudden, you have
Germany and Merkel. That's not obvious to me. Everything that goes up has to come down at some
point. So if you see this big exponential curve somewhere, it's usually the beginning of an S-curve,
where something eventually reaches a saturation. And the S-curve is the beginning of some kind
of bump that goes down again. And there is just this thing that when you are inside of an evolution
of life, you are on top of a puddle of negentropy that is being sucked dry by life. And during
that happening, you see an increase in complexity, because life forms are competing with each other
to get more and more and finer and finer corner of that, like entropy extraction.
But that, I feel like that's a gradual, beautiful process, like that's almost,
follows a process akin to evolution. And the way it comes down is not the same way it came up.
The way it comes down is usually harshly and quickly. So usually there's some kind of catastrophic
event. The Roman Empire took a long time. Would that be, would you classify that as a
decrease in complexity, though? Yes. I think that this size of the cities that could be fed has
decreased dramatically. And you could see that the quality of the art decreased, and it did so
gradually. And maybe future generations, when they look at the history of the United States
in the 21st century, will also talk about the gradual decline, not something that suddenly
happens. Do you have a sense of where we are? Are we on the exponential rise?
Are we at the peak? Or are we at the down slope of the United States empire?
It's very hard to say from a single human perspective, but it seems to me that we are
probably at the peak. I think that's probably the definition of optimism and cynicism.
So my nature of optimism is, I think we're on the rise.
I think it's just all a matter of perspective that nobody knows. But I do think that
erring on the side of optimism, you need a sufficient number. You need a minimum
number of optimists in order to make that up thing actually work. And so I tend to be on
the side of the optimists. I think that we are basically a species of grasshoppers that have
turned into locusts. And when you are in that locust mode, you see an amazing rise of population
numbers and of the complexity of the interactions between the individuals. But ultimately, the
question is, is it sustainable? See, I think we're a bunch of lions and tigers that have become
domesticated cats to use a different metaphor. And so I'm not exactly sure we're so destructive,
we're just softer and nicer and lazier. But I think we have monkeys and not the cats. And if
you look at the monkeys, they are very busy. The ones that have a lot of sex, those monkeys?
Not just the bonobos. I think that all the monkeys are basically a discontent species that
always needs to meddle. Well, the gorillas seem to have a little bit more of a structure,
but it's a different part of the tree. Okay, you mentioned the elephant and the monkey riding
the elephant. And consciousness is the monkey. And there's some prodding that the monkey gets to do.
And sometimes the elephant listens. I heard you got into some content maybe you can correct me,
but I heard you got into some contentious free will discussions. Is this with Sam Harris or
something like that? Not that I know of. Some people in clubhouse told me you made a bunch of
big debate points about free will. Well, let me just then ask you where in terms of the monkey
and the elephant, do you think we land in terms of the illusion of free will? How much control does
the monkey have? We have to think about what the free will is in the first place. We are not the
machine. We are not the thing that is making the decisions. We are a model of that decision-making
process. And there is a difference between making your own decisions and predicting your
own decisions. And that difference is the first person perspective. And what basically makes
decision-making and the conditions of free will distinct from just automatically doing the best
thing is that we often don't know what the best thing is. We make decisions under uncertainty.
We make informed bets using a betting algorithm that we don't yet understand because we haven't
reverse engineered our own minds efficiently. We don't know the expected rewards. We don't
know the mechanism by which we estimate the rewards and so on. But there is an algorithm.
We observe ourselves performing, where we see that we weight facts and factors and the future.
And then some kind of possibility, some motive gets raised to an intention. And that's informed
bet that the system is making. And that making of the informed bet, the representation of that is
what we call free will. And it seems to be paradoxical because we think that the crucial
thing is that it's somehow indeterministic. And yet, if it was indeterministic, it would be random.
And it cannot be random because if it was random, if just dice were being thrown in the
universe randomly, forces you to do things, it would be meaningless. So the important part
of the decisions is always the deterministic stuff. But it appears to be indeterministic to
you because it's unpredictable. Because if it was predictable, you wouldn't experience it as a free
will decision. You would experience it as just doing the necessary right thing. And you see this
continuum between the free will and the execution of automatic behavior when you're observing other
people. So for instance, when you are observing your own children, if you don't understand them,
you will use this agent model where you have an agent with a set point generator. And the agent is
doing the best it can to minimize the difference to the set point. And it might be confused and
sometimes impulsive or whatever, but it's acting on its own free will. And when you understand
what happens in the mind of the child, you see that it's automatic. And you can outmodel the child,
you can build things around the child that will lead the child to making exactly the decision
that you are predicting. And under these circumstances, like when you are a stage
misvision, or somebody who is dealing with people that you sell a car to, and you completely
understand the psychology and the impulses and the space of thoughts that this individual can
have at that moment. Under these circumstances, it makes no sense to attribute free will.
Because it's no longer decision making under uncertainty. You are already certain. For them,
there's uncertainty, but you already know what they're doing.
But what about for you? So is this akin to like systems like cellular automata,
where it's deterministic? But when you squint your eyes a little bit,
it starts to look like there's agents making decisions at the higher sort of when you zoom
out and look at the entities that are composed by the individual cells, even though there's
underlying simple rules that make the system evolve in deterministic ways, it looks like
there's organisms making decisions. Is that where the illusion of free will emerges? That jump in scale.
It's a particular type of model, but this jump in scale is crucial. The jump in scale happens
whenever you have too many parts to count, and you cannot make a model at that level,
and you try to find some higher level regularity. And the higher level regularity is a pattern that
you project into the world to make sense of it. And agency is one of these patterns. You have all
these cells that interact with each other, and the cells in our body are set up in such a way
that they benefit if their behavior is coherent, which means that they act as if they were serving
a common goal. And that means that they will evolve regulation mechanisms that act as if
they were serving a common goal. And now you can make sense of all these cells by projecting the
common goal into them. Right. So for you, then, free will is an illusion? No, it's a model,
and it's a construct. It's basically a model that the system is making of its own behavior,
and it's the best model that it can come up with under the circumstances, and it can get replaced
by a different model, which is automatic behavior, when you fully understand the mechanism under
which you are acting. Yeah, but another word for model is what story. So it's the story you're
telling. I mean, do you actually have control? Is there such a thing as a you? And is there such a
thing as you having control? So like, are you manifesting your evolution as an entity?
In some sense, the you is the model of the system that is in control. It's a story that the system
tells itself about somebody who is in control. Yeah. And the contents of that model are being
used to inform the behavior of the system. Okay. So the system is completely mechanical,
and the system creates that story like a loom. And then it uses the contents of that story
to inform its actions and writes the results of that actions into the story.
So how's that non-illusion? The story is written then? Or a rather, we're not the writers of the
story? Yes, but we always knew that. No, we don't know that. When did we know that?
I think that's mostly a confusion about concepts. The conceptual illusion in our culture comes from
the idea that we live in physical reality, and that we experience physical reality,
and that you have ideas about it. And then you have this dualist interpretation where you have
two substances, res extensor, the world that you can touch, and that is made of extended things,
and res cogitans, which is the world of ideas. And in fact, both of them are mental representations.
One is the representations of the world as a game engine that your mind generates to make
sense of the perceptual data. And the other one, yes, that's what we perceive as the physical
world. But we already know that the physical world is nothing like that. Quantum mechanics is
very different from what you and me perceive as the world. The world you and me perceive is a game
engine. And there are no colors and sounds in the physical world that only exist in the game
engine generated by your brain. And then you have ideas that cannot be mapped onto extended regions.
So the objects that have a spatial extension in the game engine, res extensor, and the objects
that don't have a physical extension in the game engine are ideas. And they both interact in our
mind to produce models of the world. But when you play video games, I understand that what's
actually happening is zeros and ones inside of a computer, inside of a CPU and a GPU, but you're
still seeing like the rendering of that. And you're still making decisions whether to shoot,
to turn left or to turn right. If you're playing a shooter or every time you start thinking about
Skyrim and Elder Scrolls and walking around a beautiful nature and swinging a sword. But it
feels like you're making decisions inside that video game. So even though you don't have direct
access in terms of perception to the bits, to the zeros and ones, it still feels like you're
making decisions. And your decisions are actually feels like they're being applied
all the way down to the zeros and ones. So it feels like you have control even though you don't
direct access to reality. So there is basically a special character in the video game that is
being created by the video game engine. And this character is serving the aesthetics of the video
game. And that is you. Yes, but I feel like I have control inside the video game, like all those
like 12 year olds that kick my ass on the internet. So for when you play the video game, it doesn't
really matter that there's zeros and ones, right? You don't care about the vids of the bus, you don't
care about the nature of the CPU that it runs on. What you care about are the properties of the
game that you're playing. And you hope that the CPU is good enough. Yes. And a similar thing happens
when we interact with physics. The world that you and me are in is not the physical world.
The world that you and me are in is a dream world. How close is it to the real world, though?
We know that it's not very close, but we know that the dynamics of the dream world
match the dynamics of the physical world to a certain degree of resolution.
Right. The causal structure of the dream world is different.
So you see, for instance, waves crashing on your feet, right? But there are no waves in the
ocean. There's only water molecules that have tangents between the molecules that are
the result of electrons in the molecules interacting with each other.
Aren't they very consistent where you're seeing a very crude approximation? Isn't our dream world
very consistent to the point of being mapped directly one to one to the actual physical world,
as opposed to us being completely tricked? This is like where you have like Donald Hock.
It's not a trick. That's my point. It's not an illusion. It's a form of data compression.
It's an attempt to deal with the dynamics of too many parts to count at the level at which
we are entangled with the best model that you can find. Yeah. So we can act in that dream world
and our actions have impact in the real world, in the physical world, to which we don't have
access. Yes. But it's basically like accepting the fact that the software that we live in,
the dream that we live in is generated by something outside of this world that you and me are in.
So is the software deterministic and do we not have any control?
So free will is having a conscious being. Free will is the monkey being able to steer the elephant.
No. It's slightly different. Basically, in the same way as you are modeling the water molecules
in the ocean that engulf your feet when you are walking on the beach as waves and there are no
waves, but only the atoms on more complicated stuff underneath the atoms and so on. And you
know that, right? You would accept, yes, there is a certain abstraction that happens here. It's a
simplification of what happens and the simplification that is designed in such a way that your brain
can deal with it temporarily and spatially in terms of resources and tuned for the predictive
value. So you can predict with some accuracy whether your feet are going to get wet or not.
But it's a really good, it's a really good interface and approximation. Yes. It's like
e equals mc squared is a good, equations are good approximation for what they're much better
approximation. So to me waves is a really nice approximation of what's all the complexity
that's happening underneath. Basically, it's a machine learning model that is constantly tuned
to minimize surprises. So it basically tries to predict as well as it can what you're going to
perceive next. Are we talking about which is the machine learning our perception system or the dream
world? The dream world is the result of the machine learning process of the perception system.
That's doing the compression. Yes. And the model of you as an agent is not a different type of model
or it's a different type, but not different as in its model like nature from the model of the ocean,
right? Some things are oceans, some things are agents. And one of these agents is using your
own control model, the output of your model, the things that you perceive yourself as doing.
And that is you. What about the fact that is like when you're standing
with the water on your feet and you're looking out into the vast open water of the ocean and
then there's a beautiful sunset and the fact that it's beautiful and then maybe you have friends
or loved one with you and you feel love. What is that as the dream world? What is that? Yes,
it's all happening inside of the dream. Okay. But see the word dream makes it seem like it's not real.
Yeah, of course, it's not real. The physical universe is real, but the physical universe
is incomprehensible and it doesn't have any feeling of realness. The feeling of realness that
you experience gets attached to certain representations where your brain assesses,
this is the best model of reality that I have. So the only thing that's real to you is the
thing that's happening at the very base of reality. Yeah, for something to be real,
it needs to be implemented. So the model that you have of reality is real in as far as it is a
model, right? It's an appropriate description of the world to say that there are models that
are being experienced. But the world that you experience is not necessarily implemented.
There is a difference between a reality, a simulation and a simulacrum. The reality that
we're talking about is something that fully emerges over a causally close lowest layer.
And the idea of physicalism is that we are in that layer, that basically our world emerges
over that. Every alternative to physicalism is a simulation theory, which basically says
that we are in some kind of simulation universe and the real world needs to be an apparent
universe of that, where the actual causal structure is, right? And when you look at the ocean and
your own mind, you are looking at a simulation that explains what you're going to see next.
So we are living in a simulation. Yes, but a simulation generated by our own brains.
And this simulation is different from the physical reality because the causal structure
that is being produced, what you are seeing is different from the causal structure of physics.
But consistent.
Hopefully, if not, then you are going to end up in some kind of institution where people will
take care of you because your behavior will be inconsistent, right? Your behavior needs to work
in such a way that it's interacting with an accurately predictive model of reality. And
if your brain is unable to make your model of reality predictive, you will need help.
So what do you think about Donald Hoffman's argument that it doesn't have to be consistent,
the dream world, to what he calls like the interface to the actual physical reality,
where there could be evolution. I think he makes an evolutionary argument, which is like,
it could be an evolutionary advantage to have the dream world drift away from physical reality.
I think that only works if you have tenure. As long as you're still interacting with the
ground tools, your model needs to be somewhat predictive.
Well, in some sense, humans have achieved a kind of tenure in the animal kingdom.
Yeah. At some point, we became too big to fail. So we became postmodernist.
It all makes sense now.
It's a version of reality that we like.
Oh, man. Okay.
Yeah, but basically, you can do magic. You can change your assessment of reality,
but eventually, reality is going to come by to you in the ass if it's not predictive.
Do you have a sense of what is that base layer of physical reality? You have these attempts
at the theories of everything, the very, very small of like string theory, or what
Stephen Wolfram talks about with the hypergrass. These are these tiny, tiny, tiny, tiny objects,
and then there is more like quantum mechanics that's talking about objects that are much larger,
but still very, very, very tiny. Do you have a sense of where the tiniest thing is that is like
at the lowest level, the turtle at the very bottom? Do you have a sense?
I don't think that you can talk about where it is because space is emergent over the activity
of these things. So coordinates only exist in relation to other things. And so you could,
in some sense, abstract it into locations that can hold information and trajectories
that the information can take between the different locations. And this is how we
construct our notion of space. And physicists usually have a notion of space that is continuous.
And this is a point where I tend to agree with people like Stephen Wolfram, who are very skeptical
of the geometric notions. I think that geometry is the dynamics of too many parts to count. And
when there are no infinities, if there were two infinities, you would be running into contradictions,
which is in some sense what Gödel and Turing discovered in response to Hilbert's call.
There are no infinities. There are no infinities. There is unboundedness. But if you have a language
that talks about infinity, at some point, the language is going to contradict itself,
which means it's no longer valid. In order to deal with infinities and mathematics,
you have to postulate the existence initially. You cannot construct the infinities. And that's
an issue. You cannot build up an infinity from zero. But in practice, you never do this. When
you perform calculations, you only look at the dynamics of too many parts to count. And usually,
these numbers are not that large. They're not Googles or something. The infinities that we are
dealing with in our universe are, mathematically speaking, relatively small integers. And still,
what we're looking at is dynamics, where a trillion things behave similar to 100 trillion
things or something that is very, very large because they're converging. And these converging
dynamics, these operators, this is what we deal with when we are doing the geometry.
The geometry is stuff where we can pretend that it's continuous, because if we subdivide the
space sufficiently, fine-grained, these things approach a certain dynamic. And this approached
dynamic, that is what we mean by it. But I don't think that infinity would work, so to speak,
that you would know the last digit of pi and that you have a physical process that rests on knowing
the last digit of pi. Yeah, that could be just a peculiar quirk of human cognition that we like
discrete. Discrete makes sense to us. Infinity doesn't. So in terms of our intuitions.
No, the issue is that everything that we think about needs to be expressed in some kind of mental
language, not necessarily natural language, but some kind of mathematical language that your
neurons can speak, that refers to something in the world. And what we have discovered is that
we cannot construct a notion of infinity without running into contradictions, which means that
such a language is no longer valid. And I suspect this is what made Pythagoras so unhappy when
somebody came up with the notion of irrational numbers before it was time, right? There's this
myth that he had this person killed when he blabbed out the secret that not everything can be
expressed as a ratio between two numbers, but there are numbers between the ratios. The world
was not ready for this. And I think he was right that has confused mathematicians very seriously
because these numbers are not values, they are functions. And so you can calculate these functions
to a certain degree of approximation, but you cannot pretend that pi has actually a value.
Pi is a function that would approach this value to some degree,
but nothing in the world rests on knowing pi.
How important is this distinction between discrete and continuous
for you to get to the bottom? Because there's a, I mean,
in discussion of your favorite flavor of the theory of everything, there's a few on the table.
So there's string theory, there's a particular, there's a loop quantum gravity,
which focuses on one particular unification. There's just a bunch of favorite flavors of
different people trying to propose a theory of everything. Eric Weinstein and a bunch of people
throughout history. And then of course, Stephen Wolfram, who I think is one of the only people
doing a discrete. No, no, there's a bunch of physicists who do this right now. And
Topoli and Tomasello and the digital physics is something that is, I think, growing in popularity.
But the main reason why this is interesting is because it is important sometimes to settle
disagreements. I don't think that you need infinities at all and you never needed them.
You can always deal with very large numbers and you can deal with limits, right? You are
fine with doing that. You don't need any kind of affinity. You can build your computer algebra
systems just as well without believing in infinity in the first place.
So you're okay with limits?
Yeah. So basically a limit means that something is behaving pretty much the same if you make the
number larger, right? Because it's converging to a certain value and at some point the difference
becomes negligible and you can no longer measure it. And in this sense, you have things that
if you have an n-gon which has enough corners, then it's going to behave like a circle at some
point, right? And it's only going to be in some kind of esoteric thing that cannot exist in a
physical universe that you would be talking about this perfect circle. And now it turns out that
it also wouldn't work in mathematics because you cannot construct mathematics that has infinite
resolution without running into contradictions. So that is itself not that important because
we never did that, right? It's just a thing that some people thought we could. And this leads to
confusion. So for instance, Roger Penrose uses this as an argument to say that there are certain
things that mathematicians can do dealing with infinities and by extension our mind can do
that computers cannot do.
Yeah, he talks about that the human mind can do certain mathematical things that the computer
has defined by the universal Turing machine cannot. So that it has to do with infinity.
Yes, it's one of the things. So he is basically pointing at the fact that there are things that
are possible in the mathematical mind and in pure mathematics that are not possible in machines that
can be constructed in the physical universe. And because he is an honest guy, he thinks this
means that present physics cannot explain operations that happen in our mind.
Do you think he's right? So let's leave his discussion of consciousness aside for the moment.
Do you think he's right about just what he's basically referring to as intelligence? So
is the human mind fundamentally more capable as a thinking machine than a universal Turing machine?
No. So he's suggesting that, right? So our mind is actually less than a Turing machine. There can
be no Turing machine because it's defined as having an infinite tape and we always only have a finite
tape. But he's saying it's better. Or minds can only perform finitely many operations. He can do
the kind of computation that the Turing machine cannot. And that's because he thinks that our
minds can do operations that have infinite resolution in some sense. And I don't think
that's the case. Our minds are just able to discover these limit operators over too many
parts to count. What about his idea that consciousness is more than a computation?
So it's more than something that a Turing machine can do. So again, saying that there's
something special about our mind, they cannot be replicated in the machine.
The issue is that I don't even know how to construct a language to express this statement
correctly. Well, the basic statement is there's a human experience that includes intelligence,
that includes self-awareness, that includes the hard problem of consciousness. And the question is,
can that be fully simulated in the computer, in the mathematical model of the computer,
as we understand it today? Roger Prenos says no. So the universal Turing machine cannot
simulate the universe. So the interesting question is, and you have to ask him this, is why not?
What is this specific thing that cannot be modeled? And when I looked at his writings,
and I haven't read all of it, but when I read, for instance, the section that he writes in the
introduction and wrote to infinity, the thing that he specifically refers to is the way in which
human minds deal with infinities. And that itself can, I think, easily be deconstructed.
A lot of people feel that our experience cannot be explained in a mechanical way.
And therefore, it needs to be different. And I concur, our experience is not mechanical. Our
experience is simulated. It exists only in assimilation. The only assimilation can be
conscious. Physical systems cannot be conscious because they're only mechanical. Cells cannot
be conscious. Neurons cannot be conscious. Brains cannot be conscious. People cannot be
conscious as far as you, if you understand them as physical systems. What can be conscious is
the story of the system in the world where you write all these things into the story.
You have experiences for the same reason that a character and novel have experiences because
it's written into the story. And now the system is acting on that story. And it's not a story that
is written in a natural language. It's written in a perceptual language, in this multimedia
language of the game engine. And in there, you write in what kind of experience you have,
and what this means for the behavior of the system, for your behavior tendencies,
for your focus, for your attention, for your experience of valence and so on. And
this is being used to inform the behavior of the system in the next step. And then the
story updates with the reactions of the system and the changes in the world and so on.
And you live inside of that model. You don't live inside of the physical reality.
And I mean, just to linger on it, like, you see, okay, it's in the perceptual language,
the multimodal perceptual language, that's the experience. That's what consciousness is within
that, within that model, within that story. But do you have agency? When you play a video game,
you can turn left and you can turn right in that story. So in that dream world,
how much control do you have? Is there such a thing as you in that story?
Like, is it right to say the main character, you know, everybody's NPCs, and then there's the main
character, and you're controlling the main character? Or is that an illusion? Is there a main
character that you're controlling? I'm getting to the point of like, the free will point.
Imagine that you are building a robot that plays soccer. And you've been to MIT computer science,
you basically know how to do that. Right. And so you would say the robot is an agent that solves
the control problem. How to get the ball into the goal. And it needs to perceive the world and
the world is disturbing him in trying to do this. Right. So he has to control many variables to make
that happen and to project itself and the ball into the future and understand its position on
the field relative to the ball and so on in the position of its limbs or in the space around it
and so on. So it needs to have an adequate model that abstracting reality in a useful way.
And you could say that this robot does have agency over what it's doing in some sense.
And the model is going to be a control model. And inside of that control model, you can
possibly get to a point where this thing is sufficiently abstract to discover its own agency.
Our current robots don't do that. They don't have a unified model of the universe.
But there's not a reason why we shouldn't be getting there at some point in the
not too distant future. And once that happens, you will notice that the robot tells a story about
the robot playing soccer. So the robot will experience itself playing soccer in a simulation
of the world that it uses to construct a model of the locations of its legs and limbs in space on
the field with relationship to the ball. And it's not going to be at the level of the molecules.
It will be an abstraction that is exactly at the level that is most suitable for past planning
of the movements of the robot. It's going to be a high level abstraction, but a very useful one
that is as predictive as we can make it. And in that side of that story, there is a model of
the agency of that system. So this model can accurately predict that the contents of the model
are going to be driving the behavior of the robot in the immediate future.
But there's the hard problem of consciousness, which I would also, there's a subjective experience
of free will as well, that I'm not sure where the robot gets that where that little leap is.
Because for me right now, everything I imagine with that robot, as it gets more and more and
more sophisticated, the agency comes from the programmer of the robot still of what was programmed
in. You would probably do an end to end learning system. You maybe need to give it a few priors,
so you nudge the architecture in the right direction that it converges more quickly.
But ultimately, discovering the suitable hyperparameters of the architecture is also only a
search process, right? And as the search process was evolution, it has informed our brain architecture
so we can converge in a single lifetime on useful interaction with the world and the formation of
the problem is if we define hyperparameters broadly, so it's not just the parameters that
control this end to end learning system, but the entirety of the design of the robot.
You have to remove the human completely from the picture and then in order to build the robot,
you have to create an entire universe because you have to go, you can't just shortcut evolution,
you have to go from the very beginning in order for it to have, because I feel like there's always
a human pulling the strings and that makes it seem like the robot is cheating, it's getting a
shortcut to consciousness. And you are looking at the current Boston Dynamics robots, it doesn't
look as if there is somebody pulling the strings, it doesn't look like cheating anymore. Okay, so
let's go there because I got to talk to you about this. So obviously with the case of Boston Dynamics,
as you may or may not know, it's always either hard coded or remote controlled. There's no
intelligence. So I don't know how the current generation of Boston Dynamics robots works,
but what I've been told about the previous ones was that it's basically all cybernetic control,
which means you still have feedback mechanisms and so on, but it's not deep learning for the most
part as it's currently done. It's for the most part just identifying a control hierarchy
that is congruent to the limbs that exist and the parameters that need to be optimized for
the movement of these limbs. And then there is a convergence progress. So it's basically just
regression that you would need to control this. But again, I don't know whether that's true. That's
just what I've been told about how that works. We have to separate several levels of discussions
here. So the only thing they do is pretty sophisticated control with no machine learning
in order to maintain balance or to write itself. It's a control problem in terms of
using the actuators to when it's pushed or when it steps on a thing that's uneven,
how to always maintain balance. And there's a tricky heuristics around that, but
that's the only goal. Everything you see Boston Dynamics doing in terms of that to us humans
is compelling, which is any kind of higher order movement like turning, wiggling its butt,
like jumping back and it's two feet dancing. Dancing is even worse because dancing is hard
coded in. It's choreographed by humans. There's choreography software. So there is no, of all
that high level movement, there's no anything that you can call, certainly can't call AI.
There's no even like basic heuristics. It's all hard coded in. And yet we humans immediately
project agency onto them, which is fascinating. So the gap here is it doesn't necessarily have
agency. What it has is cybernetic control. And the cybernetic control means you have a hierarchy
of feedback loops that keep the behavior in certain boundaries so the robot doesn't fall over and it's
able to perform the movements. And the choreography cannot really happen with motion capture,
because the robot would fall over because the physics of the robot, the weight distribution
and so on is different from the weight distribution in the human body. So if you were using the
directly motion captured movements of a human body to project it into this robot, it wouldn't
work. You can do this with a computer animation that will look a little bit off, but who cares.
But if you want to correct for the physics, you need to basically tell the robot where it should
move, its limbs. And then the control algorithm is going to approximate a solution that makes
it possible within the physics of the robot. And you have to find the basic solution for
making that happen. And there's probably going to be some regression necessary to get the control
architecture to make these movements. But those two layers are separate. So the thing,
the higher level instruction of how you should move and where you should move is the higher
level. I expect that the control level of these robots at some level is dumb. This is just the
physical control movement, the motor architecture. But it's a relatively smart motor
architecture. It's just that there is no high level deliberation about what decisions to make
necessarily. But it doesn't feel like free will or consciousness. No, that was not where I was
trying to get to. I think that in our own body, we have that too. So we have a certain thing that
is basically just a cybernetic control architecture that is moving our limbs.
And deep learning can help in discovering such an architecture if you don't have it in the first
place. If you already know your hardware, you can maybe handcraft it. But if you don't know your
hardware, you can search for such an architecture. And this work already existed in the 80s and 90s,
people were starting to search for control architectures by motor babbling and so on and
just use reinforcement learning architectures to discover such a thing. And now imagine that you
have the cybernetic control architecture already inside of you. And you extend this a little bit.
So you are seeking output, for instance, or rest or and so on. And you get to have a baby at some
point. And now you add more and more control layers to this. And the system is reverse
engineering its own control architecture and builds a high level model to synchronize the
pursuit of very different conflicting goals. And this is how I think you get to purposes.
Purposes are models of your goals. The goals may be intrinsic as the result of the different
set point violations that you have, hunger and thirst for very different things and rest and
pain avoidance and so on. And you put all these things together and eventually you need to come
up with a strategy to synchronize them all. And you don't need just to do this alone by yourself
because we are state building organisms. We cannot function as an isolation the way that
Homo sapiens is set up. So our own behavior only makes sense when you zoom out very far
into a society or even into ecosystemic intelligence on the planet and our place in it.
So the individual behavior only makes sense in these larger contexts. And we have a number of
priors built into us. So we are behaving as if we are acting on these high level goals pretty
much right from the start. And eventually in the course of our life, we can reverse engineer the
goals that we are acting on what actually are our higher level purposes. And the more we understand
that the more our behavior makes sense. But this is all at this point, complex stories within stories
that are driving our behavior. Yeah, I just don't know how big of a leap it is to start
creating a system that's able to tell stories within stories.
Like how big of a leap that is from where currently Boston Dynamics is
or any robot that's operating in the physical space. And that leap might be big if it requires
to solve the hard problem of consciousness, which is telling a hell of a good story.
I suspect that consciousness itself is relatively simple. What's hard is perception
and the interface between perception and reasoning.
There's, for instance, the idea of the consciousness prior that would be built into such a system by
Yoshua Bengio. And what he describes, and I think that's accurate, is that our own
model of the world can be described through something like an energy function. The energy
function is modeling the contradictions that exist within the model at any given point. And you try
to minimize these contradictions, the tangents in the model. And to do this, you need to sometimes
test things. You need to conditionally disambiguate figure and ground. You need to distinguish
whether this is true or that is true. And so on. Eventually, you get to an interpretation,
but you will need to manually depress a few points in your model to let it snap into a state that
makes sense. And this function that tries to get the biggest dip in the energy function in your
model, according to Yoshua Bengio, is related to consciousness. It's a low dimensional
discrete function that tries to maximize this dip in the energy function.
Yeah, I think I would need to get into details because I think the way he uses the word consciousness
is more akin to self-awareness, like modeling yourself within the world, as opposed to the
subjective experience, the hard problem. No, it's not even the self within the world. The self is
the agent and you don't need to be aware of yourself in order to be conscious. The self is
just a particular content that you can have, but you don't have to have. But you can be conscious
in, for instance, a dream at night or during a meditation state where you don't have a self,
where you're just aware of the fact that you are aware. And what we mean by consciousness
and colloquial sense is largely this reflexive self-awareness, that we become aware of the
fact that we are paying attention, that we are the thing that pays attention.
We are the thing that pays attention. I don't see the awareness that we're aware.
The hard problem doesn't feel like it's solved. It's called a hard problem for a reason,
because it seems like there needs to be a major leap.
Yeah, I think the major leap is to understand how it is possible that a machine can dream,
that a physical system is able to create a representation, that a physical system is acting
on and that is spun force and so on. But once you accept the fact that you are not in physics,
but that you exist inside of the story, I think the mystery disappears. Everything is possible
in a story. You exist inside the story. Your consciousness is being written into the story.
The fact that you experience things is written to the story. You ask yourself,
is this real what I'm seeing? And your brain writes into the story, yes, it's real.
So what about the perception of consciousness? So to me, you look conscious. So the illusion
of consciousness, the demonstration of consciousness, I ask for the legged robot,
how do we make this legged robot conscious? So there's two things that maybe you can tell me
if they're neighboring ideas. One is actually making conscious and the other is make it appear
conscious to others. Are those related? Let's ask from the other direction, what would it take to
make you not conscious? So when you are thinking about how you perceive the world, can you decide
to switch from looking at qualia to looking at representational states? And it turns out you
can. There is a particular way in which you can look at the world and recognize its machine
nature, including your own. And in that state, you don't have that conscious experience in this way
anymore. It becomes apparent as a representation. Everything becomes opaque. And I think this
thing that you recognize everything as a representation, this is typically what we
mean with enlightenment states. And you can have a motivational level, but you can also do this on
the experiential level and the perceptual level. See, but then I can come back to a conscious state.
Okay, I particularly, I'm referring to the social aspect that the demonstration of consciousness
is a really nice thing at a party when you're trying to meet a new person. It's a nice thing to
know that they're conscious and they can, I don't know how fundamental consciousness is in human
interaction, but it seems like to be at least an important part. And I asked that in the same kind
of way for robots, you know, in order to create a rich, compelling human robot interaction, it
feels like there needs to be elements of consciousness within that interaction.
My cat is obviously conscious. And so my cat can do this party trick. She also knows that I am
conscious. We are able to have feedback about the fact that we are both acting on models of our
own awareness. The question is, how hard is it for the robot artificially created robot to achieve
cat level in party tricks? Yes. So the issue for me is currently not so much on how to build a system
that creates a story about a robot that lives in the world, but to make an adequate representation
of the world. And the model that you and me have is a unified one. It's one where you basically
make sense of everything that you can perceive every feature in the world that enters your
perception can be relationally mapped to a unified model of everything. And we don't have an AI that
is able to construct such a unified model yet. So you need that unified model to do the party trick?
Yes, I think that it doesn't make sense if this thing is conscious, but not in the same universe
because you could not relate to each other. So what's the process, would you say, of engineering
consciousness in a machine? What are the ideas here? So you probably want to have some kind of
perceptual system. This perceptual system is a processing agent that is able to track sensory
data and predict the next frame and the sensory data from the previous frames of the sensory
data in the current state of the system. So the current state of the system is in perception
instrumental to predicting what happens next. And this means you build lots and lots of functions
that take all the blips that you feel on your skin and that you see on your retina or that you hear
and puts them into a set of relationships that allows you to predict what kind of sensory data,
what kind of sensor of blips, your vector of blips, you're going to perceive in the next frame.
This is tuned and it's constantly tuned until it gets as accurate as it can.
You build a very accurate prediction mechanism that is step one of the perceptions. At first,
you predict, then you perceive and see the error in your prediction.
And you have to do two things to make that happen. One is you have to build a network of
relationships that are constraints, that take all the variants in the world, put each of the
variances into a variable that is connected with relationships to other variables.
And these relationships are computable functions that constrain each other. So when you see a
nose that points in a certain direction in space, you have a constraint that says there
should be a phase nearby that has the same direction. And if that is not the case,
you have some kind of contradiction that you need to resolve because it's probably not a
nose what you're looking at. It just looks like one. So you have to reinterpret the data and
until you get to a point where your model converges.
And this process of making the sensory data fit into your model structure is what
Piaget calls the assimilation. And echomodation is the change of the models
where you change your model such a way that you can assimilate everything.
So you're talking about building a hell of an awesome perception system
that's able to do prediction and perception correct and improving.
Wait, there's more. Yes, there's more. So the first thing that we wanted to do is we want to
minimize the contradictions in the model. And of course, it's very easy to make a model in which
you minimize the contradictions just by allowing that it can be in many, many possible states.
Right? So if you increase degrees of freedom, you will have fewer contradictions. But you also
want to reduce the degrees of freedom because degrees of freedom mean uncertainty. You want
your model to reduce uncertainty as much as possible. But reducing uncertainty is expensive.
So you have to have a trade-off between minimizing contradictions and reducing uncertainty.
And you have only a finite amount of compute and experimental time and effort available to
reduce uncertainty in the world. So you need to assign value to what you observe. So you need
some kind of motivational system that is estimating what you should be looking at and what you
should be thinking about it, how you should be applying your resources to model what that is.
Right? So you need to have something like convergence links that tell you how to get
from the present state of the model to the next one. You need to have these compatibility links
that tell you which constraints exist and which constraint violations exist. And you need to have
some kind of motivational system that tells you what to pay attention to. So now we have a second
agent next to the perceptual agent. We have a motivational agent. This is a cybernetic system
that is modeling what the system needs, what's important for the system, and that interacts
with the perceptual system to maximize the expected reward. And you're saying the motivational system
is some kind of, like, what is it, a high-level narrative over some lower level? No, it's just
your brainstem stuff, the limbic system stuff that tells you, okay, now you should get something
to eat because I've just measured your geo blood sugar. So you mean the motivational system,
like the lower level stuff, like Hungary? Yes. But there's basically a physiological
needs and some cognitive needs and some social needs, and they all interact. And they're all
implemented at different parts in your nervous system as the motivational system. But they're
basically cybernetic feedback loops. It's not that complicated. It's just a lot of code. And
so you now have a motivational agent that makes your robot go for the ball or that makes your warm
go to eat food and so on. And you have the perceptual system that lets it predicts the
environment so it's able to solve that control problem to some degree. And now what we learned
is that it's very hard to build a machine learning system that looks at all the data
simultaneously to see what kind of relationships could exist between them. So you need to
selectively model the world. You need to figure out, where can I make the biggest difference
if I would put the following things together? Sometimes you find a gradient for that, right?
When you have a gradient, you don't need to remember where you came from. You just follow
the gradient until it doesn't get any better. But if you have a world where the problems are
discontinuous and the search spaces are discontinuous, you need to retain memory of what you explored.
You need to construct a plan of what to explore next. And this thing that means that you have
next to this perceptual construction system and the motivational cybernetics,
an agent that is paying attention to what it should select at any given moment to maximize
reward. And this scanning system, this attention agent is required for consciousness. And
consciousness is its control model. So it's the index memories that this thing retains when it
manipulates the perceptual representations to maximize the value and minimize the conflicts and
it to increase coherence. So the purpose of consciousness is to create coherence in your
perceptual representations, remove conflicts, predict the future, construct counterfactual
representations so you can coordinate your actions and so on. And in order to do this,
it needs to form memories. These memories are partial binding states of the working memory
contents that are being revisited later on to backtrack, to undo certain states to look for
alternatives. And these index memories that you can recall, that is what you perceive as your
stream of consciousness. And being able to recall these memories, this is what makes you conscious.
If you could not remember what you paid attention to, you wouldn't be conscious.
So consciousness is the index in the memory database. Okay.
But let me sneak up to the questions of consciousness a little further. So we usually
relate suffering to consciousness. So the capacity to suffer.
I think to me, that's a really strong sign of consciousness, is a thing that can suffer.
How is that useful? Suffering. And like in your model, what you just described,
which is indexing of memories, and what is the coherence with the perception,
with this predictive thing that's going on in the perception, how does suffering relate to any of
that, the higher level of suffering that humans do?
Basically, pain is a reinforcement signal. Pain is a signal that one part of your brain
sends to another part of your brain, or an abstract sense, part of your mind sends to
another part of the mind to regulate its behavior, to tell it the behavior that you're
currently exhibiting should be improved. And this is a signal that I tell you to move away
from what you're currently doing and push into a different direction. So pain gives you a part
of you an impulse to do something differently. But sometimes this doesn't work, because the
training part of your brain is talking to the wrong region. Or because it has the wrong model
of the relationships in the world, maybe you're mismodeling yourself or you're mismodeling the
relationship of yourself to the world or you're mismodeling the dynamics of the world. So you're
trying to improve something that cannot be improved by generating more pain. But the system
doesn't have any alternative. So it doesn't get better. What do you do if something doesn't get
better and you want it to get better? You increase the strengths of the signal. And when the signal
becomes chronic, when it becomes permanent, without a change inside, this is what we call suffering.
And the purpose of consciousness is to deal with contradictions, with things that cannot be resolved.
The purpose of consciousness, I think, is similar to a conductor in an orchestra. When everything
works well, the orchestra doesn't need much of a conductor as long as it's coherent. But when
there is a lack of coherence or something is consistently producing disharmony and mismatches,
then the conductor becomes alert and interacts with it. So suffering attracts the activity
of our consciousness. And the purpose of that is ideally that we bring new layers online,
new layers of modeling that are able to create a model of the dysregulation so we can deal with it.
And this means that we typically get higher level consciousness, so to speak. We get some
consciousness above our pay grade, maybe, if we have some suffering early in our life. Most of the
interesting people had trauma early on in their childhood. And trauma means that you are suffering
an injury for which the system is not prepared, which it cannot deal with, which it cannot insulate
itself from. So something breaks. And this means that the behavior of the system is permanently
disturbed in a way that some mismatch exists now in a regulation that just by following your
impulse, by following the pain in the direction where it hurts, your situation doesn't improve
but get worse. And so what needs to happen is that you grow up. And that part that is grown up
is able to deal with the part that is stuck in this earlier phase.
Yeah, so it leads to growth, adding extra layers to your cognition.
Let me ask you then, because I gotta stick on suffering, the ethics of the whole thing.
So not our consciousness, but the consciousness of others. You've tweeted, one of my biggest fears
is that insects could be conscious. The amount of suffering on earth would be unthinkable.
So when we think of other conscious beings, is suffering a property of consciousness that we're
most concerned about? So I'm still thinking about robots, how to make sense of other non-human things
that appear to have the depth of experience that humans have. And to me, that means consciousness
and the darkest side of that, which is suffering, the capacity to suffer. And so I started thinking,
how much responsibility do we have for those other conscious beings? That's where the
the definition of consciousness becomes most urgent. Like having to come up with the definition of
consciousness becomes most urgent, is who should we and should we not be torturing?
There's no general answer to this. Was Chinggis Khan doing anything wrong?
It depends on how you look at it. Well, he drew a line somewhere
where this is us and that's them. It's the circle of empathy. You don't have to use the word consciousness,
but these are the things that matter to me if they suffer or not, and these are the things that
don't matter to me. Yeah, but when one of his commanders failed him, he broke his spine and
let him die in a horrible way. And so in some sense, I think he was indifferent to suffering.
Or he was not indifferent in the sense that he didn't see it as useful if he inflicted suffering.
But he did not see it as something that had to be avoided. That was not the goal.
The question was, how can I use suffering and the infliction of suffering to reach my goals
from his perspective? I see. So like different societies throughout history put different value
on the different individuals, different psychies, but also even the objective of avoiding suffering.
Some societies probably, I mean, this is where religious belief really helps that after life,
that doesn't matter that you suffer or die. What matters is you suffer honorably,
right? So that you enter the afterlife. It seems to be superstitious to me. Basically,
beliefs that assert things for which no evidence exists are incompatible with sound epistemology.
And I don't think that religion has to be superstitious. Otherwise, it should be condemned
in all cases. You're somebody who's saying, we live in a dream world, we have zero evidence for
anything. It's not the case. They are limits to what languages can be constructed. Mathematics
breaks solid evidence for its own structure. And once we have some idea of what languages exist
and how a system can learn and what learning itself is in the first place, and so on, we can
begin to realize that our intuitions, that we are able to learn about the regularities of the world
and minimize surprise and understand the nature of our own agency to some degree of abstraction,
that's not an illusion. So useful approximation. Just because we live in a dream world doesn't
mean mathematics can't give us a consistent glimpse of physical, of objective reality.
We can basically distinguish useful encodings from useless encodings. And when we apply our
truths seeking to the world, we know we usually cannot find out whether a certain thing is true.
What we typically do is we take the state vector of the universe, separate it into
separate objects that interact with each other, so interfaces. And this distinction that we are
making is not completely arbitrary. It's done to optimize the compression that we can apply
to our models of the universe. So we can predict what's happening with our limited resources.
In this sense, it's not arbitrary. But the separation of the world into objects that are
somehow discrete and interacting with each other is not the true reality. The boundaries
between the objects are projected into the world, not arbitrarily projected, but still,
it's only an approximation of what's actually the case.
And we sometimes notice that we run into contradictions when we try to understand
high-level things like economic aspects of the world and so on, or political aspects or
psychological aspects where we make simplifications. And the objects that we are using to separate
the world are just one of many possible projections of what's going on. And so it's not in this
postmodernist sense completely arbitrary, and you're free to pick what you want or dismiss
what you don't like because it's all stories. No, that's not true. You have to show for every model
of how well it predicts the world. So the confidence that you should have in the
entities of your models should correspond to the evidence that you have.
Can I ask you in a small tangent to talk about your favorite set of ideas and people,
which is postmodernism? What is postmodernism? How would you define it? And why, to you,
is it not a useful framework of thought? Postmodernism is something that I'm really
not an expert on. And postmodernism is a set of philosophical ideas that is difficult to lump
together, that is characterized by some useful thinkers, some of them poststructuralists and so
on. And I'm mostly not interested in it because I think that it's not leading me anywhere that I
find particularly useful. It's mostly, I think, born out of the insight that the ontologies
that we impose on the world are not literally true, and that we can often get to a different
interpretation by the world by using a different ontology that is different separation of the
world into interacting objects. But the idea that this makes the world a set of stories that are
arbitrary, I think, is wrong. And the people that are engaging in this type of philosophy
are working in an area that I largely don't find productive. There is nothing useful coming out of
this. So this idea that truth is relative is not something that has in some sense informed physics
or theory of relativity. And there is no feedback between those. There is no meaningful influence
of this type of philosophy on the sciences or on engineering or on politics. But there is a very
strong information of this on ideology, because it basically has become an ideology that is
justifying itself by the notion that truth is a relative concept. And it's not being used in such
a way that the philosophers or sociologists that take up these ideas say, oh, I should doubt my
own ideas, because maybe my separation of the world into objects is not completely valid. And I
should maybe use a different one and be open to a pluralism of ideas. But it mostly exists to dismiss
the ideas of other people. It becomes a political weapon of sorts to achieve power.
Basically, there's nothing wrong, I think, with developing a philosophy around this. But to develop
norms around the idea that truth is something that is completely negotiable is incompatible
with the scientific project. And I think if the academia has no defense against the ideological
parts of the postmodernist movement, it's doomed. Right. You have to acknowledge the ideological
part of any movement, actually, including postmodernism. Well, the question is what an ideology
is. And to me, an ideology is basically a viral memeplex that is changing your mind in such a way
that reality gets warped. It gets warped in such a way that you're being cut off from the rest of
human thought space. And you cannot consider things outside of the range of ideas of your own
ideology as possibly true. Right. So, I mean, there's certain properties to an ideology that
make it harmful. One of them is that dogmatism of just certainty, dogged certainty in that you're
you have the truth and nobody else does. Yeah. But what is creating this certainty? It's very
interesting to look at the type of model that is being produced. Is it basically just a strong
prior? And you tell people, oh, this idea that you consider to be very true, the evidence for this
is actually just much weaker than you thought and look here at some studies. No, this is not how it
works. It's usually normative, which means some thoughts are unthinkable because they would change
your identity into something that is no longer acceptable. And this cuts you off from considering
an alternative. And many de facto religions use this trick to lock people into a certain mode of
thought. This removes agency over your own thoughts. And it's very ugly to me. It's basically
not just a process of domestication, but it's actually an intellectual castration that happens.
It's an inability to think creatively and to bring forth new thoughts.
Can I ask you about substances, chemical substances that affect the video game,
the dream world? So psychedelics that increasing have been getting a lot of research done on them.
So in general psychedelics, psilocybin, MDMA, but also a really interesting one, the big one,
which is DMT. What and where are the places that these substances take
the mind that is operating in the dream world? Do you have an interesting sense how this
throws a wrinkle into the prediction model? Is it just some weird little quirk? Or is there
some fundamental expansion of the mind going on?
I suspect that a way to look at psychedelics is that they induce particular types of lucid dreaming
states. So it's a state in which certain connections are being severed in your mind and no longer
active. Your mind basically gets free to move in a certain direction because some inhibition,
some particular inhibition doesn't work anymore. And as a result, you might stop having yourself
or you might stop perceiving the world as three-dimensional. And you can explore that state.
And I suppose that for every state that can be induced with psychedelics, there are people that
are naturally in that state. So sometimes psychedelics that shift you through a range of
possible mental states. And they can also shift you out of the range of permissible mental states
that is where you can make predictive models of reality. And what I observe in people that
use psychedelics a lot is that they tend to be overfitting. Overfitting means that you are
using more bits for modeling the dynamics of a function than you should. And so you can fit
your curve to extremely detailed things in the past, but this model is no longer predictive
for the future. What is it about psychedelics that forces that? I thought it would be the opposite.
I thought it's a good mechanism for generalization, for regularization. So it feels like psychedelics
expansion of the mind, like forcing your model to be non-predictive is a good thing.
Meaning like it's almost like, okay, what I would say is psychedelics I akin to is traveling to a
totally different environment. Like going if you've never been to like India or something like that
from the United States. Very different set of people, different culture, different food, different
roads and values and all those kinds of things. So psychedelics can for instance teleport people
into a universe that is hyperbolic, which means that if you imagine a room that you are in,
you can turn around 360 degrees and you didn't go full circle. You need to go
20 degrees to go full circle. Exactly. So the things that people learn in that state
cannot be easily transferred in this universe that we are in. It could be that if they're able
to abstract and understand what happened to them, that they understand that some part of their spatial
cognition has been desynchronized and has found a different synchronization. And this different
synchronization happens to be a hyperbolic one, right? So you learn something interesting about
your brain. It's difficult to understand what exactly happened, but we get a pretty good idea
once we understand how the brain is representing geometry. Yeah, but doesn't give you a fresh
perspective on the physical reality? Who's making that sound? Is it inside my head or is it external?
Well, there is no sound outside of your mind, but it's making sense. Phenomenal physics.
Yeah, in the physical reality, there's sound waves traveling through air. Okay.
That's our model of what happened. That's our model of what happened. Right.
Don't second-hand, let's give you a fresh perspective on this physical reality.
Like, not this physical reality, but this more...
What do you call the dream world that's mapped directly to it?
The purpose of dreaming at night, I think, is data augmentation.
Exactly. So that's very different. That's very similar to second-hand.
Exchange parameters about the things that you have learned. And for instance, when you are young,
you have seen things from certain perspectives, but not from others. So your brain is generating
new perspectives of objects that you already know, which means they can learn to recognize them
later from different perspectives. And I suspect that's the reason why many of us remember to have
flying dreams as children, because it's just different perspectives of the world that you
already know, and that it starts to generate these different perspective changes, and then it
fluidly turns this into a flying dream to make sense of what's happening. So you fill in the
gaps, and suddenly you see yourself flying. And similar things can happen with semantic
relationships. So it's not just spatial relationships, but it can also be the
relationships between ideas that are being changed. And it seems that the mechanisms that make that
happen during dreaming are interacting with these same receptors that are being simulated by psychedelics.
So I suspect that there is a thing that I haven't read really about, the way in which dreams are
induced in the brain. It's not just that the activity of the brain gets tuned down because
you are somehow, your eyes are closed and you no longer get enough data from your eyes. But there
is a particular type of neurotransmitter that is saturating your brain during these phases,
during the RM phases, and you produce controlled hallucinations. And psychedelics
are linking into these mechanisms, I suspect. So isn't that another trickier form of data
augmentation? Yes. But it's also data augmentation that can happen outside of the specification
that your brain is tuned to. So basically, people are overclocking their brains,
and that produces states that are subjectively extremely interesting.
Yeah, I just... But from the outset, very suspicious.
So I think I'm over-applying the metaphor of a neural network in my own mind, which
I just think that doesn't lead to overfitting, right? But you were just sort of anecdotally
saying my experiences with people that have no psychedelics are that kind of quality.
I think it typically happens. So if you look at people like Timothy Leary,
and he has written beautiful manifestos about the effect of LSD on people,
he genuinely believed, he writes on these manifestos, that in the future,
science and art will only be done on psychedelics because it's so much more efficient and so much
better. And he gave LSD to children in this community of a few thousand people that he
had near San Francisco. And basically, he was losing touch with reality. He did not
understand the effects that the things that he was doing would have on the reception of psychedelics
by society because he was unable to think critically about what happened. What happened
was that he got in a euphoric state. That euphoric state happened because he was overfitting.
He was taking this sense of euphoria and translating it into a model of actual success
in the world. He was feeling better. Limitations had disappeared that he experienced to be
existing, but he didn't get superpowers. I understand what you mean by overfitting now.
There's a lot of interpretation to the term overfitting in this case,
but I got you. So he was getting positive rewards from a lot of actions that he shouldn't have.
But not just this. So if you take, for instance, John Lilly, who was studying dolphin languages
and aliens and so on, a lot of people that used psychedelics became very loopy.
And the typical thing that you notice when people are on psychedelics is that they are in a state
where they feel that everything can be explained now. Everything is clear. Everything is obvious.
And sometimes they have indeed discovered a useful connection, but not always. Very often
these connections are over interpretations. I wonder, there's a question of correlation
versus causation. And also, I wonder if it's the psychedelics or if it's more the social,
like being the outsider and having a strong community of outside and having a leadership
position in an outsider cult-like community, that could have a much stronger effect of overfitting
than do psychedelics themselves, the actual substances, because it's a counterculture thing.
So it could be that as opposed to the actual substance. If you're a boring person who wears
a suit and tie and works at a bank and takes psychedelics, that could be a very different
effect of psychedelics on your mind. I'm just sort of raising the point that the people you
referenced are already weirdos. I'm not sure exactly. No, not necessarily. A lot of the people that
tell me that they use psychedelics in a useful way started out as squares and were liberating
themselves because they were stuck. They were basically stuck in local optimum of their own
self-model, of their relationship to the world, and suddenly they had data augmentation. They
basically saw an experience, a space of possibilities. They experienced what it would be like to be
another person. And they took important lessons from that experience back home.
Yeah. I mean, I love the metaphor of data augmentation because that's been the primary
driver of self-supervised learning in the computer vision domain is data augmentation. So it's funny
to think of data augmentation, like chemically induced data augmentation in the human mind.
There's also a very interesting effect that I noticed. I know several people who
sphere to me that LSD has cured their migraines. So severe cluster headaches or migraines that
didn't respond to standard medication that disappeared after a single dose. And I don't
recommend anybody doing this, especially not in the US where it's illegal. And there are no studies
on this for that reason. But it seems that anecdotally that it basically
can reset the serotonergic system. So it's basically pushing them outside of their normal
boundaries. And as a result, it needs to find a new equilibrium and then some people that
equilibrium is better. But it also follows that in other people, it might be worse. So
if you have a brain that is already teetering on the boundary to psychosis, it can be permanently
pushed over that boundary. Well, that's why you have to do good science, which they're starting
to do on all these different substances of how it actually works for the different conditions
like MDMA seems to help with PTSD. Same with psilocybin. You need to do good science, meaning
large studies of large N. Yeah. So based on the existing studies with MDMA, it seems that
if you look at Rick Doblin's work and what he has published about this and talks about
MDMA seems to be a psychologically relatively safe drug, but it's physiologically not very
safe. That is, there is neurotoxicity if you would use a too large dose. And if you
combine this with alcohol, which a lot of kids do in party settings during raves and so on,
it's very hepatotoxic. So basically, you can kill your liver. And this means that it's probably
something that is best and most productively used in clinical setting by people who really know
what they're doing. And I suspect that's also true for the other psychedelics. That is,
while the other psychedelics are probably not as toxic as say alcohol, the effects on Nisaki
can be much more profound and lasting. Yeah. Well, as far as I know psilocybin, so mushrooms,
magic mushrooms, as far as I know in terms of the studies they're running, I think have no over,
like they're allowed to do what they're calling heroic doses. So that one does not have a toxicity.
So they can do like huge doses in a clinical setting when they're doing study on psilocybin,
which is kind of fun. Yeah, it seems that most of the psychedelics work in extremely small doses,
which means that the effect on the rest of the body is relatively low. And MDMA is probably the
exception. Maybe ketamine can be dangerous and larger doses because it can depress breathing and
so on. But the LSD and psilocybin work in very, very small doses, at least the active part of them
of psilocybin LSD is only the active part. And the, but the effect that it can have on
your mental wiring can be very dangerous, I think. Let's talk about AI a little bit.
What are your thoughts about GPT-3 and language models trained with self-supervised learning?
It came out quite a bit ago, but I wanted to get your thoughts on it. Yeah.
In the 90s, I was in New Zealand and I had an amazing professor, Ian Witten,
who realized I was bored in class and put me in his lab. And he gave me the task to discover
grammatical structure in an unknown language. And the unknown language that I picked was English
because it was the easiest one to find a corpus four construct one. And he gave me the largest
computer at the whole university. It had two gigabytes of RAM, which was amazing. And I wrote
everything in C with some in-memory compression to do statistics over the language. And I first
would create a dictionary of all the words, which basically tokenizes everything and compresses
things so that I don't need to store the whole word, but just a code for every word. And then I
was taking this all apart in sentences. And I was trying to find all the relationships between
all the words in the sentences and do statistics over them. And that proved to be impossible,
because the complexity is just too large. So if you want to discover the relationship
between an article and a noun, and there are three adjectives in between, you cannot do
n-gram statistics and look at all the possibilities that can exist, at least not with the resources
that we had back then. So I realized I need to make some statistics over what I need to make
statistics over. So I wrote something that was pretty much a hack that did this for at least
first-order relationships. And I came up with some kind of mutual information graph that was
indeed discovering something that looks exactly like the grammatical structure of the sentence,
just by trying to encode the sentence in such a way that the words would be written in the
optimal order inside of the model. And what I also found is that if we would be able to increase
the resolution of that and not just use this model to reproduce grammatically correct sentences,
we would also be able to correct stylistically correct sentences by just having more bits in
these relationships. And if we wanted to have meaning, we would have to go much higher order.
And I didn't know how to make higher order models back then without spending way more years in
research on how to make the statistics over what we need to make statistics over. And this thing
that we cannot look at the relationships between all the bits in your input is being solved in
different domains in different ways. So in computer graphics, the computer vision standard method
for many years now is convolutional neural networks. Convolutional neural networks are
hierarchies of filters that exploit the fact that neighboring pixels in images are usually
semantically related and distance pixels in images are usually not semantically related.
So you can just by grouping the pixels that are next to each other,
hierarchically together reconstruct the shape of objects. And this is an important prior that
we built into these models so they can converge quickly. But this doesn't work in language for
the reason that adjacent words are often but not always related and distant words are sometimes
related while the words in between are not. So how can you learn the topology of language?
And I think for this reason that this difficulty existed, the transformer was invented in
natural language processing not in vision. And what the transformer is doing, it's a hierarchy
of layers where every layer learns what to pay attention to in the given context in the previous
layer. So what to make the statistics over. And the context is significantly larger than the adjacent
word. Yes. So the context that GP3 has been using, the transformer itself is from 2017,
and it wasn't using that large of a context. OpenAI has basically scaled up this idea
as far as they could at the time. And the context is about 2048 symbols, tokens in the language.
These symbols are not characters, but they take the words and project them into a vector space.
Words that are statistically co-occurring a lot are neighbors already. So it's already a
simplification of the problem a little bit. And so every word is basically a set of coordinates
in a high dimensional space. And then they use some kind of trick to also encode the order
of the words in a sentence or in the not just sentence, but 2048 tokens is about couple pages
of text or two and a half pages of text. And so they managed to do pretty exhaustive statistics
over the potential relationships between two pages of text, which is tremendous, right? I was
just using a single sentence back then. And I was only looking for first order relationships. And
they were really looking for much, much higher level relationships. And what they discover
after they've fed this with an enormous amount of trim linear pretty much the written internet
or the subset of it that had some quality, but substantial portion of the common flaw
that they're not only able to reproduce style, but they're also able to reproduce some
pretty detailed semantics, like being able to add three digit numbers and multiply two
digit numbers or to translate between pro and languages and things like that.
So the results that GBT3 got, I think were amazing.
By the way, I actually didn't check carefully. It's funny you just mentioned
how you coupled semantics to the multiplication. Is it able to do some basic math and two digit
numbers? Yes. Okay, interesting. I thought, I thought there's a lot of failure cases.
Yeah, it basically fails if you take larger digit numbers. So four digit numbers and so on
makes carrying mistakes and so on. And if you take large, larger numbers, you don't get useful
results at all. And this could be an issue of the training set, but not many examples of success
for long form addition and standard human written text. And humans aren't very good at doing three
digit numbers either. Yeah, they're not, you're not writing a lot about it. And the other thing
is that the loss function that is being used is only minimizing surprises. So it's predicting what
comes next in a typical text. It's not trying to go for causal closure first as we do.
Yeah. But the fact that that kind of prediction works to generate text that's semantically rich
and consistent is interesting. Yeah. So yeah, so it's amazing that it's able to
generate semantically consistent text. It's not consistent. So the problem is that it loses
coherence at some point. But it's also, I think not correct to say that GPT-3 is unable to deal
with semantics at all, because you ask it to perform certain transformations in text and it
performs these transformations in text. And the kind of additions that it's able to perform are
transformations in text, right? And there are proper semantics involved. You can also do more.
There was a paper that was generating lots and lots of mathematically correct text
and was feeding this into a transformer. And as a result, it was able to learn how to do
differentiation integration in race that according to the authors, matematica could not.
To which some of the people in matematica responded that they were not using the
matematica in the right way and so on. I have not really followed the
resolution of this conflict. This part, as a small tangent, I really don't like
in machine learning papers, which they often do anecdotal evidence. They'll find like one example
in some kind of specific use of matematica and demonstrate, look, here's, they'll show successes
and failures, but they won't have a very clear representation of how many cases this actually
represents. Yes, but I think as a first paper, this is a pretty good start. And so the take-home
message, I think, is that the authors could get better results from this in their experiments
than they could get from the vein, which they were using computer algebra systems,
which means that was not nothing. And it's able to perform substantially better than GPTS-V can,
based on a much larger amount of training data, using the same underlying algorithm.
Let me ask, again, so I'm using your tweets as if this is like Play-Doh, as if this is
well thought out novels that you've written. You tweeted, GPT-4 is listening to us now.
This is one way of asking, what are the limitations of GPT-3 when it scales? So what do you think
will be the capabilities of GPT-4, GPT-5, and so on? What are the limits of this approach?
So obviously, when we are writing things right now, everything that we are writing now is going
to be training data for the next generation of machine learning models. So yes, of course,
GPT-4 is listening to us. And I think the tweet is already a little bit older. And we now have
Vudao and we have a number of other systems that basically are placeholders for GPT-4.
I don't know what open AIS plans are in this regard.
I read that tweet in several ways. So one is obviously everything you put on the
internet has used this training data. But in a second way, I read it is in a, we talked about
agency. I read it is almost like GPT-4 is intelligent enough to be choosing to listen.
So not only like did a programmer tell it to collect this data and use it for training,
I almost saw the humorous angle, which is like it has achieved AGI kind of thing.
Well, the thing is, could VB already be living in GPT-5?
So GPT-4 is listening and GPT-5 actually constructed the entirety of the reality?
Of course, in some sense, what everybody is trying to do right now in AI is to extend the
transformer to be able to deal with video. And there are very promising extensions, right?
There's a work by Google that is called Perceiver and that is overcoming some of the limitations
of the transformer by letting it learn the topology of the different modalities separately
and by training it to find better input features. So the basically feature abstractions that are
being used by this successor to GPT-3 are chosen such a way that it's able to deal with video input.
And there is more to be done. So one of the limitations of GPT-3 is that it's amnesiac.
So it forgets everything beyond the two pages that it currently reads also during generation,
not just during learning. Do you think that's fixable within the space of deep learning?
Can you just make a bigger, bigger, bigger input?
No, I don't think that our own working memory is infinitely large. It's probably also just a few
thousand bits. But what you can do is you can structure this working memory. So instead of just
force feeding this thing, a certain thing that it has to focus on and it's not allowed to focus
on anything else because it's network, you allow it to construct its own working memory as we do,
right? When we are reading a book, it's not that we are focusing our attention in such a way that
we can only remember the current page. We will also try to remember other pages and try to undo
what we learn from them or modify what we learned from them. We might get up and take another book
from the shelf. We might go out and ask somebody that we can edit our working memory in any way
that is useful to put a context together that allows us to draw the right inferences and to
learn the right things. This ability to perform experiments on the world based on an attempt
to become fully coherent and to achieve causal closure, to achieve a certain aesthetic of your
modeling, that is something that eventually needs to be done. At the moment, we are skirting this
in some sense by building systems that are larger and faster so they can use dramatically larger
resources and human beings can do much more training data to get to models that in some sense
are already very superhuman and in other ways are laughingly incoherent. Do you think making
the systems multi-resolutional, some of the language models are focused on two pages,
some are focused on two books, some are focused on two years of reading, some are focused on a
lifetime like stacks of GPT-3s all the way down? You want to have gaps in between them. It's not
necessarily two years, there's no gaps. It stinks out of two years or out of 20 years or 2000 years
or two billion years where you are just selecting those bits that are predicted to be the most useful
ones to understand what you're currently doing. This prediction itself requires a very complicated
model. That's the actual model that you need to be making. It's not just that you are trying to
understand the relationships between things but what you need to make relationships or discover
relationships over. I wonder what that thing looks like, what the architecture for the thing
that's able to have that kind of model. I think it needs more degrees of freedom than the current
models have. It starts out with the fact that you possibly don't just want to have a feed-forward
model but you want it to be fully recurrent. To make it fully recurrent, you probably need to
loop it back into itself and allow it to skip connections. Once you do this, you're predicting
the next frame and your internal next frame in every moment and you are able to skip connection,
it means that signals can travel from the output of the network into the middle of the network
faster than the inputs do. Do you think it can still be differentiable? Do you think it still
can be in your network? Sometimes it can and sometimes it cannot. It can still be in your
network but not the fully differentiable one. When you want to deal with non-differentiable ones,
you need to have an attention system that is discreet and no-dimensional and can perform
grammatical operations. You need to be able to perform program synthesis. You need to be able
to backtrack in these operations that you perform on this thing. This thing needs a model of what
it's currently doing. I think this is exactly the purpose of our own consciousness.
Yeah, the program things are tricking along with your networks. Let me ask you, it's not
quite program synthesis but the application of these language models to generation
to program synthesis but generation of programs. If you look at GitHub OpenPilot,
which is based on OpenAI's codecs, I don't know if you've got a chance to look at it, but it's
the system that's able to generate code once you prompt it with what is it,
like the header of a function with some comments. It seems to do an incredibly good job
or not a perfect job but it's very important but an incredibly good job of generating functions.
What do you make of that? Is this exciting or is this just a party trick, a demo? Or is this
revolutionary? I haven't worked with it yet so it's difficult for me to judge it but I would not
be surprised if it turns out to be revolutionary. That's because the majority of programming tasks
that are being done in the industry right now are not creative. People are writing code that other
people have written or they're putting things together from code fragments that others have had
and a lot of the work that programmers do in practice is to figure out how to overcome the
gaps in the current knowledge and the things that people have already done. How to copy and paste
from Stack Overflow, that's right. And so of course we can automate that. Yeah, to make it
much faster to copy and paste from Stack Overflow. Yes, but it's not just copying and pasting,
it's also basically learning which parts you need to modify to make them fit together. Yeah,
like literally sometimes as simple as just changing the variable names
so it fits into the rest of your code. Yes, but this requires that you understand the semantics
of what you're doing to some degree. Yeah, and you can automate some of those things. The thing
that makes people nervous of course is that a little bit wrong in a program can have a dramatic
effect on the actual final operation of that program. So that's one little error which in the
space of language doesn't really matter but in the space of programs can matter a lot. Yes,
but this is already what is happening when humans program code. Yeah, so we have a technology to
deal with this. Somehow it becomes scarier when you know that a program generated code that's
running a nuclear power plant. You know humans have errors too. Exactly. But it's scarier when
a program is doing it because why? There's a fear that a program may not be as good as humans to
know when stuff is important to not mess up. There's a misalignment of priorities, of values,
that's potential, that maybe that's the source of the worry. I mean, okay, if I give you code
generated by GitHub OpenPilot and code generated by a human and say, here, use one of these,
which how do you select today and in the next 10 years, which code do you use?
Wouldn't you still be comfortable with the human?
At the moment when you go to Stanford to get an MRI, they will write a bill to the insurance
over $20,000 and of this maybe half of that gets paid by the insurance and the quarter gets paid
by you and the MRI cost them $600 to make, maybe probably less. And what are the values of the
person that writes the software and deploys this process? It's very difficult for me to say
whether I trust people. I think that what happens there is a mixture of
proper Anglo-Saxon Protestant values where somebody is trying to serve an abstract
greater whole and organize crime. Well, that's a very harsh, I think that's a harsh view of
humanity. There's a lot of bad people, whether incompetent or just malevolent in this world,
yes. But it feels like the more malevolent, so the more damage you do to the world,
the more resistance you have in your own human heart.
But not explain with malevolence or stupidity what can be explained by just people acting on
their incentives. So what happens in Stanford is not that somebody is evil, it's just that they do
what they're being paid for. No, it's not evil. I see that as malevolence. I see,
even like being a good German, as I told you offline, it's not absolute malevolence,
but it's a small amount. It's cowardice. I mean, when you see there's something wrong with the world,
it's either incompetence that you're not able to see it, or it's cowardice that you're not able to
stand up, not necessarily in a big way, but in a small way. So I do think that is in a bit of
malevolence. I'm not sure the example you're describing is a good example.
So the question is, what is it that you are aiming for? And if you don't believe in the future,
if you, for instance, think that the dollar is going to crash by what you try to save dollars,
if you don't think that humanity will be around in 100 years from now, because
global warming will wipe out civilization, why would you need to act as if it were?
So the question is, is there an overarching aesthetics that is projecting you and the world
into the future, which I think is the basic idea of religion, that you understand the
interactions that we have with each other as some kind of civilization level agent that is
projecting itself into the future. If you don't have that shared purpose, what is there to be
ethical for? So I think when we talk about ethics and AI, we need to go beyond the insane bias
discussions and so on, where people are just measuring the distance between a statistic to their
preferred current world model. But the optimism, I was a little confused by the previous thing,
just to clarify, there is a kind of underlying morality to having an optimism that human
civilization will persist for longer than 100 years. I think a lot of people believe
that it's a good thing for us to keep living. Yeah, of course. And thriving.
This morality itself is not an end to itself. It's instrumental to people living in 100 years
from now, or 500 years from now. So it's only justifiable if you actually think that it will
lead to people or increase the probability of people being arrived in that time frame.
And a lot of people don't actually believe that, at least not actively.
But I believe what exactly? Most people don't believe that they can afford to act on such a
model. Basically, what happens in the US is I think that the healthcare system is for a lot of
people no longer sustainable, which means that if they need the help of the healthcare system,
they're often not able to afford it. And when they cannot help it, they are often going bankrupt.
It's I think the leading course of personal bankruptcy in the US is the healthcare system.
And that would not be necessary. It's not because people are consuming more and more
medical services and are achieving a much, much longer life as a result. That's not actually the
story that is happening, because you can compare it to other countries. And life expectancy in
the US is currently not increasing. And it's not as high as in all the other industrialized
countries. So some industrialized countries are doing better with a much cheaper healthcare system.
And what you can see is, for instance, administrative bloat, the healthcare system has
maybe to some degree deliberately set up as a job placement program to allow people to continue
living in middle class existence, despite not having a useful use case in productivity.
So they are being paid to push paper around. And the number of administrators in the healthcare
system has been increasing much faster than the number of practitioners. And this is something
that you have to pay for, right? And also the revenues that are being generated in the healthcare
system are relatively large, and somebody has to pay for them. And the result why they are so
large is because market mechanisms are not working. The FDA is largely not protecting
people from malpractice of healthcare providers. The FDA is protecting healthcare providers from
competition. So this is a thing that it has to do with values. And this is not because people
are malicious on all levels. It's because they are not incentivized to act on a greater whole on
this idea that you treat somebody who comes to you as a patient like you would treat a family
member. Yeah, but we're trying. I mean, you're highlighting a lot of the flaws of the different
institutions, the systems we're operating under. But I think there's a continued throughout history
mechanism design of trying to design incentives in such a way that these systems behave better and
better and better. I mean, it's a very difficult thing to operate a society of hundreds of millions
of people effectively with. Yes. Do we live in a society that is ever-correcting? Do we observe
that our models of what we are doing are predictive of the future? And when they are not,
we improve them. Our laws are adjudicated with clauses that you put into every law,
what is meant to be achieved by that law, and the law will be automatically repealed
if it's not achieving that. If you are optimizing your own laws, if you're writing your own source
code, you probably make an estimate of what is this thing that's currently wrong in my life?
What is it that I should change about my own policies? What is the expected outcome? And
if that outcome doesn't manifest, I will change the policy back, right? Or I would change it to
do something different. Are we doing this on a societal level? I think so. I think it's easy
to sort of highlight the... I think we're doing it in the way that I operate my current life. I
didn't sleep much last night. You would say that Lex, the way you need to operate your life is you
need to always get sleep. The fact that you didn't sleep last night is totally the wrong way to
operate in your life. Like, you should have gotten all your shit done in time and gotten to sleep
because sleep is very important for health. And you're highlighting, look, this person is not sleeping.
Look, the medical, the healthcare system is operating... But the point is we just... It seems
like this is the way, especially in the capitalist society, we operate... We keep running into trouble
and last minute, we try to get our way out through innovation. And it seems to work.
You have a lot of people that ultimately are trying to build a better world and get
urgency about them when it's... The problem becomes more and more imminent. And that's
the way this operates. But if you look at the history, the long arc of history, it seems like
that operating on deadlines produces progress and builds better and better systems.
You probably agree with me that the US should have engaged in mass production in January 2020
and that we should have shut down the airports early on and that we should have made it mandatory
that the people that work in nursery homes are living on campus rather than living at home
and then coming in and infecting people in the nursing homes that had no immune response to COVID.
And that is something that was, I think, visible back then. The correct decisions haven't been
made. We would have the same situation again. How do we know that these wrong decisions are not
being made again? Have the people that made the decisions to not protect the nursing homes been
punished? Have the people that made the wrong decisions with respect to testing that prevented
the development of testing by startup companies and the importing of tests from countries that
already had them? Have these people been held responsible? Yeah, but first of all, so what do
you want to put before the firing squad? I think they are. No, just make sure that this doesn't
happen again. No, but it's not that, yes, they're being held responsible by many voices by people
being frustrated. There's new leaders being born now. They're going to see rise to the top in 10
years. This moves slower than there's obviously a lot of older incompetence and bureaucracy
in these systems move slowly. They move like science one depth at a time. So yes, I think
the pain has been felt in the previous year is reverberating throughout the world.
Maybe I'm getting old. I suspect that every generation in the U.S. after the war has lost
the plot even more. I don't see this development. The war of World War II?
Yes, so basically there was a time when we were modernist and in this modernist time,
the U.S. felt actively threatened by the things that happened in the world. The U.S. was worried
about possibility of failure and this imminence of possible failure led to decisions. There was
a time when the government would listen to physicists about how to do things. The physicists
were actually concerned about what the government should be doing. They would be writing letters
to the government. For instance, the decision for the Manhattan Project was something that was
driven in a conversation between physicists and the government. I don't think such a discussion
would take place today. I disagree. I think if the virus was much deadlier, we would see a very
different response. I think the virus was not sufficiently deadly. Instead, because it wasn't
very deadly, what happened is the current system started to politicize it. This is what I realized
with masks early on. They were not very quickly became not as a solution, but they became a thing
that politicians used to divide the country. The same things happened with vaccines,
so people weren't talking about solutions to this problem because I don't think the problem
was bad enough. When you talk about the war, I think our lives are too comfortable. I think
in the developed world, things are too good and we have not faced severe dangers. The
severe dangers existential threats are faced. That's when we step up on a small scale and a large
scale. That's my argument here, but I did think the virus, I was hoping that it was actually
sufficiently dangerous for us to step up because especially in the early days, it was unclear. It
still is unclear because of mutations, how bad it might be. I thought we would step up. The mask's
point is a tricky one because to me, the manufacture of masks isn't even the problem. I'm still to
this day and I was involved with a bunch of this work, have not seen good signs done on whether
masks work or not. There still has not been a large-scale study. To me, there should be large
scale studies on every possible solution, aggressive. In the same way that the vaccine
development was aggressive, there should be masks which test what kind of tests work really well.
Even the question of how the virus spreads, there should be aggressive studies on that.
To understand, I'm still, as far as I know, there's still a lot of uncertainty about that.
Nobody wants to see this as an engineering problem that needs to be solved. That I was surprised
about. I find that our views are largely convergent but not completely. I agree with
the thing that because our society in some sense perceives itself as too big to fail.
The virus did not alert people to the fact that we are facing possible failure
that basically put us into the post-modernist mode. I don't mean in a philosophical sense,
but in a societal sense. The difference between a post-modern society and the modern society is
that the modernist society has to deal with the ground tools and the post-modernist society has
to deal with appearances. Politics becomes a performance. The performance is done for an
audience and the organized audience is the media. The media evaluates itself via other media.
We have an audience of critics that evaluate themselves. I don't think it's so much the
failure of the politicians because to get in power and to stay in power, you need to be able
to deal with the published opinion. I think it goes in cycles because what's going to happen
is all of the small business owners, all the people who truly are suffering and will suffer
more because the effects of the closure of the economy and the lack of solutions to the virus,
they're going to a prize. Hopefully, this is where charismatic leaders can get the
world in trouble. Hopefully, we'll elect great leaders that will break through this
post-modernist idea of the media and the perception and the drama on Twitter and all that kind of
stuff. You know this can go either way. When the Weimar Republic was unable to deal with the
economic crisis that Germany was facing, there was an option to go back. There were people
which thought, let's get back to a constitutional monarchy and let's get this to work because
democracy doesn't work. Eventually, there was no way back. People decided there was no way back.
They needed to go forward. The only options for going forward was to become Stalinist
communists, basically an option to completely expropriate the factories and so on and nationalize
them and to reorganize Germany in communist terms and ally itself with Stalin and fascism.
Both options were obviously very bad. The one that the Germans picked led to a catastrophe
that devastated Europe. I'm not sure if the US has an immune response against that. I think that
the far-right is currently very weak in the US, but this can easily change.
Do you think from a historical perspective Hitler could have been stopped from within
Germany or from outside? It depends on who you want to focus, whether you want to focus on Stalin
or Hitler, but it feels like Hitler was the one as a political movement that could have been stopped.
I think that the point was that a lot of people wanted Hitler, so he got support from a lot of
quarters. There were a number of industrialists who supported him because they thought that the
democracy is obviously not working in unstable and you need a strongman. He was willing to play
that part. There were also people in the US who thought that Hitler would stop Stalin and would
act as a bulwark against Bolshevism, which he probably would have done at which cost.
Many of the things that he was going to do, like the Holocaust, was something where people
thought this is rhetoric. He's not actually going to do this, especially many of the Jews
themselves, which were humanists. For them, this was outside of the scope that was thinkable.
I wonder if Hitler is uniquely, I want to carefully use this term, but uniquely evil.
Hitler was never born if somebody else would come in this place. Just thinking about the
progress of history, how important are those singular figures that lead to mass destruction
and cruelty? Because my sense is, Hitler was unique. It wasn't just about the environment and
the context that gave him. Another person would not come in his place to do as destructive of
the things that he did. There was a combination of charisma, of madness, of psychopathy,
of just ego, all those things, which are very unlikely to come together in one person in the
right time. It also depends on the context of the country that you're operating in. If you
tell the Germans that they have a historical destiny in this romantic country, the effect is
probably different than it is in other countries. Stalin has killed a few more people than
Hitler did. If you look at the probability that you're survived under Stalin, Hitler killed people
if he thought they were not worth living, or if they were harmful to his racist project.
Basically, he felt that the Jews would be too cosmopolitan and would not be willing to participate
in the racist redefinition of society and the value of society and an ethno-state in this way,
as he wanted it to have it. He saw them as a harmful danger, especially since they played
such an important role in the economy and culture of Germany. Basically, he had some radical,
but rational reason to murder them. Stalin just killed everyone. The Stalinist purges were such
a random thing where he said that there is a certain possibility that this particular part
of the population has a number of German collaborators or something, and we just killed
them all. Or if you look at what Mao did, the number of people that were killed in absolute
numbers were much higher than the Mao that they were under Stalin. It's super hard to say. The
other thing is that you look at Genghis Khan and so on, how many people he killed. You see
there are a number of things that happen in human history that actually put a substantial
dent in the existing population, or Napoleon. It's very difficult to eventually measure it,
because what's happening is basically evolution on a human scale where one monkey figures out a
way to become viral and is using this viral technology to change the patterns of society
at a very large scale. What we find so abhorrent about these changes is the complexity that is
being destroyed by this. It's basically like a big fire that burns out a lot of the existing
culture and structure that existed before. Yeah, and it all just starts with one monkey,
one charismatic ape, and there's a bunch of them throughout history. Yeah, but it's in a given
environment. It's basically similar to wildfires in California. The temperature is rising,
there is less rain falling, and then suddenly a single spark can have an effect that in other
times would be contained. Okay, speaking of which, I love how we went to Hitler and Stalin from
20, 30 minutes ago, GPT-3 generating, doing programs that this is. The argument was about
morality of AI versus human. Specifically in the context of writing programs, specifically in the
context of programs that can be destructive. So running nuclear power plants or autonomous
weapons systems, for example. And I think your inclination was to say that it's not so obvious
that AI would be less moral than humans or less effective at making a world that would make humans
happy. So I'm not talking about self-directed systems that are making their own goals at
the global scale. If you just talk about the deployment of technological systems that are able
to see order and patterns and use this as control models to act on the goals that we give them,
then if we have the correct incentives to set the correct incentives for these systems,
I'm quite optimistic. So humans versus AI, let me give you an example.
Autonomous Weapon Systems. Let's say there's a city somewhere in the Middle East that has
a number of terrorists. And the question is, what's currently done with drone technologies,
you have information about the location of a particular terrorist, and you have a targeted
attack, you have a bombing of that particular building. And that's all directed by humans at
the high level strategy and also the deployment of individual bombs and missiles. Everything is
done by human except the final targeting and the spot, similar thing, like control the flight.
What if you give AI control and saying, write a program that says, here's the best information
available about the location of these five terrorists, here's the city, make sure all the
bombing you do is constrained to the city, make sure it's precision based, but you take care of
it. So you do one level of abstraction out and saying, take care of the terrorists in the city.
Which are you more comfortable with? The humans or the JavaScript GPT-3 generated code that's doing
the deployment. This is the kind of question I'm asking, is the kind of bugs that we see in human
nature, are they better or worse than the kind of bugs we see in AI? They're different bugs.
There is an issue that if people are creating an imperfect automation of a process that normally
requires a moral judgment, and this moral judgment is the reason why it cannot be automated often,
it's not because the computation is too expensive, but because the model that you give the AI is not
an adequate model of the dynamics of the world, because the AI does not understand the context
that it's operating in the right way. And this is something that already happens with Excel,
where you don't need to have an AI system to do this. If you have an automated process in place,
where humans decide using automated criteria whom to kill when, and whom to target when,
which already happens. And you have no way to get off the kill list once that happens,
once you have been targeted according to some automatic criterion by people, right,
in a bureaucracy. That is the issue. The issue is not the AI, it's the automation.
So there's something about, right, it's automation, but there's something about the,
there's a certain level of abstraction where you give control to AI to do the automation.
There's a scale that could be achieved that it feels like the scale of bug and scale mistake
and scale of destruction that could be achieved of the kind that humans cannot achieve. So AI is
much more able to destroy an entire country accidentally, versus humans. It feels like
the more civilians die as a react or suffer as a consequence of your decisions,
the more weight there is on the human mind to make that decision.
And so like it becomes more and more unlikely to make that decision for humans. For AI, it feels
like it's harder to encode that kind of weight. In a way, the AI that we're currently building
is automating statistics, right? Intelligence is the ability to make models so you can act on them
and AI is a tool to make better models. So in principle, if you're using AI wisely,
you're able to prevent more harm. And I think that the main issue is not on the side of the AI,
it's on the side of the human command hierarchy that is using technology irresponsibly.
So the question is how hard is it to encode, to properly encode the right incentives into the AI?
So for instance, there's this idea of what happens if we let our airplanes being flown
with AI systems and the neural network is a black box and so on. And it turns out our neural
networks are actually not black boxes anymore. There are function approximators losing linear
algebra, and there are performing things that we can understand. But we can also, instead of
letting the neural network fly the airplane, use the neural network to generate approval,
be correct program with a degree of accuracy of the proof that a human could not achieve.
And so we can use our AI by combining different technologies to build systems that are much
more reliable than the systems that a human being could create. And so in this sense, I would say
that if you use an early stage of technology to save labor and don't employ competent people,
but just to hack something together because you can, that is very dangerous. And if people
are acting under these incentives that they get evasive, delivering shoddy work more
cheaply using AI is less human oversight than before. That's very dangerous.
The thing is though, AI is still going to be unreliable, perhaps less so than humans,
but it'll be unreliable in novel ways. And yeah, but this is an empirical question. And it's
something that we can figure out and work with. So the issue is, do we trust the systems,
the social systems that we have in place and the social systems that we can build and maintain,
that they're able to use AI responsibly? If they can, then AI is good news. If they cannot,
then it's going to make the existing problems worse.
Well, and also who creates the AI, who controls it, who makes money from it,
because it's ultimately humans. And then you start talking about how much you trust the humans.
So the question is, what does who mean? I don't think that we have identity per se.
I think that the story of a human being is somewhat random. What happens is more or less that
everybody is acting on their local incentives, what they perceive to be their incentives.
And the question is, what are the incentives that the one that is pressing the button is operating
under? Yeah, it's nice for those incentives to be transparent. So for example, I'll give you
there seems to be a significant distrust of
tech, like entrepreneurs in the tech space, or people that run, for example, social media
companies like Mark Zuckerberg. There's not a complete transparency of incentives under
which that particular human being operates. We can listen to the words he says,
or what the marketing team says for a company, but we don't know. And that's becomes a problem
when that the algorithms and the systems created by him and other people in that company
start having more and more impact on society. And that it starts, you know, if the incentives
were somehow the definition and the explainability of the incentives was decentralized such that
nobody can manipulate it. No propaganda type manipulation of like how these systems actually
operate could be done. Then yes, if you know, I think, I think AI could achieve much fair, much
more effective sort of like solutions to difficult ethical problems. But when there's like humans
in the loop, manipulating the dissemination, the communication of how the system actually
works, that feels like you can run to a lot of trouble. And that's why there's currently a lot
of distrust for people at the heads of companies that have increasingly powerful AI systems.
I suspect what happened traditionally in the US was that since our decision making is much more
decentralized than in an authoritarian state, people are making decisions autonomously at many,
many levels in the society. What happened that was we created coherence and cohesion in society
by controlling what people thought and what information they had. The media synchronized
public opinion. And social media have disrupted this. It's not, I think, so much Russian influence
or something. It's everybody's influence. It's that a random person can come up with a conspiracy
theory and disrupt what people think. And if that conspiracy theory is more compelling or more
attractive than the standardized public conspiracy theory that we give people as a default,
then it might get more traction, right? You suddenly have the situation that a single individual
somewhere on a farm in Texas has more listeners than CNN. Which particular farmer you're referring
to in Texas? Probably no. Yes, I had dinner with him a couple of times. Okay. Right. It's an
interesting situation because you cannot get to be an anchor in CNN if you don't go through a
complicated gatekeeping process. And suddenly you have random people without that gatekeeping
process just optimizing for attention. Not necessarily with a lot of responsibility for
the long-term effects of projecting these theories into the public. And now there is a push of making
social media more like traditional media, which means that the opinion that is being projected in
social media is more limited to an acceptable range with the goal of getting society into
safe waters and increase the stability and cohesion of society again, which I think is
a laudable goal. But of course, it also is an opportunity to cease the means of indoctrination.
And the incentives that people are under when they do this are in such a way that
the AI ethics that we would need becomes very often something like AI politics,
which is basically partisan and ideological. And this means that whatever one side says,
another side is going to be disagreeing with, right? In the same way as when you turn masks or
the vaccine into a political issue, if you say that it is politically virtuous to get vaccinated,
it will mean that the people that don't like you will not want to get vaccinated. And as soon
as you have this partisan discourse, it's going to be very hard to make the right decisions,
because the incentives get to be the wrong ones. AI ethics needs to be super boring. It needs to
be done by people who do statistics all the time and have extremely boring, long-winded discussions
that most people cannot follow because they are too complicated, but that are dead serious.
These people need to be able to be better at statistics than the leading machine learning
researchers. And at the moment, the AI ethics debate is the one where you don't have any barrier
to entry, right? Everybody who has a strong opinion and is able to signal that opinion in the right
way can enter it. Strong words to judge it back. And to me, that is a very frustrating thing,
because the field is so crucially important to our future. It's so crucially important, but
the only qualification you currently need is to be outraged by the injustice in the world.
It's more complicated, right? Everybody seems to be outraged.
So let's just say that the incentives are not always the right ones. So basically,
I suspect that a lot of people that enter this debate don't have a vision for what society
should be looking like in a way that is nonviolent, where we preserve liberal democracy, where we
make sure that we all get along and we are around in a few hundred years from now, preferably
with the comfortable technological civilization around us.
I generally have a very foggy view of that world, but I tend to try to follow and I think
society should in some degree follow the gradient of love, increasing the amount of love in the
world. And whenever I see different policies or algorithms or ideas that are not doing so,
obviously, that's the ones that kind of resist.
So the thing that terrifies me about this notion is I think that German fascism was driven by love.
It was just a very selective love. It was a love that basically-
Well, now you're just manipulating. I mean, that's, you have to be very careful.
You're talking to the wrong person in this way about love.
So let's talk about what love is. And I think that love is the discovery of shared purpose.
It's the recognition of the sacred and the other. And this enables non-transactual interactions.
But the size of the other that you include needs to be maximized.
So it's basically appreciation, like deep appreciation of
the world around you fully, including the people that are very different than you,
the people that disagree with you completely, including people, including living creatures
outside of just people, including ideas and appreciation of the full mess of it.
And also it has to do with empathy, which is coupled with a lack of confidence,
uncertainty about your own rightness. It's like a radical open-mindedness to the way forward.
I agree with every part of what you said. And now, if you scale it up, what you recognize is that
love is, in some sense, the service to a next level agency, to the highest level agency that
you can recognize. It could be, for instance, life on earth or beyond that, where you could say
intelligent complexity in the universe that you try to maximize in a certain way.
But when you think it through, it basically means a certain aesthetic. And there is not one possible
aesthetic. There are many possible aesthetics. And once you project an aesthetic into the future,
you can see that there are some which defect from it, which are in conflict with it,
that are corrupt, that are evil. You and me would probably agree that Hitler was evil,
because the aesthetic of the world that he wanted is in conflict with the aesthetic of
the world that you and me have in mind. And so the thing that he destroyed, we want to keep them
in the world. There's ways to deal. I mean, Hitler's an easier case, but perhaps he wasn't so easy
in the 30s, to understand who's Hitler and who's not.
No, it's just that there was no consensus that the aesthetics that he had in mind were unacceptable.
Yeah. I mean, it's difficult. Love is complicated, because you can't just be so open-minded that
you let evil walk into the door. But you can't be so self-assured that you can always identify
evil perfectly, because that's what leads to Nazi Germany, having a certainty of what is and
wasn't evil, like always drawing lines of good versus evil. There has to be a dance between
like hard stances extending up against what is wrong. And at the same time, empathy and open
mind towards not knowing what is right and wrong. And like a dance between those.
I found that when I watched the Miyazaki movies that there is nobody who captures my spirituality
as well as he does. It's very interesting and just vicious. There is something going on in
his movies that is very interesting. So, for instance, Mononoka is discussing not only an answer
to Disney's simplistic notion of Mowgli, the jungle boy who was raised by wolves. And as soon
as he sees people, realizes that he's one of them. And the way in which the moral life and nature
is simplified and romanticized and turned into kitsch is disgusting in the Disney movie. And he
answers to this. You see, he's replaced by Mononoka, this wolf girl who was raised by wolves and who
was fierce and dangerous and who cannot be socialized because he cannot be tamed. He cannot
be part of human society. And you see human society, it's something that is very, very
complicated. You see people extracting resources and destroying nature. But the purpose is not
to be evil, but to be able to have a life that is free from, for instance, oppression and violence
and to curb death and disease. And you basically see this conflict which cannot be resolved in a
certain way. You see this moment when nature is turned into a garden and it loses most of what
it actually is when humans no longer submitting to life and death and nature. And to these questions,
there is no easy answer. So, he just turns it into something that is being observed as a journey
that happens and that happens with a certain degree of inevitability. And the nice thing about
all his movies is there is a certain main character and it's the same in all movies.
It's this little girl that is basically Heidi and I suspect that happened because when he did
field work for working on the Heidi movies back then, the Heidi animations, before he did his
own movies, he traveled to Switzerland and south-eastern Europe and the Adriatic and so on
and got an idea about a certain aesthetic and a certain way of life that informed his
future thinking. And Heidi has a very interesting relationship to herself and to the world.
There's nothing that she takes for herself. She is in a way fearless because she is committed
to a service to a greater whole. Basically, she is completely committed to serving God.
And it's not an institutionalized God. It has nothing to do with the Roman Catholic Church or
something like this. But in some sense, Heidi is an embodiment of the spirit of European
Protestantism. It's this idea of a being that is completely perfect and pure. And it's not a
feminist vision because she is not a girl boss or something like this. She is the justification
for the men in the audience to protect her, to build the civilization around her that makes
her possible. So she is not just the sacrifice of Jesus who is innocent and therefore,
nailed to the cross. She is not being sacrificed. She is being protected by everybody around her
who recognizes that she is sacred and there are enough around her to see that. So that's a very
interesting perspective. There's a certain notion of innocence. And this notion of innocence is not
universal. It's not in all cultures. Hitler wasn't innocent. His idea of Germany was not
that there is innocence that is being protected. There was a predator that was going to triumph.
And it's also something that is not at the core of every religion. There are many religions
which don't care about innocence. They might care about increasing the status of something.
And that's a very interesting notion that is quite unique and not claiming it's the optimal one.
It's just a particular kind of aesthetic which I think makes Miyazaki into the most relevant
Protestant philosopher today. And you're saying in terms of all the ways that society can operate
perhaps the preservation of innocence might be one of the best? No, it's just my aesthetic.
Your aesthetic. It's a particular way in which I feel that I relate to the world that is natural
to my own civilization and maybe it's not an accident that I have cultural roots in Europe
in a particular world. And so maybe it's a natural convergence point and it's not something that you
will find in all other times in history. So I'd like to ask you both Solzhenitsyn and our individual
role as ants in this very large society. So he says that some version of the line between good
and evil runs to the heart of every man. Do you think all of us are capable of good and evil?
Like what's our role in this play in this game while playing? Is all of us capable to play any
role? Like is there an ultimate responsibility to you mentioned maintaining innocence or whatever
the whatever the highest ideal for society you want are all of us capable of living up to that?
And that's our responsibility or are there significant limitations to what we're able to
do in terms of good and evil? So there is a certain way if you are not parable,
if you are committed to some kind of civilizational agency, a next level agent that you are serving,
some kind of transcendent principle. In the eyes of that transcendental principle,
you are able to discern good from evil, otherwise you cannot, otherwise you have just
individual aesthetics. The cat that is torturing a mouse is not evil because the cat does not envision
or not part of the cat is envisioning a world where there is no violence and nobody is suffering.
If you have an aesthetic where you want to protect innocence, then torturing somebody
needlessly is evil, but only then. No, but within, I guess the question is within the aesthetic,
like within your sense of what is good and evil, it seems like we're still able to
commit evil. Yes. So basically, if you are committing to this next level agent, you are not
necessarily are this next level agent, right? You are part of it. You have a relationship to it,
like it sailed us to its organism, its hyperorganism, and it only exists to the degree
that it's being implemented by you and others. And that means that you're not completely fully
serving it. You have freedom in what you decide, whether you are acting on your impulses and local
incentives and your verbal impulses, so to speak, or whether you're committing to it.
And what you perceive then is a tension between what you would be doing with respect to the thing
that you recognize as the sacred, if you do, and what you're actually doing. And this is the line
between good and evil, right? Where you see, oh, I'm here acting on my local incentives or impulses,
and here I'm acting on what I consider to be sacred. And there's a tension between those.
And this is the line between good and evil that might run through your heart. And if you don't
have that, if you don't have this relationship to a transcendental agent, you could call this
relationship to the next level agent soul, right? It's not a thing. It's not an immortal thing that
is intrinsically valuable. It's a certain kind of relationship that you project to understand
what's happening. Somebody is serving this transcendental sacredness or they're not.
If you don't have a soul, you cannot be evil. You're just a complex natural phenomenon.
So if you look at life, like starting today, or starting tomorrow, when we leave here today,
there's a bunch of trajectories that you can take through life,
maybe countless. Do you think some of these trajectories in your own conception of yourself,
some of those trajectories are the ideal life, a life that if you were to be the hero of your life
story, you would want to be? Like is there some Joshua Bach that you're striving to be?
Like this is the question I ask myself as an individual trying to make a better world in the
best way that I could conceive of. What is my responsibility there? And how much am I responsible
for the failure to do so? Because I'm lazy and incompetent too often in my own perception.
In my own world view, I'm not very important. So I don't have place for me as a hero in my
own world. I'm trying to do the best that I can, which is often not very good. And so it's not
important for me to have status or to be seen in a particular way. It's helpful if others can see
me, or a few people can see me, that can be my friends.
No, sorry, I want to clarify. The hero didn't mean status or perception or
some kind of marketing thing, but more in private, in the quiet of your own mind.
Is there the kind of man you want to be and would consider it a failure if you don't become that?
That's what I meant by hero.
Yeah, not really. I don't perceive myself as having such an identity.
And it's also sometimes frustrating. But it's basically a lack of having this notion of
father that I need to be emulating.
It's interesting. I mean, it's the leaf floating down the river. I worry that...
Sometimes it's more like being the river.
I'm just a fat frog sitting on a leaf on a dirty muddy lake.
Waiting for a princess to kiss me. Or the other way. I forgot which way it goes.
Somebody kisses somebody.
Can I ask you, I don't know if you know who Michael Malis is, but
in terms of constructing systems of incentives, it's interesting to ask.
I don't think I've talked to you about this before. Malis espouses anarchism.
So he sees all government as fundamentally getting in the way or even being destructive to
collaborations between human beings thriving. What do you think?
What's the role of government in a society that thrives? Is anarchism at all compelling to you
as a system? Not just small government, but no government at all?
Yeah, I don't see how this would work.
The government is an agent that imposes an offset on your reward function, on your payout
metrics, so your behavior becomes compatible with the common good.
So the argument there is that you can have collectives, like governing organizations,
but not government, like where you're born in a particular set of land, and therefore you must
follow this rule or else. You're forced by what they call violence, because there's an implied
violence here. So the key aspect of government is it protects you from the rest of the world
with an army and with police. It has a monopoly on violence. It's the only one that's able to do
violence. There are many forms of government. Not all governments do that, but we find that
in successful countries, the government has a monopoly on violence. That means that you cannot
get ahead by starting your own army, because the government will come down on you and destroy you
if you try to do that. In countries where you can build your own army and get a way visit,
some people will do it. These countries is what we call failed countries in a way.
If you don't want to have violence, the point is not to appeal to the moral intentions of people,
because some people will use strategies if they get ahead with them that feel a particular kind
of ecological niche. So you need to destroy that ecological niche. And if an effective government
has a monopoly on violence, it can create a world where nobody is able to use violence
and get ahead. So you want to use that monopoly on violence not to exert violence,
but to make violence impossible, to raise the cost of violence. So people need to get ahead with
nonviolent means. So the idea is that you might be able to achieve that in an anarchist state
with companies. So with the forces of capitalism is create security companies
where the one that's most ethically sound rises to the top. Basically, it would be a much better
representative of the people, because there is less sort of stickiness to the big military force
sticking around, even though it's long, overlived, outlived.
So you have groups of militants that are hopefully officially organized, because otherwise they're
going to lose against the other groups of militants, and they are coordinating themselves with the
rest of society until they are having a monopoly on violence. How is that different from a government?
So it's basically converging to the same thing.
So I think it always, in my, as I was trying to argue with Malice, I feel like it always converges
towards government at scale. But I think the idea is you can have a lot of collectives that are,
you basically never let anything scale too big. So one of the problems with governments is it
gets too big in terms of the size of the group over which it has control.
My sense is that would happen anyway. So a successful company like Amazon or Facebook,
it starts forming a monopoly over the entire populations, not over just hundreds of millions,
but billions of people. So I don't know. But there is something about the abuses of power
the government can have when it has a monopoly on violence. And so that's attention there.
So the question is, how can you set the incentives for government correctly? And this
mostly applies at the highest levels of government. And we, because we haven't found a way to set
them correctly, we made the highest levels of government relatively weak. And this is,
I think, part of the reason why we had difficulty to coordinate the pandemic response.
And China didn't have that much difficulty. And there is, of course, a much higher risk of the
abuse of power that exists in China, because the power is largely unchecked. And that's
basically what happens in the next generation, for instance, imagine that we would agree that
the current government of China is largely correct and by never limit. And maybe we don't agree on
this. But if we did, how can we make sure that this stays like this? And if you don't have checks
and balances and division of power, it's hard to achieve. You don't have a solution for that problem.
But the abolishment of government basically would remove the control structure from a
cybernetic perspective. There is an optimal point in the system that the regulation should be
happening, right? Where you can measure the current incentives and the regulator would
properly incentivize to make the right decisions and change the payout metrics of everything below
it in such a way that the local prisoners' dilemmas get resolved. You cannot resolve the
prisoners' dilemma without some kind of eternal control that emulates an infinite game in a way.
Yeah. I mean, there's a sense in which it seems like the reason government, the parts of government
that don't work well currently is because there's not good mechanisms through which to interact
for the citizenry to interact with government is basically it hasn't caught up in terms of
technology. And I think once you integrate some of the digital revolution of being able to
have a lot of access to data, be able to vote on different ideas at a local level, at all levels,
at the optimal level, like you're saying, that can resolve the prisoner dilemmas and to integrate
AI to help you out, automate things that don't require the human ingenuity. I feel like that's
where government could operate that well and can also break apart the inefficient bureaucracies,
if needed. There'll be a strong incentive to be efficient and successful.
So out human history, we see an evolutionary competition of modes of government and of
individual governments as in these modes. And every nation state in some sense is some kind
of organism that has found different solutions for the problem of government. And you could look at
all these different models and the different scales at which it exists as empirical attempts to
validate the idea of how to build a better government. And I suspect that the idea of anarchism,
similar to the idea of communism, is the result of being disenchanted with the ugliness of the real
existing solutions and the attempt to get to an utopia. And I suspect that communism originally
was not a utopia. I think that in the same way as original Christianity, it had a particular kind
of vision. And this vision is a society, a mode of organization within the society,
in which humans can coexist at scale without coercion. The same way as we do in a healthy
family. In a good family, you don't terrorize each other into compliance, but you understand what
everybody needs and what everybody can is able to contribute and what the intended future of the
whole thing is. And everybody coordinates their behavior in the right way and informs each other
about how to do this and all the interactions that happen are instrumental to making that happen.
Could this happen at scale? And I think this is the idea of communism. Communism is opposed to the
idea that we need economic terror or other forms of terror to make that happen. But in practice,
what happened is that the proto-communist countries, the real existing socialism, replaced a part of
the economic terror with moral terror. So we were told to do the right thing for moral reasons.
And of course, it didn't really work and the economy eventually collapsed. And the moral
terror had actual real cost. People were imprisoned because they were morally non-compliant.
The other thing is that the idea of communism became a utopia. So it basically was projected
into the afterlife. We were told in my childhood that communism was a hypothetical society
to which we were in a permanent revolution that justified everything that was presently wrong
with society morally. But it was something that our grandchildren probably would not ever see
because it was too ideal and too far in the future to make it happen right now. And
people were just not there yet morally. And the same thing happened with Christianity. This notion
of heaven was mythologized and projected into an afterlife. And I think this was just the idea of
God's kingdom, of this world in which we instantiate the next level transcendental agent in the
perfect form. So everything goes smoothly and without violence and without conflict and without
this human messiness on this economic messiness and the terror and coercion that existed in the
present societies. And the idea of whether humans can exist at scale in a harmonious way
non-coercively is untested. A lot of people tested it but didn't get it to work so far.
And the utopia is a world in where you get all the good things without any of the bad things.
And you are, I think, very susceptible to believe in utopias when you are very young and don't
understand that everything has to happen in causal patterns, that there is always feedback loops that
ultimately are closed. There's nothing that just happens because it's good or bad. Good or bad
don't exist in isolation. They only exist with respect to larger systems.
So can you intuit why utopias fail as systems? So like having a utopia that's out there beyond
the horizon, is it because then, it's not only because it's impossible to achieve utopias,
but it's because what certain humans, certain small number of humans start to
sort of greedily attain power and money and control and influence
as they become, as they see the power in using this idea of a utopia.
It's a little like saying, why is my garden not perfect? It's because some evil weeds are
overgrowing it and they always do. But this is not how it works. A good garden is a system that
is in balance and requires minimal interactions by the gardener. And so you need to create a system
that is designed to self-stabilize. And the design of social systems requires not just the
implementation of the desired functionality but the next level design, also in biological systems.
You need to create a system that wants to converge to the intended function.
And so instead of just creating an institution like the FDA that is performing a particular kind
of role in society, you need to make sure that the FDA is actually driven by a system that wants to
do this optimally, that is incentivized to do it optimally and then makes the performance that is
actually enacted in every generation instrumental to that thing, that actual goal. And that is much
harder to design and to achieve. So you have to design a system where, and listen, communism also
was quote unquote incentivized to be a feedback loop system that achieves that utopia. It just,
it wasn't working given human nature. The incentives were not correct given human nature.
So how do you incentivize people when they are getting coal off the ground to work as hard as
possible? Because it's a terrible job and it's very bad for your health. And right, how do you do
this? And you can give them prices and metals and status to some degree, right? There's only so much
status to give for that. And most people will not fall for this, right? Or you can pay them.
And you probably have to pay them in an asymmetric way because if you pay everybody the same and
you nationalize the coal mines, eventually people will figure out that they can game the system.
Yes. So you're describing capitalism. Capitalism is the present solution to the system. And
what we also noticed that I think that Marx was correct in saying that capitalism is prone to
crisis, that capitalism is a system that in its dynamics is not convergent but divergent.
It's not a stable system. And that eventually it produces an enormous potential for productivity.
But it also is systematically misallocating resources. So a lot of people cannot participate
in the production and consumption anymore. And this is what we observe. We observe that
the middle class in the US is tiny. A lot of people think that they're middle class,
but if you are still flying economy, you're not middle class.
Right. Every class is a menu to a smaller than the previous class.
The thing about classes is really like airline classes.
It's the no-play class. A lot of people are economy class. Business class and very few
are first class and summer budget. I mean, I understand. I think there is, yeah,
maybe some people, probably I would push back against that definition of the middle class.
It does feel like the middle class is pretty large, but yes, there's a discrepancy in terms of wealth.
So think about the terms of the productivity that our society could have. There is no reason
for anybody to fly economy. We would be able to let everybody travel in style.
Well, but also some people like to be frugal even when they're billionaires. So let's take
that into account. Yes, but I mean, we probably don't need to be a traveling lavish, but you also
don't need to be tortured, right? There is a difference between frugal and subjecting yourself
to torture. Listen, I love economy. I don't understand why you're comparing a flying economy
to torture. Although the flight here, there's two crying babies next to me. But that has
nothing to do with crime babies. They're very cute though. I have two kids and sometimes I have
to go back to visit the grandparents and back means going from the west coast to Germany.
And that's a long flight. Is it true that when you're a father, you grow immune to the crying
and all that kind of stuff? Because like me just not having kids, other people's kids can be quite
annoying when they're crying and screaming and all that kind of stuff. When you have children
and you're wired up in a default natural way, you're lucky in this regard, you fall in love with
them. And this falling in love with them means that you basically start to see the world through
their eyes and you understand that in a given situation, they cannot do anything but
being expressing despair. And so it becomes more differentiated. I noticed that, for instance,
my son is typically acting on a pure experience of what things are like right now. And he has
to do this right now. And you have this small child that is, when he was a baby and so on,
where he was just immediately expressing what he felt. And if you cannot regulate this from the
outside, there's no point to be upset about it. It's like dealing with weather or something like
this. You all have to get through it. And it's not easy for him either. But if you also have
a daughter, maybe she is planning for that. Maybe she understands that
she's sitting in the car behind you and she's screaming at the top of her lungs and you're
almost doing an accident. And you really don't know what to do. What should I have done to
make you stop screaming? You could have given me candy.
I think that's like a cat versus dog discussion. I love it. Because you said the
like a fundamental aspect of that is love that makes it all worth it.
What in this monkey riding an elephant in a dream world, what role does love play
in the human condition? I think that love is the facilitator of non-transactual interaction.
When you are observing your own purposes, some of these purposes go beyond your ego. They go
beyond the particular organism that you are and your local interests.
That's what you mean by non-transactual.
Yes. So basically, when you are acting in a transactional way, it means that you are
respecting something in return for you from the one that you're interacting with.
You are interacting with a random stranger. You buy something from them on eBay. You expect
a fair value for the money that you send them and vice versa because you don't know that person.
You don't have any kind of relationship to them. But when you know this person a little bit better
and you know the situation that they're in, you understand what they try to achieve in their life
and you approve because you realize that they're in some sense serving the same
human sacredness as you are. They need to think that you have. Maybe you give it to them as a present.
The feeling itself of joy is a kind of benefit, is a kind of transaction.
Yes, but the joy is not the point. The joy is the signal that you get. It's the reinforcement
signal that your brain sends to you because you are acting on the incentives of the agent that
you're part of. We are meant to be part of something larger. That is the way in which we out-competed
other hominids. Take that, Neanderthals. Yes, and also other humans. There was a population
bottleneck for human society that leads to an extreme lack of genetic diversity among humans.
If you look at Bushmen in the Kalahari that basically tribes that are not that far
distant to each other have more genetic diversity than exist between Europeans and Chinese.
That's because basically the out-of-Africa population at some point had a bottleneck
of just a few thousand individuals. What probably happened is not that at any time the number of
people shrunk below a few hundred thousand. What probably happened is that there was a small group
that had a decisive mutation that produced an advantage. This group multiplied and killed
everybody else. We are descendants of that group. I wonder what the peculiar characteristics of
that group. We can only just listen to the echoes and the ripples that are still within us.
I suspect what eventually made a big difference was the ability to organize at scale, to program
each other with ideas. That we became programmable, that we were willing to work on lockstep, that we
went above the tribal level, that we no longer were groups of a few hundred individuals and
acted on direct reputation systems transactionally, but that we basically evolved an adaptation
to become state building. To form collectives outside of the direct collectives.
Yes, and that's basically a part of us became committed to serving something outside of what
we know. Then that's kind of what love is. It's terrifying because it meant that we
eradicated the others. It's a force. It's an adaptive force that gets us ahead in evolution,
which means we displace something else that doesn't have that.
Oh, so we had to murder a lot of people that warned about love. Love led to destruction.
They didn't have the same strong love as we did. That's why I mentioned this thing with fascism.
When you see these speeches, do you want total war? Everybody says yes. This is this big,
oh my God, be a part of something that is more important than me that gives meaning to my existence.
Fair enough. Do you have advice for young people today in high school, in college,
that are thinking about what to do with their career, with their life, so that at the end of
the whole thing, they could be proud of what they did? Don't cheat. Have integrity.
Integrity. So what does integrity look like when you're at the river, or at the leaf,
or the fat frog in a lake? It basically means that you try to figure out what the thing is that
is the most right. This doesn't mean that you have to look for what other people tell you
what's right, but you have to aim for moral autonomy. Things need to be right independently
of what other people say. I always felt that when people told me to listen to what others say,
like read the room, build your ideas of what's true based on the high status people of your
in-group, that does not protect me from fascism. The only way to protect yourself from fascism
is to decide it's the world that is being built here, the world that I want to be in.
Yeah. So in some sense, try to make your behavior sustainable. Act in such a way that you
would feel comfortable on all sides of the transaction. Realize that everybody is you
in a different timeline, but is seeing things differently and has reasons to do so.
Yeah. I've come to realize this recently. There is an inner voice that tells you what's right
and wrong. And speaking of reading the room, there's times what integrity looks like is there's
times when a lot of people are doing something wrong and what integrity looks like is not going
on Twitter and tweeting about it, but not participating quietly, not doing. So it's
not like signaling or not all this kind of stuff, but actually living your what you think is right,
like living it. That's also sometimes this expectation that others are like us. So imagine
the possibility that some of the people around you are space aliens that only look human.
Right. So they don't have the same prayers as you do. They don't have the same
impulses that what's right and wrong. There's a large diversity in these basic impulses that
people can have in a given situation. And now realize that you are a space alien.
Right. You are not actually human. You think that you're human, but you don't know what it means,
like what it's like to be human. You just make it up as you go along like everybody else.
And you have to figure that out what it means that you are a full human being, what it means to be
human in the world and how to connect with others on that. And there is also something, don't be
afraid in the sense that if you do this, you're not good enough. Because if you are acting on these
incentives of integrity, you become trustworthy. That's the way in which you can recognize each
other. There is a particular place where you can meet and you can figure out what that place is,
where you will give support to people because you realize that they act with integrity,
and they will also do that. So in some sense, you are safe if you do that.
You're not always protected. There are people which will abuse you and that might,
that are bad actors in a way that it's hard to imagine before you meet them.
But there is also people which will try to protect you.
Yeah, that's such a, thank you for saying that. There's such a hopeful message
that no matter what happens to you, there'll be a place, there's people you'll meet
that also have what you have. And you will find happiness there and safety there.
Yeah, but it doesn't need to end well. It can also all go wrong. So there's no guarantee in this life.
So you can do everything right and you still can fail. And horrible things happen to you that
traumatize you and mutilate you. And you have to be grateful if it doesn't happen.
And ultimately be grateful no matter what happens, because even just being alive is pretty damn nice.
Yeah, even that, you know. The gratefulness in some sense is also just generated by your brain
to keep you going. It's all the trick. Speaking of which, Camus said,
I see many people die because they judge that life is not worth living. I see others
paradoxically getting killed for the ideas or illusions that give them a reason for living.
What is called the reason for living is also an excellent reason for dying.
I therefore conclude that the meaning of life is the most urgent of questions.
So I have to ask what Josh Abok is the meaning of life. It is an urgent question according to Camus.
I don't think that there's a single answer to this. Nothing makes sense unless a mind makes it so.
So you basically have to project a purpose. And if you zoom out far enough, there's the heat test
of the universe and everything is meaningless. Everything is just a blip in between. And the
question is, do you find meaning in this blip in between? Do you find meaning in observing squirrels?
Do you find meaning in raising children and projecting a multi-generational organism into
the future? Do you find meaning in projecting an aesthetic of the world that you like to the future
and trying to serve that aesthetic? And if you do, then life has that meaning. And if you don't,
then it doesn't. I enjoy the idea that you just create the most vibrant, the most weird,
the most unique kind of blip you can, given your environment, given your set of skills.
Just be the most weird set of local pocket of complexity you can be. So that when people study
the universe, they'll pause and be like, that's weird. It looks like a useful strategy, but of
course it's still motivated reasoning. You're obviously acting on your incentives here.
It's still a story we tell ourselves within a dream that's hardly in touch with the reality.
It's definitely a good strategy if you are a podcaster.
And a human, which I'm still trying to figure out if I am.
Yeah, there's a mutual relationship somehow.
Josh, you're one of the most incredible people I know. I really love talking to you. I love
talking to you again. And it's really an honor that you spend your valuable time with me. I hope
we get to talk many times throughout our short and meaningless lives.
More meaningful.
More meaningful.
Thank you, Alex. I enjoyed this conversation very much.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Yosha Bach. And thank you to
Coinbase, Codecademy, Linode, Netsuite, and ExpressVPN. Check them out in the description
to support this podcast. And now let me leave you with some words from Carl Jung.
People will do anything, no matter how absurd in order to avoid facing their own souls.
One does not become enlightened by imagining figures of light, but by making the darkness
conscious. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
