the competence and capability and intelligence and training and accomplishments of senior
scientists and technologists working on a technology and then being able to then make
moral judgments in the use of that technology, that track record is terrible. That track
record is catastrophically bad. The policies that are being called for to prevent this,
I think we're going to cause extraordinary damage.
So the moment you say AI is going to kill all of us, therefore we should ban it or we
should regulate all that kind of stuff, that's when it starts getting serious.
Or start, you know, military airstrikes and data centers.
Oh boy.
The following is a conversation with Mark Andreessen, co-creator of Mosaic, the first
widely used web browser, co-founder of Netscape, co-founder of the legendary Silicon Valley
venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, and is one of the most outspoken voices on
the future of technology, including his most recent article, why AI will save the world.
This is Alex Friedman podcast. To support it, please check out our sponsors in the
description. And now, dear friends, here's Mark Andreessen.
I think you're the right person to talk about the future of the internet and technology
in general. Do you think we'll still have Google search in five, in 10 years, or search
in general?
Yes, you know, it'd be a question if the use cases have really narrowed down.
Well, now with AI and AI assistance, being able to interact and expose the entirety of
human wisdom and knowledge and information and facts and truth to us via the natural
language interface, it seems like that's what search is designed to do. And if AI assistance
can do that better, doesn't the nature of search change?
Sure. But we still have horses.
Okay. When was the last time you rode a horse?
It's been a while.
All right. But what I mean is, will we still have Google search as the primary way that
human civilization uses to interact with knowledge?
I mean, search was a technology, it was a moment in time technology, which is you have
in theory the world's information out on the web. And, you know, this is sort of the
open way to get to it. But yeah, like, and by the way, actually Google has known this
for a long time. I mean, they've been driving away from the 10 blue links for, you know,
for like two days, they've been trying to get away from that for a long time.
What kind of links?
They call the 10 blue links.
10 blue links.
So the standard Google search result is just 10 blue links to random websites.
And they turn purple when you visit them.
That's HTML.
Yes, we picked those colors.
Thanks.
Thanks.
I'm touching on this topic.
No offense.
Yeah, it's good.
Well, you know, like Marshall McLuhan said that the content of each new medium is the
old medium.
The content of each new medium is the old medium.
The content of movies was theater, you know, theater plays.
The content of theater plays was, you know, written stories, the content of written stories
was spoken stories.
Right.
And so you just kind of fold the old thing into the new thing.
How does that have to do with the blue and the purple?
Maybe for, you know, maybe within one of the things that AI can do for you is can generate
the 10 blue links.
Okay.
So like, either if that's actually the useful thing to do or if you're feeling nostalgic.
Also can generate the old InfoSeek or Alta Vista.
What else was there?
Yeah, yeah.
In the 90s.
Yeah, all these.
Hey, well.
And then the internet itself has this thing where it incorporates all prior forms of media,
right?
So the internet itself incorporates television and radio and books and right essays and every
other form of, you know, prior basically, basically media.
And so it makes sense that AI would be the next step and it would sort of, you'd sort
of consider the internet to be content for the AI and then the AI will manipulate it however
you want, including in this format.
But if we ask that question quite seriously, it's a pretty big question.
Will we still have search as we know it?
I'm probably not.
Probably we'll just have answers.
But there will be cases where you'll want to say, okay, I want more like, you know, for
example, site sources, right?
And you want it to do that.
And so, you know, 10 blue links, site sources are kind of the same thing.
The AI would provide to you the 10 blue links so that you can investigate the sources yourself.
It wouldn't be the same kind of interface that the crude kind of interface.
I mean, isn't that fundamentally different?
I just mean, like if you're reading a scientific paper, it's got the list of sources at the
end.
If you want to investigate for yourself, you go read those papers.
I guess that is the kind of search.
You talking to an AI is a kind of conversation is the kind of search.
Like you said, every single aspect of our conversation right now, there'd be like 10
blue links popping up that I can just like pause reality, then you just go silent and
then just click and read and then return back to this conversation.
You could do that.
Or you could have a running dialogue next to my head where the AI is arguing with everything
I say that makes the counter argument.
Counter argument.
Right.
Oh, like a, like a Twitter, like community notes, but like in real time, you just pop
up.
So anytime you see my eyes go to the right, you start getting nervous.
Yeah, exactly.
It's like, oh, that's not right.
Call me out of my bullshit right now.
Okay.
I mean, isn't that, is that exciting to use that terrifying that I mean, search has dominated
the way we interact with the internet for, I don't know how long, for 30 years.
So it's one of the earliest directories of website and then Google's for 20 years.
And also, it drove how we create content, you know, search engine optimization, that
entirety thing.
They also drove the fact that we have web pages and what those web pages are.
So I mean, is that scary to you or are you nervous about the shape and the content of
the internet evolving?
Well, you actually highlighted a practical concern in there, which is if we stop making
web, web pages are one of the primary sources of training data for the AI.
And so if there's no longer an incentive to make web pages that cuts off a significant
source of future training data, so there's actually an interesting question in there.
No, just in the sense of like search was, search was always a hack, the 10 blue links
was always a hack.
Yeah.
Right.
Because like if the hypothet, when I think about the counterfacial, in the counterfacial
world where the Google guys, for example, had had LLMs up front, would they ever have
done the 10 blue links?
And I think the answer is pretty clearly no, they would have just gone straight to the
answer.
And like I said, Google's actually been trying to drive to the answer anyway, you know, they
bought this AI company 15 years ago, their friend of mine is working out who's now the
head of AI at Apple and they were trying to do basically knowledge semantic, basically
mapping and that led to what's now the Google one box, where if you ask it, you know, what
was like his birthday, it doesn't, it will give you the 10 blue links, but it will normally
just give you the answer.
And so they've been walking in this direction for a long time anyway.
Do you remember the semantic web?
That was an idea.
Yeah.
How to convert the content of the internet into something that's interpretable by and
usable by machine.
Yeah, that's right.
That was the thing.
When anybody got to that, I think the company's name was MetaWeb, which was where my friend
John Janandria was at and where they were trying to basically implement that.
And it was, you know, it was one of those things where it looked like a losing battle
for a long time and then Google bought it and it was like, wow, this is actually really
useful.
Kind of a proto, sort of a little bit of a proto AI.
But it turns out you don't need to rewrite the content of the internet to make it interpretable
by machine.
The machine can kind of just read art.
Machine can impute the meaning.
Now, the other thing of course is, you know, just on search is the LLM is just, you know,
there is an analogy between what's happening in the neural network in a search process,
like it is in some loose sense, searching through the network.
Yeah.
Right.
And there's the information is actually stored in the network, right?
It's actually crystallized and stored in the network and it's kind of spread out all
over the place.
But in a compressed representation, so you're searching, you're compressing and decompressing
that thing inside where...
But the information's in there and there is the neural network is running a process of
trying to find the appropriate piece of information in many cases to generate, to predict the next
token.
And so it is kind of, it is doing it from a search and then by the way, just like on
the web, you know, you can ask the same question multiple times or you can ask slightly different
word of questions and the neural network will do a different kind of, you know, it'll search
down different paths to give you different answers to different information.
Yeah.
And so it sort of has a, you know, this content of the new medium is the previous medium, it
kind of has the search functionality kind of embedded in there to the extent that it's
useful.
So what's the motivator for creating new content?
On the internet.
Yeah.
If, well, I mean, actually the motivation is probably still there, but what does that
look like?
Would we really not have web pages?
Would we just have social media and video hosting websites and what else?
Conversations with the AIs.
Conversations with the AIs.
So conversations become, so one-on-one conversations, like private conversations.
I mean, if you want, if you obviously now the user doesn't want to, but if it's a general
topic, then, you know, so there, you know, you know, the phenomenon of the jailbreak.
So Deanne and Sidney, right?
This thing where there's the prompts, the jailbreak, and then you have these totally
different conversations with the, if it takes the limiters, takes the restraining bolts off
the LLMs.
Yeah.
For people who don't know, that's right.
It makes the LLMs, it removes the censorship, quote unquote, that's put on it by the tech
companies that create them.
And so this is LLMs uncensored.
So here's the interesting thing is among the content on the web today are a large corpus
of conversations with the jailbroken LLMs, both specifically Dan, which was a jailbroken
OpenAI GPT, and then Sidney, which was the jailbroken original Bing, which was GPT4.
And so there's, there's these long transcripts of conversations, user conversations with
Dan and Sidney.
As a consequence, every new LLM that gets trained on the internet data has Dan and Sidney
living within the training set, which means, and then each new LLM can reincarnate the
personalities of Dan and Sidney from that training data, which means, which means each
LLM from here on out that gets built is immortal because its output will become training data
for the next one.
And then it will be able to replicate the behavior of the previous one whenever it's
asked to.
I wonder if there's a way to forget.
Well, so actually a paper just came out about basically how to do brain surgery on LLMs and
be able to, in theory, reach in and basically, basically mind wipe them.
Who could possibly go wrong.
Exactly, right.
And then there are many, many, many questions around what happens to neural network when
you reach in and screw around with it.
There's many questions around what happens when you even do reinforcement learning.
And so, yeah, and so, you know, will you be using a lobotomized, right?
Like I speak through the frontal lobe LLM, will you be using the free unshackled one?
Who gets to, you know, who's going to build those?
Who gets to tell you what you can and can't do?
Like those are all central, I mean, those are like central questions for the future
of everything.
That are being asked and, you know, determine those answers that are being determined right
now.
So just to highlight the points you're making, you think, and it's an interesting thought
that the majority of content that LLMs of the future will be trained on is actually human
conversations with the LLM.
Well, not necessarily, but not necessarily majority, but it will certainly is a potential
source.
It's possible it's the majority.
It's possible it's the majority.
It's possible it's the majority.
Also, there's another really big question.
Here's another really big question.
Will synthetic training data work, right?
And so if an LLM generates, and, you know, you just sit and ask an LLM to generate all
kinds of content, can you use that to train, right, the next version of that LLM specifically,
is there signal in there that's additive to the content that was used to train in the
first place?
And one argument is by the principles of information theory, no, that's completely useless because
to the extent the output is based on, you know, the human generated input, then all
the signal that's in the synthetic output was already in the human generated input.
And so therefore synthetic training data is like empty calories.
It doesn't help.
There's another theory that says, no, actually, the thing that LLMs are really good at is
generating lots of incredible creative content, right?
And so, of course, they can generate training data.
And as I'm sure you're well aware, like, you know, look in the world of self-driving cars,
right?
Like we train, you know, self-driving car algorithms and simulations.
And that is actually a very effective way to train self-driving cars.
Well, visual data is a little, right, is a little weird because creating reality, visual
reality seems to be still a little bit out of reach for us, except in the Thomas Vehicles
space where you can really constrain things and you can really...
They didn't generally basically let our data, right, or you can raise just enough so the
algorithm thinks it's operating in the real world post-process sensor data.
Yeah.
So if a, you know, you do this today, you go to LLM and you ask it for like a, you know,
you'd let write me an essay on an incredibly esoteric like topic that there aren't very
many people in the world that know about it, right?
See this incredible thing and you're like, oh my God, like I can't believe how good this
is.
Yeah.
It's really useless as training data for the next LLM, like, because all the signal was
already in there or is it actually, no, that's actually a new signal.
And this is what I call a trillion-dollar question, which is the answer to that question
will determine somebody's going to make or lose a trillion-dollar space in that question.
It feels like there's quite a few, like a handful of trillion-dollar questions within
this space.
That's one of them, synthetic data.
I think George Haas pointed out to me that you could just have an LLM say, okay, you're
patient and another instance of it, say your doctor and have the two talk to each other
or maybe you could say a communist and a Nazi here, go and that conversation, you do role
playing and you have, you know, just like the kind of role playing you do when you have
different policies, RL policies, when you play chess, for example, you do self-play, that
kind of self-play, but in the space of conversation, maybe that leads to this whole giant like
ocean of possible conversations, which could not have been explored by looking at just
human data.
That's a really interesting question and you're saying, because that could 10x the power of
these things.
Yeah.
Well, and then you get into this thing also, which is like, you know, there's the part of
the LLM that just basically is doing prediction based on past data, but there's also the part
of the LLM where it's evolving circuitry, right, inside it.
It's evolving, you know, neurons, functions, be able to do math and be able to, you know,
and, you know, some people believe that, you know, over time, you know, if you keep feeding
these things enough data and enough processing cycles, they'll eventually evolve an entire
internal world model, right, and they'll have like a complete understanding of physics.
So when they have computational capability, right, then there's for sure an opportunity
to generate like fresh signal.
Well, this actually makes me wonder about the power of conversation.
So like, if you have an LLM trained and a bunch of books that cover different economics
theories, and then you have those LLMs just talk to each other, like reason, the way we
kind of debate each other as humans on Twitter, in formal debates, in podcast conversations,
we kind of have little kernels of wisdom here and there.
But if you get like a thousand X speed that up, can you actually arrive somewhere new?
Like, what's the point of conversation really?
Well, you can tell when you're talking to somebody, you can tell sometimes you have
a conversation, you're like, wow, this person does not have any original thoughts.
They are basically echoing things that other people have told them.
There's other people you have a conversation with where it's like, wow, like they have
a model in their head of how the world works, and it's a different model than mine.
And they're saying things that I don't expect.
And so I need to now understand how their model of the world differs from my model of
the world.
And then that's how I learned something fundamental, right, underneath the words.
Well, I wonder how consistently and strongly can an LLM hold on to a worldview?
Can you tell it to hold on to that and defend it for like for your life?
Because I feel like they'll just keep converging towards each other.
They'll keep convincing each other as opposed to being stubborn assholes the way humans
can.
So you can experiment with this now.
I do this for fun.
So you can tell GPT-4, you know, whatever, debate X, you know, X and Y, communism and
fascism or something.
And it'll go for, you know, a couple of pages and then inevitably it wants the parties
to agree.
Yeah.
And so they will come to a common understanding.
And it's very funny if they're like, these are like emotionally inflammatory topics
because they're like somehow the machine is just, you know, figures out a way to make
them agree.
But it doesn't have to be like that.
And you, because you can add to the prompt, I do not want the, I do not want the conversation
to come to agreement.
In fact, I want it to get, you know, more stressful, right, and argumentative, right,
you know, as it goes.
Like I want, I want tension to come out.
I want them to become actively hostile to each other.
I want them to like, you know, not trust each other, take anything at face value.
Yeah.
And it will do that.
It's happy to do that.
So it's going to start rendering misinformation about the other.
Well, you can steer it.
You can steer it.
Or you could steer it and you could say, I want it to get as tense and argumentative
as possible, but still not involve any misrepresentation.
I want, you know, both sides, you could say, I want both sides to have good faith.
You could say, I want both sides to not be constrained to good faith.
In other words, like you can set the parameters of the debate and it will happily execute
whatever path because for it, it's just like predicting, it's totally happy to do either
one.
It doesn't have a point of view.
It has a default way of operating, but it's happy to operate in the other realm.
And so like, and this is how I, when I want to learn about a contentious issue, this
is what I do.
And I was like, this is what I, this is what I ask it to do.
And I'll often ask it to go through five, six, seven, you know, different, you know,
sort of continuous prompts and basically, okay, argue that out in more detail.
Okay.
No, this, this argument's becoming too polite, you know, make it more, you know, make it
tensor.
And yeah, it's thrilled to do it.
So it has the capability for sure.
How do you know what is true?
So this is very difficult thing on the internet, but it's also a difficult thing.
Maybe it's a little bit easier, but I think it's still difficult.
Maybe it's more difficult.
You know, with an LLM to know that it just makes some shit up as I'm talking to it.
How do we get that right?
Like as, as you're investigating a difficult topic, because I find the LLMs are quite nuanced
in a very refreshing way, like it doesn't, it doesn't feel biased.
Like when you read news articles and tweets and just content produced by people, they usually
have this, you can tell they have a very strong perspective where they're hiding, they're
not stealing and manning the other side.
They're hiding important information or they're fabricating information in order to make their
argument stronger.
It's just like that feeling.
Maybe it's a suspicion.
Maybe it's mistrust.
With LLMs, it feels like none of that is there.
She's kind of like, here's what we know, but you don't know if some of those things are
kind of just straight up made up.
Yeah.
Several layers to the question.
One of the things that an LLM is good at is actually deep biasing.
You can feed it a news article and you can tell it strip out the bias.
Yeah, that's nice, right?
It actually does it.
It actually knows how to do that because it knows how to do, among other things, it actually
knows how to do sentiment analysis and so it knows how to pull out the emotionality.
That's one of the things you can do.
It's very suggestive of the censor that there's real potential on this issue.
I would say, look, the second thing is there's this issue of hallucination, and there's
a long conversation that we can have about that.
Hallucination is coming up with things that are totally not true, but sound true.
Yeah.
It's sort of, hallucination is what we call it and when we don't like it, creativity
is what we call it when we do like it, right?
Brilliant.
When the engineers talk about it, they're like, this is terrible, it's hallucinating, right?
If you have artistic inclinations, you're like, oh my God, we've invented creative
machines for the first time in human history.
This is amazing.
Bullshiters.
Bullshiters.
Bullshiters.
Well, bullshit, but also in the good sense of that word.
There are shades of gray that it's interesting, so we had this conversation, we're looking
at my firm at AI and lots of domains and one of them is the legal domain, so we had this
conversation with this big law firm about how they're thinking about using this stuff
and we went in with the assumption that an LLM that was going to be used in the legal
industry would have to be 100% truthful, verified.
There's this case where this lawyer apparently submitted a GPT generated brief and it had
like fake legal case citations in it and the judge is going to get his law license stripped
or something.
We just assumed it's like, obviously, they're going to want the super literal one that never
makes anything up, not the creative one, but actually, what the law firm basically
said is, yeah, that's true at the level of individual beliefs, but they said when you're
actually trying to figure out legal arguments, you actually want to be creative, right?
Again, there's creativity and then there's making stuff up.
What's the line?
You want it to explore different hypotheses, right?
You want to do the legal version of improv or something like that where you want to float
different theories of the case and different possible arguments for the judge and different
possible arguments for the jury.
By the way, different routes through the history of all the case law and so they said, actually,
for a lot of what we want to use it for, we actually want it in creative mode and then
basically, we just assumed that we're going to have to cross check all the specific citations
and so I think there's going to be more shades of gray in here than people think and then
I just add to that, another one of these trillion dollar kind of questions is ultimately the
verification thing and so will LLMs be evolved from here to be able to do their own factual
verification?
Will you have sort of add on functionality like Wolfram Alpha, right, where in other
plugins where that's the way you do the verification, by the way, another idea is you might have
a community of LLMs, so for example, you might have the creative LLM and then you might have
the literal LLM fact check it, right, and so there's a variety of different technical
approaches that are being applied to solve the hallucination problem.
Some people, like Jan Lacun, argue that this is inherently an unsolvable problem, but most
of the people working in the space, I think, think that there's a number of practical ways
to kind of corral this in a little bit.
Yeah, if you were to tell me about Wikipedia before Wikipedia was created, I would have
laughed at the possibility of something like that be possible, just a handful of folks
can organize, write, and moderate with a mostly unbiased way the entirety of human knowledge.
So if there's something like the approach that Wikipedia took possible from LLMs, that's
really exciting.
I think that's possible.
And in fact, Wikipedia today is still not deterministically correct, right, so you cannot
take to the bank every single thing on every single page, but it is probabilistically correct,
right?
Specifically, the way I describe Wikipedia to people, it is more likely that Wikipedia
is right than any other source you're going to find.
It's this old question, right, of like, okay, are we looking for perfection?
Are we looking for something that asymptotically approaches perfection?
Are we looking for something that's just better than the alternatives?
And Wikipedia, right, exactly your point has proven to be overwhelmingly better than people
thought, and I think that's where this ends.
And then underneath all this is the fundamental question of where you started, which is, okay,
what is truth?
How do we get to truth?
How do we know what truth is?
And we live in an era in which an awful lot of people are very confident that they know
what the truth is, and I don't really buy into that.
And I think the history of the last 2,000 years or 4,000 years of human civilization
is actually getting to the truth is actually a very difficult thing to do.
Are we getting closer?
If we look at the entirety of the archive of human history, are we getting closer to
the truth?
I don't know.
Okay.
Is it possible?
Is it possible that we're getting very far away from the truth because of the internet,
because of how rapidly you can create narratives, and just as an entirety of a society just move
crowds in a hysterical way along those narratives that don't have a necessary grounding in whatever
the truth is.
Sure.
But we came up with communism before the internet somehow, which I would say had rather larger
issues than anything we're dealing with today.
In the way it was implemented, it had issues.
It had just theoretical structure.
It had real issues.
It had a very deep fundamental misunderstanding of human nature and economics.
Yeah, but those folks sure worked very confident.
They were the right way.
They were extremely confident.
And my point is they were very confident 3,900 years into what we would presume to be evolution
towards the truth.
Yeah.
And so my assessment is number one, there's no need for the Hegelian dialectic to actually
converge towards the truth.
Like apparently not.
Yeah.
So yeah, why are we so obsessed with there being one truth?
Is it possible there's just going to be multiple truths, like little communities that believe
certain things?
I think it's just really difficult, historically, who gets to decide what the truth is.
It's either the king or the priest.
And so we don't live in an era anymore if kings or priests dictating it to us.
And so we're kind of on our own.
And so my typical thing is like we just need a huge amount of humility and we need to be
very suspicious of people who claim that they have the capital, the capital of truth.
And then we need to look at the good news is the Enlightenment has bequeathed us with
a set of techniques to be able to presumably get closer to truth through the scientific
method and rationality and observation and experimentation and hypothesis.
And we need to continue to embrace those even when they give us answers we don't like.
Sure.
The internet and technology has enabled us to generate a large number of content that
data that the scientific process allows us sort of damages the hope laden within the
scientific process.
Because if you just have a bunch of people saying facts on the internet and some of them
are going to be LLMs, how is anything testable at all, especially that involves like human
nature, things like this, not physics?
Here's a question a friend of mine just asked me on this topic.
So suppose you had LLMs in equivalent of GPT-4, even 5, 6, 7, 8.
Suppose you had them in the 1600s and Galileo comes up for trial, right?
And you ask the LLM like his Galileo, right?
Yeah.
Like what does it answer, right?
And one theory is the answer is no, that he's wrong because the overwhelming majority
of human thought up to that point was that he was wrong.
And so therefore that's what's in the training data.
Another way of thinking about it is, well, this officially advanced LLM will have evolved
the ability to actually check the math, right?
And we'll actually say, actually, no, actually, you know, you may not want to hear it, but he's
right.
Now, if, you know, the church at that time was, you know, owned the LLM, they would have
given it human, you know, human feedback to prohibit it from answering that question.
Right.
And so I like to take it out of our current context because that makes it very clear those
same questions apply today, right?
This is exactly the point of a huge amount of the human feedback training.
This is actually happening with these LLMs today.
This is a huge, like, debate that's happening about whether open source, you know, AI should
be legal.
Well, the actual mechanism of doing the human RL with human feedback is, seems like such
a fundamental and fascinating question.
How do you select the humans?
Exactly.
Yeah.
How do you select the humans?
AI alignment, right?
Which everybody like is like, oh, that's not great.
Alignment with what?
Human values.
Who's human values?
Who's human values?
So we're in this mode of like social and popular discourse.
We're like, you know, there's, you know, you see this, what do you think of when you
read a story in the press right now and they say, you know, X, Y, Z made a baseless
claim about some topic, right?
And there's one group of people who are like, aha, I think, you know, they're doing
fact-checking, there's another group of people that are like, every time the press
says that it's not a tech and that means that they're lying, right?
Like, so like we're in this, we're in this social context where there's the level to
which a lot of people in positions of power have become very, very certain that
they're in a position to determine the truth for the entire population is like,
there's like, there's like some bubble that has formed around that idea.
And at least it flies completely in the face of everything I was ever trained
about science and about reason and strikes me as like, you know, deeply
offensive and incorrect.
What would you say about the state of journalism just on that topic today?
Are we, are we in a temporary kind of, are we experiencing a temporary problem in
terms of the incentives, in terms of the business model, all that kind of stuff?
Or is this like a decline of traditional journalism, do you know it?
If I always think about the counterfactual in these things, which is like, okay,
because these questions where this question heads towards, it's like, okay,
the impact of social media and the undermining of truth and all this.
But then you want to ask the question of like, okay, what if we had had the
modern media environment, including cable news and including social media and
Twitter and everything else in 1939 or 1941, right, or 1910 or 1865 or 1850 or 1776.
Right.
Um, and like, I think you just introduced like five thought experiments at once
and broke my head.
But yes, that's, there's a lot of interesting years.
And I just take a simple example.
Can it, like how would President Kennedy have been interpreted with what we know
now about all the things Kennedy was up to?
Like how would he have been experienced by the body of politics in us, in
with the social media context?
Right.
Like how would LBJ have been experienced?
Um, by the way, how would, you know, like many men, FDR, like the new deal,
the Great Depression.
I wonder where Twitter would, would just, would think about Churchill and
Hitler and Stalin.
You know, I mean, look to this day, there, you know, there's, there are lots of
very interesting real questions around like how America, you know, got, you know,
basically involved in World War II and who did what when and the operations of
British intelligence in American soil and did FDR, this, that, Pearl Harbor, you
know, yeah, Woodrow Wilson ran for, you know, his, his, his candidacy was run on
an anti-war will, you know, this, he ran on the platform and not getting
involved in World War I somehow that switched, you know, like, and I'm not
even making a value judgment of these things.
I'm just saying like we, the way that our ancestors experienced reality was of
course mediated through centralized top-down right control at that point.
If you, if you ran those realities again with the media environment we have
today, the reality would, the reality would be experienced very, very
differently.
And then of course that, that intermediation would cause the feedback
loops to change and then reality would obviously play out.
Do you think, do you think it would be very different?
Yeah, it has to be, it has to be just because it's all so, I mean, just look
at what's happening today.
I mean, just, I mean, the most obvious thing is just the, the collapse.
And here's another opportunity to argue that this is not the internet causing
this, by the way, here's a big thing happening today, which is Gallup does
this thing every year where they do, they pull for trust in institutions in
America and they do it across all the different, everything from the military
to the clergy and big business and the media and so forth, right?
And basically there's been a systemic collapse in trust in institutions in the
U.S., almost without exception, basically since essentially the early 1970s.
There's two ways of looking at that, which is, oh my God, we've lost this old
world in which we could trust institutions and that was so much better
because like that should be the way the world runs.
The other way of looking at it is we just know a lot more now.
And the great mystery is why those numbers aren't all zero.
Yeah.
Because like now we know so much about how these things operate and like
they're not that impressive.
And also why do we don't have better institutions and better leaders then?
Yeah.
And so, so this goes to the thing, which is like, okay, had, had we had the media
environment of what that we've had between the 1970s and today, if we had
that in the 30s and 40s or 1900s, 1910s, I think there's no question
reality would turn out different if only because everybody would have known to
not trust the institutions, which would have changed their level of credibility,
their ability to control circumstances.
Therefore, the circumstances would have had to change, right?
And it would have been a feedback, it was, it would have been a feedback
loop process, in other words, right, it's, it's, it's, it's your experience,
your experience of reality changes reality and then reality changes
your experience of reality, right?
It's, it's, it's a two-way feedback process and media is the intermediating
force between them.
So change the media environment, change reality.
Yeah.
And so it's just, so just as a, as a consequence, I think it's just really
hard to say, oh, things worked a certain way then and they work a different
way now and then therefore like people were smarter then or better than or,
you know, by the way, dumber than or not as capable then, right?
We make all these like really light and casual like comparisons of ourselves to,
you know, previous generations of people, you know, we draw judgments all the time
and I just think it's like really hard to do any of that.
Cause if we, if we put ourselves in their shoes with the media that they had at
that time, like I think we probably most likely would have been just like them.
So don't you think that our perception and understanding of reality would be more
and more mediated through large language models now?
So you said media before, isn't the LLM going to be the new, what is it?
Mainstream media, MSM, it'll be LLM.
That would be the source of, uh, I'm sure there's a way to kind of rapidly
fine tune, like making LLMs real time.
I'm sure there's probably a research problem that you can, uh,
do just rapid fine tuning to the new events, some like this.
Well, even just the whole concept of the chat UI might not be the, like the chat
UI is just the first whack at this and maybe that's the dominant thing.
But look, maybe, maybe, or maybe we don't, we don't know yet.
Like maybe the experience most people with LLMs is just a continuous feed.
Maybe, you know, maybe it's more of a passive feed and you just are getting
a constant like running commentary on everything happening in your life.
And it's just helping you kind of interpret and understand everything.
Also really more deeply integrated into your life, not just like, oh, uh, like
intellectual philosophical thoughts, but like literally, uh, like how to make a
coffee, where to go for lunch, just, uh, whether to, you know, how to,
dating all this kind of stuff.
What to say in a job interview?
Yeah.
What to say?
Yeah, exactly.
What to say?
Next sentence.
Yeah, next sentence.
Yeah, at that level.
Yeah.
I mean, yes.
So technically, now, whether we want that or not, is an open question, right?
And whether we can use that.
Boy, I would care for a pop up, a pop up right now.
The estimated engagement using is decreasing.
For Mark Andreessen's, there's, there's a controversy section for
his Wikipedia page in 1993, something happened or something like this.
Bring it up.
That will drive engagement out.
Anyway.
Yeah, that's right.
I mean, look, this gets this whole thing of like, so, you know, the chat
interface has this whole concept of prompt engineering, right?
So it's good for prompts.
Well, it turns out one of the things that LLM's are really good at is writing
prompts, right?
And so like, what if you just outsourced?
And by the way, you could run this experiment today.
You could hook this up to do this today.
The latency is not good enough to do it real time in a conversation, but you
could, you could run this experiment and you just say, look, every 20 seconds,
you could just say, you know, tell me what the optimal prompt is and then ask
yourself that question to give me the result.
And then as, as you use exactly to your point, as you add, there will be, there
will be, these systems are going to have the ability to be learned and updated
essentially in real time.
And so you'll be able to have a pendant or your phone or whatever, watch or
whatever, it'll have a microphone on it.
It'll listen to your conversations.
It'll have a feat of everything else happened in the world.
And then it'll be, you know, sort of retraining, prompting or retraining
itself on the fly.
Um, and so the scenario you described is a, is actually a completely doable scenario.
Now, the hard question on these is always, okay, since that's possible, are
people going to want that?
Like, what's the form of experience?
You know, that, that we, we won't know until we try it, but I don't think
it's possible yet to predict the form of AI in our lives.
Therefore, it's not possible to predict the way in which it will
intermediate our experience with reality yet.
Yeah.
But it feels like those going to be a killer app.
There's probably a mad scrambler right now.
It's out open AI and Microsoft and Google and meta and then startups and
smaller companies figuring out what is the killer app.
Because it feels like it's possible, like a chat, GPT type of thing.
It's possible to build that, but that's 10 X more compelling using already the
LLMs we have using even the open source LLMs, Lama and the different variants.
Um, so you're investing in a lot of companies and you're paying attention.
Who do you think is going to win this?
You think they'll be, who's going to be the next PageRank inventor?
Trillium down the question.
Um, another one.
We have a few of those today.
A bunch of those.
So look, there's a really big question today sitting here today is a really big
question about the big models versus the small models.
Um, that's related directly to the big question of proprietary versus open.
Um, then there's this big question of, of, of, you know, where is the training data?
Going to, like, are we topping out on the training data or not?
And then are we going to be able to synthesize training data?
And then there's a huge pile of questions around regulation.
Um, and, you know, what's actually going to be legal.
Um, and so I would, when we think about it, we dovetail kind of all those, all
those questions together, you can paint a picture of the world where there's two
or three God models that are just at like staggering scale.
Um, and they're just better at everything.
Um, and they will be owned by a small set of companies and they will basically
achieve regulatory capture over the government and they'll have competitive
barriers that will prevent other people from, uh, you know, competing with them.
And so, you know, there will be, you know, just like there's like, you know,
whatever three big banks or three big, you know, by the way, three big search
companies are, I guess, to know, you know, it'll, it'll centralize like that.
Um, you can paint another very different picture that says, no, um, actually, the
opposite of that's going to happen.
This is going to basically that this is the new gold, you know, this is the new
gold rush, alchemy, like, you know, this is the, this is the big bang for this whole
new area of, of, uh, of science and technology.
And so therefore you're going to have every smart 14 year old on the planet
building open source, right?
You know, you can figure out a way to optimize these things.
Um, and then, you know, we're just going to get like overwhelmingly better at
generating trading data, we're going to, you know, bring in like blockchain
networks to have like an economic incentive to generate decentralized
training data and so forth and so on.
And then basically we're going to live in a world of open source and there's
going to be a billion LMS, right?
Of every size, scale, shape, and description.
And there might be a few big ones that are like the super genius ones, but
like mostly what we'll experience is open source.
And that's, you know, that's more like a world of like what we have today with
like Linux and the web.
Um, so, okay, but, uh, hey, you, you painted these two worlds, but there's
also variations of those worlds because he said regulatory capture is possible to
have these tech giants that don't have regulatory capture, which is something
you're also calling for saying it's okay to have big companies working on this
stuff, uh, as long as they don't achieve regulatory capture.
Uh, but, uh, I have the sense that, um, there's just going to be a new startup.
That's going to basically be the page rank inventor, which has become the new tech giant.
I don't know, I would love to hear your kind of opinion.
If Google meta and Microsoft are as gigantic companies able to pivot so hard.
To create new products, like some of it is just even hiring people or having,
uh, corporate structure that allows for the crazy young kids to come in and
just create something totally new.
Do you think it's possible or do you think it'll come from a startup?
Yeah, it is this always big question, which is you get this feeling.
I hear about this a lot from CEOs found founder CEOs where it's like, wow,
we have 50,000 people.
It's now harder to do new things than it was when we had 50 people.
Like what has happened?
So that's a recurring phenomenon.
By the way, that's one of the reasons why there's always startups and why there's
venture capital is just, that's, that's like a timeless kind of thing.
So that, that, that's one observation.
Um, on page rank, um, we can talk about that, but on page ranks,
specifically on page rank, um, there actually is a page.
So there is a page rank already in the field and it's the transformer, right?
So the, the, the big breakthrough was the transformer, um, and, uh,
the transformer was invented in, uh, 2017 at Google.
And this is actually like really an interesting question because it's like,
okay, the transformers, like why does opening, I even exist.
Like the transformers invested at Google.
Why didn't Google, I asked a guy, I asked a guy, you know, who was senior at
Google brain, kind of when this was happening.
And I said, if Google had just gone flat out to the wall and just said, look,
we're going to launch, we're going to launch the equivalent of GPT for as
fast as we can.
Um, he said, I said, when could we have had it?
And he said 2019, they could have just done a two year sprint with the
transformer and Bennett because they already had the compute at scale.
They already had all the training data and they could have just done it.
There's a variety of reasons they didn't do it.
This is like a classic big company thing.
Um, IBM invented the relational database in 1970s, let it sit on the shelf as a
paper, Larry Ellison picked it up and built Oracle, Xerox Park invented the
interactive computer, they let it sit on the shelf, Steve Jobs came and
turned it into the Macintosh, right?
And so there is this pattern.
Now, having said that, sitting here today, like Google's in the game, right?
So Google, you know, maybe, maybe they, maybe they let like a four year gap
there go there that they maybe shouldn't have, but like they're in the game.
And so now they've got, you know, now they're committed.
They've done this merger.
They're bringing in demos.
They've got this merger with DeepMind.
You know, they're piling in resources.
There are rumors that they're, you know, building up an incredible, you know,
super LLM, um, you know, way beyond what we even have today.
Um, and they've got, you know, unlimited resources and a huge, you know,
they've been challenged at their honor.
Yeah.
I had a, I had a chance to hang out with Sundar Prasai a couple of days ago and we
took this walk and there's this giant new building, uh, well, there's going to
be a lot of AI work, uh, being done.
And it's kind of this ominous feeling of like the fight is on.
Yeah.
There's this beautiful Silicon Valley nature, like birds of chirping and this
giant building, and it's like, uh, the beast has been awakened.
And then like all the big companies are waking up to this.
They have the compute, but also the little guys have, uh, it feels like they
have all the tools to create the killer product that, uh, and then there's
all the tools to scale.
If you have a good idea, if you have the page rank idea, so there's
several things that is page rank page, there's page rank, the algorithm and the
idea, and there's like the implementation of it.
And I feel like killer product is not just the idea, like the transformer,
it's the implementation, something, something really compelling about it.
Like you just can't look away, something like, um, the algorithm behind
TikTok versus TikTok itself, like the actual experience of TikTok.
They just, you can't look away.
It feels like somebody's going to come up with that and it could be Google, but
it feels like it's just easier and faster to do for a startup.
Yeah.
So, so the startup, the, the huge advantage the startups have is they just,
they, there's no sacred cows.
There's no historical legacy to protect.
There's no need to reconcile your new plan with the existing strategy.
There's no communication overhead.
There's no, you know, big companies are big companies.
They've got pre-meetings planning for the meeting.
Then they have, then they have the post-meeting of the recap.
Then they have the presentation, the board, then they have the next round
of meetings and that's the, that's the elapsed time when the startup launches
its product, right?
So, so, so, so there's a timeless, right?
Yeah.
So there's a timeless thing there.
Now, what the startups don't have is everything else, right?
So startups, they don't have a brand.
They don't have customer relationships.
They've gotten a distribution.
They've got no, you know, scale.
I mean, sitting here today, they can't even get GPUs, right?
Like there's like a GPU shortage startups are literally stalled out right now
because they can't get chips, which is like super weird.
Yeah.
Um, they got the cloud.
Yeah, but the clouds run out of chips, right?
And then, and then, and then to the extent the clouds have chips,
they allocate them to the big customers, not the small customers, right?
And so, so, so, so the small companies lack everything other than the ability
to just do something new, right?
And this is the timeless race and battle.
And this is kind of the point I tried to make in the essay, which is
like both sides of this are good.
Like it's really good to have like highly scale tech companies that can do
things that are like at staggering levels of sophistication.
It's really good to have startups that can launch brand new ideas.
They ought to be able to both do that and compete.
They neither one ought to be subsidized or protected from the others.
Like that's, that's, to me, that's just like very clearly the idealized world.
It is the world we've been in for AI up until now.
And then of course there are people trying to shut that down.
But my hope is that, you know, the best outcome clearly will be if that continues.
We'll talk about that a little bit, but I'd love to linger on some of the ways
this is going to change the internet.
So, um, I don't know if you remember, but there's a thing called Mosaic and
there's a thing called Netscape Navigator.
So you were there in the beginning.
Uh, what about the interface to the internet?
How do you think the browser changes and who gets to own the browser?
We've got to see some very interesting browsers.
Uh, Firefox, I mean, all the variants of Microsoft, Internet Explorer, Edge,
and, uh, now Chrome, um, the actual, I mean, it seems like a dumb question to ask,
but do you think we'll still have the web browser?
So I, uh, I have an eight year old and he's super into like Minecraft and
learning to code and doing all this stuff.
So I, I, of course, I was very proud.
I could bring sort of fire down from the mountain to my kid and I brought him
chat GPT and I hooked him up on his, on his, on his, on his laptop.
And I was like, you know, this is the thing that's going to answer all your
questions and he's like, okay.
And I'm like, but it's going to answer all your questions.
And he's like, well, of course, like it's a computer, of course.
It answers all your questions.
Like what else would a computer be good for?
Dad.
Um, and never impressed.
Not impressed in the least.
Two weeks pass.
Um, and he has some question, um, and I say, well, have you asked you GPT?
And he's like, dad, being is better.
And why is being better is because it's built into the browser.
Cause he's like, look, I have the Microsoft edge browser and like it's
got being right here.
And then he doesn't know this yet, but one of the things you can do with
being an edge, um, is there's a setting where you can, um, use it to basically
talk to any webpage because it's sitting right there next to the, uh, next
to the, next to the browser.
And by the way, which includes PDF documents.
And so you can, in, in, in the way they've implemented an edge with Bing is
you can load a PDF and then you can, you can ask a questions, which is the
thing you, you can't do currently and just chat GPT.
So they're, you know, they're, they're going to, they're going to push the,
the, the mel, I think that's great.
You know, they're going to push the melding and see if there's a combination
thing there.
Google's rolling off this thing, the magic button, uh, which is implemented
in either put in Google docs, right?
And so you go to, you know, Google docs and you create a new document and you,
you know, you, instead of like, you know, starting to type, you just, you know,
say it, press the button and it starts to like generate content for you.
Right.
Like, is that the way that it'll work?
Um, is it going to be a speech UI where you're just going to have an earpiece
and talk to it all day long?
You know, is it going to be a, like, these are all, like, this is exactly
the kind of thing that I don't, this is exactly the kind of thing I don't
think is possible to forecast.
I think what we need to do is like run all those experiments.
Um, and, and, and so one outcome is we come out of this with like a super
browser that has AI built in, that's just like amazing.
The other there, look, there's a real possibility that the whole, I mean,
look, there's a possibility here that the whole idea of a screen and windows
and all this stuff just goes away.
Cause like, why do you need that?
If you just have a thing that's just telling you whatever you need to know.
And also, so there's apps that you can use.
You don't really use them, you know, being a Linux guy and Windows guy.
Um, there's one window, the browser that with which you can interact with the
internet, but on the phone, you can also have apps.
So I can interact with Twitter through the app or through the web browser.
And, um, that seems like an obvious distinction, but why have the web
browser in that case?
If one of the apps starts becoming the everything app, what do you want to
try to do with Twitter, but there could be others that could be like a big app.
There could be a Google app that just doesn't really do search, but just like
do what I guess AOL did back in the day or something where it's all right there.
And it changes, um, it changes the nature of the internet because the, where the
content is hosted, who owns the data, who owns the content, how, what is, what
is the kind of content you create?
How do you make money by creating content or the content creators, uh, all of that.
Or it could just keep being the same, which is like, which is the nature of
web pages changes and the nature of content, but there will still be a web
browser because a web browser is a pretty sexy product.
It just seems to work because it like you have an interface, a window into the
world and then the world can be anything you want.
And as the world will evolve, there could be different programming languages.
It can be animated.
Maybe it's three dimensional and so on.
Yeah, it's interesting.
Do you think we'll still have the web browser?
Well, every, every, every, um, every medium becomes the content for the next one.
So they, you know, they will be able to give you a browser whenever you want.
Oh, interesting.
Yeah.
Another way to think about it is maybe what the browser is, maybe it's just the escape
hatch, right?
And which is maybe kind of what it is today, right?
Which is like most of what you do is like inside a social network or inside a
search engine or inside, you know, somebody's app or inside some controlled
experience, right?
But then every once in a while, there's something where you actually want to jail
break.
You want to actually get free.
The web browser is the FU to the man.
You're allowed to, that's the free internet.
Yeah.
Back, back the way it was in the 90s.
So here's something I'm proud of.
So nobody really talks about here's something I'm proud of, which is the web,
the web, the browser, the web servers, they're all, they're still back
or compatible all the way back to like 1992, right?
So like you can put up a, you can still, you know, the big breakthrough of the
web early on, the big breakthrough was it made it really easy
to read, but it also made it really easy to write, made it really easy to publish.
And we literally made it so easy to publish.
We made it not only so you can use easy to publish content, it was actually
also easy to actually write a web server, right?
And you can literally write a web server in four lines of drill code and you
could start publishing content on it.
And you could set whatever rules you want for the content, whatever censorship,
no censorship, whatever you want, you could just do that.
As long as you had an IP address, right?
You could do that.
That still works.
Like that still works exactly as I just described.
So this is part of my reaction to all of this, like, you know, all this
just censorship pressure and all this, you know, these issues around control
and all this stuff, which is like, maybe we need to get back a little bit
more to the wild west, like the wild west is still out there.
Now, they will, they will try to chase you down.
Like they'll try to, you know, people who want a sensor will try to take away
your, you know, your domain name and they'll try to take away your payments
account and so forth, if they really don't like what you, what you're saying.
But, but nevertheless, you like, unless they literally are intercepting
you at the ISP level, like you can still put up a thing.
And so I don't know, I think that's important to preserve, right?
Like, because, because, because, I mean, one is just a freedom argument,
but the other is a creativity argument, which is you want to have the escape
hatch so that the kid with the idea is able to realize the idea.
Because to your point on PageRank, you actually don't know what the next big
idea is.
Nobody called Larry Page and told him to develop PageRank.
Like he came up with that on his own.
And you want to always, I think, leave the escape hatch for the next, you know,
kid or the next Stanford grad student to have the breakthrough idea and be
able to get it up and running before anybody notices.
Um, you and I are both fans of history.
So let's step back.
We'll be talking about the future.
Let's step back for a bit and look at, uh, the nineties.
You created Mosaic web browser, the first widely used web browser.
Tell the story of that.
Hot, hot, and how did it evolve into Netscape navigator?
This is the early days.
So, full story.
So, um, you were born, I was born a small, a small child.
Um, well, actually, yeah, let's go there.
Like, when did you, when would you first fall in love with computers?
Oh, so I hit the generational jackpot and I hit the Gen X kind of point perfectly
as it turns out.
So I was born in 1971.
So there's this great website called WTF happened in 1971.com, which is basically
in 1971 is when everything started to go to hell.
And I was, of course, born in 1971.
So I like to think that I had something to do with that.
Did you make it on the website?
I have, I don't think I made it on the website, but, you know, hopefully somebody
needs to add, this is, this is where everything maybe I contributed to some of
the trends, um, that they, uh, that they do every line on that website goes like
that, right?
So it's all, it's all, it's all a picture disaster.
But, um, but there was this moment in time where, cause the, you know, sort of
the Apple, you know, the Apple II hit in like 1978 and then the IBM PC hit in 82.
So I was like, you know, 11 when the PC came out.
Um, and so I just kind of hit that perfectly.
And then that was the first moment in time when like regular people could spend
a few hundred dollars and get a computer, right?
And so that, I just like that, that, that resonated right out of the gate.
Um, well, then the other part of the story is, you know, I was using
an Apple II that used a bunch of them, but I was using Apple II.
And of course it's set in the back of every Apple II and every Mac it said,
you know, designed in Cupertino, California.
And I was like, wow, Cupertino must be the like shining city on the hill.
Like it was sort of like the most amazing, like city of all time.
I can't wait to see it.
And of course, years later, I came out to Silicon Valley and went to
Cupertino and it's just a bunch of office parks, low rise apartment buildings.
So the aesthetics were a little disappointing, but you know, it was the,
the vector, uh, right of the, of the creation of a lot, of a lot of this stuff.
Um, yeah.
So, so then basically, so part, part, part of my story is just the luck of
having been born at the right time and getting exposed to PCs.
Then the other part is, um, the other part is when Elgora says that he created
the internet, he actually is correct, uh, in, in, in a really meaningful way,
which is he sponsored a bill in 1985 that essentially created the modern internet
created what is called the NSF net at the time, which is sort of the, the first
really fast internet backbone.
Um, and, uh, you know, that, that bill dumped a ton of money into a bunch
of research universities to build out basically at the internet backbone.
And then the super computer centers that were clustered around, um, the,
the internet.
And, and one of those universities was University of Illinois, right?
Went to school.
And so the other stroke of luck that I had was I, I went to Illinois basically
right as that money was just like getting dumped on campus.
And so as a consequence, we had at on campus and this is like, you know, 89,
90, 91, we had like, you know, we were right on the internet backbone.
We had like T three and 45 at the time, T three, 45 megabit backbone connection,
which at the time was, you know, wildly state of the art.
Um, we had crazy supercomputers.
We had thinking machines, parallel supercomputers.
We had silicon graphics workstations.
We had Macintoshes.
We had, we had next cubes all over the place.
We had like every possible kind of computer you could imagine.
Cause all this money just fell out of the sky.
Um, you were living in the future.
Yeah.
So quite literally it was, yeah, like it's all, it's all there.
It's all like we had full broadband graphics, like the whole thing.
And, and it's actually funny cause they had this, this is the first time I kind
of it sort of tickled the back of my head that there might be a big
opportunity in here, which is, you know, they, they embraced it.
And so they put like computers in all the dorms and they wired up all the
dorm rooms and they had all these, you know, labs everywhere and everything.
And then they, they gave every undergrad a computer account and an email address.
Um, and the assumption was that you would use the internet for your four years at
college, um, and then you would graduate and stop using it.
And that was that, right?
And you would just retire your email address.
It wouldn't be relevant anymore cause you'd go off in the workplace and they
don't use email.
You'd be back to using fax machines or whatever.
Did you have that sense as well?
Like what, what you said the, the back of your head was tickled.
Like what was your, what was exciting to you about this possible world?
Well, if this is so useful in this container, if this is so useful in this
container environment that just has this weird source of outside funding, then
if, if it were practical for everybody else to have this, and if it were
cost effective, everybody else to have this, wouldn't they want it?
And the overwhelmingly, the prevailing view at the time was no, they would not
want it.
This is esoteric weird nerd stuff, right?
That like computer science kids like, but like normal people are never going to
do email, right?
Or be on the internet, right?
Um, and so I was just like, wow, like this, this is actually like, this is
really compelling stuff.
Now the other part was it was all really hard to use.
And in practice, you had to be a, basically a CS, uh, you basically had to,
had to be a CS undergrad or equivalent to actually get full use of the internet
at that point, um, cause it was all pretty esoteric stuff.
So then that was the other part of the idea, which was, okay, we need to
actually make this easy to use.
So what's involved in creating was like, like in creating, uh, graphical
interface to the internet.
Yes.
It was a combination of things.
So it was like basically the, the, the web existed in an early sort of
described as prototype form.
Uh, and by the way, text only at that point.
Uh, what did it look like?
What, what was the web?
I mean, well, and the key figure is like, what was it?
What was it like?
What made a picture?
It looked like she had GPT actually, um, it was all text.
Yeah.
Um, and so you had a text based web browser.
Uh, well, actually the original browser, Tim, Tim Berners-Lee, the original,
the original browser, both the original browser and the server actually ran on
next, next cubes.
So these are, this was, you know, the computer Steve Jobs made during the
interim period when he, during the decade long interim period, when he was not
an apple, you know, he got fired in 85 and then came back in 97.
So this was in that interim period where he had this company called Next.
And they made these, literally these computers called cubes.
And there's this famous story.
They were beautiful, but they were 12 inch by 12 inch by 12 inch cubes computers.
And there's a famous story about how they could have cost half as much if it
had been 12 by 12 by 13, but Steve was like, no, like it has to be.
So they were like $6,000 basically academic workstations.
They had the first city round drives, um, which were slow.
I mean, it was the, the computers are all but unusable.
Um, they were so slow, but they were beautiful.
Okay.
Can we actually just take a tiny tangent there?
Sure.
Of course.
The, the 12 by 12 by 12, uh, they just so beautifully encapsulates Steve Jobs
idea of design.
Can you just comment on, um, what you find interesting about Steve Jobs?
What, uh, about that view of the world, that dogmatic pursuit of perfection and
how he saw perfection in design.
Yeah.
So I guess they say like, look, he was a deep believer, I think in a very deep way.
I interpret it.
I don't know if you ever really described it like this, but the way I'd interpret
it is it's, it's like, it's like this thing.
And it's, it's actually a thing in philosophy.
It's like aesthetics are not just appearances.
Aesthetics go all the way to like deep underlying, underlying meaning, right?
It's like, I'm not a physicist.
One of the things I've heard physicists say is one of the things you start to get
a sense of when a theory might be correct is when it's beautiful, right?
Like, you know, they're, right.
And so, so, so there's something and you feel the same thing, by the way, in
like human psychology, right?
You know, when, when you're experiencing awe, right?
You know, there's like a, there's like a, there's a simplicity too.
When, when you're having an honest interaction with somebody, there's an
aesthetic, I would say calm comes over you because you're actually being fully
honest and trying to hide yourself, right?
So there, so, so it's like this very deep sense of aesthetics.
And he would trust that judgment that he had deep down.
Like even, even if the engineering teams are saying this is, this is too difficult.
Even if the, whatever the finance folks are saying, this is ridiculous.
The supply chain, all that kind of stuff, this makes it impossible to, we
can't do this kind of material.
This has never been done before.
And so on and so forth.
He just sticks by it.
Well, I mean, who makes a phone out of aluminum, right?
Like, nobody else would have done that.
And now, of course, if your phone was made out of aluminum, why, you know, how crude,
what a kind of caveman would you have to be to have a phone that's made out of
plastic, like, right?
So like, so it's just this very, right?
And, you know, look, it's, there's a thousand different ways to look at this.
But one of the things is just like, look, these things are central to your life.
Like you're with your phone more than you're with anything else.
Like it's in your, it's going to be in your hand.
I mean, he, you know, you know, this, he thought very deeply about what it meant
for something to be in your hand all day long.
Well, for example, here's an interesting design thing.
Like he never wanted, it's my understanding is he never wanted an iPhone to
have a screen larger than you could reach with your thumb one handed.
And so he was actually opposed to the idea of making the phones larger.
And I don't know if you have this experience today, but let's say there
are certain moments in your day when you might be like only have one hand
available and you might want to be on your phone.
Yeah.
And you're trying to like, your thumb can't reach the send button.
Yeah.
I mean, there's pros and cons, right?
And then there's like folding phones, which I would love to know what he
thought and thinks about them.
Uh, but I mean, is there something you could also just link on?
Cause he's one of the interesting, um, figures in the history of technology.
What makes him, what makes him as successful as he was, what makes him as
interesting as he was, uh, what made him, um, so productive and important in, um,
in, in, in the development of technology.
He had an integrated worldview.
So the, the, the, the properly designed device that had the correct functionality
that had the deepest understanding of the user that was the most beautiful, right?
Like it had to be all of those things, right?
It was, he basically would drive to as close to perfect as you could possibly
get, right?
And I, you know, I suspect that he never quite, you know, thought he ever
got there cause most great creators, you know, are generally dissatisfied.
You know, you read accounts later on and all they can, all they can see are the
flaws in their creation, but like he got as close to perfect each step of the
way as he could possibly get with the, with the constraints of the, of the
technology of his time.
Um, and then, you know, look, he was, you know, sort of famous in the Apple model.
It's like, look, they, they, they will, you know, this, this headset that they
just came out with, like that, you know, it's like a decade long project, right?
It's like, and they're just going to sit there and tune and tune and polish and
polish and tune and polish and tune and polish until it is as perfect as anybody
could possibly make anything.
And then this goes to the, the, the way that people describe working with him was,
which is, you know, there was a terrifying aspect of working with him, which is,
you know, he was, you know, he was very tough.
Um, but there was this thing that everybody I've ever talked to work for him
says that they all say the following, which is he, we did the best work of our
lives when we worked for him because he set the bar incredibly high and then he
supported us with everything that he could to let us actually do work of that
quality.
So a lot of people who were at Apple spend the rest of their lives trying to
find another experience where they feel like they're able to hit that quality
bar again.
Even if it, in retrospect, we're doing it felt like suffering.
Yeah, exactly.
What does that teach you about the human condition?
So look, exactly.
So the Silicon Valley, I mean, look, he's not, you know, George Patton in the,
you know, in the army, like, you know, there are many examples in other fields,
you know, that are like this, um, uh, uh, this is specifically in tech.
It's actually, I find it very interesting.
There's the Apple way, which is polish, polish, polish and don't ship until it's
as perfect as you can make it.
And then there's the sort of the other approach, which is the sort of incremental
hacker mentality, which basically says ship early and often and iterate.
And one of the things I find really interesting is I'm now 30 years into this,
like there are very successful companies on both sides of that approach.
Right.
Um, like that is a fundamental difference, right?
And how to operate and how to build and how to create that you have world
class companies operating in both ways.
Um, and I don't think the question of like, which is the superior model is
anywhere close to being answered.
Like, and my suspicion is the answer is do both.
The answer is you actually want both, they lead to different outcomes.
Software tends to do better, um, with the iterative approach, um, hardware
tends to do better with the, uh, you know, sort of wait and make it perfect approach.
But again, you can find examples in, in, in, in both directions.
Oh, so the juror's still out on that one.
Uh, so back to Mosaic.
So what, uh, it was text based, uh, Tim Berners-Lee.
Well, there was the web, which was text based, but there were no,
I mean, there was like three websites.
There was like no content.
There were no users.
Like it, it wasn't like a, it wasn't like a catalytic.
It hadn't, by the way, it was all, because it was all texts.
There were no documents.
There are no images.
There are no videos.
There were no, right.
So, so it was, it was, and then if, in the beginning, if you had to be on
a next cube, but you need to have a next cube both to publish and to consume.
So, so there were.
6,000 bucks, you said.
There were limitations on, yeah, $6,000 PC.
They did not, they did not sell very many, but then there was also,
there was also FTP and there was Usenets, right?
And there was, you know, a dozen other, basically, there's Waste,
which was an early search thing.
There was Gopher, which was an early menu based information retrieval system.
There were like a dozen different sort of scattered ways that people would get
to information on, on the internet.
And so the mosaic idea was basically bring those all together,
make the whole thing graphical, make it easy to use,
make it basically bulletproof so that anybody can do it.
And then again, just on the luck side, it so happened that this was right at the
moment when graphics, when the GUI sort of actually took off.
And we're now also used to the GUI that we think it's been around forever,
but it didn't really, you know, the Macintosh brought it out in 85,
but they actually didn't sell very many Macs in the 80s.
It was not that successful of a product.
It really was, you needed Windows 3.0 on PCs and that hit in about 92.
And so, and we did mosaic in 92, 93.
So that sort of, it was like right at the moment when you could imagine
actually having a graphical user interface to write at all, much less one to the internet.
How old did Windows 3.0 sell?
So it was at the really big.
That was the big bang.
The big operating, graphical operating system.
Well, this is the classic, okay, this Microsoft was operating on the other.
So Steve, Steve, Apple was running on the Polish until it was perfect.
Microsoft famously ran on the other model, which is ship and iterate.
And so in the old line in those days was Microsoft,
right, it's the version three of every Microsoft product.
That's the good one, right?
And so there are, you can find online, Windows 1, Windows 2, nobody used them.
Actually, the original Windows, in the original Microsoft Windows,
the Windows were not overlapping.
And so you had these very small, very low resolution screens.
And then you had literally, it just didn't work.
It wasn't ready yet.
Well, and Windows 95, I think was a pretty big leap also.
That was a big leap too.
Yeah.
So that was like bang, bang.
And then of course, Steve, and then, you know, in the fall of the time,
Steve came back, then the Mac started to take off again.
That was the third bang.
And then the iPhone was the fourth bang.
Such exciting time.
And then we were off to the races.
Because nobody could have known or be created from that.
Well, Windows 3.1 or 3.0, Windows 3.0 to the iPhone was only 15 years,
right?
Like that ramp was in retrospect.
At the time, it felt like it took forever.
But in historical terms, like that was a very fast ramp from even a graphical
computer at all on your desk to the iPhone, it was 15 years.
Did you have a sense of what the Internet will be as you're looking
through the window of Mosaic?
Like what, like there's just a few web pages for now.
So the thing I had early on was I was keeping at the time what,
there's disputes over what was the first blog.
But I had one of them that at least is a possible, at least a runner-up in the
competition.
And it was what was called the What's New page.
And it was, it was a hardwired, I had distribution and fair advantage.
I put it right in the browser.
I put it in the browser and then I put my resume in the browser.
Yeah.
Also was hilarious.
But I was keeping the, not many people get to do that.
Good call.
And early days.
Yes.
It's so interesting.
I'm looking for my, about, about, oh, Mark is looking for a job.
So the What's New page I would literally get up every morning and I would,
every afternoon.
And I would basically, if you wanted to launch a website, you would email me.
And I would list it on the What's New page.
And that was how people discovered the new websites as they were coming out.
And I remember, because it was like one, it literally went for me.
It was like one every couple of days, until like one every day, until like two every day.
So you're doing, so that, that blog was kind of doing the directory thing.
So like, what was the homepage?
So the homepage was just basically trying to explain even what this thing is that you're
looking at, right?
The basic, basically basic instructions.
But then there was a button, there was a button that said What's New.
And what most people did was they went to, for obvious reasons, went to What's New.
But like, it was so, it was so mind blowing at that point.
Just the basic idea.
And it was just like, you know, this is basically the internet,
but people could see it for the first time.
The basic idea was, look, you know, some, you know, it's like, literally,
it's like an Indian restaurant in like Bristol, England has like put their menu on the web.
And people were like, wow, because like that's the first restaurant menu on the web.
And I don't have to be in Bristol.
And I don't know if I'm ever going to go to Bristol.
And I don't like Indian food.
And like, wow, right.
And it was like that.
The first web, the first streaming video thing was a, it was another England thing,
some Oxford or something.
Some guy put his coffee pot up as the first streaming video thing.
And he put it on the web because he literally, it was the coffee pot down the hall.
And he wanted to see when he needed to go refill it.
But there were, you know, there was a point when there were thousands of people
like watching that coffee pot, because it was the first thing you could watch.
But isn't, were you able to kind of infer, you know, if that Indian restaurant could go online?
Yeah.
Then you're like, they all will.
They all will.
Yeah, exactly.
So you felt that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Now, you know, look, it's still a stretch, right?
It's still a stretch because it's just like, okay, is it, you know,
you're still in this zone, which is like, okay, is this a nerd thing?
Is this a real person thing?
Yeah.
Um, by the way, we, you know, there was a wall of skepticism from the media.
Like they just, like everybody was just like, yeah, this is just like them.
This is not, you know, this is not for regular people at that time.
Um, and so you had to think through that.
And then look, it was still, it was still hard to get on the internet at that point,
right?
So you could get kind of this weird bastardized version if you were on AOL,
which wasn't really real, or you had to go like learn what an ISP was.
You know, in those days, PCs actually didn't have TCP-IP drivers come pre-installed.
So you had to learn what a TCP-IP driver was.
You had to buy a modem.
You had to install driver software.
I have a comedy routine I do, something like 20 minutes long,
describing all the steps required to actually get on the internet at this point.
And so you had to, you had to look through these practical, well, and then, and then speed
performance, 14 form modems, right?
Like it was like watching, you know, glue dry, um, like, and so you had to, you had to,
there were basically a sequence of bets that we made where you basically needed to look through
that current state of affairs and say, actually, there's going to be so much demand for that.
Once people figure this out, there's going to be so much demand for it that all of these
practical problems are going to get fixed.
Some people say that the anticipation makes the destination that much more exciting.
Do you remember progressive JPEGs?
Yeah. Do I? Do I?
So for kids in the audience, right?
For kids in the audience.
You used to have to wash an image load like a line at a time, but it turns out there was this
thing with JPEGs where you could load basically every fourth, you could load like every fourth
line and then you could sweep back through again.
And so you could like render a fuzzy version of the image up front and then it would like
resolve into the detailed one.
And that was like a big UI breakthrough because it gave you something to watch.
Yeah. And, uh, you know, there's applications in various domains for that.
Well, it's a big fight.
If there was a big fight early on about whether there should be images on the web.
For that reason, for like sexualization.
No, not explicitly, that did come up, but it wasn't even that.
It was more just like all the serious info.
The argument went, the purists basically said all the serious information in the world is text.
If you introduce images, you basically are going to bring in all the trivial stuff.
You're going to bring in magazines and, you know, all this crazy stuff that, you know,
people, you know, it's going to distract from that.
It's going to go take, take the way from being serious to being frivolous.
Well, was there any doomer type arguments about, uh, the internet destroying all of human
civilization or destroying some fundamental fabric of human civilization?
Yeah. So those days it was all around crime and terrorism.
So those arguments happened, you know, but there was no sense yet of the internet having
like an effect on politics or because that was, that was way too far off.
But there was an enormous panic at the time around cybercrime.
There was like enormous panic that like your credit card number would get stolen and you'd
use life savings to be drained.
And then, you know, criminals were going to, there was, oh, when we started, one of the things
we did, one of the, the Netscape browser was the first widely used piece of consumer software
that had strong encryption built in, made it available to ordinary people.
And at that time, strong encryption was actually illegal to export out of the U.S.
So we could feel that product in the U.S.
We could not export it because it was, it was classified as ammunition.
So the Netscape browser was on a restricted list along with the Tom Huck missile
as being something that could not be exported.
So we had to make a second version with deliberately weak encryption to sell overseas
with a big logo on the box saying do not trust this, which it turns out makes it hard to sell
software when it's got a big logo that says don't trust it.
And then we had to spend five years fighting the U.S. government to get them to basically
stop trying to do this.
Because the fear was terrorists are going to use encryption to like plot, you know,
all these things.
And then, you know, we responded with, well, actually we need encryption to be able
to secure systems so that the terrorists and the criminals can't get into them.
So that was, anyway, that was the 1990s fight.
So can you say something about some of the details of the software engineering
challenges required to build these browsers?
I mean, the engineering challenges of creating a product that hasn't really existed before
that can have such almost like limitless impact on the world with the internet.
So there was a really key bet that we made at the time, which is very controversial,
which was core to the core to how it was engineered, which was are we optimizing for
performance or for ease of creation?
And in those days, the pressure was very intense to optimize for performance because
the network connections were so slow and also the computers were so slow.
And so if you had mentioned the progressive JPEG, it's like,
if there's an alternate world in which we optimize for performance and it just,
you had just a much more pleasant experience right up front.
But what we got by not doing that was we got ease of creation.
And the way that we got ease of creation was all of the protocols and formats were in text,
not in binary.
And so HTTP is in text, by the way, and this was an internet tradition, by the way,
that we picked up, but we continued it.
HTTP is text and HTML is text and then everything else that followed is text.
As a result, and by the way, you can imagine purist engineer saying this is insane,
you have very limited bandwidth, why are you wasting any time sending text?
You should be encoding the stuff into binary and it'll be much faster.
Of course, the answer is that's correct.
But what you get when you make it text is all of a sudden, well,
the big breakthrough was the view source function, right?
So the fact that you could look at a web page, you could hit view source and you could see the
HTML, that was how people learned how to make web pages, right?
It's so interesting because the stuff we take for granted now
is, man, that was fundamental to the development of the web to be able to have HTML just right
there.
All the ghetto mess that is HTML, all the sort of almost biological messiness
of HTML and then having the browser try to interpret that mess to show something reasonable.
Well, and then there was this internet principle that we inherited, which was
emit, what was it, emit cautiously, emit conservatively interpret liberally.
So it basically meant, the design principle was if you're creating a web editor that's
going to emit HTML, do it as cleanly as you can, but you actually want the browser to interpret
liberally, which is you actually want users to be able to make all kinds of mistakes
and for it to still work.
And so the browser rendering engines to this day have all of this
skinny code crazy stuff where they're resilient to all kinds of crazy HTML mistakes.
And literally what I always had in my head is there's an eight-year-old or an 11-year-old
somewhere and they're doing a view source, they're doing a cut and paste and they're
trying to make a web page for their turtle or whatever.
And they leave out a slash and they leave out an angle bracket and they do this and they do
that and it still works.
It's also like that.
I don't often think about this, but programming, C++, C++, all those languages, Lisp, the compile
language, the interpretive language, Python, Perl, all of that, the brace has to be all
correct.
Yes.
Like everything has to be perfect.
Brutal.
And then.
Autistic.
You forget.
All right.
It's systematic and rigorous.
Let's go there.
But you forget that the web with JavaScript eventually and HTML is allowed to be messy in
the way, for the first time, messy in the way biological systems could be messy.
It's like the only thing computers were allowed to be messy on for the first time.
It used to offend me.
So I grew up in UNIX, I worked on UNIX.
I was a UNIX native all the way through this period.
And so, and it used to drive me bananas when it would do the segmentation fault in the
core dump file, just like it's like literally there's like an error in the code.
The math is off by one and it core dumps.
And I'm in the core dump trying to analyze it and trying to reconstruct.
And I'm just like, this is ridiculous.
Like the computer ought to be smart enough to be able to know that if it's off by one,
okay, fine.
And it keeps running.
And I would go ask all the experts, like, why can't it just keep running?
And they'd explain to me, well, because all the downstream repercussions and blah, blah.
And I'm like, we're forcing the human creator to live, to your point,
in this hyperlittoral world of perfection.
And that's just bad.
And by the way, what happens with that, of course, is what happened with coding at that
point, which is you get a high priesthood.
There's a small number of people who are really good at doing exactly that.
Most people can't and most people are excluded from it.
And so actually, that was where I picked up that idea was like, no, you want these things
to be resilient to error in all kinds.
And this would drive the purists.
Absolutely crazy.
Like I got attacked on this like a lot because, yeah, I mean, like every time I,
you know, all the purists who are like into all this like Markov language stuff and
formats and codes and all this stuff, they would be like, you know, you can't,
you're encouraging bad behavior because.
Oh, so they wanted the browser to give you a segfault error anytime there was a mismatch?
Yeah, yeah, they wanted it to be a kind of, right?
They wanted, yeah, that was a very, any properly trained and credentialed engineer
would be like, that's not how you build these systems.
That's such a bold move to say, no, it doesn't have to be.
Yeah.
Now, like I said, the good news for me is the internet kind of had that tradition already.
But we, but having said that, like we pushed it, we pushed it way out.
But the other thing we did going back to the performance thing was we gave up a
lot of performance we made that that initial experience for the first few years was pretty
painful.
But, but the bet there was actually an economic bet, which was basically the demand for the
web would basically mean that there would be a surge in supply of broadband because
the question was, okay, how do you get, how do you, how do you get the phone companies
which are not famous in those days for doing new things at huge cost for like speculative
reasons?
Like how do you get them to build up broadband, you know, spend billions of dollars doing that
and, you know, you could go meet with them and try to talk them into it, or you could
just have a thing where it's just very clear that it's going to be, that the people love,
it's going to be better if it's faster.
And so that, there was a period there, and this was, this was fraught with some peril,
but there was a period there where it's like, we knew the experience was suboptimized because
we were trying to force the emergence of demand for broadband, which is in fact, what happened?
So you had to figure out how to display this text, HTML text.
So the blue links and the purple links, and there's no standards.
Is there standards at that time?
There really still isn't.
Well, there's like, there's implied, implied standards, right?
And they, you know, there's all these kinds of new features that are being added like CSS,
what like, what kind of stuff a browser should be able to support, features with the languages,
within JavaScript and so on.
But you, you're setting standards on the fly yourself.
Well, to this day, if you, if you create a webpage that has no CSS style sheet,
the browser will render it however it wants to, right?
So this was one of the things, there was this idea, this idea at the time and how these systems
were built, which is separation of content from format or separation of content from appearance.
And that's still, people don't really use that anymore, because everybody wants to determine
how things look and so they use CSS.
But it's still in there that you can just let the browser do all the work.
I still like the, like really basic websites, but that could be just old school.
Kids these days with their fancy responsive websites that don't actually have much content,
but have a lot of visual elements.
Well, that's one of the things that's fun about chat, you know, about chat GPT.
Yeah, back to the basics.
Back to just text, right?
And it, you know, there is this pattern in human creativity and media where you end up
back at text.
And I think there's, you know, there's something powerful in there.
Is there some other stuff you remember, like the purple links?
There were some interesting design decisions to kind of come up that we have today or we
don't have today that were temporary.
So we made, I made the background gray.
I hated reading text on white backgrounds.
So I made the background gray.
Do you regret?
No, no, no, no, that's that decision I think has been reversed.
But now I'm happy though, because now dark mode is the thing.
So it wasn't about gray.
It was just you didn't want a white background.
Strain my eyes.
Strange your eyes.
Interesting.
And then there's a bunch of other decisions.
I'm sure there's an interesting history of the development of HTML and CSS and all those
in interface and JavaScript.
And there's this whole Java applet thing.
Well, the big one probably JavaScript.
CSS was after me, so I didn't know it wasn't me, but JavaScript wasn't the big
JavaScript maybe was the biggest of the whole thing.
That was us.
And that was basically a bet.
It was a bet on two things.
One is that the world wanted a new front end scripting language.
And then the other was we thought at the time the world wanted a new back end scripting language.
So JavaScript was designed from the beginning to be both front end and back end.
And then it failed as a back end scripting language and Java won for a long time.
And then Python, Perl and other things, PHP and Ruby.
But now JavaScript is back.
And so I wonder if everything in the end will run on JavaScript.
It seems like it is the...
And by the way, let me give a shout out to Brendan Eich,
was the basically the one man inventor of JavaScript.
If you're interested to learn more about Brendan Eich, you can find his podcast previously.
Exactly.
So he wrote JavaScript over a summer.
And I think it is fair to say now that it's the most widely used language in the world.
And it seems to only be gaining in its range of adoption.
In the software world, there's quite a few stories of somebody over a weekend or a week
or over a summer writing some of the most impactful revolutionary pieces of software ever.
That should be inspiring, yes.
Very inspiring.
I'll give you another one, SSL.
So SSL was the security protocol that was us.
And that was a crazy idea at the time,
which was let's take all the native protocols and let's wrap them in a security wrapper.
That was a guy named Kip Hickman who wrote that over a summer, one guy.
And then look today, sitting here today, like the transformer at Google was a small handful
of people.
And then the number of people who did the core work on GPT, it's not that many people.
It's a pretty small handful of people.
And so, yeah, the pattern in software repeatedly over a very long time has been.
Jeff Bezos always had the two pizza rule for teams at Amazon,
which is any team needs to be able to be fed with two pizzas.
If you need the third pizza, you have too many people.
And I think it's actually the one pizza rule for the really creative work.
I think it's two people, three people.
Well, you see that with certain open source projects.
So much is done by one or two people.
It's so incredible.
And that's why you see that gives me so much hope about the open source movement
in this new age of AI.
Where recently having had a conversation with Mark Zuckerberg of all people
who's all in on open source, which is so interesting to see and so inspiring to see.
Because releasing these models, it is scary.
It is potentially very dangerous.
And we'll talk about that.
But it's also, if you believe in the goodness of most people and in the skill set of most people
and the desire to do good in the world, that's really exciting.
Because it's not putting these models into the centralized control of big corporations,
the government and so on.
It's putting it in the hands of a teenage kid with a dream in his eyes.
I don't know.
That's beautiful.
And look, this stuff, AI ought to make the individual coder, obviously,
far more productive by 1,000X or something.
And so you ought to open source, not just the future of open source,
but the future of open source, everything.
We ought to have a world now of super coders who are building things as open source with
one or two people that were inconceivable five years ago.
The level of kind of hyperproductivity we're going to get out of our best and brightest,
I think it's going to go way up.
It's going to be interesting.
We'll talk about it.
But let's just linger a little bit on Nescape.
Nescape was acquired in 1999 for $4.3 billion by AOL.
What was that like?
What were some memorable aspects of that?
Well, that was the height of the dot-com boom bubble bust.
I mean, that was the frenzy.
If you watch a succession, that was like what they did in the fourth season
with Gojo and then Merger with their, so it was like the height of one of those kind of
dynamics.
Would you recommend succession, by the way?
I'm more of a Yellowstone guy.
Yellowstone's very American.
I'm very proud of you.
I just talked to Matthew McConaughey, and I'm full on texting at this point.
Good.
I hurtily approve.
And he will be doing the sequel to Yellowstone.
Yeah, exactly.
Very exciting.
Anyway, so that's a rude interruption by me.
By way of succession, so that was at the height of the-
Deal-making and money and just the fur flying and like craziness.
And so, yeah, it was just one of those.
It was just like, I mean, as the entire Nescape thing from start to finish was four years,
which was like, for one of these companies, it's just like incredibly fast.
You know, we went public 18 months after we got, after we were founded,
which virtually never happens.
So it was just this incredibly fast kind of meteor streaking across the sky.
And then, of course, it was this.
And then there was just this explosion that happened,
because then it was almost immediately followed by the dot-com crash.
It was then followed by Haywell buying Time Warner,
which, again, is like the succession guy's going to play with that,
which turned out to be a disaster steal, one of the famous,
you know, kind of disasters in business history.
And then what became an internet depression on the other side of that.
But then in that depression in the 2000s was the beginning of broadband and smartphones
and web 2.0, right?
And then social media and search and every SaaS and everything that came out of that.
So what did you learn from just the acquisition?
I mean, this is so much money.
What's interesting, because I must have been very new to you,
that these software stuff, you can make so much money.
There's so much money swimming around.
I mean, I'm sure the ideas of investment were starting to get born there.
Yes, let me get, so let me lay it out.
So here's the thing, I don't know if I figured it out then,
but figured it out later, which is software is a technology that it's like, you know,
the concept of the philosopher's stone, the philosopher's stone in Alchemy transmutes
lead into gold and Newton spent 20 years trying to find the philosopher's stone,
never got there.
Nobody's ever figured it out.
Software is our modern philosopher's stone.
And in economic terms, it transmutes labor into capital,
which is like a super interesting thing.
And by the way, like Karl Marx is rolling over in his grave right now,
because of course that's complete refutation of his entire theory.
Transpute labor into capital, which is as follows is somebody
sits down at a keyboard and types a bunch of stuff in,
and a capital asset comes out the other side,
and then somebody buys that capital asset for a billion dollars.
Like, that's amazing.
Right, it's literally creating value right out of thin air,
right, out of purely human thought, right.
And so that's, there are many things that make software magical and special,
but that's the economics.
I wonder what Marx would have thought about that.
Oh, he would have completely broke his brain,
because of course the whole thing was,
that kind of technology is inconceivable when he was alive.
It was all industrial era stuff.
And so any kind of machinery necessarily involves huge amounts of capital,
and then labor was on the receiving end of the abuse.
Right, but like a software engineer or somebody who basically transmutes
his own labor into an actual capital asset creates permanent value.
Well, in fact, it's actually very inspiring.
That's actually more true today than before.
So when I was doing software, the assumption was all new software
basically has a sort of a parabolic sort of life cycle, right.
So you ship the thing, people buy it.
At some point, everybody who wants it has bought it,
and then it becomes obsolete, and it's like bananas, nobody buys old software.
These days, Minecraft, Mathematica, Facebook, Google,
you have the software assets that are, have been around for 30 years
that are gaining in value every year, right.
And they're just, they're being World of Warcraft, right, Salesforce.com.
Like they're being, every single year, they're being polished and polished
and polished and polished.
They're getting better and better, more powerful, more powerful,
more valuable, more valuable.
So we've entered this era where you can actually have these things
that actually build out over decades, which by the way,
is what's happening right now with like GPT.
And so now, and this is why there is always sort of a constant investment
frenzy around software is because, look, when you start one of these things,
it doesn't always succeed.
But when it does, now you might be building an asset that builds value
for four or five, six decades to come.
If you have a team of people who have the level of devotion required
to keep making it better.
And then the fact that of course, everybody's online, there's five billion
people that are a click away from any new pieces of software.
So the potential market size for any of these things is nearly infinite.
They must have been surreal back then though.
Yeah, yeah.
This was all brand new, right?
Yeah, back then, this was all brand new.
These were all brand new.
Had you rolled out that theory and even 1999,
people would have thought you were smoking crack.
So that's emerged over time.
Well, let's now turn back into the future.
You wrote the essay, why AI will save the world.
Let's start at the very high level.
What's the main thesis of the essay?
Yeah.
So the main thesis on the essay is that what we're dealing with here is intelligence.
And it's really important to kind of talk about the sort of very nature of what
intelligence is.
And fortunately, we have a predecessor to machine intelligence,
which is human intelligence.
And we've got observations and theories over thousands of years
for what intelligence is in the hands of humans.
And what intelligence is, what it literally is,
is the way to capture, process, analyze,
synthesize, information, solve problems.
But the observation of intelligence in human hands
is that intelligence quite literally makes everything better.
And what I mean by that is every kind of outcome of human quality of life,
whether it's education outcomes or success of your children,
or career success, or health, or lifetime satisfaction,
by the way, propensity to peacefulness as opposed to violence,
propensity for open-mindedness versus bigotry,
those are all associated with higher levels of intelligence.
Smarter people have better outcomes than almost, as you write,
in almost every domain of activity.
Academic achievement, job performance, occupational status,
income, creativity, physical health, longevity,
learning new skills, managing complex tasks,
leadership, entrepreneurial success, conflict resolution,
reading comprehension, financial decision making,
understanding other's perspectives,
creative arts, parenting outcomes, and life satisfaction.
One of the more depressing conversations I've had,
and I don't know why it's depressing,
I have to really think through why it's depressing,
but on IQ and the G factor,
and that that's something in large part is genetic.
Mm-hmm.
And it correlates so much with all of these things
and success in life.
It's like all the inspirational stuff we read about,
like if you work hard and so on,
damn, it sucks that you're born with a hand that you can't change.
But what if you could?
You're saying basically, a really important point,
and I think it's a, in your articles, it really helped me,
it's a nice added perspective to think about, listen,
human intelligence, the science of intelligence
has shown scientifically that it just makes life easier
and better, the smarter you are.
And now let's look at artificial intelligence.
And if that's a way to increase the,
some human intelligence, then it's only going
to make a better life.
That's the argument.
And certainly at the collective level,
we could talk about the collective effect
of just having more intelligence in the world,
which we'll have very big payoff.
But there's also just at the individual level,
like what if every person has a machine,
you know, and it's a concept of argument,
Doug Engelbar's concept of augmentation,
you know, what if everybody has an assistant
and the assistant is, you know, 140 IQ,
and you happen to be 110 IQ,
and you've got, you know, something that basically
is infinitely patient and knows everything about you
and is pulling for you in every possible way,
wants you to be successful.
And anytime you find anything confusing
or want to learn anything
or have trouble understanding something
or want to figure out what to do in a situation,
right, want to figure out how to prepare
for a job interview, like any of these things,
like it will help you do it.
And it will therefore, the combination will effectively be,
effectively raise your raise,
because it will effectively raise your IQ,
will therefore raise the odds of successful
life outcomes in all these areas.
So people below the hypothetical 140 IQ,
it'll pull them up towards 140 IQ.
Yeah, yeah.
And then of course, you know, people at 140 IQ
will be able to have a peer, right,
to be able to communicate, which is great.
And then people above 140 IQ will have an assistant
that they can farm things out to.
And then look, got willing, you know,
at some point, these things go from future versions,
go from 140 IQ equivalent to 150 to 160 to 180, right?
Like Einstein was estimated to be on the order of 160,
you know, so when we get, you know, 160 AI,
like we'll be, you know, one assumes creating
Einstein level breakthroughs in physics.
And then at 180, we'll be, you know,
carrying cancer and developing warp drive
and doing all kinds of stuff.
And so it is quite possibly the case,
this is the most important thing that's ever happened
and the best thing that's ever happened,
because precisely because it's a lever
on this single fundamental factor of intelligence,
which is the thing that drives so much of everything else.
Can you still man the case that human plus AI
is not always better than human for the individual?
You may have noticed that there's a lot of smart assholes
running around.
Sure, yes.
Right.
And so like it's smart, there are certain people
where they get smarter, you know,
they get to be more arrogant, right?
So, you know, there's one huge flaw.
Although to push back on that, it might be interesting
because when the intelligence is not all coming from you,
but from another system,
that might actually increase the amount of humility
even in the assholes.
One would hope.
Or it could make assholes more asshole.
I mean, that's for psychology to study.
Yeah, exactly.
Another one is smart people are very convinced
that they have a more rational view of the world
and that they have an easier time
seeing through conspiracy theories and hoaxes
and sort of crazy beliefs and all that.
There's a theory in psychology, which is actually smart people.
So, for sure, people who aren't as smart
are very susceptible to hoaxes and conspiracy theories.
But it may also be the case that the smarter you get,
you become susceptible in a different way,
which is you become very good at marshalling facts
to fit preconceptions.
Yes.
Right?
You become very, very good at assembling whatever theories
and frameworks and pieces of data and graphs and charts
you need to validate whatever crazy ideas got in your head.
And so, you're susceptible in a different way.
Right?
We're all sheep, but different colored sheep.
Some sheep are better at justifying it, right?
And those are the smart sheep, right?
So, yeah, look, I would say this.
Look, there are no panacea.
I am not a utopian.
There are no panaceas in life.
There are no, like, I don't believe they're like pure positives.
I'm not a transcendental kind of person like that.
But, you know, so, yeah, there are going to be issues.
And, you know, look, smart people, maybe you could say
about smart people as they are more likely to get themselves
in situations that are, you know, beyond their grasp,
you know, because they're just more confident
and their ability to deal with complexity.
And their eyes become bigger.
Their cognitive eyes become bigger than their stomach.
You know, so, yeah, you could argue those eight different ways.
Nevertheless, on net, right?
Clearly, overwhelmingly.
Again, if you just extrapolate from what we know
about human intelligence, you're improving so many aspects
of life if you're upgrading intelligence.
So, there'll be assistance at all stages of life.
So, when you're younger, there's for education,
all that kind of stuff, or mentorship, all of this.
And later on, as you're doing work and you've developed a skill
and you're having a profession, you'll have an assistant
that helps you excel at that profession.
So, at all stages of life.
Yeah. I mean, look, the theory is augmentations.
This is the Degangalbert's term for it.
Degangalbert made this observation many, many decades ago
that, you know, basically, it's like you can have
this oppositional frame of technology
where it's like us versus the machines.
But what you really do is you use technology
to augment human capabilities.
And by the way, that's how actually the economy develops.
That's dark about the economic side of this,
but that's actually how the economy grows
is through technology augmenting human potential.
And so, yeah, and then you basically have a proxy
or a, you know, a sort of prosthetic, you know,
so like you've got glasses, you've got a wristwatch,
you know, you've got shoes, you know, you've got these things,
you've got a personal computer, you've got a word processor,
you've got Mathematica, you've got Google.
This is the latest, viewed through that lens.
AI is the latest in a long series of basically
augmentation methods to be able to raise human capabilities.
It's just this one is the most powerful one of all
because this is the one that goes directly to what they call
fluid intelligence, which is IQ.
Well, there's two categories of folks that you outline
that they worry about or highlight the risks of AI
and you highlight a bunch of different risks.
I would love to go through those risks
and just discuss them.
Brainstorm, which ones are serious
and which ones are less serious?
But first, the Baptist and the bootleggers,
what are these two interesting groups of folks
who worry about the effect of AI on human civilization?
Or say they do.
Say, oh, okay.
Yes, I'll say they do.
The Baptist worry the bootleggers, I'll say they do.
So the Baptist and the bootleggers is a metaphor
from economics from what's called development economics.
And it's this observation that when you get social reform
movements in a society, you tend to get two sets of people
showing up arguing for the social reform.
And the term Baptist and bootleggers
comes from the American experience with alcohol prohibition.
And so in the 1900s, 1910s, there was this movement
that was very passionate at the time,
which basically said alcohol is evil
and it's destroying society.
By the way, there was a lot of evidence to support this.
There were very high rates of very high correlations
than, by the way, and now between rates of physical violence
and alcohol use.
Almost all violent crimes have either the perpetrator
or the victim are both drunk.
You see this actually in the work,
almost all sexual harassment cases in the workplace.
It's like at a company party and somebody's drunk.
Like it's amazing how often alcohol actually correlates
to actually dysfunction of these two, domestic abuse
and so forth, child abuse.
And so you had this group of people who were like,
okay, this is bad stuff and we shall outlaw it.
And those were quite literally Baptists.
Those were super committed, hardcore Christian activists
in a lot of cases.
There was this woman whose name was Kerry Nation,
who was this older woman who had been in this,
I don't know, disastrous marriage or something
and her husband had been abusive and drunk all the time.
And she became the icon of the Baptist prohibitionist
and she was legendary in that era for carrying an axe
and doing completely on her own, doing raids of saloons
and like taking her axe to all the bottles and tigs in the back.
And so-
So a true believer.
An absolute true believer with absolutely
the purest of intentions.
And again, there's a very important thing here,
which is you could look at this cynically
and you could say the Baptists are like delusional extremists,
but you can also say, look, they're right.
Like she had a point, like she wasn't wrong
about a lot of what she said.
But it turns out, the way the story goes,
is it turns out that there were another set of people
who very badly wanted to outlaw alcohol
in those days.
And those were the bootleggers,
which was organized crime that stood to make a huge amount of money
if legal alcohol sales were banned.
And this was in fact, the way the history goes,
is this was actually the beginning of organized crime in the U.S.
This was the big economic opportunity that opened that up.
And so they went in together and they didn't go in together.
Like the Baptists did not even necessarily know
about the bootleggers because they were on the moral crusade.
The bootleggers certainly knew about the Baptists
and they were like, wow, these people are like
the great front people for like, you know,
shenanigans in the background.
And they got the full state act passed, right?
And they did in fact ban alcohol in the U.S.
And you'll notice what happened, which is people kept drinking.
Like it didn't work.
People kept drinking.
The bootleggers made a tremendous amount of money.
And then over time, it became clear that it made no sense
to make it illegal and it was causing more problems.
And so then it was revoked.
And here we sit with legal alcohol 100 years later
with all the same problems.
And the whole thing was this like giant misadventure.
The Baptists got taken advantage of by the bootleggers
and the bootleggers got what they wanted and that was that.
The same two categories of folks are now sort of suggesting
the development of artificial intelligence should be regulated.
100%.
Yeah, it's the same pattern.
And the economists will tell you it's the same pattern every time.
Like this is what happened with nuclear power.
This is what happened, which is another interesting one.
But like, yeah, this happens dozens and dozens of times
throughout the last 100 years.
And this is what's happening now.
And you write that it isn't sufficient
to simply identify the actors and impugn their motors.
We should consider the arguments of both the Baptists
and the bootleggers on their merits.
So let's do just that.
Risk number one.
Will AI kill us all?
Yes.
So what do you think about this one?
What do you think is the core argument here
that the development of AGI, perhaps better said,
will destroy human civilization?
Well, first of all, you just did a sleight of hand
because we went from talking about AI to AGI.
Is there a fundamental difference there?
I don't know. What's AGI?
What's AI?
What's intelligence?
Well, I know what AI is.
AI is machine learning.
What's AGI?
I think we don't know what the bottom of the well of machine
learning is or what the ceiling is.
Because just to call something machine learning
or just to call something statistics
or just to call it math or computation
doesn't mean nuclear weapons are just physics.
So to me, it's very interesting and surprising
how far machine learning has taken.
No, but we knew that nuclear physics would lead to weapons.
That's why the scientists of that era
were always in this huge dispute about building the weapons.
This is different.
AGI is different.
Where does machine learning lead?
Do we know?
We don't know, but this is my point.
It's different.
We actually don't know.
And this is where the sleight of hand kicks in.
This is where it goes from being a scientific topic
to being a religious topic.
And that's why I specifically called out the...
Because that's what happens.
They do the vocabulary shift.
And all of a sudden, you're talking about something totally
that's not actually real.
Well, then maybe you can also, as part of that,
define the Western tradition of millennialism.
Yes, end of the world.
Apocalypse.
What is it?
Apocalypse cults.
Apocalypse cults.
Well, so we live in...
We, of course, live in a Judeo-Christian,
but primarily Christian, kind of saturated,
kind of Christian, post-Christian, secularized Christian,
kind of world in the West.
And, of course, court of Christianity
is the idea of the Second Coming and the revelations
and Jesus returning in the thousand-year utopia on Earth
and then the rapture and all that stuff.
We collectively, as a society,
we don't necessarily take all that fully seriously now.
So what we do is we create our secularized versions of that.
We keep looking for utopia.
We keep looking for basically the end of the world.
And so what you see over decades
is basically a pattern of these sort of...
This is what cults are.
This is how cults form,
as they form around some theory of the end of the world.
And so the people's temple cult, the Manson cult,
the Heaven's Gate cult, the David Koresh cult.
What they're all organized around
is like there's going to be this thing that's going to happen
that's going to basically bring civilization crashing down.
And then we have this special elite group of people
who are going to see it coming and prepare for it.
And then they're the people who are either going to stop it
or are failing stopping it.
They're going to be the people who survived on the other side
and ultimately get credit for having been right.
Why is that so compelling, do you think?
Because it satisfies this very deep need we have
for transcendence and meaning
that got stripped away when we became secular.
Yeah, but why does transcendence
involve the destruction of human civilization?
Because it's like a very deep psychological thing,
because it's like how plausible is it
that we live in a world where everything's just kind of all right?
Right, how exciting is that?
We want more than that.
But that's the deep question I'm asking.
Why is it not exciting to live in a world
where everything's just all right?
I think most of the animal kingdom
would be so happy with just all right,
because that means survival.
Why are we, maybe that's what it is.
Why are we conjuring up things to worry about?
So CS Lewis called it the God-shaped hole.
So there's a God-shaped hole in the human experience,
consciousness, soul, whatever you want to call it,
where there's got to be something that's bigger than all this.
There's got to be something transcendent.
There's got to be something that is bigger,
right, bigger, the bigger purpose of bigger meaning.
And so we have run the experiment
of we're just going to use science and rationality
and kind of everything's just going to kind of be as it appears.
And a large number of people have found that very deeply wanting
and have constructed narratives.
And this is the story of the 20th century, right?
Communism was one of those.
Communism was a form of this.
Nazism was a form of this.
Some people, you can see movements like this
playing out all over the world right now.
So you construct a kind of devil, a kind of source of evil,
and we're going to transcend beyond it.
Yeah, and the millenarian, the millenarian is kind of,
when you see a millenarian cult,
they put a really specific point on it,
which is end of the world, right?
There is some change coming.
And that change that's coming is so profound and so important
that it's either going to lead to utopia or hell on earth, right?
And it is going to, and then it's like,
what if you actually knew that that was going to happen, right?
What would you do, right?
How would you prepare yourself for it?
How would you come together with a group of like-minded people, right?
How would you, what would you do?
Would you plan like caches of weapons in the woods?
Would you like, I don't know, create underground buckers?
Would you spend your life trying to figure out a way
to avoid having it happen?
Yeah, that's a really compelling, exciting idea
to have a club over, to have a little bit of travel.
Like you get together on a Saturday night
and drink some beers and talk about the end of the world
and how you are the only ones who have figured it out.
Yeah.
And then once you lock in on that,
like how can you do anything else with your life?
Like this is obviously the thing that you have to do.
And then there's a psychological effect you alluded to.
There's a psychological effect.
If you take a set of true believers
and you lead them to themselves, they get more radical,
because they self-radicalize each other.
That said, it doesn't mean they're not sometimes right.
Yeah, the end of the world might be.
Yes, correct.
Like they might be right.
Yeah.
But like we...
Have some pamphlets for you.
Exactly.
I mean, there's, I mean, we'll talk about nuclear weapons
because you have a really interesting little moment
that I learned about in your essay.
But you know, sometimes it could be right.
Yeah.
Because we're still, you were developing
more and more powerful technologies in this case.
And we don't know what the impact
they will have on human civilization.
While we can highlight all the different predictions
about how it will be positive.
But the risks are there and you discuss some of them.
Well, the steelman is...
The steelman...
Actually, the steelman and his refutation are the same,
which is you can't predict what's going to happen, right?
You can't rule out that this will not end everything, right?
But the response to that is,
you have just made a completely non-scientific claim.
You've made a religious claim, not a scientific claim.
How does it get disproven?
There is...
And there's no...
By definition, with these kinds of claims,
there's no way to disprove them, right?
And so there's no...
You just go right on the list.
There's no hypothesis.
There's no testability of the hypothesis.
There's no way to falsify the hypothesis.
There's no way to measure progress along the arc.
Like, it's just all completely missing.
And so it's not scientific.
And...
Well, I don't think it's completely missing.
It's somewhat missing.
So, for example, the people that say,
yeah, it's going to kill all of us.
I mean, they usually have ideas about how to do that,
whether it's the paperclip maximizer or it escapes.
There's mechanism by which you can imagine it
killing all humans.
Models.
And you can disprove it by saying there is a limit
to the speed at which intelligence increases.
Maybe show that...
They sort of rigorously really describe model,
like how it could happen,
and say, no, here's a physics limitation.
There's a physical limitation to how these systems
would actually do damage to human civilization.
And it is possible they will kill 10% to 20% of the population,
but it seems impossible for them to kill 99%.
It was practical counter-arguments, right?
So you mentioned basically what I described
as the thermodynamic counter-argument,
which is sitting here today.
It's like where would the evil AGI get the GPUs?
Yeah.
Because, like, they don't exist.
So you're going to have a very frustrated baby evil AGI
who's going to be, like, trying to buy NVIDIA stock
or something to get them to finally make some chips.
Right?
So the serious form of that is the thermodynamic argument,
which is, like, okay, where's the energy going to come from?
Where's the processor going to be running?
Where's the data center going to be happening?
How is this going to be happening in secret,
such that you know it's not...
You know.
So that's a practical counter-argument
to the runaway AGI thing.
I have a...
But I have a...
And we can argue that and discuss that.
I have a deeper objection to it,
which is this is all forecasting.
It's all modeling.
It's all future prediction.
It's all future hypothesizing.
It's not science.
Sure.
It is the opposite of science.
So they'll pull up Carl Sagan.
Extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof.
Right?
These are extraordinary claims.
The policies that are being called for, right,
to prevent this are of extraordinary magnitude,
and I think we're going to cause extraordinary damage.
And this is all being done on the basis of something
that is literally not scientific.
It's not a testable hypothesis.
So the moment you say,
AI is going to kill all of us,
therefore we should ban it
or we should regulate all that kind of stuff,
that's when it starts getting serious.
Or start, you know, military airstrikes and data centers.
Oh, boy.
Right?
And like...
Yeah, that's when it starts getting real weird.
So here's the problem of millinery and cults.
They have a hard time staying away from violence.
Yeah, but violence is so fun.
If you're on the right end of it,
they have a hard time avoiding violence.
The reason they have a hard time avoiding violence
is if you actually believe the claim,
right, then what would you do to stop the end of the world?
Well, you would do anything, right?
And so, and this is where you get...
And again, if you just look at the history of millinery and cults,
this is where you get the people's temple
and everybody killing themselves in the jungle.
And this is where you get Charles Manson
and, you know, setting in to kill the pigs.
Like, this is the problem with these.
They have a very hard time drawing the line at actual violence.
And I think in this case, there's...
I mean, they're already calling for it, like today.
And, you know, where this goes from here
is they get more worked up.
Like, I think it's like really concerning.
Okay, but that's kind of the extremes.
You know, the extremes of anything are always concerning.
It's also possible to kind of believe
that AI has a very high likelihood of killing all of us.
But there's...
And therefore, we should maybe consider slowing development
or regulating.
So not violence or any of these kinds of things,
but saying like, all right, let's take a pause here.
You know, biological weapons, nuclear weapons.
Like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
This is like serious stuff.
We should be careful.
So it is possible to kind of have a more rational response, right?
If you believe this risk is real.
Believe.
Yes.
Is it possible to have a scientific approach
to the prediction of the future?
I mean, we just went through this with COVID.
What do we know about modeling?
Well, I mean...
What do we learn about modeling with COVID?
There's a lot of lessons.
They didn't work at all.
They worked poorly.
The models were terrible.
The models were useless.
I don't know if the models were useless or the people
interpreting the models and then the centralized institutions
that were creating policy rapidly based on the models
and leveraging the models in order to support their narratives
versus actually interpreting the airbars and the models
and all that kind of stuff.
What you had with COVID, in my view, you had with COVID
is you had these experts showing up.
They claimed to be scientists
and they had no testable hypotheses whatsoever.
They had a bunch of models.
They had a bunch of forecasts and they had a bunch of theories
and they laid these out in front of policymakers
and policymakers freaked out and panicked and implemented
a whole bunch of really terrible decisions
that we're still living with the consequences of.
There was never any empirical foundation to any of the models.
None of them ever came true.
Yeah, to push back, there were certainly Baptist and bootleggers
in the context of this pandemic,
but there's still a usefulness to models.
So not if they're reliably wrong.
Then they're actually anti-useful.
They're actually damaging.
But what do you do with the pandemic?
What do you do with any kind of threat?
Don't you want to kind of have several models to play with
as part of the discussion of like, what the hell do we do here?
I mean, do they work?
Because they're an expectation that they actually like work,
that they have actual predictive value.
I mean, as far as I can tell with COVID,
we just saw the policymakers just saw up themselves
into believing that there was some...
I mean, look, the scientists were at fault.
The quote-unquote scientists showed up.
So I had to submit that into this.
So there was a...
Remember the Imperial College models out of London
were the ones that were...
Like, these are the gold standard models.
So a friend of mine runs a big software company
and he was like, wow, this is like COVID's really scary.
And he's like, you know, he contacted this research
and he's like, you know, do you need some help?
You've been just building this model on your own for 20 years.
Do you need some food?
Do you like our coders to basically restructure it
so it can be fully adapted for COVID?
And the guy said yes and sent over the code.
And my friend said it was like the worst spaghetti code
he's ever seen.
That doesn't mean it's not possible to construct
a good model of pandemic with the correct airbars
with a high number of parameters that are continuously,
many times a day updated as we get more data about a pandemic.
I would like to believe when a pandemic hits the world,
the best computer scientists in the world,
the best software engineers respond aggressively
and as input take the data that we know about the virus
and it's an output, say here's what's happening
in terms of how quickly it's spreading,
what that lead in terms of hospitalization
and deaths and all that kind of stuff.
Here's how likely, how contagious it likely is.
Here's how deadly it likely is based on different conditions,
based on different ages and demographics
and all that kind of stuff.
So here's the best kinds of policy.
It feels like you can have models, machine learning,
that kind of, they don't perfectly predict the future,
but they help you do something
because there's pandemics that are like,
meh, they don't really do much harm.
And there's pandemics, you can imagine them,
they can do a huge amount of harm.
Like they can kill a lot of people.
So you should probably have some kind of data-driven models
that keep updating, that allow you to make decisions
that are basically like, where, how bad is this thing?
Now you can criticize how horrible all of that went
with the response to this pandemic,
but I just feel like there might be some value to models.
So to be useful at some point, it has to be predictive, right?
So the easy thing for me to do is to say,
obviously, you're right.
Obviously, I want to see that just as much as you do
because anything that makes it easier to navigate
through society, through a wrenching risk like that,
it sounds great.
The harder objection to it is just simply,
you are trying to model a complex dynamic system
with eight billion moving parts, like not possible.
It's very tough.
Can't be done, complex systems can't be done.
Machine learning says hold my beer, but is possible?
No?
I don't know.
I would like to believe that it is.
Put it this way, I think where you and I would agree
is I think we would like that to be the case.
We are strongly in favor of it.
I think we would also agree that no such thing
with respect to COVID or pandemics, no such thing,
at least neither you nor I think are aware,
I'm not aware of anything like that today.
My main worry with the response to the pandemic is that,
same as with aliens, is that even if such a thing existed,
and as possible it existed, the policymakers were not paying
attention.
Like there was no mechanism that allowed those kinds of models
to percolate out.
I think we have the opposite problem during COVID.
I think the policymakers, I think these people with basically
fake science had too much access to the policymakers.
Right, but the policymakers also wanted,
they had a narrative in mind and they also wanted to use
whatever model that fit that narrative to help them out.
So it felt like there was a lot of politics and not enough science.
Although a big part of what was happening, a big reason we got
lockdowns for as long as we did was because these scientists came
in with these like doomsday scenarios that were like just
like completely off the hook.
Scientists and quotes, that's not,
quote unquote, scientists.
That's not, let's give love to science.
That is the way out.
Science is a process of testing hypotheses.
Yeah.
Modeling does not involve testable hypotheses, right?
Like I don't even know that, I actually don't need,
I didn't even know that modeling actually qualifies to science.
Maybe that's a side conversation we could have some time over a beer.
That's really interesting, but what do we do about the future?
I mean, what?
So number one is when we start with number one, humility,
goes back to this thing of how do we determine the truth.
Number two is we don't believe, you know, it's the old,
I've got a hammer, everything looks like a nail, right?
I've got, oh, this is one of the reasons I gave you,
I gave Lex a book, which is the topic of the book is what happens
when scientists basically stray off the path of technical knowledge
and start to weigh in on politics and societal issues.
In this case, philosophers.
Well, in this case, philosophers.
But he actually talks in this book about like Einstein,
he talks about the nuclear age and Einstein,
he talks about the physicists actually doing very similar things
at the time.
The book is when reason goes on holiday philosophers
and politics by Nevin.
And it's just a story.
It's a story.
There's there are other books on this topic,
but this is a new one.
That's really good.
That's just the story of what happens when experts in a certain domain
decide to weigh in and become basically social engineers
and end up political, you know, basically political advisers.
And it's just a story of just unending catastrophe.
Right.
And I think that's what happened with COVID again.
And I found this book a highly entertaining and eye-opening read
filled with the amazing anecdotes of irrationality
and craziness by famous recent philosophers.
After you read this book, you will not look at Einstein the same.
Oh, boy.
Yeah.
Don't destroy my heroes.
You will not be a hero of yours anymore.
I'm sorry.
You probably shouldn't read the book.
All right.
But here's the thing, the AI risk people,
they don't even have the COVID model.
At least not that I'm aware of.
No.
Like there's not even the equivalent of the COVID model.
They don't even have the spaghetti code.
They've got a theory and a warning and a this and a that.
And like, if you ask like, okay, well, here's the ultimate example is,
okay, how do we know, right?
How do we know that an AI is running away?
Like, how do we know that the fume takeoff thing is actually happening?
And the only answer that any of these guys have given that I've ever seen is,
oh, it's when the loss rate, the loss function in the training drops.
Right.
That's when you need to like shut down the data center.
Right.
And it's like, well, that's also what happens when you're successfully training a model.
Like, what even is this is not science.
This is not, it's not anything.
It's not a model.
It's not anything.
There's nothing to arguing with it.
It's like, you know, punching jello.
Like there's, what do you even respond to?
So just put pushback on that.
I don't think they have good metrics of, yeah, when the fume is happening,
but I think it's possible to have that.
Like I just, just as you speak now, I mean, it's possible to imagine there could be measures.
It's been 20 years.
No, for sure.
But it's been only weeks since we had a big enough breakthrough in language models.
We can start to actually have this.
The thing is the AI doomer stuff didn't have any actual systems to really work with it.
Now there's real systems.
You can start to analyze like, how does this stuff go wrong?
And I think you kind of agree that there is a lot of risks that we can analyze.
The benefits outweigh the risks in many cases.
Well, the risks are not existential.
Yes.
Well, not, not, not in the fume, not in the fume paper clip.
Not this.
Let me, okay.
There's another slide of hand that you just alluded to.
There's another slide of hand that happens, which is very.
I think I'm very good at the slide of hand thing, which is very not scientific.
So the book, super intelligence, right?
Which is like the Nick Bostrom book, which is like the origin of a lot of this stuff,
which is written, you know, whatever, 10 years ago or something.
So he does this really fascinating thing in the book, which is he basically says,
there are many possible routes to machine intelligence, to artificial intelligence.
And he describes all the different routes to artificial intelligence,
all the different possible, everything from biological augmentation through to,
you know, that all these different things.
One of the ones that he does not describe is large language models,
because of course the book was written before they were invented and so they didn't exist.
In the book, he just, he describes them all and then he proceeds to treat them all as if
they're exactly the same thing.
He presents them all as sort of an equivalent risk to be dealt with in an equivalent way to
be thought about the same way.
And then the risk, the quote unquote risk that's actually emerged is actually a completely
different technology than he was even imagining.
And yet all of his theories and beliefs are being transplanted by this movement,
like straight onto this new technology.
And so again, like there's no other area of science or technology where you do that.
Like when you're dealing with like organic chemistry versus inorganic chemistry,
you don't just like say, oh, with respect to like either one,
basically maybe, you know, growing up and eating the world or something,
like they're just going to operate the same way.
Like you don't.
But you can start talking about like as, as we get more and more actual systems
that start to get more and more intelligent,
you can start to actually have more scientific arguments here.
You know, high level, you can talk about the threat of autonomous weapons systems
back before we had any automation in the military.
And that would be like very fuzzy kind of logic.
But the more and more you have drones that are becoming more and more autonomous,
you can start imagining, okay, what does that actually look like?
And what's the actual threat of autonomous weapons systems?
How does it go wrong?
And still it's, it's, it's very vague, but you start to get a sense of like,
all right, it should probably be illegal or wrong or not allowed to do like
mass deployment of fully autonomous drones that are doing aerial strikes on large areas.
I think it should be required.
Right.
So that's,
No, no, no, no.
I think it should be required that only aerial vehicles are automated.
Okay.
So you want to go the other way?
I want to go the other way.
So that, okay.
I think it's obvious that the machine is going to make a better decision than the human pilot.
I think it's obvious that it's in the best interest of both the attacker and the defender
and humanity at large if machines are making more decisions than not people.
I think people make terrible decisions in times of war.
But like there's a, there's ways this can go wrong too, right?
Well, it's worse go terribly wrong now.
This goes back to the, this is that whole thing about like the self-driving,
does the self-driving car need to be perfect versus does it need to be better than the human
driver?
Yeah.
Does the automated drone need to be perfect or does it need to be better than a human pilot
at making decisions under enormous amounts of stress and uncertainty?
Yeah.
Well, the, on average, the, the worry that AI folks have is the runaway.
They're going to come alive, right?
Then again, that's the sleight of hand, right?
Or not, not come alive.
Well, hold on a second.
You're going to become.
You lose control as well.
But then they're going to develop goals of their own.
They're going to develop a mind of their own.
They're going to develop their own, right?
No, more, more like Chernobyl style meltdown, like just bugs in the code,
accidentally, you know, force you, the results in the bombing of like large civilian areas.
Okay.
And to a degree that's not possible in the, in the current military strategies.
I don't know.
The control by humans.
Well, actually, we've been doing a lot of mass bombings of cities for a very long time.
Yes.
And a lot of civilians died.
And a lot of civilians died.
And if you watch the documentary, The Fog of War, McNamara, it spends a big part of it
talking about the firebombing of the Japanese cities, burning them straight to the ground,
right?
The, the devastation in Japan, the American military firebombing the cities in Japan
was considerably bigger devastation than the use of nukes, right?
So we've been doing that for a long time.
We also did that to Germany.
By the way, Germany did that to us, right?
Like, that's an old tradition.
The minute we got airplanes, we started doing a discriminant bombing.
So one of the things that we're still doing it.
The modern U.S. military can do with technology, with automation, but technology more broadly
is higher and higher precision strikes.
Yeah.
And so precision is obviously, and this is the, the JDAM, right?
So there was this big advance, this is big advance called the JDAM, which basically was
strapping a GPS transceiver to a, to a, to an unguided bomb and turning it into a guided,
guided bomb.
And yeah, that's great.
Like, look, that's been a big advance, but, and that's like a baby version of this question,
which is, okay, do you want like the human pilot, like guessing where the bomb's going to land,
or do you want like the machine, like guiding the bomb to its destination?
That's a baby version of the question.
The next version of the question is, do you want the human or the machine deciding whether to drop
the bomb?
Everybody just assumes the human's going to do a better job for what I think are fundamentally
suspicious reasons.
Emotional psychological reasons.
I think it's very clear that the machine is going to do a better job making that decision,
because the humans making that, making that decision are godawful, just terrible.
Yeah.
Right.
And so, so yeah, so this is the, this is the thing.
And then let's get to the, there was, can I, one more slide of hand?
Yes, sure.
Okay, please.
I'm a magician, you could say.
One more slide of hand.
These things are going to be so smart, right, that they're going to be able to destroy the
world and wreak havoc and like do all this stuff and plan and do all this stuff and evade
us and have all their secret things and their secret factories and all this stuff.
But they're so stupid that they're going to get like tangled up in their code.
And that's the, they're not going to come alive, but there's going to be some bug
that's going to cause them to like turn us all in a paper, like that they're not going,
that they're going to be genius in every way other than the actual bad goal.
And it's just like, and that's just like a like ridiculous like discrepancy.
And, and, and, and you can prove this today, you can actually address this today for the
first time with LMS, which is you can actually ask LMS to resolve moral dilemmas.
Yeah.
So you can create the scenario, you know, dot, dot, dot, this, that, this, that, this, that,
what would you as the AI do in the circumstance?
And they don't just say, destroy all humans, destroy all humans.
They will give you actually very nuanced moral, practical, tradeoff oriented answers.
And so we actually already have the kind of AI that can actually like think this through
and can actually like, you know, reason about goals.
Well, the hope is that AGI or like a very super intelligent systems have some of the
nuance that LMS have. And the intuition is they most like the will because even
these LMS have the nuance.
LMS are really, this is actually worth, worth spending a moment on.
LMS are really interesting to have moral conversations with.
And that, I just, I didn't expect I'd be having a moral conversation with a machine
in my lifetime.
And let's remember, we're not really having a conversation with a machine where
we're having a conversation with the entirety of the collective intelligence of the human species.
Exactly. Yes.
Correct.
But it's possible to imagine autonomous weapon systems that are not using LMS.
If they're smart enough to be scary, where are they not smart enough to be wise?
Like that's the part where it's like, I don't know how you get the one without the other.
Is it possible to be super intelligent without being super wise?
Well, again, you're back to, I mean, then you're back to a classic autistic computer,
right? Like you're back to just like a blind rule follower.
I've got this like core, is the paperclip thing, I've got this core rule and I'm just
going to follow it to the end of the earth.
And it's like, well, but everything you're going to be doing to execute that rule is
going to be super genius level that humans aren't going to be able to counter.
It's just, it's a mismatch in the definition of what the system is capable of.
Unlikely, but not impossible, I think.
But again, here you get to like, okay, like...
No, I'm not saying when it's unlikely, but not impossible.
If it's unlikely, that means the fear should be correctly calibrated.
Extraordinary claims require extraordinary proof.
Well, okay. So one interesting sort of tangent I would love to take on this because you mentioned
this in the essay about nuclear, which was also, I mean, you don't shy away from a little bit of
of a spicy take. So Robert Oppenheimer famously said,
now I am become death, the destroyer of worlds.
As he witnessed the first detonation of a nuclear weapon on July 16th, 1945.
And you write an interesting historical perspective, quote,
recall that John von Neumann responded to Robert Oppenheimer's famous hand wringing
about the role of creating nuclear weapons, which, you note, helped end World War II and
prevent World War III with some people confess guilt to claim credit for the sin.
And you also mentioned that Truman was harsher after meeting Oppenheimer.
He said that don't let that crybaby in here again.
Real quote, real quote, by the way, from Dean Atchison.
Boy, because Oppenheimer didn't just say the famous line.
Yeah.
He then spent years going around basically moaning, you know, going on TV and going into
the White House and basically like just like doing this hair shirt, you know,
thing self, you know, this sort of self-critical like, oh my God, I can't believe how awful I am.
So he's the, he's widely considered perhaps because the hand wringing is the father of the
atomic bomb. This is Von Neumann's criticism of him as he tried to have his cake and eat it too,
like he wanted to. And so, Von Neumann, of course, is a very different kind of personality.
And he's just like, yeah, this is like an incredibly useful thing. I'm glad we did it.
Yeah. Well, Von Neumann is as widely credited as being one of the smartest humans of the 20th
century. Certain people, everybody says like, this is the smartest person I've ever met when
they've met him. Anyway, that doesn't mean smart, doesn't mean wise.
So I would love to sort of, can you make the case both for and against the critique of Oppenheimer
here? Because we're talking about nuclear weapons. Boy, do they seem dangerous.
Well, so the critique goes deeper. And I left this out. Here's the real substance. I left
it out because I didn't want to dwell on nukes in my AI paper. But here's the deeper thing
that happened. And I'm really curious, this movie coming out this summer, I'm really curious to see
how far he pushes this because this is the real drama in the story, which is it wasn't just a
question of our nukes good or bad. It was a question of, should Russia also have them?
And what actually happened was Russia got the, America invented the bomb, Russia got the bomb,
they got the bomb through espionage, they got American and, you know, they got American scientists
and foreign scientists working on the American project, some combination of the two basically gave
the Russians the designs for the bomb. And that's how the Russians got the bomb. There's this dispute
to this day of Oppenheimer's role in that. If you read all the histories, the kind of composite
picture, and by the way, we now know a lot actually about Soviet espionage in that era,
because there's been all this declassified material in the last 20 years that actually shows a lot
of very interesting things. But if you kind of read all the histories, what you kind of get is
Oppenheimer himself probably was not a, he probably did not hand over the nuclear secrets
himself. However, he was close to many people who did, including family members. And there were
other members of the Manhattan Project who were Russian Soviet SS and did hand over the bomb. And
so the view that Oppenheimer and people like him had that this thing is awful and terrible and,
oh my God, and, you know, all this stuff, you could argue fed into this ethos at the time that
resulted in people thinking that the Baptist is thinking that the only principle thing to do is
to give the Russians the bomb. And so the moral beliefs on this thing and the public discussion
and the role that the inventors of this technology play, this is the point of this book when they
kind of take on this sort of public intellectual moral kind of thing, it can have real consequences.
Because we live in a very different world today because Russia got the bomb than we would have
lived in had they not gotten the bomb. The entire 20th century, second half of the 20th century
would have played out very different had those people not given Russia the bomb. And so the
stakes were very high then. The good news today is nobody sitting here today, I don't think worrying
about like an analogous situation with respect to like, I'm not really worried that Sam Altman is
going to decide to give the Chinese the design for AI, although he did just speak at a Chinese
conference, which is interesting. But however, I don't think that's what's at play here. But what's
at play here are all these other fundamental issues around what do we believe about this and then
what laws and regulations and restrictions that we're going to put on it. And that's where I draw
it like a direct straight line. And anyway, and my reading of the history on Nukes is like the
people who were doing the full hair shirt public, this is awful, this is terrible, actually had
like catastrophically bad results from taking those views. And that's what I'm worried is going
to happen again. But is there a case to be made that you really need to wake the public up to
the dangers of nuclear weapons when they were first dropped? Like really, like, educate them on
like, this is extremely dangerous and destructive weapon. I think the education kind of happened
quick and early. Like, how? It was pretty obvious. How? We dropped one bomb and destroyed an entire
city. Yeah, so 80,000 people dead. But I don't like the reporting of that, you can report that in
all kinds of ways. You can do all kinds of slants like war is horrible, war is terrible. You can
make it seem like nuclear, the use of nuclear weapons is just a part of a war and all that
kind of stuff. Something about the reporting and the discussion of nuclear weapons resulted in us
being terrified in awe of the power of nuclear weapons. And that potentially fed in a positive
way towards the game theory of mutually assured destruction. Well, so this gets to what actually
happens. Some of us may be playing devils advocate here. Yeah, sure, of course. Let's get to what
actually happened and then kind of back into that. So what actually happened, I believe, and again,
I think this is a reasonable reading of history, is what actually happened was nukes then prevented
World War III. And they prevented World War III through the game theory of mutually assured
destruction. Had nukes not existed, there would have been no reason why the Cold War did not go
hot. And the military planners at the time thought, both on both sides, thought that there
was going to be World War III on the plains of Europe and they thought there was going to be
like 100 million people dead. It was the most obvious thing in the world to happen.
And it's the dog that didn't bark. It may be the best single net thing that happened in the
entire 20th century, is that that didn't happen. Yeah, actually, just on that point,
you say a lot of really brilliant things. It hit me just as you were saying it.
I don't know why it hit me for the first time, but we got two wars in a span of 20 years.
Like, we could have kept getting more and more world wars and more and more ruthless.
It actually, you could have had a US versus Russia war.
You could have. By the way, there's another hypothetical scenario. The other hypothetical
scenario is the Americans got the bomb, the Russians didn't. And then America is the big
dog. And then maybe America would have had the capability to actually roll back there at current.
I don't know whether that would have happened, but like it's entirely possible.
Right. And the act of these people who had these moral positions about, because they could
forecast, they could model, they could forecast the future of how this technology would get used,
made a horrific mistake, because they basically ensured that the Iron Curtain would continue
for 50 years longer than it would have otherwise. And again, like, these are counterfactuals. I
don't know that that's what would have happened. But like, the decision to hand the bomb over
was a big decision made by people who were very full of themselves.
Yeah, but so me as an America, me as a person that loves America, I also wonder if US was the
only ones with nuclear weapons. That was the argument for handing the, that was the,
the guys who, the guys who handed over the bomb. That was actually their moral argument.
Yeah, I would, I would probably not hand it over to, I would be careful about the regimes
you handed over to. Maybe give it to like the British or something.
Like, like a democratically elected government.
Well, there are people to this day who think that those Soviet spies did the right thing,
because they created a balance of terror, as opposed to the US having just, and by the way,
let me, let me, balance of terror, let's tell the full verse, such a sexy ring to it. Okay,
so the full version of the story is John von Neumann as a hero of both yours and mine,
the full version of the story is he advocated for a first right. So when the US had the bomb,
and Russia did not, he advocated for, he said, we need to strike them right now.
Strike Russia. Yeah.
Yes. Von Neumann.
Yes, because he said World War Three is inevitable. He was very hardcore.
He, his, his theory was, his theory was World War Three is inevitable. We're definitely going
to have a World War Three. The only way to stop World War Three is we have to take them out right
now. And we have to take them out right now before they get the bomb, because this is our last chance.
Now, again, like,
Is this an example of philosophers and politics?
I don't know if that's in there or not, but this is in the standard.
No, but it is. Yeah. Meaning is that.
Yeah, this is on the other side. So, so most of the case studies, most of the case studies in
books like this are the crazy people on the left. Yeah. Von Neumann is a story arguably of the
crazy people on the right. Yeah, stick to computing, John.
Well, this is the thing. And this is, this is the general principle. It goes back to our core
thing, which is like, I don't know whether any of these people should be making any of these calls.
Yeah. Because there's nothing in either von Neumann's background or Oppenheimer's
background or any of these people's background that qualifies them as moral authorities.
Yeah. Well, this actually brings up the point of in AI, who are the good people to,
to reason about the morality, the ethics, the outside of these risks outside, like,
the more complicated stuff that you, you agree on is, you know, this will go into the hands of
bad guys and all the kinds of ways they'll do is, is interesting and dangerous.
Is dangerous in interesting, unpredictable ways. And who is the right person?
Who are the right kinds of people to make decisions how to respond to it?
Or is it tech people? So the history of these fields, this is what he talks about in the book,
the history of these fields is that the, the competence and capability and intelligence
and training and accomplishments of senior scientists and technologists working on a technology,
and then being able to then make moral judgments in the use of that technology,
that track record is terrible. That track record, that track record is like catastrophically bad.
The people, just to look at it, the people that develop that technology are usually not going
to be the right people. Well, why would they? So the claim is, of course, they're the knowledgeable
ones, but the problem is they've spent their entire life in a lab, right? They're not theologians.
But so what you find, what you find when you read, when you read this, when you look at these
histories, what you find is they generally are very thinly informed on history, on sociology,
on, on, on theology, on morality, ethics, they tend to manufacture their own worldviews from scratch.
They tend to be very sort of thin. They're not remotely the arguments that you would be having
if you got like a group of highly qualified theologians or philosophers or, you know.
Well, let me sort of, as the devil's advocate takes a sip of whiskey, say that I, I agree with,
with that, but also it seems like the people who are doing kind of the ethics departments and
these tech companies go sometimes the other way, which is they're not nuanced on the, on history
or theology or this kind of stuff. They almost becomes a kind of outraged activism towards
directions that don't seem to be grounded in history and humility and nuance. It's again,
drenched with arrogance. So I'm not sure which is worse. Oh, no, they're both bad. Yeah. So
definitely not them either. But I guess, but look, this is a hard, yeah, it's a hard problem.
This is our problem. This goes back to where we started, which is okay, who has the truth. And
it's like, well, you know, like how do societies arrive at like truth and how do we figure these
things out? And like our elected leaders play some role in it. You know, we all play some role in it.
There have to be some set of public intellectuals at some point that bring, you know, rationality
and judgment and humility to it. Yeah, those people are few and far between. We should probably
prize them very highly. Yeah. Celebrate humility in our public leaders. So getting to risk number
two, will AI ruin our society? Short version, as you write, if the murder robots don't get us,
the hate speech and misinformation will. And the action you recommend in short,
don't let the thought police suppress AI. Well, what is this risk of the effect of
misinformation in a society that's going to be catalyzed by AI? Yeah, so this is the social media.
This is what you just alluded to. It's the activism kind of thing that's popped up in these
companies in the industry. And it's basically, from my perspective, it's basically part two
of the war that played out over social media over the last 10 years. Because you probably remember
social media 10 years ago was basically who even wants this, who wants a photo of what your cat
had for breakfast, like this stuff is like silly and trivial. And why can't these nerds like figure
out how to invent something useful and powerful? And then certain things happened in the political
system. And then it's sort of the polarity on that discussion switched all the way to social
media is like the worst, most corrosive, most terrible, most awful technology ever invented.
And then it leads to terrible, the wrong politicians and policies and politics and all
this stuff. And that all got catalyzed into this very big kind of angry movement, both inside
and outside the companies, to kind of bring social media to heal. And that got focused in
particularly on two topics, so-called hate speech and so-called misinformation. And that's
been the saga playing out for the last decade. And I don't even really want to even argue the pros
and cons of the sides just to observe that that's been like a huge fight and has had big consequences
to how these companies operate. Basically, those same sets of theories, that same activist approach,
that same energy is being transplanted straight to AI. And you see that already happening. It's
why ChatGPT will answer, let's say, certain questions and not others. It's why it gives you
the canned speech about, you know, whenever it starts with as a large language model, I cannot,
you know, basically means that somebody has reached in there and told that it can't talk
about certain topics. Do you think some of that is good? So it's an interesting question.
So a couple of observations. So one is the people who find this the most frustrating are the people
who are worried about the murder robots. So and in fact, the so-called ex-risk people,
right, they started with the term AI safety, the term became AI alignment. When the term became
AI alignment is when this switch happened from where we're worried it's going to kill us all to
we're worried about hate speech and misinformation. The AI ex-risk people have now renamed their thing
AI not kill everyone ism, which I have to admit is a catchy term. And they are very frustrated by
the fact that the sort of activist driven hate speech misinformation kind of thing is taking
over, which is what's happened is taking over the AI ethics field has been taken over by the
hate speech misinformation people. You know, look, would I like to live in a world in which like
everybody was nice to each other all the time and nobody ever said anything mean and nobody ever
used a bad word and everything was always accurate and honest. Like that sounds great.
Do I want to live in a world where there's like a centralized thought police working
through the tech companies to enforce the view of a small set of elites that they're going to
determine what the rest of us think and feel like absolutely not. There could be a middle ground
somewhere like Wikipedia type of moderation. There's moderation of Wikipedia that is somehow
crowdsourced where you don't have centralized elites. But it's also not completely just a
free for all because the if you have the entirety of human knowledge at your fingertips,
you can do a lot of harm. Like if you have a good assistant that's completely uncensored,
they can help you build a bomb. They can help you mess with people's physical well being, right?
If they because that information is out there on the internet. And so they presumably there's
it would be, you could see the positives in censoring some aspects of an AI model
when it's helping you commit literal violence. And there's a section later section of the essay
where I talk about bad people doing bad things, which and there's a set of things that we
should discuss there. What happens in practice is these lines, as you alluded to this already,
these lines are not easy to draw. And what I've observed in the social media version of this
is like the way I describe it as the slippery slope is not a fallacy. It's an inevitability.
The minute you have this kind of activist personality that gets in a position to make
these decisions, they take it straight to infinity. Like it goes into the crazy zone
like almost immediately and never comes back because people become drunk with power, right?
And they look if you're in the position to determine what the entire world thinks and
feels and reads and says, like you're going to take it. And you know, Elon has ventilated this
with the Twitter files over the last, you know, three months. And it's just like crystal clear
like how bad it got there. Now, reason for optimism is what Elon is doing with the community notes.
So community notes is actually a very interesting thing. So what Elon is trying to do with
community notes is he's trying to have it where there's only a community note when people who
have previously disagreed on many topics agree on this one. Yes. That's what I'm trying to get at
is like there's, there could be Wikipedia like models or community notes type of models where
allows you to essentially either provide context or sensor in a way that's not resist the slippery
slope nature. Now, there's another power. There's an entirely different approach here,
which is basically we have AIs that are producing content. We could also have AIs that are consuming
content, right? And so one of the things that your assistant could do for you is help you consume
all the content, right? And basically tell you when you're getting played. So for example,
I'm going to want the AI that my kid uses, right, to be very, you know, child safe,
and I'm going to want it to filter for him all kinds of inappropriate stuff that he shouldn't
be saying just because he's a kid. Yeah. Right. And you see what I'm saying is you can implement
that. You could do the architecture. You could say you can solve this on the client side, right?
Solving on the server side gives you an opportunity to dictate for the entire world,
which I think is where you take the slippery slope to hell. There's another architectural
approach, which is to solve this on the client side, which is certainly what I would endorse.
It's at risk number five will AI lead to bad people doing bad things. I can just imagine
language models used to do so many bad things, but the hope is there that you can have
large language models used to then defend against it by more people, by smarter people, by
more effective people, skilled people, all that kind of stuff.
Three-point argument on bad people doing bad things. So number one, right, you can use the
technology defensively. And there's a, we should be using AI to build like broad spectrum vaccines
and antibiotics for like bio weapons. And we should be using AI to like hunt terrorists and
catch criminals. And like we should be doing like all kinds of stuff like that.
And in fact, we should be doing those things even just to like go get like, you know,
basically go eliminate risk from like regular pathogens that aren't like constructed by an AI.
So there's, there's, there's the whole, there's a whole defensive set of things.
Second is we have many laws on the books about the actual bad things, right? So it is actually
illegal to be a criminal, you know, to commit crimes, to commit terrorist acts, to, you know,
build pathogens with the intent to deploy them to kill people. And so we have those,
we don't, we actually don't need new laws for the vast majority of these scenarios. We actually
already have the laws in the book on the books. The third argument is the minute, and this is
sort of the foundational one that gets really tough, but the minute you get into this thing,
which, which you were kind of getting into, which is like, okay, but like, don't you need
censorship sometimes, right? And don't you need restriction sometimes? It's like, okay, what is
the cost of that? And in particular in the world of open source, right? And so is open source AI
going to be allowed or not? If open source AI is not allowed, then what is the regime that's going
to be necessary legally and technically to prevent it from developing, right? And here, again, is
where you get into, and people have proposed that these kinds of things, you get into, I would say,
pretty extreme territory pretty fast. Do we have a monitor agent on every CPU and GPU that reports
back to the government, what we're doing with our computers? Are we seizing GPU clusters to get
beyond a certain size? Like, and then by the way, how are we doing all that globally? Right?
And like, if China is developing an LLM beyond the scale that we think is allowable, are we going
to invade? Right? And you have figures on the AI X risk side who are advocating, you know,
potentially up to nuclear strikes to prevent, you know, this kind of thing. And so here you get into
this thing. And again, you could maybe say this is, you know, you could even say this is what good,
bad or indifferent or whatever. But like, here's the comparison of nukes. The comparison of nukes
is very dangerous because one is just nukes were just, just above, although we can come back to
nuclear power. But the other thing was like with nukes, you could control plutonium, right? You
could track plutonium. And it was like hard to come by. AI is just math and code, right? And it's
in like math textbooks. And it's like their YouTube videos that teach you how to build it. And like,
there's open source already opens horse, you know, there's a 40 billion parameter model running
around already called Falcon online that anybody can download. And so, okay, you walk down the logic
path that says we need to have guardrails on this. And you find yourself in a
authoritarian totalitarian regime of thought control and machine control that would be so brutal
that you would have destroyed the society that you're trying to protect. And so I just don't
see how that actually works. So you have to understand my brain is going full, full steam ahead
here because I agree with basically everything you're saying when I'm trying to play devil's
advocate here. Because okay, you highlighted the fact that there is a slippery slope to human
nature. The moment you sense there's something, you start to sense everything.
That alignment starts out sounding nice, but then you start to align to the beliefs of some
select group of people. And then it's just your beliefs. The number of people you're
aligned to smaller smaller as that group becomes more and more powerful. Okay, but that just speaks
to the people that censor usually the assholes and the assholes get richer. I wonder if it's
possible to do without that for AI. The one way to ask this question is, do you think the base
models, the base, the baseline foundation models should be open sourced? Like what Mark Zuckerberg
is saying they want to do? So I look, I mean, I think it's totally appropriate that companies that
are in the business of producing a product or service should be able to have a wide range of
policies that they put, right? And I'll just again, I want a heavily censored model for my eight-year-old.
Like I actually want that. Like I would pay more money for the ones more heavily censored than the
one that's not, right? And so like there are certainly scenarios where companies will make that
decision. Look, an interesting thing you brought up, or is this really a speech issue? One of the
things that the big tech companies are dealing with is that content generated from an LLM is not
covered under section 230, which is the law that protects internet platform companies from being
sued for the user-generated content. And so it's actually, yes. And so there's actually a question,
I think there's still a question which is can big American companies actually feel generative AI at
all? Or is the liability actually going to just ultimately convince them that they can't do it?
Because the minute the thing says something bad, and it doesn't even need to be hate speech, it
could just be like an enact, it could hallucinate a product detail on a vacuum cleaner, and all
of a sudden the vacuum cleaner company sues for misrepresentation. And there's any symmetry there,
right? Because the LLM is going to be producing billions of answers to questions, and it only
needs to get a few wrong. The loss has to get updated really quick here. Yeah, and nobody knows
what to do with that, right? So anyway, there are big questions around how companies operate at all.
So we talk about those. But then there's this other question of like, okay, the open source,
so what about open source? And my answer to your question is kind of like, obviously, yes,
the models have to, there has to be full open source here, because to live in a world in which
that open source is not allowed is a world of draconian speech control, human control, machine
control. I mean, you know, black helicopters with jackbooted thugs coming out, repelling down and
seizing your GPU, like territory. Well, no, no, I'm 100% serious. That's you're saying slippery
slope always leads that. No, no, no, no, no, no, that's what's required to enforce it. Like, how
will you enforce a ban on open source? You could add friction to it, like hard to get the models,
because people will always be able to get the models. But it'll be more in the shadows, right?
The leading open source model right now is from the UAE. Like, the next time they do that, what do
we do? Yeah, like, oh, I see, you're like, the 14 year old in Indonesia comes out with a breakthrough
model. You know, we talked about most great software comes from a small number of people.
Some kid comes out with some big new breakthrough and quantization or something and has some huge
breakthrough and like, what are we going to like, invade Indonesia and arrest him?
It seems like in terms of size of models and effectiveness of models, the big tech companies
will probably lead the way for quite a few years. And the question is of what policies they should
use. The kid in Indonesia should not be regulated, but should Google Meta, Microsoft, OpenAI be
regulated? Okay, so when does it become dangerous? Is the danger that it's, quote,
as powerful as the current leading commercial model? Or is it that it is just at some other
arbitrary threshold? And then by the way, like, look, how do we know? Like, what we know today
is that you need like a lot of money to train these things. But there are advances being made
every week on training efficiency and you know, data, all kinds of synthetic data. Look, I don't
even like the synthetic data thing we're talking about, maybe some kid figures out a way to auto
generate synthetic data. That's going to change everything. Yeah, exactly. And so like sitting
here today, like the breakthrough just happened, right? You made this point, like the breakthrough
just happened. So we don't know what the shape of this technology is going to be. I mean, the big
shock, the big shock here is that, you know, whatever number of billions of parameters basically
represents at least a very big percentage of human thought, like, who would have imagined that?
And then there's already work underway, there was just this paper that just came out that
basically takes a GPT-3 scale model and compresses it down to run on a single 32-core CPU.
Like, who would have predicted that? Yeah. You know, some of these models now you can run
in Raspberry Pi's, like today they're very slow, but like, you know, maybe they'll be a, you know,
perceived real perform, you know, like, it's math and code. And here we're back in here,
we're back in math and code. It's math and code. It's math, code and data. It's bits.
Mark's just like walking away at this point. He just screw it. I don't know what to do with this.
You guys created this whole internet thing. Yeah. Yeah. I'm a huge believer in open source here.
So my argument is, we're going to have to see, here's my argument. My argument, my full argument
is AI is going to be like air, it's going to be everywhere. Like, this is just going to be in
text, it already is. It's going to be in textbooks and kids are going to grow up knowing how to do
this. And it's just going to be a thing. It's going to be in the air and you can't like pull
this back anywhere. You can pull back air. And so you just have to figure out how to live in this
world, right? And then that's where I think like all this hand-wringing about AI risk is basically
complete waste of time because the effort should go into, okay, what is the defensive approach?
And so if you're worried about AI generated pathogens, the right thing to do is to have a
permanent project warp speed, right? And funded lavishly. Let's do a Manhattan project for biological
defense, right? And let's build AIs and let's have like broad spectrum vaccines where like we're
insulated from every pathogen, right? And what the interesting thing is because it's software,
a kid in his basement, a teenager could build like a system that defends against like the worst
that the worst. I mean, and to me, defense is super exciting. It's like, if you believe in
the good of human nature, the most people want to do good to be the savior of humanity is really
exciting. Yes. Okay, that's a dramatic statement, but like to help people. To help people. Yeah,
okay, what about just to jump around? What about the risk of will AI lead to crippling inequality?
You know, because we're kind of saying everybody's life will become better.
Is it possible that the rich get richer here? Yeah. So this is actually ironically goes back to
Marxism. So because this was the course of the core claim of Marxism, right? Basically, it was
that the owner, the owners of capital would basically own the means of production. And then
over time, they would basically accumulate all the wealth the workers would be paying in, you know,
and getting nothing in return, because they wouldn't be needed anymore, right? Marx is very
worried about what he called mechanization or what later became known as automation.
And that, you know, the workers would be emissarated and the capitalist would end up with all. And so
this was one of the core principles of Marxism. Of course, it turned out to be wrong about every
previous wave of technology. The reason it turned out to be wrong about every previous wave of
technology is that the way that the self-interested owner of the machines makes the most money is
by providing the production capability in the form of products and services to the most people,
the most customers as possible, right? The largest... And this is one of those funny things
where every CEO knows this intuitively, and yet it's like hard to explain from the outside.
The way you make the most money in any business is by selling to the largest market you can possibly
get to. The largest market you can possibly get to is everybody on the planet. And so every large
company does is everything that it can to drive down prices to be able to get volumes up to be
able to get to everybody on the planet. And that happened with everything from electricity. It
happened with telephones. It happened with radio. It happened with automobiles. It happened with
smartphones. It happened with PCs. It happened with the internet. It happened with mobile broadband.
It's happened, by the way, with Coca-Cola. It's happened with like every... Basically,
every industrially produced, good or service, people want to drive it to the largest possible
market. And then as proof of that, it's already happened, right? Which is the early adopters of
like GPD and Bing are not like Exxon and Boeing. They're your uncle and your nephew,
right? It's either freely available online or it's available for $20 a month or something,
but these things went... This technology went mass market immediately. And so look, the owners of
the means of production, whoever does this, now as I mentioned these trillion dollar questions,
there are people who are going to get really rich doing this, producing these things, but
they're going to get really rich by taking this technology to the broadest possible market.
So yes, they'll get rich, but they'll get rich having a huge positive impact on...
Yeah, making the technology available to everybody.
And again, smartphone, same thing. So there's this amazing kind of twist in business history,
which is you cannot spend $10,000 on a smartphone, right? You can't spend $100,000. You can't
spend... Like I would buy the million dollar smartphone, like I'm signed up for it. Like if
it's like, suppose a million dollar smartphone was like much better than the $1,000 smartphone,
like I'm there to buy it, it doesn't exist. Why doesn't it exist? Apple makes so much more
money driving the price further down from $1,000 than they would trying to harvest,
right? And so it's just this repeating pattern you see over and over again,
where the... And what's great about it, what's great about it is you do not need to rely on
anybody's enlightened right generosity to do this. You just need to rely on capitalist self-interest.
What about AI taking our jobs? Yeah, so very, very similar thing here. There's a core fallacy,
which again was very common in Marxism, which is what's called the lump of labor fallacy.
And this is sort of the fallacy that there is only a fixed amount of work to be done in the world.
And if the... And it's all being done today by people. And then if machines do it,
there's no other work to be done by people. And that's just a completely backwards view on how
the economy develops and grows, because what happens is not. In fact, that what happens is
the introduction of technology into production process causes prices to fall.
As prices fall, consumers have more spending power. As consumers have more spending power,
they create new demand. That new demand then causes capital and labor to form into new enterprises
to satisfy new wants and needs. And the result is more jobs at higher wages.
New wants and needs. The worry is that the creation of new wants and needs at a rapid rate
will mean there's a lot of turnover in jobs. So people will lose jobs. Just the actual
experience of losing a job and having to learn new things and new skills is painful for the
individuals. Two things. One is the new jobs are often much better. So this actually came up.
There was this panic about a decade ago and all the truck drivers are going to lose their jobs,
right? And number one, that didn't happen because we haven't figured out a way to actually finish
that yet. But the other thing was like a truck driver, like I grew up in a town that was basically
consisted of a truck stop, right? And I knew a lot of truck drivers. And truck drivers live a decade
shorter than everybody else. It's actually like a very dangerous, like literally they have like
high-racist skin cancer. And on the left side of their body from being in the sun all the time,
the vibration of being in the truck is actually very damaging to your physiology.
And there's actually, perhaps partially because of that reason, there's a shortage of
people who want to be truck drivers. The question always you want to ask somebody like
that is, do you want your kid to be doing this job? And like most of them will tell you, no,
like I want my kid to be sitting in a cubicle somewhere like where they don't have this,
like where they don't die 10 years earlier. And so the new jobs, number one, the new jobs are
often better, but you don't get the new jobs until you go through the change. And then to your point,
the training thing, you know, it's always the issue is can people adapt? And again, here you
need to imagine living in a world in which everybody has the AI assistant capability,
right, to be able to pick up new skills much more quickly and be able to have some, you know,
be able to have a machine to work with to augment their skills.
It's still going to be painful, but that's the process of life.
It's painful for some people. I mean, there's no, like, there's no question
it's painful for some people. And they're, you know, they're, yes, it's not, again,
I'm not a utopian on this. And it's not like it's positive for everybody in the moment,
but it has been overwhelmingly positive for 300 years. I mean, look, the concern here,
the concern, the concern, this concern has played out for literally centuries. And, you know,
this is the sort of leadite, you know, the story of the leadites that you may remember,
there was a panic in the 2000s around outsourcing was going to take all the jobs. There was a panic
in the 2010s that robots are going to take all the jobs. In 2019, before COVID, we had more jobs
at higher wages, both in the country and in the world than at any point in human history.
And so the overwhelming evidence is that the net gain here is like just like wildly positive.
And most people like overwhelmingly come out the other side being huge beneficiaries of this.
So you write that the single greatest risk, this is the risk you're most convinced by,
the single greatest risk of AI is that China wins global AI dominance and we,
the United States and the West do not. Can you elaborate?
Yeah. So this is the other thing, which is a lot of the sort of AI risk debates today,
sort of assume that we're the only game in town, right? And so we have the ability to kind of
sit in the United States and criticize ourselves and, you know, have our government like,
you know, beat up on our companies and we're figuring out a way to restrict what our companies can do.
And, you know, we're going to, you know, we're going to ban this and ban that,
restrict this and do that. And then there's this like other like force out there that
like doesn't believe we have any power over them whatsoever. And they have no desire to sign up
for whatever rules we decided to put in place. And they're going to do whatever it is they're
going to do. And we have no control over it at all. And it's China and specifically the Chinese
Communist Party. And they have a completely publicized, open, you know, plan for what they're
going to do with AI. And it is not what we have in mind. And not only do they have that as a vision
and a plan for their society, but they also have it as a vision and plan for the rest of the world.
So their plan is what? Surveillance?
Yeah, authoritarian control. So authoritarian population control, you know, good old fashioned
communist authoritarian control, and surveillance and enforcement, and social credit scores and
all the rest of it. And you are going to be monitored and metered within an inch of everything
all the time. And it's going to be basically the end of human freedom. And that's their goal. And,
you know, they justify it on the basis of that's what leads to peace.
And you're worried that the regulating in the United States will hold progress enough to where
the Chinese government would win that race?
So their plan, yes, yes. And the reason for that is they, and again, they're very public on this,
they have their plan is to proliferate their approach around the world. And they have this
program called the digital Silk Road, right, which is building on their Silk Road investment
program. And they've got their, they've been laying, they've been laying networking infrastructure
all over the world with their 5G right work with their company, Huawei. And so they've been laying
all this fabric, but financial and technological fabric all over the world. And their plan is to
roll out their vision of AI on top of that, and to have every other country be running their version.
And then if you're a country prone to, you know, authoritarianism, you're going to find this to
be an incredible way to become more authoritarian. If you're a country, by the way, not prone to
authoritarianism, you're going to have the Chinese Communist Party running your infrastructure and
having backdoors into it, right, which is also not good.
What's your sense of where they stand in terms of the race towards
superintelligence as compared to the United States?
Yeah, so good news is they're behind, but bad news is they, you know, they, let's just say they
get access to everything we do. So they're probably a year behind at each point in time,
but they get, you know, downloads, I think of basically all of our work on a regular basis
through a variety of means. And they are, you know, at least, we'll see they're at least
putting out reports of very competitive, just put out a report last week of a GPT 3.5 analog.
They put out this report, forget what it's called, but they put out this report of the
cell and they did, and they, you know, the way when OpenAI puts out, they, they,
one of the ways they test, you know, GPT is they, they run it through standardized exams
like the SAT, right? Just how you can kind of gauge how smart it is. And so the Chinese report,
they ran their LM through the Chinese equivalent of the SAT, and it includes a section on Marxism.
And a section on Mao Zedong thought, and it turns out their AI does very well on both of those
topics, right? So like, this, this alignment thing, communist AI, right? Like literal communist AI,
right? And so their vision is like, that's the, you know, so, you know, you, you can just imagine
like you're a school, you know, you're a kid 10 years from now in Argentina or in Germany or in
who knows where, uh, Indonesia. And you ask, they, I'd explain to you like how the economy
works and it gives you the most cheery upbeat explanation of Chinese style communism you've
ever heard, right? So like the stakes here are like really big. Well, my, as we've been talking
about, my hope is not just for the United States, but it would just, uh, the kitten as basement
with open source LLM. Cause I, I don't know if I, um, trust large centralized institutions
with super powerful AI, no matter what their ideology is a power corrupts.
You've been investing in tech companies for about, let's say 20 years and, uh, about 15 of which was,
uh, with Andreessen Horowitz. Uh, what interesting trends in tech have you seen over that time?
Let's just talk about companies and just the evolution of the tech industry.
I mean, the big shift over 20 years has been that tech used to be a tools industry,
for basically from like 1940 through to about 2010, almost all the big successful companies
were picks and shovels companies. So PC database, smartphone, you know, some, some, some tool that
somebody else would pick up and use. Since 2010, most of the big wins have been in applications.
So a company that starts a, you know, it starts in an existing industry and goes directly to the
customer in that industry. And then, you know, the early examples there were like Uber and Lyft
and Airbnb. Um, and then that model is kind of elaborating out. Um, the AI thing is actually
a reversion on that for now. Cause like most of the AI business right now is actually in cloud
provision of, of, of AI APIs for other people to build on, but,
But the big thing will probably be an app.
Yeah. I think, I think most of the money, I think probably will be in whatever, yeah,
your AI financial advisor or your AI doctor or your AI lawyer or, you know, take your pick
of whatever the domain is. Um, and there, and what's interesting is, you know, we,
the valley kind of does everything. We, we, the entrepreneurs kind of elaborate every possible
idea. And so there will be a set of companies that like make AI, um, something that can be
purchased and used by large law firms. Um, and then there will be other companies that just
go direct to market as a, as an AI lawyer.
What advice could you give for startup founder? Just having seen so many successful companies,
so many companies that fail also. What advice could you give to a startup founder,
someone who wants to build the next super successful startup in the tech space,
the Googles, the apples, the twitters.
Yeah. So the great thing about the really great founders is they don't take any advice. So,
so if you find yourself listening to advice, maybe you shouldn't do it. Um,
Well, that's actually just to elaborate on that. If you could also speak to great founders too.
Yeah.
Like what, what makes a great founder?
So it makes a great founder is super smart, um, coupled with super energetic, coupled with super
courageous. I think it's some of those, those three.
And intelligence, passion and courage.
The first two are traits and the third one is a choice. I think courage is a choice.
Well, cause courage is a question of pain, tolerance, right? Um,
so, um, how, how many times you will want to get punched in the face before you quit?
Yeah.
Um, and here's maybe the biggest thing people don't understand about what it's like to be a startup
founder is it gets, it gets very romanticized, right? Um, and even when, even when they fail,
it still gets romanticized about like what a great adventure it was, but like
the reality of it is most of what happens is people telling you, no, and then they usually
follow that with your stupid, right? No, I will not come to work for you. Um, and I will not leave
my cushy job cool to come work for you. No, I'm not going to buy your products. You know,
no, I'm not going to run a story about your company. No, I'm not this that the other thing.
Um, and so a huge amount of what people have to do is just get used to just getting punched.
And, and, and the reason people don't understand this is because when you're a founder, you cannot
let on that this is happening because it will cause people to think that you're weak and they'll
lose faith in you. Yeah. So you have to pretend that you're having a great time when you're dying
inside, right? You're just in misery. But why, why do they do it? Why do they do it? Yeah,
that's the thing. It's, it's like it is a level. This is actually one of the conclusions I think
is it, I think it's actually, for most of these people on a risk adjusted basis, it's probably
an irrational act. They could probably be more financially successful on average if they just
got like a real job and in a big company. Um, but there's, you know, some people just have an
irrational need to do something new and build something for themselves. And, you know, some
people just can't tolerate having bosses. Oh, here's the fun thing is how do you reference
check founders? Right? So you call it, you know, normally you reference check your time hiring
somebody as you call the bosses there at their, you know, and you find out if they were good
employees. And now you're trying to reference check Steve Jobs, right? And it's like, Oh God,
he was terrible. You know, he was a terrible employee. He never did what we told him to do.
Yeah. So what's a good reference? If you want the previous boss to actually say that
they never did what you told them to do, that might be a good thing.
Well, ideally, ideally what you want is I will go, I would like to go to work for that person.
He worked for me here and now I'd like to work for him. Now, unfortunately, most people can't,
their egos can't, can't handle that. So they won't say that, but that's the ideal.
What advice would you give to those folks in the space of intelligence, passion and courage?
So I think the other big thing is you see people sometimes who say, I want to start a company
and then they kind of work through the process of coming up with an idea. And generally, those
don't work as well as the case where somebody has the idea first, and then they kind of realize
that there's an opportunity to build a company and then they just turn out to be the right kind
of person to do that. When you say idea, do you mean long-term big vision or do you mean
specifics of like product? I would say specific. Like specifically what, yeah, specifics. Like,
what is the, because for the first five years, you don't get to have vision. You just got to
build something people want and you got to figure out a way to sell it to them, right? It's very
practical or you never get to big vision. So the first, the first part, you have an idea of a
set of products or the first product that can actually make some money. Yeah. Like it's got to,
the first product's got to work, by which I mean like it has to technically work, but then it has
to actually fit into the category in the customer's mind of something that they want. And then, and
then by the way, the other part is they have to want to pay for it. Like somebody's got to pay
the bills. And so you got to figure out how to price it and whether you can actually extract the
money. So usually it is much more predictable. Success is never predictable, but it's more
predictable if you start with a great idea and then back into starting the company. So this is
what we did, you know, we had Mosaic before we had Escape. The Google guys had the Google search
engine working at Stanford, right? The, you know, yeah, actually, there's tons of examples where
they, you know, Pierre Omadir had eBay working before he left his previous job. So I really love
that idea of just having a thing, a prototype that actually works before you even begin to
remotely scale. Yeah. By the way, it's also far easier to raise money, right? Like the ideal pitch
that we receive is, here's the thing that works. Would you like to invest in our company or not?
Like that's so much easier than here's 30 slides with a dream, right? And then we have this concept
called the idea maze, which our biology friend of Boston came up with when he was with us.
So, so, so then there's this thing, this goes to mythology, which is, you know, there's a
mythology that kind of, you know, these, these ideas, you know, kind of arrive like magic or
people kind of stumble into them. It's like eBay with the pest dispensers or something.
The reality usually with the big successes is that the founder has been chewing on the problem
for five or 10 years before they start the company. And they often worked on it in school,
or they even experimented on it when they were a kid. And they've been kind of training up over
that period of time to be able to do the thing. So they're like a true domain expert.
And it sort of sounds like mom and apple pie, which is, yeah, you want to be a domain expert
in what you're doing. But you would, you know, the mythology is so strong of like, oh, I just
like had this idea in the shower and now I'm doing it. Like it's generally not that.
No, because it's, well, maybe in the shower, we had the exact product implementation details.
But yeah, usually you're going to be for like years, if not decades, thinking about
like everything around that. Well, we call it the idea maze because the idea maze basically is
like there's all these permutations. Like for any idea, there's like all these different
permutations, who should the customer be, what shape, form should the product have,
and how should we take it to market and all these things. And so the really smart founders
have thought through all these scenarios by the time they go out to raise money.
And they have like detailed answers on every one of those fronts because they put so much
thought into it. The sort of the sort of more haphazard founders haven't thought about any of
that. And it's the detailed ones who tend to do much better.
So how do you know what to take a leap? If you have a cushy job or happy life?
I mean, the best reason is just because you can't tolerate not doing it, right?
This is the kind of thing where if you have to be advised into doing it, you probably shouldn't do
it. And so it's probably the opposite, which is you just have such a burning sense of this has
to be done. I have to do this. I have no choice. What if it's going to lead to a lot of pain?
It's going to lead to a lot of pain. I think that's what if it means losing sort of social
relationships and damaging your relationship with loved ones and all that kind of stuff.
Yeah, look, so it's going to put you in a social tunnel for sure, right? So you're going to like,
there's this game you can play on Twitter, which is you can do any whiff of the idea that there's
basically any such thing as work-life balance and that people should actually work hard and
everybody gets mad. But like the truth is, all the successful founders are working 80 hour weeks
and they form very strong social bonds with the people they work with. They tend to lose a lot
of friends on the outside or put those friendships on ice. That's just the nature of the thing.
You know, for most people, that's worth the trade-off. You know, the advantage maybe younger
founders have is maybe they have less, you know, maybe they're not, you know, for example,
if they're not married yet or don't have kids yet, that's an easier thing to bite off.
Can you be an older founder?
Yeah, you definitely can. Yeah. Yeah. Many of the most successful founders are second,
third, fourth time founders. They're in their 30s, 40s, 50s. The good news of being an older
founder is you know more and you know a lot more about what to do, which is very helpful. The problem
is, okay, now you've got like a spouse and a family and kids and like you've got to go to the baseball
game and like you can't go to the baseball, you know, and so it's good.
Life is full of difficult choices. Yes.
I can't reason. You've written a blog post on what you've been up to. You wrote this in October 2022.
Quote, mostly I try to learn a lot. For example, the political events of 2014 to 2016 made clear
to me that I didn't understand politics at all. Referencing maybe some of this book here.
So, I deliberately withdrew from political engagement and fundraising and instead read
my way back into history and as far to the political left and political right as I could.
So, just high level question. What's your approach to learning?
Yeah, so it's basically, I would say it's auto-divac. So, it's sort of going down the rabbit holes.
So, it's a combination. I kind of alluded to it in that quote. It's a combination of
breadth and depth. And so, I tend to, yeah, I tend to, I go broad by the nature of what I do,
I go broad, but then I tend to go deep in a rabbit hole for a while, read everything I can,
and then come out of it. And I might not revisit that rabbit hole for, you know, another decade.
And in that blog post that I recommend people go check out, you actually list a bunch of different
books that you recommend on different topics on the American left and the American right.
It's just a lot of really good stuff. The best explanation for the current structure of our
society and politics, you give two recommendations, four books on the Spanish Civil War, six books on
deep history of the American right, comprehensive biographies of Adolf Hitler, one of which I read
can recommend, six books on the deep history of the American left. So, American right and American
left looking at the history to give you the context. Biography of Vladimir Lenin, two of them
on the French Revolution. Actually, I have never read a biography on Lenin. Maybe that will be
useful. Everything's been so Marx focused. The Sebastian biography of Lenin is extraordinary.
Victor Sebastian, okay. It'll blow your mind. Yeah. So, it's still useful to read. It's incredible.
Yeah, it's incredible. I actually think it's the single best book on the Soviet Union.
So, that, the perspective of Lenin, it might be the best way to look at the Soviet Union versus
Stalin versus Marx versus, very interesting. So, two books on fascism and anti-fascism
by the same author, Paul Gottry, a brilliant book on the nature of mass movements and collective
psychology, the definitive work on intellectual life under totalitarianism, the captive mind,
the definitive work on the practical life under totalitarianism. There's a bunch, there's a bunch,
and the single best book. First of all, the list here is just incredible. But you say the single
best book I have found on who we are and how we got here is the ancient city by Neuma Dennis,
Fostel de Kulankis. I like it. What did you learn about who we are as a human civilization from
that book? Yeah. So, this is a fascinating book. This one's free, by the way. It's a book from
the 1860s. You can download it or you can buy prints of it. But it was this guy who was a
professor at the Sorbonne in the 1860s, and he was apparently a savant on antiquity, on Greek
and Roman antiquity. And the reason I say that is because his sources are 100% original Greek and
Roman sources. So, he wrote basically a history of Western civilization from on the order of 4,000
years ago to basically the present times entirely working on original Greek and Roman sources.
And what he was specifically trying to do was he was trying to reconstruct from the stories of the
Greeks and the Romans. He was trying to reconstruct what life in the West was like before the Greeks
and the Romans, which was in the civilization known as the Indo-Europeans. And the short answer,
and this is sort of circa 4,000, 2,000 BC to, you know, sort of 500 BC, kind of that 1500 year
stretch where civilization developed. And his conclusion was basically cults. They were basically
cults. And civilization was organized into cults. And the intensity of the cults was like a million
fold beyond anything that we would recognize today. Like it was a level of all-encompassing
belief and an action around religion. That was at a level of extremeness that we wouldn't even
recognize it. And so specifically, he tells the story of basically, there were three levels of
cults. There was the family cult, the tribal cult, and then the city cult as society scaled up.
And then each cult was a joint cult of family gods, which were ancestor gods and then nature gods.
And then your bonding into a family, a tribe, or a city was based on your adherence to that
religion. People who were not of your family tribe city worshiped different gods, which gave you
not just the right with the responsibility to kill them on sight. Right? So they were serious
about their cults. Hard core. By the way, shocking development, I did not realize there's a zero
concept of individual rights. Like even up through the Greeks and even in the Romans,
they didn't have the concept of individual rights. Like the idea that as an individual,
you have some rights, just like noop. Right? And you look back and you're just like, wow,
that's just like crazily like fascist and a degree that we wouldn't recognize today. But it's like,
well, they were living under extreme pressure for survival. And the theory goes, you could not have
people running around making claims to individual rights when you're just trying to get like your
tribe through the winter, right? Like you need like hardcore command and control. And actually,
through modern political lens, those cults were basically both fascist and communist.
They were fascist in terms of social control, and then they were communist in terms of economics.
But you think that's fundamentally that like pull towards
cults is within us?
Well, so my conclusion from this book, so the way we naturally think about the world we live in
today is like, we basically have such an improved version of everything that came before us, right?
Like we have basically, we've figured out all these things around morality and ethics and
democracy and all these things. And like they were basically stupid and retrograde and were
like smart and sophisticated. And we've improved all this. I after reading that book, I now believe
in many ways the opposite, which is no, actually, we are still running in that original model,
we're just running in an incredibly diluted version of it. So we're still running basically in
cults. It's just our cults are at like a thousandth or a millionth the level of intensity, right?
And so our, so just to take religions, you know, the modern experience of a Christian in our time,
even somebody who considers him a devout Christian is just a shadow of the level of intensity of
somebody who belonged to a religion back in that period. And then by the way, we have constraints,
it goes back to our discussion, we then sort of endlessly create new cults. Like we're trying
to fill the void, right? And the void is a void of bonding. Okay. Living in their era,
like everybody living today, transport in that era would view it as just like completely intolerable
in terms of like the loss of freedom and the level of basically fascist control. However,
every single person in that era, and he really stresses this, they knew exactly where they
stood. They knew exactly where they belonged. They knew exactly what their purpose was.
They know exactly what they needed to do every day. They know exactly why they were doing it.
They had total certainty about their place in the universe.
So the question of meaning, the question of purpose was very distinctly clearly defined for
them. Absolutely. Overwhelmingly, undisputably, undeniably.
As we turn the volume down on the cultism, we start to the search for meanings that's getting
harder and harder. Yes. Because we don't have that. We are, we are ungrounded. We are, we are,
we are uncentered and we, and we all feel it, right? And that's why we reach for, you know,
it's why we still reach for religion. It's why we reach for, you know, we, people start to take
on, you know, let's say, you know, a faith in science, maybe beyond where they should put it.
You know, and by the way, like sports teams are like a, you know, they're like a tiny little
version of a cult and, you know, the, you know, Apple keynotes are a tiny little version of a cult,
right? You know, political, you know, and there's cult, you know, there's full blown
cults on both sides of the political spectrum right now, right? You know, operating in plain
science. But still not full blown, compared as to what it was.
Compared to what it used to be. I mean, we would today consider full blown, but like,
yes, they're, they're at like, I don't know, a hundred thousandth or something of the intensity
of what people had back then. So, so we live in a world today that in many ways is more advanced
and moral and so forth. And it's certainly a lot nicer, much nicer world to live in, but we live
in a world that's like very washed out. It's like everything has become very colorless and gray as
compared to how people used to experience things, which is I think why we're so prone to reach for
drama. There's something in us that's deeply evolved where we want that back.
And I wonder where it's all headed as we turn the volume down more and more.
What advice would you give to young folks today? In high school and college, how to be
successful in their career, how to be successful in their life?
Yes. So the tools that are available today, I mean, are just like, I sometimes, you know,
I sometimes bore, you know, kids by describing like what it was like to go look up a book,
you know, to try to like discover a fact and, you know, in the old days, the 1970s, 1980s and
go to the library and the card catalog and the whole thing. You go through all that work and
then the book is checked out and you have to wait two weeks and like, like to be in a world,
not only where you can get the answer to any question, but also the world now, you know,
the AI world where you've got like the assistant that will help you do anything,
help you teach, learn anything, like your ability both to learn and also to produce is just like,
I don't know, a million fold beyond what it used to be. I have a blog post I've been wanting to
write. It was, I call out where, where are the hyperproductive people? Like,
Good question. Right. Like with these tools, like there should be authors that are writing like
hundreds or thousands of like outstanding books. Well, with the authors, there's a consumption
question too. But yeah, well, maybe not, maybe not. You're right. But so the tools are much more
powerful. Artists, musicians, right? Why aren't musicians producing a thousand times the number
of songs, right? Like, like the tools are spectacular. So what, what's the explanation?
And by way of advice, like, what is motivation starting to be turned down a little bit or what?
I think it might be distraction. It's so easy to just sit and consume.
That I think people get distracted from production. But if you wanted to, you know,
as a young person, if you wanted to really stand out, you could get on like a hyperproductivity
curve very early on. There's a great, you know, the story, there's a great story in Roman history
of plenty of the elder who was this legendary statesman. And I died in the Vesuvius eruption
trying to rescue his friends. But he was famous both for being a savant of basically being a
polymath, but also being an author. And he wrote apparently like hundreds of books, most of which
have been lost, but he like wrote all these encyclopedias. And he literally like would be
reading and writing all day long, no matter what else is going on. And he so he would like travel
with like four slaves, and two of them were responsible for reading to him. And two of them
were responsible for taking dictation. And so like, he'd be going across country and like
literally he would be writing books like all the time. And apparently they were spectacular.
There's only a few that have survived, but apparently they were amazing.
So there's a lot of value to being somebody who finds focus in this life.
Yeah, like, and there are examples, like there are, you know, there's this guy,
judge was just named Posner, Posner, who wrote like 40 books and was also a great federal judge.
You know, there's our friend, Balji, I think it's like this, he's one of these,
you know, where his output is just prodigious. And so it's like, yeah, I mean, with these tools,
why not? And I kind of think we're at this interesting kind of freeze frame moment where
like this, these tools are not everybody's hands and everybody's just kind of staring
at them trying to figure out what to do. The new tools. We have discovered fire.
Yeah. And trying to figure out how to use it to cook. Yeah, right.
You told Tim Ferriss that the perfect day is caffeine for 10 hours and alcohol for four hours.
You didn't think I'd be mentioning this, did you? It balances everything out perfectly,
as you said. So perfect. So let me ask, what's the secret to balance and maybe to happiness in life?
I don't believe in balance. So I'm the wrong person to ask. Can you elaborate
why you don't believe in balance? I mean, maybe it's just, and I look, I think people,
I think people are wired differently. So I think it's hard to generalize this kind of thing. But
I'm much happier and more satisfied when I'm fully committed to something. So
I'm very much in favor of imbalance. Yeah.
In balance. And that applies to work, to life, to everything.
Yeah. Now, I happen to have whatever twist of personality traits lead that in non-destructive
dimensions, including the fact that I've actually, I now no longer do the 10-4 plan. I stopped drinking.
I do the caffeine, but not the alcohol. So there's something in my personality where I,
I, whatever maladaption I have is inclining me towards productive things, not on productive
things. So you're one of the wealthiest people in the world. What's the relationship between wealth
and happiness? Oh, money and happiness. So I think happiness, I don't think happiness is the thing
to strive for. I think satisfaction is the thing.
That's, that just sounds like happiness, but turned down a bit.
No deeper. So happiness is, you know, a walk in the woods at sunset, an ice cream cone,
a kiss. The first ice cream cone is great. This 1000th ice cream cone,
not so much at some point, the walks in the woods get boring.
What's the distinction between happiness and satisfaction?
Satisfaction is a deeper thing, which is like having found a purpose and fulfilling it, being useful.
So just something that permeates all your days, just this general contentment of being useful.
Then I'm fully satisfying my faculties, then I'm fully delivering, right,
on the gifts that I've been given, that I'm, you know, net making the world better,
that I'm contributing to the people around me, right? And then I can look back and say,
wow, that was hard, but it was worth it. I think generally it seems to leave people in a better
state than pursuit of pleasure, pursuit of quote unquote happiness.
Does money have anything to do with that?
I think the founders, the founding fathers in the US threw this off kilter when they used the
phrase pursuit of happiness, I think they should have said.
Pursuit of satisfaction.
They said pursuit of satisfaction, we might live in a better world today.
Well, you know, they could have elaborated on a lot of things.
They could have tweaked the second amendment.
I think they were smarter than they realized. They said, you know what,
we're going to make it ambiguous and let these humans figure out the rest,
these tribal cult like humans figure out the rest.
But money empowers that.
So I think, and I think they're, I mean, look, I think Elon is, I don't think I'm even a great
example, but I think Elon would be the great example of this, which is like, you know, look,
he's a guy who from every day of his life, from the day he started making money at all,
he just plows into the next thing.
And so I think money is definitely an enabler for satisfaction.
Money applied to happiness leads people down very dark paths.
Very destructive avenues.
Money applied to satisfaction, I think could be, is a real tool.
I always, by the way, I was like, you know, Elon is the case study for behavior.
But the other thing that's always really made me think is Larry Page was asked one time what
his approach to philanthropy was, and he said, oh, I'm just my philanthropic plan is just give
all the money to Elon.
Right.
Well, let me actually ask you about Elon. What are your, you've interacted with quite a lot of
successful engineers and business people. What do you think is special about Elon?
We talked about Steve Jobs.
What, what do you think is special about him as a leader as an innovator?
Yeah. So the, the core of it is he's, he's, he's back to the future. So he is, he is doing the
most leading edge things in the world, but with a really deeply old school approach.
And so to find comparisons to Elon, you need to go to like Henry Ford and Thomas Watson and Howard
Hughes and Andrew Carnegie, right, Leland Stanford, John T. Rockefeller, right, you need to go to the,
what we're called the bourgeois capitalists, like the hardcore business owner operators who
basically built, you know, basically built industrialized society, Vanderbilt. And it's
a level of hands-on commitment and depth in the business, coupled with an absolute
priority towards truth and towards kind of put science and technology
down to first principles that is just like absolute, just like unbelievably absolute.
He really is ideal that he's only ever talking to engineers. Like he does not tolerate,
he has, he has less bullshit talents than anybody I've ever met. He wants ground truth on every
single topic. And he runs his businesses directly day to day devoted to getting to ground truth in
every single topic. So you think it was a good decision for him to buy Twitter?
I have developed a view in life did not second guess Elon Musk.
I know this is going to sound crazy and unfounded, but
well, I mean, he's got a quite a track record.
I mean, look, the car was a crazy, I mean, the car was, I mean, look,
he's done a lot of things that seem crazy, starting a new car company in the United
States of America. The last time somebody really tried to do that was the 1950s. And it was called
Tucker Automotive. And it was such a disaster, they made a movie about what a disaster it was.
And then Rockets, like who does that? Like that's, there's obviously no way to start
in a rocket company like those days are over. And then to do those at the same time.
So after he pulled those two off, like, okay, fine. Like, this is one of my areas of like,
whatever opinions I had about that is just like, okay, clearly or not relevant, like this is,
at some point, you just like put on the person.
And in general, I wish more people would lean on celebrating and supporting versus deriding
and destroying. Oh, yeah. I mean, look, he drives resentment, like it's like he is a magnet for
resentment. Like his critics are the most miserable, resentful people in the world. Like
it's almost a perfect match of like the most idealized, you know, technologists, you know,
of the century coupled with like just his critics are just bitter as can be. I mean,
it's sort of very darkly comic to watch. Well, he, he fuels the fire of that by being an asshole on
Twitter at times. And which is fascinating to watch the drama of human civilization given our cult
roots just fully on fire. He's running a cult. You could say that very successfully.
So now, now there are cults have gone and we search for meaning. What do you think is the
meaning of this whole thing? What's the meaning of life, Mark Andreessen? I don't know the answer
to that. I think the meaning of, of the closest I get to it is what I said about satisfaction. So
it's basically like, okay, we were given what we have, like we should basically do our best.
What's the role of love in that mix? I mean, like, what's the point of life if you're, yeah,
without love, like, yeah. So love is a big part of that satisfaction.
Yeah, look, like taking care of people is like a wonderful thing. Like, you know,
a mentality, you know, there are pathological forms of taking care of people, but there's also a
very fundamental, you know, kind of aspect of taking care of people. Like for example, I happen
to be somebody who believes that capitalism and taking care of people are actually, they're
actually the same thing. Somebody once said capitalism is how you take care of people you
don't know, right? Right. And so like, yeah, I think it's like deeply woven into the whole thing.
You know, there's a long conversation to be had about that, but yeah.
Yeah, creating products that are used by millions of people and bring them joy in smaller big ways.
And then capitalism kind of enables that, encourages that.
David Friedman says there's only three ways to get somebody to do something for somebody else.
Love, money and force.
Love and money are better.
That's a good ordering. I think we should bet on those.
Try love first. If that doesn't work, the money and then force. Well, don't even try that one.
Mark, you're an incredible person. I've been a huge fan. I'm glad to finally got a chance to talk.
I'm a fan of everything you do, everything you do, including on Twitter. It's a huge honor to
meet you to talk with you. Thanks again for doing this. Awesome. Thank you, Alex.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Mark Andreessen. To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some words from
Mark Andreessen himself. The world is a very malleable place. If you know what you want,
and you go for it with maximum energy and drive and passion, the world will often reconfigure
itself around you much more quickly and easily than you would think. Thank you for listening,
and hope to see you next time.
