the source of energy at the origin of life is the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen.
And amazingly, most of these reactions are exagonic, which is to say they release energy.
This, if you have hydrogen and CO2 and you put them together in a falcon tube and you warm it up
to say 50 degrees centigrade and you put in a couple of catalysts and you shake it, nothing's
going to happen. But thermodynamically, that is less stable, two gases hydrogen and CO2 is less
stable than cells. What should happen is you get cells coming out. Why doesn't that happen?
It's because of the kinetic barriers. It's because that's where you need the spark.
The following is a conversation with Nick Lane, a biochemist at University College London
and author of some of my favorite books on biology, science and life ever written,
including his two most recent title transformer, the deep chemistry of life and death,
and the vital question, why is life the way it is? This is the Lux Friedman podcast to support it.
Please check out our sponsors in the description. And now, dear friends, here's Nick Lane.
Let's start with perhaps the most mysterious, the most interesting question
that we little humans can ask of ourselves. How did life originate on earth?
You could ask anybody working on the subject and you'll get a different answer from all of them.
They will be pretty passionately held opinions and their opinions grounded in science,
but they're still really at this point, their opinions, because there's so much stuff to know
that all we can ever do is get a kind of a small slice of it and it's the context which matters.
So I can give you my answer. My answer is from a biologist's point of view. That has been missing
from the equation over decades, which is, well, what does life do on earth? Why is it this way?
Why is it made of cells? Why is it made of carbon? Why is it powered by electrical charges on
membranes? There's all these interesting questions about cells that if you then look to see, well,
is there an environment on earth, on the early earth, four billion years ago that kind of matches
the requirements of cells? Well, there is one. There's a very obvious one. It's basically created
by whenever you have a wet rocky planet, you get these hydrothermal vents which generate hydrogen
gas in bucket loads and electrical charges on kind of cell-like pores that can drive the kind of
chemistry that life does. So it seems so beautiful and so obvious that I've spent the last 10 years
or more trying to do experiments. It turns out to be difficult, of course. Everything's more
difficult than you ever thought it was going to be. But it looks, I would say, more true
rather than less true over that 10-year period. I think I have to take a step back every now and
then and think, hang on a minute, where's this going? I'm happy it's going in a sensible direction.
And I think then you have these other interesting dilemmas. I mean, I'm often accused of being
too focused on life on earth, too kind of narrow-minded and inward-looking, you might say.
I'm talking about carbon, I'm talking about cells, and maybe you or plenty of people can say to me,
ah, yeah, but life can be anything. I have no imagination. And maybe they're right. But
unless we can say why life here is this way, and if those reasons are fundamental reasons,
or if they're just trivial reasons, then we can't answer that question. So I think they're
fundamental reasons, and I think we need to worry about them. Yeah, there might be some deep truth
to the puzzle here on earth that will resonate with other puzzles elsewhere that will solving
this particular puzzle will give us that deeper truth. So to this puzzle, you said
vents, hydrogen, wet, so chemically, what is the potion here? How important is oxygen? You're
the book about this. Yeah. And I actually just came straight here from a conference where I was
chairing a session on whether oxygen matters or not in the history of life. Of course, it matters.
But it matters most to the origin of life to be not there. As I see it, we have this,
I mean, life is made of carbon, basically, primarily, organic molecules with carbon,
carbon bonds. And the building block, the Lego brick that we take out of the air or take out of
the oceans is carbon dioxide. And to turn carbon dioxide into organic molecules, we need to strap
on hydrogen. And so we need, and this is basically what life is doing, it's hydrogenating carbon
dioxide, it's taking the hydrogen that bubbles out of the earth in these hydrothermal vents,
and it sticks it on CO2. And it's kind of really as simple as that. And actually,
thermodynamically, the thing that I find most troubling is that if you do these experiments
in the lab, the molecules you get are exactly the molecules that we see at the heart of biochemistry
in the heart of life. Is there something to be said about the earliest origins of that little
potion, that chemical process? What really is the spark there?
There isn't a spark. There is a continuous chemical reaction. And there is kind of a spark,
but it's a continuous electrical charge, which helps drive that reaction.
So literally spark?
Well, the charge at least, but yes. I mean, a spark in that sense is we tend to think of,
in terms of Frankenstein, we tend to think in terms of electricity, and one moment you zap
something and it comes alive. And what does that really mean? You've come alive, and now what's
sustaining it? Well, we are sustained by oxygen, by this continuous chemical reaction. And if you
put a plastic bag on your head, then you've got a minute or something before it's all over.
So it's some way of being able to leverage a source of energy?
Well, the source of energy at the origin of life is the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen.
And amazingly, most of these reactions are hexagonic, which is to say they release energy.
If you have hydrogen and CO2, and you put them together in a falcon tube, and you warm it up
to say 50 degrees centigrade, and you put in a couple of catalysts and you shake it,
nothing's going to happen. But thermodynamically, that is less stable, two gases hydrogen and CO2
is less stable than cells. What should happen is you get cells coming out.
So why doesn't that happen is because of the kinetic barriers is because that's why you need
the spark. Is it possible that life originated multiple times on earth? The way you describe it,
you make it sound so easy. There's a long distance to go from the first bits of
prebiotic chemistry to say molecular machines like ribosomes. Is that the first thing that you would
say is life? Like if I introduce you to the two of you at a party, you would say that's a living
thing? I would say as soon as we introduce genes information into systems that are growing anyway,
so I would talk about growing protocells. As soon as we introduce even random bits of
information into there, I'm thinking about RNA molecules, for example, doesn't have to have
any information. It can be completely random sequence. But if it's introduced into a system
which is in any case growing and doubling itself and reproducing itself, then any changes in that
sequence that allow it to do so better or worse are now selected by perfectly normal natural
selection. So that's when it becomes alive to my mind. That's encompassed into an object
that keeps information and involves that information over time or changes that information
over time in response to the. So it's always part of a cell system from the very beginning.
So is your sense that it started only once because it's difficult or is it possibly started
multiple occasions on earth? It's possible it started multiple occasions. There's two
provisos to that. One of them is oxygen makes it impossible really for life to start. So as soon
as we've got oxygen in the atmosphere, then life isn't going to keep starting over. So I often get
asked by people, why can't we have life starting? If it's so easy, why can't life start in these
vents now? And the answer is if you want hydrogen to react with CO2 and there's oxygen there,
hydrogen reacts with oxygen instead. It's just, you know, you're getting explosive reaction that
way is rocket fuel. So it's never going to happen. But the other for the origin of life earlier than
that, all we know is that there's a single common ancestor for all of life. There could have been
multiple origins and they all just disappeared. But there's a very really interesting deep split
in life between bacteria and what are called archaea, which look just the same as bacteria.
And they're not quite as diverse, but nearly. And they are very different in their biochemistry.
And so any explanation for the origin of life has to account as well for why they're so different
and yet so similar. And that makes me think that life probably did arise only once.
Can you describe the difference that's interesting there? Well, how they're similar,
how they're different? Well, they're different in their membranes primarily. They're different
in things like DNA replication. They use completely different enzymes and the genes behind it for
replicating DNA. So they both have membranes, both have DNA replication. Yes. The process
of that is different. They have, they both have DNA. The genetic code is identical in them both.
The way in which it's transcribed into RNA into the copy of a gene and the way that that's then
translated into a protein, that's all basically the same in both these groups. So they clearly share
a common ancestor. It's just that they're different in fundamental ways as well. And if you think
about, well, what kind of processes could drive that divergence very early on? I can think about
these in terms of membranes, in terms of the electrical charges on membranes. And it's that
that makes me think that there were probably many unsuccessful attempts and only one really
successful attempt. Can you explain why that divergence makes you think there's one common
ancestor? Okay, can you describe that intuition? I'm a little bit unclear about why the divert,
like the leap from the divergence means there's one. Do you mean like the divergence indicates
that there was a big invention at that time from one source? Yes. If you've got, as I imagine it,
you have a common ancestor living in a hydrothermal vent. Let's say there are millions of vents and
millions of potential common ancestors living in all of those vents, but only one of them makes it
out first. Then you could imagine that that cell is then going to kind of take over the world and
wipe out everything else. And so what you would see would be a single common ancestor for all of
life, but with lots of different vent systems all kind of vying to create the first life forms,
you might say. So this thing is a cell, a single cell organism? We're always talking about populations
of cells, but yes, these are celled organisms. But the fundamental life form is a single cell,
right? So they're always together, but they're alone together. There's a machinery in each
one individual component that if left by itself would still work. Yes, it's the unit of selection
is a single cell, but selection operates over generations and changes over generations in
populations of cells. So it would be impossible to say that a cell is the unit of selection
in the sense that unless you have a population, you can't evolve, you can't change.
Right. But there was one Chuck Norris, it's an American reference cell that made it out of the
vents, right? Or like the first one. So imagine then that there's one cell gets out and it takes
over the world. It gets out in the water, it's like floating around. We're deep in the ocean
somewhere. But actually two cells got out and they appear to have got out from the same vent
because they both share the same code and everything else. So unless all the, you know,
we've got a million different common ancestors in all these different vents. So either they all have
the same code and two cells spontaneously merged from different places or two different cells,
fundamentally different cells came from the same place. So either way, what are the constraints
that say not just one came out or not half a million came out, but two came out? That's kind
of a bit strange. So how did they come out? Well, they come out because what you're doing inside
event is you're relying on the electrical charges down there to power this reaction between hydrogen
and CO2 to make yourself grow. And when you leave the vent, you've got to do that yourself. You've
got to power up your own membrane. And so the question is, well, how do you power up your own
membrane? And the answer is, well, you need to pump, you need to pump ions to give an electrical
charge on the membrane. So what do the pumps look like? Well, the pumps look different in these two
groups. It says if they both emerge from a common ancestor, as soon as you've got that ancestor,
things move very quickly and divergently. Why does the DNA replication look different? Well,
it's joined to the membrane. The membranes are different. The DNA replication is different
because it's joined to a different kind of membrane. So there's interesting,
this is detail, you may say, but it's also fundamental because it's about the two
big divergent groups of life on earth that seem to have diverged really early on.
It all started from one organism. And then that organism just start replicating the heck out of
itself with some mutation of the DNA. So there's a competition through the process of evolution.
They're not like trying to beat each other up. They're just trying to live the way.
They're just replicators. Yeah. Well, let's not minimize their...
Yeah.
They're just trying to chill. They're trying to relax up in the... But there's no sense of trying
to survive. They're replicating... I mean, there's no sense in which they're trying to do anything.
They're just a kind of an outgrowth of the earth, you might say.
Of course, the aliens would describe us humans in that same way.
They might be right.
This primitive life. It's just ants that are hairless, mostly hairless.
Overgrown ants.
Overgrown ants. Okay. What do you think about the idea of panspermia, that the theory that
life did not originate on earth and was planted here from outer space? Or pseudo panspermia,
which is like the basic ingredients, the magic that you mentioned was planted here
from elsewhere in space?
I don't find them helpful. That's not to say they're wrong.
So, pseudo panspermia, the idea that the chemicals, the amino acids, the nucleotides are
being delivered from space. Well, we know that happens. It's unequivocal. They're delivered on
meteorites, comets, and so on. So, what do they do next? That's to me the question.
Well, what do they do is they stock a soup, like presumably they land in a pond or in an ocean or
wherever they land. And then you end up with a best possible case scenario is you end up with
a super-nucleotides and amino acids. And then you have to say, so now what happens? And the
answer is, oh, well, they have to go become alive. So, how did they do that? You may as well say,
then a miracle happened. I don't believe in soup. I think what we have in event is a continuous
conversion, a continuous growth, a continuous reaction, a continuous converting a flow of
molecules into more of yourself, you might say, even if it's a small bit. So, you've got
a kind of continuous self-organization and growth from the very beginning. You never have that in
a soup. Isn't the entire universe and living organisms in the universe? Isn't it just soup
all the way down? Isn't it all soup? No, no. I mean, soup almost by definition doesn't have a
structure. But soup is a collection of ingredients that are like randomly... Yeah, but they're not
random. They're not. I mean, we have chemistry going on here. We have metal grains forming,
which are, you know, effective oil-water interactions. Okay, so it feels like there's a
direction to a process, like a directive process. There are directions to processes, yeah.
And if you're starting with CO2 and you've got two reactive fluids being brought together
and they react, what are they going to make? Well, they make carboxylic acids, which include
the fatty acids that make up the cell membranes. And they form directly into bilayer membranes.
They form like soap bubbles. It's spontaneous organization caused by the nature of the
molecules. And those things are capable of growing and are capable in effect of being
selected even before there are genes. We have that. So, we have a lot of order. And that order is
coming from thermodynamics. And the thermodynamics is always about increasing the entropy of the
universe. But if you have oil and water and they're separating, you're increasing the entropy of
the universe, even though you've got some order, which is the soap and the water are not missable.
Now, to come back to your first question about panspermia properly, that just pushes the question
somewhere else. That just, even if it's true, maybe life did start on earth by panspermia. But
so, what are the principles that govern the emergence of life on any planet? It's an assumption
that life started here. And it's an assumption that it started in a hydrothermal vent or it started
in a terrestrial geothermal system. The question is, can we work out a testable sequence of events
that would lead from one to the other one, and then test it and see if there's any truth in it
or not? With panspermia, you can't do any of that. But the fundamental question of panspermia is,
do we have the machine here on earth to build life? Is the vents enough? Is oxygen and hydrogen
and whatever the heck else we want and some source of energy and heat, is that enough to build life?
Well, that's, of course, you would say that as a human. But there could be aliens right now
chuckling at that idea. Maybe you need some special sauce. Your sense is we have everything here.
I mean, this is precisely the question. I like to, when I'm talking in schools, I like to start
out with the idea of, we can make a time machine. We go back four billion years. And we go to these
environments that people talk about. We go to a deep sea hydrothermal vent. We go to a kind of
Yellowstone Park type place environment. And we find some slime that looks like we can
test it. It's made of organic molecules. It's got a structure, which is not obviously cells, but
is this a stepping stone on the way to life or not? How do we know? Unless we've got an
intellectual framework that says, this is a stepping stone, and that's not a step. We'd
never know. We wouldn't know which environment to go to, what to look for, how to say this.
So all we can ever hope for, because we're never going to build that time machine,
is to have an intellectual framework that can explain step by step, experiment by experiment,
how we go from a sterile inorganic planet to living cells as we know them. And in that framework,
every time you have a choice, it could be this way, or it could be that way, or there's lots of
possible forks down that road. Did it have to be that way? Could it have been the other way,
and would that have given you life with very different properties?
And so if you come up with a, it's a long hypothesis, because as I say, we're going from
really simple prebiotic chemistry all the way through to genes and molecular machines. That's
a long, long pathway, and nobody in the field would agree on the order in which these things
happened, which is not a bad thing, because it means that you have to go out and do some experiments
and try and demonstrate that it's possible or not possible.
It's so freaking amazing that it happened though. It feels like there's a direction to the thing.
Can you try to answer from a framework perspective of what is life?
So you said there's some order, and yet there's complexity. So it's not perfectly ordered.
It's not boring. There's still some fun in it. And it also feels like the processes have a direction
through the selection mechanism. They seem to be building something always better, always
improving. I mean, maybe it's- I mean, that's a perception. That's our romanticization of
things are always better. Things are getting better. We'd like to believe that.
I mean, you think about the world from the point of view of bacteria, and bacteria are the first
things to emerge from whatever environment they came from, and they dominated the planet very,
very quickly. And they haven't really changed. Four billion years later, they look exactly the same.
So if about four billion years ago, bacteria started to really run the show, and then nothing
happened for a while. Nothing happened for two billion years. Then after two billion years,
we see another single event origin, if you like, of our own type of cell, the eukaryotic cells,
cells with a nucleus and lots of stuff going on inside. Another singular origin, it only
happened once in the history of life on Earth. Maybe it happened multiple times, and there's no
evidence, everything just disappeared. But we have to at least take it seriously, that there's
something that stops bacteria from becoming more complex, because they didn't. That's a fact that
they emerged four billion years ago, and something happened two billion years ago, but the bacteria
themselves didn't change. They remain bacterial. So there is no trajectory, necessary trajectory
towards great complexity in human beings at the end of it. It's very easy to imagine that without
photosynthesis arising, or without eukaryotes arising, that a planet could be full of bacteria
and nothing else. We'll get to that, because that's a brilliant invention. And there's a few
brilliant invention along the way. But what is life? If you were to show up on Earth, but to
take that time machine, and you said, asking yourself the question, is this a stepping stone
towards life? As you step along, when you see the early bacteria, how would you know it's life?
This is really important question when you go to other planets and look for life.
What is the framework of telling a difference between a rock and a bacteria?
I mean, the question's kind of both impossible to answer and trivial at the same time,
and I don't like to answer it, because I don't think there is an answer. I think we're trying to
describe the process at the same time. There's lots of at least 40 or 50 different definitions
of life out there, and most of them are obviously bad in one way or another.
I mean, there's freaks. I can never remember the exact words that people use, but there's a NASA
working definition of life, which more or less says a system which is capable of a
self-sustaining system capable of evolution or something along those lines.
And I immediately have a problem with the words self-sustaining, because it's sustained by the
environment. And I know what they're getting at. I know what they're trying to say, but I pick a
hole in that. And there's always wags who say, but by that definition, a rabbit is not alive.
Only a pair of rabbits would be alive, because a single rabbit is incapable of copying itself.
There are all kinds of pedantic, silly, but also important, objections to any hypothesis.
The real question is what is... We can argue all day, or people do argue all day about,
is a virus alive or not? And it depends on the content. But most biologists could not agree
about that. So then what about a jumping gene, a retro element or something like that? It's even
simpler than a virus, but it's capable of converting its environment into a copy of itself.
And that's about as close... This is not a definition, but this is a kind of a description of life,
is that it's able to parasitize the environment, and that goes for plants as well as animals and
bacteria and viruses to make a relatively exact copy of themselves, information on the
exact copy of themselves. By the way, it doesn't really have to be a copy of itself, right? It just
has to be... You have to create something that's interesting. The way evolution is... So it is
extremely powerful process of evolution, which is basically make a copy yourself and sometimes mess
up a little bit. Okay, that seems to work really well. I wonder if it's possible to
mess up big time as a standard, as the default. It's called a hopeful monster. And
in principle, it can. Actually, it turns out, I would say that this is due a reemergence. This
is some amazing work from Michael Levin. I don't know if you came across him, but
if you haven't interviewed him, you should interview him. Yeah, yeah, I'm talking to him in
a few days. Oh, fantastic. So I mentioned there's two people that, if I may mention,
Andre Capati is a friend who's really admired in the AI community, said you absolutely must talk
to Michael and to Nick. So this, of course, I'm a huge fan of yours, so I'm really fortunate
that we can actually make this happen. Anyway, your second. Well, Michael Levin is doing amazing work
basically about the way in which electrical fields control development.
And he's done some work with planarian worms, so flatworms, where he'll tell you all about
this. So I won't say any more than the minimum, but basically you can cut their head off and they'll
redevelop a different, a new head. But the head that they develop depends if you knock out just one
iron pump in a membrane, so you change the electrical circuitry just a little bit,
you can come up with a completely different head. It can be a head which is similar to those that
diverged 150 million years ago, or it can be a head which no one's ever seen before, a different
kind of head. Now, that is really, you might say a hopeful monster. This is a kind of leap into a
different direction. The only question for natural selection is, does it work? Is the change itself
feasible as a single change? And the answer is yes, it's just a small change to a single gene.
And the second thing is it gives rise to a completely different morphology.
Does it work? And if it works, that can easily be a shift. But for it to be a speciation, for it to
continue, for it to give rise to a different morphology over time, then it has to be perpetuated.
So that shift, that change in that one gene has to work well enough that it is selected and it
goes on. And copied enough times to where you can really test it. So the likelihood it would be
lost, but there will be some occasions where it survives. And yes, the idea that we can have
sudden fairly abrupt changes in evolution I think is time for a rebirth. What about this idea that
kind of trying to mathematicalize a definition of life and saying how many steps, the shortest
amount of steps it takes to build the thing, almost like an engineering view of it?
I like that view, because I think that in a sense that's not very far away from what a
hypothesis needs to do to be a testable hypothesis for the origin of life. You need to spell out,
here's each step, and here's the experiment to do for each step. The idea that we can do it in the
lab, some people say, well, we'll have created life within five years, but ask them what they
mean by life. We have a planet four billion years ago with these vent systems across the entire
surface of the planet, and we have millions of years if we wanted. I have a feeling that we're
not talking about millions of years. I have a feeling we're talking about maybe millions of
nanoseconds or picoseconds. We're talking about chemistry, which is happening quickly.
But we still need to constrain those steps, but we've got a planet doing similar chemistry. You
asked about a trajectory. The trajectory is the planetary trajectory. The planet has properties.
See, it's basically got a lot of iron at the center of it. It's got a lot of electrons at the
center of it. It's more oxidized on the outside, partly because of the sun, and partly because
the heat of volcanoes puts out oxidized gases. The planet is a battery, it's a giant battery.
We have a flow of electrons going from inside to outside in these hydrothermal vents, and that's
the same topology that a cell has. A cell is basically just a microversion of the planet.
There is a trajectory in all of that, and there's an inevitability that certain types of chemical
reaction are going to be favored over others. There's an inevitability in what happens in water,
the chemistry that happens in water. Some will be immiscible with water and will form membranes and
will form insoluble structures. Nobody really understands water very well. It's another big
question for experiments on the origin of life. What do you put it in? What kind of structure do
we want to induce in this water? Because the last thing it's likely to be is just bulk water.
How fundamental is water to life, would you say?
I would say pretty fundamental. I wouldn't like to say it's impossible for life to start any other
way, but water is everywhere. Water is extremely good at what it does, and carbon works in water
especially well. Carbon is everywhere. Those things together make me think probabilistically,
if we found a thousand life forms, 995 of them would be carbon-based and living in water.
Now the reverse question, if you found a puddle of water elsewhere and some carbon,
no, just a puddle of water. Is a puddle of water a pretty damn good indication that life
either exists here or has once existed here? No. So it doesn't work the other way.
I think you need a living planet. You need a planet which is capable of turning over its surface. It
needs to be a planet with water. It needs to be capable of bringing those electrons from inside
to the outside. It needs to turn over its surface. It needs to make that water work and turn it into
hydrogen. So I think you need a living planet. But once you've got the living planet, I think the
rest of it is kind of thermodynamics all the way. So if you were to run Earth over a million times,
up to this point, maybe beyond, to the end. Let's run it to the end. What is it? How much
variety is there? You kind of spoke to this trajectory that the environment dictates
like chemically, I don't know in which other way, spiritually, like dictates kind of the
direction of this giant machine that seems chaotic, but it does seem to have order in the
steps it's taking. How often will life, how often will bacteria emerge? How often will something
like humans emerge? How much variety do you think there would be? I think at the level of bacteria,
not much variety. I think we would get, that's how many times you say you want to run it a
million times. I would say at least a few hundred thousand will get bacteria again.
Because I think there's some level of inevitability that a wet rocky planet will give rise through
the same processes to something very, I think this is not something I'd have thought a few years ago,
but we're working with a PhD student of mine, Stuart Harrison. He's been thinking about the
genetic code, and we've just been publishing on that. There are patterns that you can discern
in the code, or he has discerned in the code, that if you think about them in terms of we start
with CO2 and hydrogen, and that these are the first steps of biochemistry, you come up with a code
which is very similar to the code that we see. It wouldn't surprise me any longer if we found
life on Mars and it had a genetic code that was not very different to the genetic code that we have
here without it just being transferred across. There's some inevitability about the whole of
the beginnings of life in my view. That's really promising because if the basic chemistry is tightly
linked to the genetic code, that means we can interact with other life if it exists out there.
Well, that's potentially... That's really exciting if that's the case. Okay, but then bacteria...
We've got bacteria. How easy is photosynthesis? Much harder, I would say.
Let's actually go there. Let's go through the inventions. What is photosynthesis and why is
it hard? Well, there are different forms. Basically, you're taking hydrogen and you're
sticking it onto CO2 and it's powered by the sun. The question is where are you taking the hydrogen
from? And in photosynthesis that we know in plants, it's coming from water. So you're using the power
of the sun to split water, take out the hydrogen, stick it onto CO2, and the oxygen is a waste
product and you just throw it out, throw it away. So it's the single greatest planetary pollution
event in the whole history of the earth. The pollutant being oxygen. Yes. It also made possible
animals. You can't have large active animals without an oxygenated atmosphere, at least not
in the sense that we know on earth. So that's a really big invention in the history of earth.
Huge invention, yes. And it happened once. There's a few things that happen once on earth and you're
always stuck with this problem. Once it happened, did it become so good so quickly that it precluded
the same thing happening ever again? Or are there other reasons? And we really have to look at each
one in turn and think, why did it only happen once? In this case, it's really difficult to split
water. It requires a lot of power and that power, you're effectively separating charge across a
membrane and the way in which you do it, if it doesn't all rush back and kind of cause an explosion
right at the site, requires really careful wiring. And that wiring, it can't be easy to get it right
because the plants that we see around us, they have chloroplasts. Those chloroplasts were cyanobacteria
ones. Those cyanobacteria are the only group of bacteria that can do that type of photosynthesis.
So there's plenty of opportunity. So not even many bacteria. So who invented photosynthesis?
The cyanobacteria or their ancestors. And there's not many...
No other bacteria can do what's called oxygenic photosynthesis. Lots of other bacteria can split.
You can take your hydrogen from somewhere else. You can take it from hydrogen sulfide bubbling
out of a hydrothermal vent, grab your two. Hydrogens, the sulfur is the waste now.
You can do it from iron. You can take electrons. So the early oceans were probably full of iron.
You can take an electron from ferrous iron, so iron 2 plus and make it iron 3 plus,
which now precipitates as rust. And you take a proton from the acidic early ocean,
stick it there. Now you've got a hydrogen atom, stick it onto CO2. You've just done the trick.
The trouble is you bury yourself in rusty iron. And with sulfur, you can bury yourself in sulfur.
One of the reasons oxygenic photosynthesis is so much better is the waste product is oxygen,
which just bubbles away. That seems like extremely unlikely. And it's extremely
essential for the evolution of complex organisms because of all the oxygen.
Yeah. And that didn't accumulate quickly either. So it's converting, what is it?
It's converting energy from the sun and the resource of water into the resource needed for
animals. Both resources needed for animals. We need to eat and we need to burn the food.
And we're eating plants, which are getting their energy from the sun, and we're burning it with
their waste product, which is the oxygen. So there's a lot of kind of circularity in that.
But without an oxygenated planet, you couldn't really have predation. You can have animals,
but you can't really have animals that go around and eat each other. You can't have ecosystems,
as we know them. Well, let's actually step back. What about eukaryotic versus prokaryotic cells,
prokaryotes? What are each of those and how big of an invention is that?
I personally think that's the single biggest invention in the whole history of life.
Exciting. So what are they? Can you explain?
Yeah. So I mentioned bacteria and archaea. These are both prokaryotes.
They're basically small cells that don't have a nucleus. If you look at them under a microscope,
you don't see much going on. If you look at them under a super resolution microscope,
then they're fantastically complex. In terms of their molecular machinery, they're amazing.
In terms of their morphological appearance under a microscope, they're really small
and really simple. The earliest life that we can physically see on the planet are
stromatolites, which are made by things like cyanobacteria and their large superstructures.
Effectively, biofilms plated on top of each other and you end up with quite large structures
that you can see in the fossil record. But they never came out with animals.
They never came out with plants. They came out with multicellular things,
filamentous cyanobacteria, for example. They're just long strings of cells.
But the origin of the eukaryotic cell seems to have been what's called an endosymbiosis.
So one cell gets inside another cell. I think that that's transformed the energetic possibilities
of life. So what we end up with is a kind of supercharged cell, which can have a much larger
nucleus with many more genes, all supported. If you think about it, you could think about it as
multi-bacterial power without the overhead. So you've got a cell and it's got bacteria
living in it. And those bacteria are providing it with the energy currency it needs. But each
bacterium has a genome of its own, which costs a fair amount of energy to express, to kind of turn
over and convert into proteins and so on. What the mitochondria did, which are these
power packs in our own cells, they were bacteria once and they threw away virtually all their
genes. They've only got a few left. So mitochondria is, like you said, is the bacteria that got inside
a cell and then throw away all this stuff it doesn't need to survive inside the cell and then
kept what? So what we end up with, so it kept always a handful of genes in our own case, 37 genes.
But there's a few protists, which are single cells, things that have got as many as 70 or 80
genes. So it's not always the same, but it's always a small number. And you can think of it as a
paired down power pack where the control unit has really been kind of paired down to almost nothing.
So you're putting out the same power, but the investment in the overheads is really paired
down. That means that you can support a much larger nuclear genome. So we've gone up in the
number of genes, but also the amount of power you have to convert those genes into proteins.
We've gone up about fourfold in the number of genes, but in terms of the size of genomes and
your ability to make the building blocks, make the proteins, we've gone up a hundred thousand
fold or more. So it's huge step change in the possibilities of evolution. And it's interesting
then that the only, the only two occasions that complex life has arisen on earth, plants and
animals, fungi, you could say are complex as well, but they don't form such complex morphology as
plants and animals. Start with a single cell. They start with an oocyte and a sperm fused together
to make as I got. So you start development with a single cell and all the cells in the organism
have identical DNA. And you switch off in the brain, you switch off these genes and you switch on
those genes and the liver, you switch off those and you switch on a different set.
And the standard evolutionary explanation for that is that you've, you know, you're
restricting conflict. You don't have a load of genetically different cells that are all fighting
each other. And so it works. The trouble with bacteria, they form these biofilms and they're
all genetically different. And effectively, they're incapable of that level of cooperation.
They would get in the fight. Okay, so why is this such a difficult invention
of getting this bacteria inside and becoming an engine, which the mitochondria is? Why was that?
Why do you assign it such great importance? Is it great importance in terms of the difficulty
of how was to achieve a great importance in terms of the impact they had on life?
Both. It had a huge impact on life because if that had not happened, you can be certain
that life on earth would be bacterial only. And that took a really long time to...
It took two billion years. And it hasn't happened since to the best of our knowledge.
So it looks as if it's genuinely difficult. And if you think about it then from just an
informational perspective, you think bacteria have got, they structure their information
differently. So a bacterial cell has a small genome, you might have 4,000 genes in it,
but a single E. coli cell has access to about 30,000 genes. Potentially, it's got a kind of
metagenome where other E. coli out there have got different gene sets and they can switch them
around between themselves. And so you can generate a huge amount of variation and they've got more...
An E. coli metagenome is larger than the human genome. We own 20,000 genes or something.
So... And they've had 4 billion years of evolution to work out what can I do and what can't I do
with this metagenome. And the answer is you're stuck. You're still bacteria.
So they have explored genetic sequence space far more thoroughly than eukaryotes ever did
because they've had twice as long at least and they've got much larger populations.
And they never got around this problem. So why can't they? It seems as if you can't solve it
with information alone. So what's the problem? The problem is structure. If cells...
If the very first cells need an electrical charge on their membrane to grow
and in bacteria, it's the outer membrane that surrounds the cell, which is electrically charged.
You try and scale that up and you've got a fundamental design problem. You've got an
engineering problem. And there are examples of it and what we see in all these cases is what's
known as extreme polyploidy, which is to say they have tens of thousands of copies of their
complete genome, which is energetically hugely expensive and you end up with a large bacteria with
no further development. What you need is to incorporate these electrically charged power
pack units inside with their control units intact. And for them not to conflict so much
with the host cell that it all goes wrong. Perhaps it goes wrong more often than not.
And then you change the topology of the cell. Now, you don't necessarily have any more DNA
than a giant bacterium with extreme polyploidy. But what you've got is an asymmetry. You now have a
giant nuclear genome surrounded by lots of subsidiary energetic genomes that do all the...
And they're the control units that are doing all the control of energy generation.
Could this have been done gradually or does it have to be done?
The power pack has to be all intact and ready to go and work.
I mean, it's a kind of step change in the possibilities of evolution, but it doesn't
happen overnight. It's going to still require multiple, multiple generations. So it could take
millions of years. It could take shorter time. This is another thing I would like to put the
number of steps and try and work out what's required at each step. And we are trying to do
that with sex for example. You can't have a very large genome unless you have sex at that point.
So what are the changes to go from bacterial recombination to eukaryotic recombination?
What do you need to do? Why do we go from passing around bits of DNA as if it's loose
change to fusing cells together, lining up the chromosomes, recombining across the chromosomes
and then going through two rounds of cell division to produce your gametes? All eukaryotes do it that
way. So again, why switch? What are the drivers here? So there's a lot of time, there's a lot of
evolution, but as soon as you've got cells living inside another cell, what you've got is a new
design. You've got new potential that you didn't have before. So the cell living inside another cell,
that design allows for better storage of information, better use of energy, more delegation,
like a hierarchical control of the whole thing. And then somehow that leads to ability to have
multi-cell organisms. I'm not sure that you have hierarchical control necessarily, but you've
got a system where you can have a much larger information storage depot in the nucleus. You
can have a much larger genome. And that allows multicellularity, yes, because it allows you...
It's a funny thing, but to have an animal where I have 70% of my genes switched on in my brain
and a different 50% switched on in my liver or something, you've got to have all those genes
in the egg cell at the very beginning. And you've got to have a program of development
which says, okay, you guys switch off those genes and switch on those genes and you guys,
you do that. But all the genes are there at the beginning. That means you've got to have a lot
of genes in one cell and you've got to be able to maintain them. And the problem with bacteria is
they don't get close to having enough genes in one cell. So if you were to try and make a
multicellular organism from bacteria, you'd bring different types of bacteria together and hope
they'll cooperate and the reality is they don't. That's really, really tough to do. Yeah. We know
they don't because it doesn't exist. We have the data, as far as we know. I'm sure there's a few
like special ones and they get off quickly. I'd love to know some of the most fun things bacteria
have done since. I mean, they can do some pretty funky things. This is big, this is broad brush
joke that I'm talking about. Yes, generally speaking. So how was another fun invention?
Us humans seem to utilize it well, but you say it's also very important early on is sex.
So what is sex? Just asking for a friend. And when was it invented and how hard was it
to invent? Just as you were saying, and why was it invented? Why, how hard was it and when?
I have a PhD student who's been working on this and we've just published a couple of papers on
sex. Yes, yes, yes. What do you publish? Does biology? Is it biology, genetics, journals?
This is actually PNAS, which is Proceedings of the National Academy.
Broad, big pictures. Everyone's interested in sex. The job of biologist is to make sex dull.
Yes. Yeah, that's a beautiful way to put it. Okay. So when was it invented?
It was invented with eukaryotes about two billion years ago. All eukaryotes share the same basic
mechanism that you produce gametes. The gametes fuse together. So a gamete is the egg cell and
the sperm. They're not necessarily even different in size or shape. So the simplest eukaryotes produce
what are called motile gametes. They're all like sperm and they all swim around. They find
each other. They fuse together. They don't have kind of much going on there beyond that.
And then these are haploid, which is to say we all have two copies of our genome and the gametes
have only a single copy of the genome. So when they fuse together, you now become diploid again,
which is to say you now have two copies of your genome. And what you do is you line them all up
and then you double everything. So now we have four copies of the complete genome.
And then we crisscross between all of these things. So we take a bit from here and stick it on there
and a bit from here and we stick it on here. That's recombination. And then we go through two rounds
of cell division. So we divide in half. So now the two daughter cells have two copies and we
divide in half again. Now we have some gametes, each of which has got a single copy of the genome.
And that's the basic ground plan for what's called meiosis and syngamy. That's basically sex.
And it happens at the level of single-celled organisms and it happens pretty much the same
way in plants and pretty much the same way in animals and so on. And it's not found in any bacteria.
They switch things around using the same machinery and they take up a bit of DNA
from the environment. They take out this bit and stick in that bit and it's the same molecular
machinery they're using to do it. So what about the kind of, you said, find each other,
this kind of imperative to find each other. What is that? Like is that? Well, you've got a few cells
together. So the bottom line on all of this is bacteria. I mean, it's kind of simple when you've
figured it out and figuring it out. This is not me. This is my PhD student, Marco Colnaghi.
And in effect, if you're doing lateral, you're a Nikolaicel. You've got 4,000 genes. You want to
scale up to a eukaryotic size. I want to have 20,000 genes. And I need to maintain my genome
so it doesn't get shot to pieces by mutations. And I'm going to do it by lateral gene transfer.
So I know I've got a mutation in a gene. I don't know which gene it is because I'm not sentient,
but I know I can't grow. I know all my regulation systems are saying something wrong here,
something wrong. Pick up some DNA. Pick up a bit of DNA from the environment.
If you've got a small genome, the chances of you picking up the right bit of DNA from the
environment is much higher than if you've got a genome of 20,000 genes. To do that, you've
effectively got to be picking up DNA all the time, all day long, and nothing else. And you're
still going to get the wrong DNA. You've got to pick up large chunks. And in the end, you've got
to align them. You're forced into sex, to coin a phrase. So there is a kind of incentive.
If you want to have a large genome, you've got to prevent it mutating to nothing.
That will happen with bacteria. There's another reason why bacteria can't have a large genome.
But as soon as you give them the power pack, as soon as you give you carotid cells the power pack
that allows them to increase the size of their genome, then you face the pressure that you've
got to maintain its quality. You've got to stop it just mutating away.
What about sexual selection? So the finding, I don't like this one. I don't like this one. This
one seems all right. At which point does it become less random?
It's hard to know. Because eukaryotes just float around.
I mean, is there sexual selection in single celled eukaryotes? The probably is. It's just
that I don't know very much about it. By the time we get on to it.
If you don't hang out with the eukaryotes. Well, I do all the time, but I can't communicate with
them yet. A peacock or something. This is not quite what I work on, but the standard answer
is that it's female mate choice. She is looking for good genes. If you can have a tail that's like
this and still survive, still be alive, not actually have been taken down by the nearest
predator, then you must have got pretty good genes. Because despite this handicap,
you're able to survive. So those are like human interpretable things,
like with a peacock. But I wonder, I'm sure echos of the same thing
are there with more primitive organisms. Basically, your PR, like how you advertise
yourself that you're worthy of. So one big advertisement is the fact that you survived
it all. Let me give you one beautiful example of an algal bloom. And this can be a cyanobacteria.
It's going to be in bacteria. So if suddenly you pump nitrate or phosphate or something
into the ocean and everything goes green, you end up with all this algae growing there.
A viral infection or something like that can kill the entire bloom overnight.
And it's not that the virus takes out everything overnight. It's that most of the cells in that
bloom kill themselves before the virus can get onto them. And it's through a form of cell death
called programmed cell death. And we do the same things. This is how we have the different,
the gaps between our fingers and so on is how we craft synapses in the brain.
It's fundamental again to multicellular life. They have the same machinery in these algal blooms.
How do they know who dies? The answer is they will often put out a toxin. And that toxin
is kind of a challenge to you. Either you can cope with the toxin or you can't. If you can cope with
it, you form a spore and you will go on to become the next generation. You form a kind of a resistance
spore. You sink down a little bit. You get out of the way. You can't be attacked by a virus if
you're a spore or at least not so easily. Whereas if you can't deal with that toxin, you pull the
plug and you trigger your death apparatus and you kill yourself. It's truly life and death
solution. Yeah. So it's really, it's a challenge. And this is a bit like sexual selection. It's not
they're all pretty much genetically identical, but they've had different life histories. So
have you had a tough day? Did you happen to get infected by this virus or did you run out of iron
or did you get a bit too much sun? Whatever it may be, if this extra stress of the toxin just
pushes you over the edge, then you have this binary choice. Either you're the next generation
or you kill yourself now using the same machinery. It's also actually exactly the way I approach
dating, but that's probably why I'm single. Okay. What about if we can step back DNA?
Just mechanism of storing information. RNA, DNA. Yeah. How big of an invention was that? That seems
to be, that seems to be fundamental to like something deep within what life is, is the ability,
as you said, to kind of store and propagate information. But then you also kind of infer
with your and your students' work that there's a deep connection between the chemistry and the
ability to have this kind of genetic information. So how big of an invention is it to have a nice
representation, a nice hard drive for info to pass on? Huge, I suspect. I mean, but
when I was talking about the code, you see the code in RNA as well. And RNA almost certainly came
first. And there's been an idea going back decades called the RNA world because RNA in theory can
copy itself and can catalyze reactions. So it kind of cuts out this chicken and egg loop.
The DNA, it's possible, is not that special. So RNA, RNA is the thing that does the work,
really. And the code lies in RNA. The code lies in the interactions between RNA and amino acids.
And it still is there today in the ribosome, for example, which is just kind of a giant ribosome,
which is to say it's an enzyme that's made of RNA. So getting to RNA, I suspect it's probably not
that hard. But getting from RNA, how do you, you know, there's multiple different types of RNA
now. How do you distinguish? This is something we're actively thinking about. How do you distinguish
between, you know, a random population of RNA? Some of them go on to become messenger RNA. This
is the transcript of the code, of the gene that you want to make. Some of them become transfer RNA,
which is kind of the unit that holds the amino acid that's going to be polymerized.
Some of them become ribosomal RNA, which is the machine which is joining them all up together.
How do they discriminate themselves? And, you know, there's some kind of phase transition going on
there. I don't know. It's a difficult question. And we're now in the region of biology where
information is coming in. But the thing about RNA is very, very good at what it does. But the
largest genome supported by RNA are RNA viruses like HIV, for example. They're pretty small.
And so there's a limit to how complex life could be unless you come up with DNA, which
chemically is a really small change. But how easy it is to make that change? I don't really know.
As soon as you've got DNA, then you've got an amazingly stable molecule for information storage.
And you can do absolutely anything. But how likely that transition from RNA to DNA was? I don't know
either. How much possibility is there for variety in ways to store information? Because it seems
to be very specific characteristics about the programming language of DNA.
Yeah. There's a lot of work going on on what's called Zeno DNA or RNA. Can we replace the bases
themselves, the letters, if you like, in RNA or DNA? Can we replace the backbone? Can we replace,
for example, phosphate with arsenate? Can we replace the sugar ribose or deoxyribose with
a different sugar? And the answer is yes, you can. Within limits, there's not an infinite
space there. Arsenate doesn't really work if the bonds are not as strong as phosphate. It's
probably quite hard to replace phosphate. It's possible to do it. The question to me is why is
it this way? Is it because there was some form of selection that this is better than the other
forms and there were lots of competing forms of information storage early on and this one was
the one that worked out? Or was it kind of channeled that way, that these are the molecules that
you're dealing with and they work? And I'm increasingly thinking it's that way that we're
channeled towards ribose, phosphate, and the bases that are used. But there are 200 different
letters kicking around out there that could have been used. It's such an interesting question. If
you look at in the programming world in computer science, there's a programming language called
JavaScript, which was written super quickly. It's a giant mess, but it took over the world.
It sounds very biological. It was kind of a running joke that surely this can't be.
It's a terrible programming language. It's a giant mess. It's full of bugs. It's so easy to
write really crappy code, but it took over all of front-end development in the web browser.
If you have any kind of dynamic interactive website, it's usually running JavaScript,
and it's now taking over much of the back end, which is like the serious heavy-duty
computational stuff, and it's become super fast with the different compilation engines
that are running it. So it's like, it really took over the world. It's very possible that this
initially crappy, derided language actually takes everything over. And then the question is,
did human civilization always strive towards JavaScript, or was JavaScript just the first
programming language that ran on the browser and still sticky? The first is the sticky one,
and so it wins over anything else because it was first. I don't think that's answerable,
right? But it's good to ask that. I suppose in the lab, you can't run it with programming
languages, but in biology, you can probably do some kind of small-scale evolutionary test
to try to infer which is which. Yeah. I mean, in a way, we've got the hardware and the software
here, and the hardware is maybe the DNA and the RNA itself, and then the software, perhaps,
is more about the code. Did the code have to be this way? Could it have been a different way?
People talk about the optimization of the code, and there's some suggestion for that.
I think it's weak, actually. But you could imagine, you could come out with a million
different codes, and this would be one of the best ones. Well, we don't know this.
Well, I mean, people have tried to model it based on the effect that mutations would have.
So no, you're right. We don't know it because that's a single assumption that a mutation is
what's being selected on there, and there's other possibilities, too.
I mean, there does seem to be a resilience and a redundancy to the whole thing.
Yes. It's hard to mess up, and the way you mess it up often is likely to produce interesting
results. Are you talking about JavaScript or the genetic code now?
Yeah. Well, I mean, biology is underpinned by this kind of mess, as well. You look at the
human genome, and it's full of stuff that is really either broken or dysfunctional or was
a virus once, whatever it may be, and somehow it works, and maybe we need a lot of this mess.
We know that some functional genes are taken from this mess.
So what about, you mentioned the predatory behavior.
Yeah.
We talked about sex. What about violence, predator and prey dynamics?
How, when was that invented? And poetic and biological ways of putting it,
how do you describe predator-prayer relationship? Is it a beautiful dance, or is it a violent atrocity?
Well, I guess it's both, isn't it? I mean, when does it start? It starts in bacteria. You see
these amazing predators. Delivibrio is one that, in Margolis, used to talk about a lot.
It's got a kind of a drill piece that drills through the wall and the membrane of the bacterium,
and then it effectively eats the bacterium from just inside the periplasmic space,
and makes copies of itself that way. So that's straight predation. There are predators among
bacteria. So predation in that, sorry to interrupt, means you murder somebody and use their body as
a resource in some way. Yeah.
But it's not parasitic in that you need them to be still alive?
No, no. I mean, predation is you kill them, really.
You murder.
The parasite is, you kind of live on them.
Okay. So, but it seems the predator is the really popular tool.
So what we see if we go back 560, 570 million years before the Cambrian explosion,
there is what's known as the Ediacaran fauna, or sometimes they call Vendobionts,
which is a lovely name. And it's not obvious that they're animals at all.
They're stalked things. They often have fronds that look a lot like leaves with kind of fractal
branching patterns on them. And the thing is, they're found sometimes geologists can figure out
the environment that they were in and say, this is more than 200 meters deep because
there's no sign of any waves. There's no storm damage down here, this kind of thing.
They were more than 200 meters deep. So they're definitely not photosynthetic.
These are animals. And they're filter feeders. And we know sponges and corals and things are
filter feeding animals. They're stuck to the spot. And little bits of carbon that come their way.
They filter it out and that's what they're eating.
So no predation involved in this beyond stuff just dies anyway. And it feels like a very gentle,
rather beautiful, rather limited world, you might say. There's not a lot going on there.
And something changes. Oxygen definitely changes during this period. Other things
may have changed as well. But the next thing you really see in the fossil record is the Cambrian
explosion. And what do we see there? We're now seeing animals that we would recognize.
They've got ice. They've got claws. They've got shells. They're plainly killing things or running
away and hiding. And so we've gone from a rather gentle but limited world to a rather vicious,
unpleasant world that we recognize and which leads to kind of arms races, evolutionary arms races.
Which again is something that when we think about a nuclear arms race, we think, Jesus,
we don't want to go there. It's not done anybody any good. In some ways, maybe it does do good.
I don't want to make an argument for nuclear arms. But predation as a mechanism forces organisms to
adapt change to be better to escape or to kill. If you need to eat, then you've got to eat. And
a cheetah is not going to run at that speed unless it has to because the zebra is capable of escaping.
So it leads to much greater feats of evolution would ever have been possible without it. And in
the end, to a much more beautiful world. And so it's not all bad by any means. But the thing is,
you can't have this if you don't have an oxygenated planet because it's all in the end. It's about
how much energy can you extract from the food you eat. And if you don't have an oxygenated planet,
you can get about 10% out, not much more than that. And if you've got an oxygenated planet,
you can get about 40% out. And that means you can have instead of having one or two
trophic levels, you can have five or six trophic levels. And that means things can eat things that
eat other things and so on. And you've gone to a level of ecological complexity, which is completely
impossible in the absence of oxygen. This reminds me of the Hunter S. Thompson quote,
that for every moment of triumph, for every instance of beauty, many souls must be trampled.
The history of life on earth, unfortunately, is that of violence, just the trillions and
trillions of multi cell organisms that were murdered in the in the struggled.
It's a sorry statement. But yes, it's basically true.
And that somehow is a catalyst from an evolutionary perspective for creativity,
for creating more and more complex organisms that are better and better at surviving.
Survival of the fittest, if you just go back to that old phrase, means death the weakest.
Now, what's fit, what's weak, these are terms that don't have much intrinsic meaning.
But the thing is, evolution only happens because of death.
One way to die is the constraints, the scarcity of the resources in the environment.
But that seems to be not nearly as good of a mechanism for death
than other creatures roam about in the environment. When I say environment,
I mean like the static environment. But then there's the dynamic environment of
bigger things trying to eat you and use you for your energy.
It forces you to come up with a solution to your specific problem
that is inventive and is new and hasn't been done before.
And so it forces, I mean, literally change, literally evolution on populations,
they have to become different.
And it's interesting that humans have channeled that into more,
I mean, I guess what humans are doing is they're inventing
more productive and safe ways of doing that.
You know, this whole idea of morality and all those kinds of things,
I think they ultimately lead to competition versus violence.
Because I think violence can have a cold, brutal, inefficient aspect to it.
But if you channel that into more controlled competition in the space of ideas,
in the space of approaches to life, maybe you can
be even more productive than evolution is, because evolution is very wasteful.
Like the modern murder required to really test a good idea,
genetically speaking, is just a lot. Many, many, many generations.
Morally, we cannot base society on the way that evolution works.
That's an invention, right?
But actually, in some respects, we do, which is to say,
this is how science works. We have competing hypotheses
that have to get better, otherwise they die.
It's the way that society works. In ancient Greece,
we had the Athens and Sparta and city-states,
and then we had the Renaissance and nation-states.
And universities compete with each other.
Yes.
Tremendous amount of companies competing with each other all the time.
It drives innovation.
And if we want to do it without all the death that we see in nature,
then we have to have some kind of societal level control that says,
well, there's some limits, guys, and these are what the limits are going to be.
And society as a whole has to say, right, we want to limit the amount of death here,
so you can't do this and you can't do that.
And who makes up these rules and how do we know?
It's a tough thing, but it's basically trying to find a moral basis
for avoiding the death of evolution and natural selection
and keeping the innovation and the richness of it.
And I forgot who said it, but that murder is illegal,
probably curve out of it, murder is illegal,
except when it's done to the sound of trumpets and at a large scale.
So we still have wars.
But we are struggling with this idea that murder is a bad thing.
It's so interesting how we're channeling the best of the evolutionary imperative
and trying to get rid of the stuff that's not productive.
So trying to almost accelerate evolution,
the same kind of thing that makes evolution creative, we're trying to use that.
I think we naturally do it.
I mean, I don't think we can help ourselves do it.
Capitalism as a form is basically about competition and differential rewards.
But society, and I keep using this word moral obligation,
we cannot operate as a society if we go that way.
It's interesting that we've had problems achieving balance.
So for example, in the financial crash in 2009,
do you let banks go to the wall or not?
This is kind of question.
In evolution, certainly you let them go to the wall,
and in that sense, you don't need the regulation because they just die.
Whereas if we as a society think about what's required for society as a whole,
then you don't necessarily let them go to the wall.
In which case, you then have to impose some kind of regulation that the bankers themselves will
in an evolutionary manner exploit.
Yeah, we've been struggling with this kind of idea of capitalism,
the cold brutality of capitalism that seems to create so much beautiful things in this world,
and then the ideals of communism that seem to create so much brutal destruction in history.
We struggle with ideas of, well, maybe we didn't do it right.
How can we do things better?
And then the ideas are the things we're playing with as opposed to people.
If a PhD student has a bad idea, we don't shoot the PhD student.
We just criticize their idea and hope they improve.
You have a very humane lamp.
Yeah, I don't know how you guys do it.
You know, the way I run things, it's always life and death.
Okay, so it is interesting about humans that there is an inner sense of morality,
which begs the question of how did homo sapiens evolve?
If we think about the invention of early invention of sex and early invention of predation,
what was the thing invented to make humans?
What would you say?
I mean, I suppose a couple of things I'd say.
Number one is you don't have to wind the clock back very far, five, six million years or so,
and let it run forwards again.
And the chances of humans, as we know them, is not necessarily that high.
Now, you know, imagine, as an alien, you find planet Earth and it's got everything
apart from humans on it, it's an amazing, wonderful, marvelous planet,
but nothing that we would recognize as extremely intelligent life,
kind of space-faring civilization.
So when we think about aliens, we're kind of after something like ourselves,
or after a space-faring civilization.
We're not after zebras and giraffes and lions and things.
Amazing though they are.
But the additional kind of evolutionary steps to go from large complex mammals, monkeys, let's say,
to humans doesn't strike me as that longer a distance.
It's all about the brain.
And where's the brain and morality coming from?
It seems to me to be all about groups, human groups and interactions between groups.
The collective intelligence of it.
Yes, the interactions really.
And there's a guy at UCL called Mark Thomas who's done a lot of really beautiful work,
I think, on this kind of question.
So I talk to him every now and then, so my view is influenced by him.
But a lot seems to depend on population density.
The more interactions you have going on between different groups,
the more transfer of information, if you like, between groups,
so people moving from one group to another group,
almost like lateral gene transfer in bacteria.
The more expertise you're able to develop and maintain,
the more culturally complex your society can become.
And groups that have become detached, like on Easter Island, for example,
very often degenerate in terms of the complexity of their civilization.
Is that true for complex organisms in general?
Population density is often productive.
Really matters.
But in human terms, I don't know what the actual factors were
that were driving a large brain.
But you can talk about fire.
You can talk about tool use.
You can talk about language.
And none of them seem to correlate especially well
with the actual known trajectory of human evolution in terms of cave art and these kind of things.
That seems to work much better just with population density
and a number of interactions between different groups.
All of which is really about human interactions.
Human-human interactions and the complexity of those.
But population density is the thing that increases the number of interactions.
But then there must have been inventions
forced by that number of interactions that actually led to humans.
So like Richard Rangham talks about that it's basically the beta males had to beat up the alpha
male. So that's what collaboration looks like is they, when you're living together,
they don't like, our early ancestors don't like the dictatorial aspect of a single individual
at the top of a tribe.
So they learn to collaborate how to basically create a democracy of sorts,
a democracy that prevents, minimizes or lessens the amount of violence,
which essentially gives strength to the tribe and make the war between tribes versus the dictator.
I mean, I think one of the most wonderful things about humans is where all of those things.
I mean, we are deeply social as a species and we're also deeply selfish.
And it seems to me the conflict between capitalism and communism,
it's really just two aspects of human nature, both of which are.
Yeah, both.
We have both and we have a constant kind of vying between the two sides.
We really do care about other people beyond our families, beyond our immediate people.
We care about society and the society that we live in.
And you could say that's a drawing towards socialism or communism.
On the other side, we really do care about ourselves.
We really do care about our families about working for something that we gain from.
And that's the capitalist side of it.
They're both really deeply ingrained in human nature.
In terms of violence and interactions between groups,
yes, all this dynamic of if you're interacting between groups,
you can be certain that they're going to be burning each other
and all kinds of physical, violent interactions as well,
which will drive the kind of cleverness of how do you resist this?
Let's build a tower.
Let's see, what are we going to do to prevent being overrun
by those marauding gangs from over there?
And you look outside humans and you look at chimps and bonobos and so on.
And they're very, very different structures to society.
Chimps tend to have an aggressive alpha male type structure and bonobos.
There's basically a female society where the males are predominantly excluded
and only brought in at the behest of the female.
We have a lot in common with both of those groups.
And there's again tension there.
And probably chimps more violent, so bonobos probably more sex.
That's another tension.
How serious do we want to be?
How much fun do we want to be?
Asking for a friend again, what do you think happened to Neanderthals?
What did we cheeky humans do to the Neanderthals, homo sapiens?
Do you think we murdered them?
How do we murder them?
How do we out-compete them?
Or do we out-mate them?
I don't know.
I mean, I think there's unequivocal evidence that we mated with them.
We always try to mate with everything.
Yes, pretty much.
There's some interesting.
The first sequences that came along were in mitochondrial DNA.
And that was back to about 2002 or thereabouts.
What was found was that Neanderthal mitochondrial DNA was very different
to human mitochondria.
Oh, that's so interesting.
You could do a clock on it.
And they said the divergent state was about 600,000 years ago
or something like that, so not so long ago.
And then the first full genomes were sequenced,
maybe 10 years after that.
And they showed plenty of signs of mating between.
So the mitochondrial DNA effectively says no mating.
And the nuclear genes say, yeah, lots of mating.
But we don't know.
Is that possible?
So can you explain the difference between mitochondrial DNA and nucleus?
I've talked before about the mitochondria,
which are the power packs in cells.
These are the paired down control units is their DNA.
So it's passed on by the mother only.
And in the egg cell, we might have half a million copies of mitochondrial DNA.
There's only 37 genes left.
And they do basically the control unit of energy production.
That's what it's doing.
It's a basic old school machine that does.
And it's got genes that were considered to be effectively trivial
because they did a very narrowly defined job.
But they're not trivial in the sense that that narrowly defined job is about
everything that is being alive.
So they're much easier to sequence.
You've got many more copies of these things.
And you can sequence them very quickly.
But the problem is because they go down only the maternal line from mother to daughter,
your mitochondrial DNA and mine is going nowhere.
Doesn't matter any kids we have, they get their mother's mitochondrial DNA.
Except in very, very rare and strange circumstances.
And so it tells a different story.
And it's not a story which is easy to reconcile always.
And what it seems to suggest to my mind at least is that there was one way
traffic of genes probably going from humans into Neanderthals rather than the other way around.
Why did the Neanderthals disappear?
I don't know.
I mean, I suspect that they were probably less violent, less clever,
less populace, less willing to fight.
I don't know.
I mean, I think I already drove them to extinction at the margins of Europe.
And it's interesting how much if we ran earth over and over again,
how many of these branches of intelligent beings that have figured out some kind of
how to leverage collective intelligence, which ones of them emerge,
which one of them succeed?
Is it the more violent ones?
Is it the more isolated ones?
You know, like what dynamics result to more productivity?
And I suppose we'll never know.
The more complex the organism, the harder it is to run the experiment in the lab.
Yes.
And in some respects, maybe it's best if we don't know.
Yeah, the truth might be very painful.
What about if we actually step back a couple of interesting things that we humans do?
One is object manipulation and movement.
And of course, movement was something that was done.
That was another big invention, being able to move around the environment.
And the other one is this sensory mechanism, how we sense the environment.
One of the coolest, high definition ones is vision.
How big are those inventions in the history of life on earth?
Vision, movement, again, extremely important, going back to the origin of animals,
the Cambrian explosion where suddenly you're seeing eyes in the fossil record.
It's not necessarily, again, lots of people historically have said what use is half an eye.
You can go in a series of steps from a light sensitive spot on a flat piece of tissue
to an eyeball with a lens and so on.
If you assume no more, then I don't remember this.
This was a specific model that I have in mind, but it was one percent change or half a percent
change for each generation.
How long would it take to evolve an eye as we know it?
And the answer is half a million years.
It doesn't have to take long.
That's not how evolution works.
That's not an answer to the question.
It just shows you can reconstruct the steps and you can work out roughly how it can work.
So it's not that big a deal to evolve an eye.
But once you have one, then there's no way to hide.
And again, we're back to predator-prey relationships.
We're back to all the benefits that being able to see brings you.
And if you think philosophically what bats are doing with eco-location and so on,
I have no idea.
But I suspect that they form an image of the world in pretty much the same way that we do.
It's just a matter of mental reconstruction.
So I suppose the other thing about sight, there are single-celled organisms that have got
a lens and a retina and a cornea and so on.
Basically, they've got a camera tied by in a single cell.
They don't have a brain.
What they understand about their world is impossible to say, but they're capable of coming
out with the same structures to do so.
So I suppose, then, is that once you've got things like eyes, then you have a big driving
pressure on the central nervous system to figure out what it all means.
And we come around to your other point about manipulation, sensory input and so on, about
you have a huge requirement to understand what your environment is and what it means
and how it reacts and where you should run away and where you should stay put.
Actually, on that point, I don't know if you know the work of Donald Hoffman,
who uses the argument, the mechanism of evolution, to say that there's not necessarily a
strong evolutionary value to seeing the world as it is.
So objective reality, that our perception actually is very different from what's objectively real.
We're living inside an illusion and we're basically the entire set of species on earth,
I think, I guess, are competing in a space that's an illusion that's distinct from,
that's far away from physical reality as it is defined by physics.
I'm not sure it's an illusion so much as a bubble.
I mean, we have a sensory input, which is a fraction of what we could have a sensory input on,
and we interpret it in terms of what's useful for us to know to stay alive.
So yes, it's an illusion in that sense, but the tree is physically there,
and if you walk into that tree, it's not purely a delusion of some physical reality to it.
So it's a sensory slice into reality as it is, but because it's just a slice,
you're missing a big picture.
But he says that that slice doesn't necessarily need to be a slice,
it could be a complete fabrication that's just consistent amongst the species,
which is an interesting, or at least it's a humbling realization that our perception
is limited and our cognitive abilities are limited.
And at least to me, it's argument from evolution.
I don't know how much, how strong that is as an argument,
but I do think that life can exist in the mind.
Yes.
In the same way that you can do a virtual reality video game,
and you can have a vibrant life inside that place, and that place is not real in some sense,
but you can still have a vibrant, all the same forces of evolution,
all the same competition, the dynamics of between humans you can have,
but I don't know if, I don't know if there's evidence for that being the thing that happened on
Earth. It seems that Earth...
I think in either environment, I wouldn't deny that you could have exactly the world that you
talk about, and it would be very difficult to, you know, the idea in Matrix movies and so on,
that the whole world is completely a construction, and we're fundamentally deluded.
It's difficult to say that's impossible or couldn't happen, and certainly we construct
in our minds what the outside world is, but we do it on input and that input,
I would hesitate to say it's not real, because it's precisely how we do understand the world.
We have eyes, but if you keep someone, apparently this kind of thing happens,
someone kept in a dark room for five years or something like that, and they never see properly
again, because the neural wiring that underpins how we interpret vision never developed,
you know, you need, when you watch a child develop, it walks into a table, it bangs his head on the
table and it hurts, and now you've got two inputs, you've got one pain from this sharp edge, and
number two, you've touched it and realized it's there, it's a sharp edge, and you've got the
visual input, and you put the three things together and think, I don't want to walk into a table again,
so you're learning, and it's a limited reality, but it's a true reality, and if you don't learn
that properly, then you will get eaten, you will get hit by a bus, you will not survive,
and same if you're in some kind of, let's say, computer construction of reality,
I'm not in my ground here, but if you construct the laws that this is what reality is inside this,
then you play by those laws. Yeah, well, I mean, as long as the laws are consistent,
so just like you said in the lab, the interesting thing about the simulation question,
yes, it's hard to know if we're living inside a simulation, but also, yes, it's possible to do
these kinds of experiments in the lab now, more and more, to me, the interesting question is,
how realistic does a virtual reality game need to be for us to not be able to tell the difference?
A more interesting question to me is, how realistic or interesting does a virtual reality world need
to be in order for us to want to stay there forever, or much longer than physical reality,
prefer that place, and also prefer it not as we prefer hard drugs, but prefer it in a deep,
meaningful way, in a way we enjoy life. I mean, I suppose the issue with the matrix,
I imagine that it's possible to delude the mind sufficiently that you genuinely,
in that way, do think that you are interacting with the real world when, in fact, the whole
thing's a simulation. How good does a simulation need to be to be able to do that? Well, it needs to
convince you that all your sensory input is correct and accurate and joins up and makes sense. Now,
that sensory input is not something that we're born with, we're born with a sense of touch,
we're born with eyes and so on, but we don't know how to use them, we don't know what to make of them.
We go around, we bump into trees, we cry a lot, we're in pain a lot, we're basically
booting up the system so that it can make head a tail of the sensory input that it's getting,
and that sensory input is not just a one-way flux of things, it's also you have to walk into
things, you have to hear things, you have to put it together. Now, if you've got just babies
in the matrix who are slotted into this, I don't think they have that kind of sensory input,
I don't think they would have any way to make sense of New York as a world that they're part of,
the brain is just not developed in that way. Well, I can't make sense of New York in this
physical reality either, but yeah, I mean, but you said pain and the walking into things, well,
you can create a pain signal, and as long as it's consistent that certain things result in pain,
you can start to construct a reality, there are some, maybe, maybe you disagree with this,
but I think we are born almost with a desire to be convinced by our reality,
like a desire to make sense of our reality. Oh, I'm sure we are, yes.
So there's an imperative, so whatever that reality is given to us, like the table hurts,
fire is hot, I think we want to be deluded in a sense that we want to make a simple,
like Einstein simple theory of the thing around us, we want that simplicity. And so maybe the
hunger for the simplicity is the thing that could be used to construct a pretty dumb simulation
that tricks us. So maybe tricking humans doesn't require building a universe.
No, I don't, I mean, this is not what I work on, so I don't know how close to it we are,
but I agree with you that, yeah, I'm not sure that it's a morally justifiable thing to do,
but is it possible in principle? I think it would be very difficult,
but I don't see why in principle it wouldn't be possible, and I agree with you that we try to
understand the world, we try to integrate the sensory inputs that we have, and we try to come
out with a hypothesis that explains what's going on. I think though, that we have huge input from
the social context that we're in, we don't do it by ourselves, we don't kind of blunder around in a
universe by ourselves and understand the whole thing, we're told by the people around us,
what things are and what they do, and you know, languages coming in here and so on. So
it would have to be an extremely impressive simulation to simulate all of that.
Yeah, simulate all of that, including the social construct, the thing, the spread of ideas and
the exchange of ideas, I don't know, but those questions are really important to understand
as we become more and more digital creatures. It seems like the next step of evolution is us
becoming partial, all the same mechanisms we've talked about are becoming more and more plugged
into the machine. We're becoming cyborgs, and there's an interesting interplay between wires
and biology, you know, zeros and ones and the biological systems, and I don't think you can just,
I don't think we'll have the luxury to see humans as disjoint from the technology we've
created for much longer. We are an organism that's... Yeah, I mean, I agree with you, but
we come really with this to consciousness and is there a distinction there? Because what you're
saying, the natural end point says we are indistinguishable, that if you are capable of building
an AI which is sufficiently close and similar, that we merge with it, then to all intents and
purposes, that AI is conscious as we know it. And I don't have a strong view, but I have a view.
And I wrote about it in the epilogue to my last book, because 10 years ago, I wrote a chapter
in a book called Life Ascending about consciousness, and the subtitle of life ascending was the 10
great inventions of evolution, and I couldn't possibly write a book with a subtitle like
that that did not include consciousness, and specifically consciousness as one of the great
inventions. And it was in part because I was just curious to know more, and I read more for that
chapter. I never worked on it, but I've always... How can anyone not be interested in the question?
And I was left with the feeling that A, nobody knows, and B, there are two main
schools of thought out there with a big skew in distribution. One of them says,
oh, it's a property of matter. It's an unknown law of physics, panpsychism, everything is conscious,
the sun is conscious, it's just a matter of... Or a rock is conscious, it's just a matter of
how much. And I find that very unpersuasive. I can't say that it's wrong, it's just that
I think we somehow can tell the difference between something that's living and something that's not.
And then the other end is it's an emergent property of a very complex central nervous system.
And I never quite understand what people mean by words like emergence. I mean,
there are genuine examples, but I think we very often tend to use it to plaster over ignorance.
As a biochemist, the question for me then was, okay, it's a concoction of a central nervous
system. A depolarizing neuron gives rise to a feeling, to a feeling of pain, or to a feeling of
love, or anger, whatever it may be. So what is then a feeling in biophysical terms in the
central nervous system? Which bit of the wiring gives rise to... And I've never seen anyone answer
that question in a way that makes sense to me. And that's an important question to answer.
I think if we want to understand consciousness, that's the only question to answer, because
certainly an AI is capable of out thinking and it's only a matter of time. Maybe it's already
happened. In terms of just information processing and computational skill, I don't think we have any
problem in designing a mind which is at least the equal of the human mind. But in terms of
what we value the most as humans, which is to say our feelings, our emotions, our
sense of what the world is in a very personal way, that's, I think, means as much or more to
people than their information processing. And that's where I don't think that AI necessarily will
become conscious, because I think it's the property of life. Well, let's talk about it more. You're
an incredible writer. One of my favorite writers. So let me read from your latest book, Transformers,
What You Write About Consciousness. I think therefore I am, said Descartes, is one of the
most celebrated lines ever written. But what am I exactly? And artificial intelligence can think
too, by definition, and therefore is. Yet few of us could agree whether AI is capable in principle
of anything resembling human emotions of love or hate, fear and joy of spiritual yearnings
for oneness or oblivion or corporeal pangs of thirst and hunger. The problem is we don't know
what emotions are, as you were saying. What is the feeling in physical terms? How does a
discharging neuron give rise to a feeling of anything at all? This is the hard problem of
consciousness, the seeming duality of mind and matter, the physical makeup of our innermost self.
We can understand in principle how an extremely sophisticated parallel processing system
could be capable of wondrous feats of intelligence. But we can't answer in principle
whether such a supreme intelligence would experience joy or melancholy. What is the quantum
of solace? Speaking to the question of emergence, you know, there's just technical, there's an
excellent paper on this recently about the kind of phase transition emergence of performance in
neural networks on the problem of NLP, natural language processing. So language models, there
seems to be this question of size. At some point, there is a phase transition as you grow the size
of the neural network. So the question is sort of somewhat of a technical question that you can
philosophize over. The technical question is, is there a size of a neural network that starts to
be able to form the kind of representations that can capture a language and therefore be able to,
not just language, but linguistically capture knowledge that's sufficient to solve a lot of
problems in language, like be able to have a conversation. And there seems to be not a gradual
increase, but a phase transition. And they're trying to construct the science of where that is,
like what is the good size of a neural network? And why does such a phase transition happen?
Anyway, that sort of points to emergence that there could be stages where a thing goes from being,
you're a very intelligent toaster that's feeling sad today and turns away and looks out
the window, sighing, having an existential crisis. I was thinking of Marvin, the paranoid
android. Well, no, Marvin is simplistic because Marvin is just cranky. So easily programmed.
Easily programmed, nonstop existential crisis. You're almost basically, what is it, notes from
underground, but just constantly complaining about life. No, they're capturing the full
roller coaster of human emotion, the excitement, the bliss, the connection,
the empathy and all that kind of stuff. And then the selfishness, the anger, the depression,
all that kind of stuff. They're capturing all of that and be able to experience it deeply.
Like it's the most important thing you could possibly experience today. The highest highs,
the lowest lows, this is it. My life will be over. I cannot possibly go on that feeling,
and then like after a nap, you're feeling amazing. That might be something that emerges.
So why would a nap make an AI being feel better?
First of all, we don't know that for a human either, right?
But we do know that that's actually true for many people much of the time. Maybe I'd be depressed
if you have an app and you do, in fact, feel better. Oh, you are actually asking the technical
question there. So there's a biological answer to that. And so the question is whether AI needs
to have the same kind of attachments to its body, bodily function, preservation
of the brain's successful function, self-preservation essentially, in some deep biological sense.
I mean, to my mind, it comes back around to the problem we were talking about before,
about simulations and sensory input and learning what all of this stuff means.
And life and death, that biology, unlike society, has a death penalty over everything.
And natural selection works on that death penalty, that if you make this decision wrongly,
you die. And the next generation is represented by beings that made a slightly different decision
on balance. And that is something that's intrinsically
difficult to simulate in all its richness, I would say. So what is...
Death in all its richness, our relationship with death, or the whole of it. So when you say
richness, of course, there's a lot in that, which is hard to simulate. What's part of the
richness that's hard to simulate? I suppose the complexity of the environment and your position
position of an organism in that environment, in the full richness of that environment over its
entire life, over multiple generations, with changes in gene sequence over those generations,
so slight changes in the makeup of those individuals over generations.
But if you take it back to the level of single cells, which I do in the book, and ask how does a
single cell, in effect, know it exists as an unit, as an entity? I mean, no, in inverted commas,
obviously, it doesn't know anything. But it acts as a unit, and it acts with astonishing
precision as a unit. And I had suggested that that's linked to the electrical fields on the
membranes themselves, and that they give some indication of how am I doing in relation to my
environment as a kind of real-time feedback on the world. And this is something physical,
which can be selected over generations, that if you get this wrong,
it's linked with this set of circumstances that I've just, as an individual, I have a moment
of blind panic and run. As a bacterium or something, you have some electrical discharge that says
blind panic, and it runs, whatever it may be. And you associate over generations, multiple
generations, that this electrical phase that I'm in now is associated with a response like that.
And it's easy to see how feelings come in through the back door, almost, with that kind of
giving real-time feedback on your position in the world in relation to how am I doing.
And then you complexify the system, and yes, I have no problem with a phase transition.
And can all of this be done purely by the language, by the issues with how the system
understands itself? Maybe it can, I honestly don't know. But the philosophers for a long time have
talked about the possibility that you can have a zombie intelligence, and that there are no
feelings there, but everything else is the same. I mean, I have to throw this back to you, really.
How do you deal with a zombie intelligence? So, first of all, I can see that from a biologist
perspective, you think of all the complexities that led up to the human being, the entirety of
the history of four billion years, that in some deep sense, integrated the human being into this
environment, and that dance of the organism and the environment, you could see how emotions arise
from that, and then emotions are deeply connected and creating a human experience, and from that,
you mix in consciousness and the full mess of it, yeah. But from a perspective of an intelligent
organism that's already here, like a baby that learns, it doesn't need to learn how to be a
collection of cells or how to do all the things he needs to do. The basic function of a baby,
as it learns, is to interact with this environment, to learn from its environment, to learn how to fit
in to this social society. And the basic response of the baby is to cry a lot of the time.
To cry, well, to convince the humans to protect it, or to discipline it, to teach it, whatever.
I mean, we've developed a bunch of different tricks, how to get our parents to take care of us,
to educate us, to teach us about the world. Also, we've constructed the world in such a way
that it's safe enough for us to survive in, and yet dangerous enough for learning the valuable
lessons, like the tables are still hard with corners, so it can still run into them. It hurts
like hell. So AI needs to solve that problem, not the problem of constructing this super complex
organism that leads up to run the whole, to make an apple pie, to build the whole universe,
you need to build the whole universe. I think the zombie question is something
I would leave to the philosophers, because, and I will also leave to them the definition of love
and what happens between two human beings when there's a magic that just grabs them,
like nothing else matters in the world, and somehow you've been searching for this feeling,
this moment, this person, your whole life. That feeling, the philosophers can have a lot of fun
with that one, and also say that that's just, you can have a biological explanation, you can have
all kinds of, it's all fake, it's actually, I'm Rand, we'll say it's all selfish, there's a lot
of different interpretations, I'll leave it to the philosophers. The point is the feeling,
sure as hell feels very real, and if my toaster makes me feel like it's the only toaster in the
world, and when I leave and I miss the toaster, and when I come back, I'm excited to see the toaster,
and my life is meaningful, and joyful, and the friends I have around me get a better version
of me, because that toaster exists. That sure as hell feels like a conscious toaster.
Is that psychologically different to having a dog?
No, no.
Because, I mean, most people would dispute whether we can say a dog, I would say a dog is
undoubtedly conscious, but some people would say it doesn't.
But there's degrees of consciousness and so on, but people are definitely much more uncomfortable
saying a toaster can be conscious than a dog, and there's still a deep connection,
and you could say our relationship with the dog has more to do with anthropomorphism,
like we kind of project the human being onto it.
Maybe.
We can do the same damn thing with a toaster.
Yes, but you can look into the dog's eyes and you can see that it's sad that it's delighted
to see you again. I don't have a dog, by the way, I don't know, it's not that I'm a dog.
Dogs are actually incredibly good at using their eyes to do just that.
They are. Now, I don't imagine that a dog is remotely as close to being intelligent as an AI
intelligence, but it's certainly capable of communicating emotionally with us.
But here's what I would venture to say, we tend to think because AI plays chess well,
and is able to fold proteins now well, that it's intelligent.
I would argue that in order to communicate with humans, in order to have emotional intelligence,
it actually requires another order of magnitude of intelligence.
It's not easy to be flawed.
Solving a mathematical puzzle is not the same as the full complexity of human-to-human interaction.
That's actually, we humans just take for granted the things we're really good at.
Non-stop people tell me how shitty people are at driving.
No, humans are incredible at driving.
Bipedal walking, walking, object manipulation, we're incredible at this.
People tend to discount the things we all just take for granted.
And one of those things that they discount is our ability, the dance of conversation and
interaction with each other, the ability to morph ideas together,
the ability to get angry at each other, and then to miss each other,
like to create attention that makes life fun and difficult and challenging in a way that's
meaningful. That is a skill that's learned, and AI would need to solve that problem.
I mean, in some sense, what you're saying is AI cannot become meaningfully
emotional, let's say, until it experiences some kind of internal conflict that is unable to reconcile
these various aspects of reality or its reality with a decision to make.
And then it feels sad necessarily because it doesn't know what to do.
I certainly can't dispute that. That may very well be how it works.
I think the only way to find out is to do it.
To build it, yeah, and leave it to the philosophers if it actually feels sad or not.
The point is, the robot will be sitting there alone having an internal conflict,
an existential crisis, and that's required for it to have a deep,
meaningful connection with another human being. Now, does it actually feel that? I don't know.
But I'd like to throw something else at you, which troubles me on reading it.
Noah Harar is book 21, Lessons for the 21st Century, and he's written about this kind of
thing on various occasions. And he sees biochemistry as an algorithm.
And then AI will necessarily be able to hack that algorithm and do it better than humans.
So there will be AI better at writing music that we appreciate, the Mozart ever called,
or writing better than Shakespeare ever did, and so on. Because biochemistry is a algorithmic,
and all you need to do is figure out which bits of the algorithm to play
to make us feel good or bad or appreciate things. And as a biochemist, I find that argument
close to irrefutable and not very enjoyable. I don't like the sound of it. That's just my
reaction as a human being. You might like the sound of it because that says that AI is capable of the
same kind of emotional feelings about the world as we are, because the whole thing is an algorithm
and you can program an algorithm. And there you are. He then has a peculiar final chapter
where he talks about consciousness in rather separate terms. And he's talking about meditating
and so on and getting in touch with his inner consciousness. I don't meditate. I don't know
anything about that. But he wrote in very different terms about it, as if somehow it's a way out of
the algorithm. Now, it seems to me that consciousness, in that sense, is capable of scuppering the
algorithm. I think in terms of the biochemical feedback loops and so on, it is undoubtedly
algorithmic. But in terms of what we decide to do, it can be much more
based on an emotion. We can just think, I don't care. I can't resolve this complex situation.
I'm going to do that. And that can be based on, in effect, a different currency, which is the
currency of feelings and something where we don't have very much personal control over.
And then it comes back around to you. And what are you trying to get at with AI? Do we need to
have some system which is capable of overriding a rational decision which cannot be made because
there's too much conflicting information by effectively an emotional, judgmental decision
that just says, do this and see what happens? That's what consciousness is really doing in my view.
Yeah. And the question is whether it's a different process or just a higher level process.
I might, you know, the idea that biochemistry is an algorithm is, to me, an oversimplistic view.
There's a lot of things that, the moment you say it, it's irrefutable,
but it simplifies and in the process loses something fundamental. So for example,
calling a universe and an information processing system, sure, yes. You can make that. It's a
computer that's performing computations, but you're missing the process of the entropy somehow
leading to pockets of complexity that creates these beautiful artifacts that are incredibly complex
and they're like machines. And then those machines are through the process of evolution
are constructing even further complexity. Like in calling the universe information
processing machine, you're, you're missing those little local pockets and how difficult
is to create them. So the question to me is if biochemistry is an algorithm, how difficult
is it to create a software system that runs the human body, which I think is incorrect.
I think we're, that is going to take so long. I can't, I mean, that's going to be centuries from
now to be able to reconstruct the human. Now what I would venture to say, to get some of the magic
of a human being with what we're saying with the emotions and the interactions and like,
like a dog makes a smile and joyful and all those kinds of things that will come much sooner,
but that doesn't require us to reverse engineer the algorithm of biochemistry.
Yes, but the toaster is making you happy. Yes. It's not about whether you make the toaster happy.
No, it has to be. It has to be. It has to be. The toaster has to be able to leave me.
Yes, but it's the toaster is the AI in this case is very intelligent.
Yeah, the toaster has to be able to be unhappy and leave me. That's essential.
Yeah. That's essential for my being able to miss the toaster. If the toaster is just my servant,
that's not or a provider of like services like tells me the weather makes toast.
That's not going to deep connection. It has to have internal conflict. You write about life
and death. It has to be able to be conscious of its mortality and the finiteness of its existence.
And that life is for its temporary and therefore needs to be more selective.
One of the most moving moments in the movies from when I was a boy was the unplugging of Hal in
2001, where that was the death of a sentient being and Hal knew it. So I think we all kind of know
that a sufficiently intelligent being is going to have some form of consciousness,
but whether it would be like biological consciousness, I just don't know. And if you're
thinking about how do we bring together, I mean, obviously we're going to interact
more closely with AI, but are we really is a dog really like a toaster? Or is there really some
kind of difference there? You're talking about biochemistry is algorithmic, but it's not single
algorithm and it's very complex, of course it is. So it may be that there's that there are again
conflicts in the circuits of biochemistry, but I have a feeling that the level of complexity of
the total biochemical system at the level of a single cell is less complex than the level of
neural networking in the human brain or in an AI. Well, I guess I assumed that we were including
the brain in the biochemistry algorithm, because you have to- I would see that as a higher level
of organization of neural networks, they're all using the same biochemical wiring within themselves.
Yeah, but the human brain is not just neurons, it's the immune system, it's the whole package.
I mean, to have a biochemical algorithm that runs an intelligent biological system, you have to
include the whole damn thing. And it's pretty fascinating that it comes from an embryo.
I mean, if you can, what is a human being? Because it's just some code and then you build.
And then that DNA doesn't just tell you what to build, but how to build it.
I mean, the thing is impressive. And the question is how
difficult is it to reverse engineer the whole shebang?
Very difficult.
I would say it's-
Don't want to say impossible, but it's much easier to build a human than to reverse engineer,
to build a fake human, human-like thing, than to reverse engineer the entirety of the process of
the evolution of her. I'm not sure if we are capable of reverse engineering the whole thing.
If the human mind is capable of doing that. I mean, I wouldn't be a biologist if I wasn't trying.
But I know I can't understand the whole problem. I'm just trying to understand
the rudimentary outlines of the problem. There's another aspect though,
you're talking about developing from a single cell to the human mind and all the
part system subsystems that are part of the immune system and so on.
This is something that you'll talk about, I imagine, with Michael Levin. But
so little is known about- you talk about reverse engineers. So little is known about
the developmental pathways that go from a genome to going to a fully wired organism.
And a lot of it seems to depend on the same electrical interactions
that I was talking about happening at the level of single cells and its interaction
with the environment. There's a whole electrical field side to biology
that is not yet written into any of the textbooks, which is about how does an embryo develop into
or a single cell develop into these complex systems? What defines the head? What defines
the immune system? What defines the brain and so on? That really is written in a language that
we're only just beginning to understand and frankly biologists, most biologists, are still very reluctant
to even get themselves tangled up in questions like electrical fields influencing development.
It seems like mumbo jumbo to a lot of biologists and it should not be because this is the 21st
century biology. This is where it's going. But we're not going to reverse engineer a human being,
or the mind, or any of these subsystems until we understand how this developmental process is,
how electricity and biology really works. And if it is linked with feelings and with
consciousness and so on, that's the, I mean, in the meantime, we have to try. But I think
that's where the answer lies. So you think it's possible that the key to things like consciousness
are some of the more tricky aspects of cognition might lie in that early development,
the interaction of electricity and biology, electrical fields.
But we already know the EEG and so on is telling us a lot about brain function,
but we don't know which cells, which parts of a neural network is giving rise to the EEG. We
don't know the basics. The assumption is, I mean, we know it's neural networks, we know it's multiple
cells, hundreds or thousands of cells involved in it. And we assume that it's to do with depolarization
during action potentials and so on. But the mitochondria which are in there have much
more membranes than the plasma membrane of the neuron. And there's a much greater membrane
potential. And it's formed in parallel, very often parallel Christi, which are capable of
reinforcing a field and generating fields over longer distances. And nobody knows if that plays
a role in consciousness or not. There's reasons to argue that it could, but frankly, we simply do
not know. And it's not taken into consideration. You look at the structure of the mitochondrial
membranes in the brains of simple things like josophila, the fruit fly, and they have amazing
structures. You can see lots of little rectangular things all lined up in amazing patterns.
What are they doing? Why are they like that? We haven't the first clue.
What do you think about organoids and brain organoids? So in a lab, trying to study the
development of these in the Petru dish development of organs, do you think that's promising? Do you
have to look at the whole systems? I've never done anything like that. I don't know much about it.
The people who I've talked to who do work on it say amazing things can happen. And a bit of a
brain drone in a dish is capable of experiencing some kind of feelings or even memories of its
former brain. Again, I have a feeling that until we understand how to control the electrical
fields that control development, we're not going to understand how to turn an organoid into a real
functional system. But how do we get that understanding? It's so incredibly difficult. I mean, you would
I mean, one promising direction. I'd love to get your opinion on this. I don't know if you're
familiar with the work of Deep Mind and Alpha Fold with protein folding and so on. Do you think
it's possible that that will give us some breakthroughs in biology, trying to basically
simulate and model the behavior of trivial biological systems as they become complex
biological systems? I'm sure it will. The interesting thing to me about protein folding
is that for a long time, my understanding is not what I work on. So I may have got this wrong. But
my understanding is that you take the sequence of a protein and you try to fold it. And there are
multiple ways in which you can fold and to come up with the correct confirmation is not a very
easy thing because you're doing it from first principles from a string of letters, which specify
the string of amino acids. But what actually happens is when a protein is coming out of a ribosome,
it's coming out of a charged tunnel and it's in a very specific environment, which is going to
force this to go there now and then this one to go there and this one to come like that. And so
you're forcing a specific conformational set of changes onto it as it comes out of the ribosome.
So by the time it's fully emerged, it's already got its shape and that shape depended on
the immediate environment that it was emerging into one letter, one amino acid at a time.
And I don't think that the field was looking at it that way. And if that's correct,
then that's very characteristic of science, which is to say it asks very often the wrong
question and then does really amazingly sophisticated analyses on something having never
thought to actually think, well, what is biology doing? And biology is giving you a charged
electrical environment that forces you to be this way. Now, did deep mind come up through
patterns with some answer that was like that? I've got absolutely no idea. It ought to be
possible to deduce that from the shapes of proteins. It would require much greater
skill than the human mind has. But the human mind is capable of saying, well, hang on,
let's look at this exit tunnel and try and work out what shape is this protein going to take.
We can figure that out. That's really interesting about the exit tunnel. But sometimes we get lucky
and just like in science, the simplified view or the static view will actually solve the problem
for us. So in this case, it's very possible that the sequence of letters has a unique mapping to
our structure without considering how it unraveled, so without considering the tunnel.
And so that seems to be the case in this situation where the cool thing about proteins,
all the different shapes they can possibly take, it actually seems to take
very specific unique shapes given the sequence. That's forced on you by an exit tunnel. So the
problem is actually much simpler than you thought. And then there's a whole army of proteins that
which change the conformational state, chaperone proteins. And they're only used when
there's some presumably issue with how it came out of the exit tunnel and you want to do it
differently to that. So very often the chaperone proteins will go there and will influence the
way in which it falls. So there's two ways of doing it. Either you can look at the structures and
the sequences of all the proteins and you can apply an immense mind to it and figure out what
the patterns are and figure out what how or you can look at the actual situation where it is and
say, well, hang on, it was actually quite simple. It's got a charged environment and then you fall
it's forced to come out this way. And then the question will be, well, do different ribosomes
have different charged environments for what happens if a chaperone, you're asking a different
set of questions to come to the same answer in a way which is telling you a much simpler story
and explains why it is rather than saying it could be, this is one in a billion different
possible conformational states that this protein could have. You're saying, well, it has this one
because that was the only one it could take given its setting. Well, yeah, I mean, currently humans
are very good at that kind of first principles thinking of stepping back. But I think AI is
really good at, you know, collect a huge amount of data and a huge amount of data of observation of
planets and figure out that Earth is not at the center of the universe that there's actually a
sun were orbiting the sun. But then you can as a human being ask, well, how did how do solar
systems come to be? How do what are the different forces that are required to make this kind of
pattern emerge? And then you start to invent things like gravity, what I mean, obviously,
I mixed up the ordering of gravity wasn't considered as a thing that connects planets, but
we are able to think about those big picture things as human beings. AI is just very good to
infer simple models from a huge amount of data. And the question is with biology, you know, we
kind of go back and forth to how we solve biology. Listen, protein folding was thought to be
impossible to solve. And there's a lot of brilliant PhD students that worked one protein at a time
trying to figure out the structure. And the fact that I was able to do that. Oh, I'm not knocking
it at all. But I think that people have been asking the wrong question. But then as the people
start to ask better and bigger questions, the AI kind of enters the chat and says,
I'll help you out with that. Can I give you another example of my own work?
The risk of getting a disease as we get older. There are genetic aspects to it. You know, if
you spend your whole life overeating and smoking and whatever, that's a whole separate question.
But there's a genetic side to the risk. And we know a few genes that increase your risk of
certain things. And for probably 20 years now, people have been doing what's called GWAS, which is
genome-wide association studies. So you've effectively scanned the entire genome for any
single nucleotide polymorphisms, which is to say a single letter change in one place
that has a higher association of being linked with a particular disease or not. And you can
come out with thousands of these things across the genome. And if you add them all up and try and
say, well, so do they add up to explain the known genetic risk of this disease? And the known genetic
risk often comes from twin studies. And you can say that if this twin gets epilepsy, there's a 40
or 50% risk that the other twin, identical twin, will also get epilepsy. Therefore, the genetic
factor is about 50%. And so the gene similarities that you see should account for 50% of that known
risk. Very often it accounts for less than a tenth of the known risk. And there's two possible
explanations. And there's one which people tend to do, which is to say, ah, well, we don't have
enough statistical power. If we maybe there's maybe there's a million, we've only found a thousand of
them. But if we find the other million, they're weakly related, but there's a huge number of them.
And so we'll, we'll, we'll account for that whole risk. Maybe there's, you know, maybe there's a
billion of them. So, so that's one way. The other way is to say, well, hang on a minute, you're
missing a system here. That system is the mitochondrial DNA, which people tend to dismiss
because it's small and it's not, it doesn't change very much. But a few single letter changes in
that mitochondrial DNA, it, it controls some really basic processes. It controls
not only all the energy that we need to live and to move around and do everything we do,
but also biosynthesis to make the new building blocks to, you know, to, to, to make new cells
and cancer cells very often kind of take over the mitochondria and rewire them so that instead of
using them for making energy, they're effectively using them as precursors for the building blocks
with biosynthesis. You need to make new amino acids, new nucleotides for DNA. You want to make
new lipids to make your membranes and so on. So they kind of rewire metabolism. Now the problem is
that we've got all these interactions between mitochondrial DNA and the genes in the nucleus
that are overlooked completely because people throw away, literally throw away the mitochondrial
genes. And we can see in fruit flies that they interact and produce big differences in risk.
So you can set, you can set AI onto this question of exactly what, you know, how many of these
base changes there are. And this is one possible solution that maybe there are a million of them,
and it does account for the greatest part of the risk. Or the other one is they aren't,
that it's just not there. That actually the risk lies in something you weren't even looking at.
And this is where human intuition is very important. And just this feeling that, well,
I'm working on this and I think it's important and I'm bloody minded about it. And in the end,
some people are right. It turns out that it was important. Can you get AI to do that, to be bloody
minded? And that hang on a minute, you might be missing a whole other system here that's much
bigger. That's the moment of discovery of scientific revolution. I'm giving up on saying AI
can't do something. I've said enough times about enough things. I think there's been a lot of
progress. And instead, I'm excited by the possibility of AI helping humans. But at the same time,
just like I said, we seem to dismiss the power of humans. Like we're so limited in so many ways
that we kind of, in what we feel like dumb ways, like we're not strong, where we're kind of,
our attention, our memory is limited, our ability to focus on things is limited
in our own perception of what limited is. But that actually, there's an incredible computer
behind the whole thing that makes this whole system work, our ability to interact with the
environment, to reason about the environment. There's magic there. And I am hopeful that AI
can capture some of that same magic. But that magic is not going to look like deep blue playing
chess. It's going to be more interesting. But I don't think it's going to look like
pattern finding either. I mean, that's essentially what you're telling me. It does very well at
the moment. And my point is, it works very well where you're looking for the right pattern.
But we are storytelling animals. And the hypothesis is a story. It's a testable story.
But a new hypothesis is a leap into the unknown and it's a new story, basically. And it says,
this leads to this leads to that. It's a causal set of storytelling.
It's also possible that the leap into the unknown has a pattern of its own.
Yes, it is. And it's possible that it's learnable.
I'm sure it is. There's a nice book by Arthur Kersler on the nature of creativity. And he
likens it to a joke where the punchline goes off in a completely unexpected direction and says
that this is the basis of human creativity, that some creative switch of direction to an
unexpected place is similar to a joke. I'm not saying that's how it works, but it's a nice idea
and there must be some truth in it. And it's one of these, most of the stories we tell are probably
the wrong story and probably going nowhere and probably not helpful. And we definitely don't
do as well at seeing patterns in things. But some of the most enjoyable human aspects is finding a
new story that goes to an unexpected place. And these are all aspects of what being human means
to me. And maybe these are all things that AI figures out for itself, or maybe they're just
aspects of it. But I just have the feeling sometimes that the people who are trying to
understand what we are like, if we wish to craft an AI system, which is somehow human-like,
that we don't have a firm enough grasp of what humans really are like in terms of how we are built.
But we get a better, better understanding of that. I agree with you completely. We try to build a thing
and then we go, hang on in a minute. There's another system here and that's actually the attempt to build
AI that's human-like, is getting us to a deeper understanding of human beings. The funny thing
that I recently talked to Magnus Carlson, widely considered to be the greatest chess player of all
time, and he talked about AlphaZero, which is a system from DeepMind that plays chess.
And he had a funny comment. He has a kind of dry sense of humor, but he was extremely impressed
when he first saw AlphaZero play. And he said that it did a lot of things that could easily be
mistaken for creativity. So he, as a typical human, refused to give the system
sort of its due, because he came up with a lot of things that a lot of people
are extremely impressed by, not just the sheer calculation, but the brilliance of play. So one
of the things that it does in really interesting ways is it sacrifices pieces. So in chess, that
means you basically take a few steps back and it takes a step forward. You give away pieces
for some future reward. And that, for us humans, is where art is in chess. You take big risks,
that for us humans, those risks are especially painful because you have a fog of uncertainty
before you. So to take a risk now, based on intuition, if I think this is the right risk to
take, but there's so many possibilities that that's where it takes guts. That's where art is,
that's that danger. And then AlphaZero takes those same kind of risks
and does them even greater degree. But of course, it does it from a,
well, you could easily reduce down to a cold calculation over patterns. But
boy, when you see the final result, it sure looks like the same kind of magic that we see in
creativity. We see creative play on the chessboard. But the chessboard is very limited. And the
question is, as we get better and better, can we do that same kind of creativity in mathematics,
in programming, and then venturing biology, psychology, and expand into more and more
complex systems? I was, I used to go running when I was a boy and fell running, which is to say
running up and down mountains. And I was never particularly great at it. But there were some
people who were amazingly fast, especially at running down. And I realized in trying to do this,
that there's, there's only really two, two ways, there's three possible ways of doing it. And
there's only two that work, either you go extremely slowly and carefully. And you figure out, okay,
there's a stone, I'll put my foot on this stone. And then there's another, there's a muddy puddle
and we're void. And, you know, it's slow, it's laborious, you figure it out step by step.
Or you can just go incredibly fast. And you don't think about it at all. The entire conscious mind
is shut out of it. And it's probably the same, playing table tennis or something. There's something
in the mind, which is doing a whole lot of subconscious calculations about exactly that.
And it's amazing, you can run that astonishing speed down a hillside with no idea how you did it at
all. And then you panic, when you think, I'm going to break my leg if I keep doing this,
I've got to think about where I'm going to put my foot. So you slow down a bit and try to bring
those conscious mind in. And then you do, you crash, you can't, you cannot think consciously
while running downhill. So it's amazing. It's amazing how many calculations the mind is able
to make. And now the problem with playing chess or something, if you're able to make all of those
subconscious kind of forward calculations about what is the likely outcome of this move now,
in the way that we can by running down a hillside or something, you know, it's partly about what
we have adapted to do. It's partly about the reality of the world that we're in running fast
downhill is something that we'd better be bloody good at otherwise we're going to be eaten. Whereas
trying to calculate multiple, multiple moves into the future is not something we've ever been called
on to do. Two or three, four moves into the future is quite enough for most of us most of the time.
Yeah. Yeah. So the, yeah, just solving chess may not, we may not be as far towards solving the
problem of downhill running as we might think just because we solve chess. Still, it's beautiful to
see creativity. Humans create machines that are able to create art and art on the chess board and
art otherwise. Who knows how far that takes us. So I mentioned Andre Carpathia earlier. Him and I
are big fans of yours. If you're taking votes, his suggestion was you should write your next book on
the Fermi Paradox. So let me ask you on the topic of alien life. Since we've been talking about life
and we're a kind of aliens. How many alien civilizations are out there? Do you think?
Well, the universe is very big. So some, but not as many as most people would like to think is my
view because the idea that there is a trajectory going from simple cellular life like bacteria
all the way through to humans. It seems to me there's some big gaps along that way that the
eukaryotic cell, the complex cell that we have is the biggest of them, but also photosynthesis is
another. Another interesting gap is a long gap from the origin of the eukaryotic cell to the
first animals. That was about a billion years, maybe more than that. A long delay in where
no oxygen began to accumulate in the atmosphere. So from the first appearance of oxygen in the
Great Oxidation Event to enough for animals to respire, it was close to two billion years.
Why so long? It seems to be planetary factors. It seems to be geology as much as anything else.
And we don't really know what was going on. So the idea that there's a kind of an inevitable
march towards complexity and sentient life, I don't think is right. It doesn't, not to say,
it's not going to happen, but I think it's not going to happen often.
So if you think of earth, given the geological constraints and all that kind of stuff,
do you have a sense that life, complex life, intelligent life happen really quickly on earth
or really long? So just to get a sense of, are you more sort of saying that it's very
unlikely to get the kind of conditions required to create humans? Or is it even if you have the
condition it's just statistically difficult? I think the, I mean, the problem, the single
great problem at the center of all of that to my mind is the origin of the eukaryotic cell,
which happened once and without eukaryotes, nothing else would have happened. And that is
something that- That's because you're saying it's super important, the eukaryotes, but-
I'm saying tantamount to saying that it is impossible to build something as complex as
a human being from bacterial cells. Totally agree and some deep fundamental way. But it's just
like a one cell going inside another. Is that so difficult to get to work right?
Well, again, it happened once. And if you think about, if you think about, I mean,
I'm in a minority view in this position, most biologists probably wouldn't agree with me anyway.
But if you think about the starting point, we've got a simple cell. It's an archaeal cell,
we can be fairly sure about that. So it looks a lot like a bacterium, but it's in fact from this
other domain of life. So it looks a lot like a bacterial cell. That means it doesn't have anything.
It doesn't have a nucleus. It doesn't really have complex endomembrane. It has a little bit of stuff,
but not that much. And it takes up an endosymbiont. So what happens next? And the answer is basically
everything to do with complexity. To me, there's a beautiful paradox here. Plants and animals and
fungi all have exactly the same type of cell. But they all have really different ways of living.
So a plant cell is photosynthetic. They started out as algae in the oceans and so on. So think of
algal blooms, single cell things. The basic cell structure that it's built from is exactly the same
with a couple of small differences. It's got chloroplasts as well. It's got a vacuole. It's
got a cell wall. But that's about it. Pretty much everything else is exactly the same in a plant
cell and an animal cell. And yet the ways of life are completely different. So this cell structure
did not evolve in response to different ways of life, different environments. I'm in the ocean
doing photosynthesis. I'm on land running around as part of an animal. I'm a fungus in the soil,
spending out long kind of shoots into whatever it may be, mycelium. So they all have the same
underlying cell structure. Why? Almost certainly it was driven by adaptation to the internal
environment, to having these pesky endosymbionts that forced all kinds of change on the host cell.
Now, in one way, you could see that as a really good thing because it may be that
there's some inevitability to this process. As soon as you've got endosymbionts, you're more or
less bound to go in that direction. Or it could be that there's a huge fluke about it and it's
almost certain to go wrong in just about every case possible, that the conflict will lead to
effectively war leading to death and extinction. And it simply doesn't work out. So maybe it
happened millions of times and it went wrong every time. Or maybe it only happened once
and it worked out because it was inevitable. And actually, we simply do not know enough now
to say which of those two possibilities is true, but both of them are a bit grim.
But you're leaning towards, we just got really lucky in that one leap.
Like we got, so do you have a sense that our galaxy, for example, has just
maybe millions of planets with bacteria living on it?
I would expect billions, tens of billions of planets with bacteria living on it practically.
I mean, there's probably what five to 10 planets per star of which I would hope that at least one
would have bacteria on. So I expect bacteria to be very common. I simply can't put a number
otherwise. I mean, I expect it will happen elsewhere. It's not that I think we're living
in a completely empty universe. That's so fascinating.
But I think that it's not going to happen inevitably and there's something,
that's not the only problem with complex life on Earth. I mentioned oxygen and animals and so on
as well. And even humans, we came along very late. You go back five million years and would
be that impressed if we came across a planet full of giraffes? I mean, you'd think, hey,
there's life here. There's a nice planet to colonize or something. We wouldn't think,
oh, let's try and have a conversation with this giraffe.
Yeah, I'm not sure what exactly we would think. I'm not exactly sure what makes humans so interesting
from an alien perspective or how they would notice. I'll talk to you about cities too,
because that's an interesting perspective of how to look at human civilization.
But your sense, I mean, of course you don't know, but it's an interesting
world. It's an interesting galaxy. It's an interesting universe to live in.
That's just like every sun, like 90% of solar systems have bacteria in it.
Imagine that world. And the galaxy maybe has just a handful, if not one,
intelligence civilization. That's a wild world. I didn't even think about that world. There's a
kind of thought that one of the reasons it would be so exciting to find life on Mars or Titan or
whatever is like, if it's life is elsewhere, then surely, statistically, that life, no matter how
unlikely, eukaryos, multi-cell organisms, sex, violence, what else is extremely difficult?
I mean, photosynthesis is figuring out some machinery that involves the chemistry and the
environment to allow the building up of complex organisms. Surely that would arise.
But man, I don't know how I would feel about just bacteria everywhere.
Well, it would be depressing if it was true. I suppose depressing.
Always natural. I don't know what's more depressing, bacteria everywhere, nothing
everywhere. Yes, either of them are chilling. But whether it's chilling or not, I don't think
should force us to change our view about whether it's real or not. And what I'm saying may or may
not be true. So how would you feel if we discovered life on Mars? It sounds like you would be less
excited than some others because you're like, wow. What I would be most interested in is how
similar to life on Earth it would be. It would actually turn into quite a subtle problem because
the likelihood of life having gone to and fro between Mars and the Earth is quite, I wouldn't
say high, but it's not low. It's quite feasible. And so if we found life on Mars and it had very
similar genetic code, but it was slightly different, most people would interpret that immediately as
evidence that there'd been transit one way or the other and that it was a common origin of life on
Mars or on the Earth. And it went one way or the other way. The other way to see that question,
though, would be to say, well, actually, the beginnings of life lie in deterministic chemistry
and thermodynamics, starting with the most likely abundant materials, CO2 and water and
a wet rocky planet. And Mars was wet and rocky at the beginning. And we'll, I won't say inevitably,
but potentially almost inevitably come up with a genetic code, which is not very far away from
the genetic code that we already have. So we see subtle differences in the genetic code. What does
it mean? It could be very difficult to interpret. Is it possible, do you think, to tell the difference
or something that truly originated? I think if the stereochemistry was different,
we have sugars, for example, that are the L form or the D form. And we have D sugars and
alumino acids right across all of life. But lipids, the bacteria have one stereoisomer and
the bacteria have the other, the opposite stereoisomer. So it's perfectly possible to
use one or the other one. And the same would almost only go for, and I think George Church
has been trying to make life based on the opposite stereoisomer. So it's perfectly
possible to do and it will work. And if we were to find life on Mars that was using the opposite
stereoisomer, that would be unequivocal evidence that life had started independently there.
So hopefully the life we find will be on Titan and Europa or something like that,
where it's less likely that we shared. And it's harsher conditions, so there's going to be weird
or kind of life. I wouldn't count on that because life started in deep sea hydrothermal vents.
It's a little harsh. That's pretty harsh. Yeah. So Titan is different. Europa is probably quite
similar to Earth in the sense that we're dealing with an ocean, some acidic ocean there,
as the early Earth would have been. And it almost only has hydrothermal systems, same with Enceladus.
We can tell that from these plumes coming from the surface through the ice. We know there's a
liquid ocean and we can tell roughly what the chemistry is. For Titan, we're dealing with
liquid methane and things like that. So that would really, if there really is life there,
it would really have to be very, very different to anything that we know on Earth.
So the hard leap, the hardest leap, the most important leap is from
prokaryotes to eukaryotes. What's the second, if we're ranking? You gave a lot of emphasis on
photosynthesis. Yeah. And that would be my second one, I think. But it's not so much. I mean,
photosynthesis is part of the problem. It's a difficult thing to do. Again, we know it happened
once. We don't know why it happened once. But the fact that it was kind of taken on board
completely by plants and algae and so on as chloroplasts and did very well in completely
different environments and then on land and whatever else seems to suggest that there's no
problem with exploring. You could have a separate origin that explored this whole domain over there
that the bacteria had never gone into. So that kind of says that the reason that it only happened
once is probably because it's difficult, because the wiring is difficult. But then it happened
at least 2.2 billion years ago, right before the GOE, maybe as long as 3 billion years ago,
when there are some people say there are whiffs of oxygen, there's just kind of traces in the
fossil in the geochemical record that say maybe there was a bit of oxygen then,
that's really disputed. Some people say it goes all the way back 4 billion years ago
and that it was the common ancestor of life on earth was photosynthetic. So immediately you've
got groups of people who disagree over a 2 billion year period of time about when it started.
But well, let's take the latest date when it's unequivocal, that's 2.2 billion years ago,
through to around about the time of the Cambrian explosion when oxygen levels definitely got
close to modern levels, which was around about 550 million years ago. So we've gone more than
one and a half billion years where the earth was in stasis, nothing much changed,
as known as the boring billion, in fact. Probably stuff was, that was when Eukaryotes arose somewhere
in there, but it's... So this idea that the world is constantly changing, that we're constantly
evolving, that we're moving up some ramp is a very human idea. But in reality, there are
tipping points to a new stable equilibrium, where the cells that are producing oxygen are
precisely counterbalanced by the cells that are consuming that oxygen, which is why it's 21%
now and has been that way for hundreds of millions of years. We have a very precise balance.
You go through a tipping point and you don't know where the next stable state's going to be,
but it can be a long way from here. And so if we change the world with global warming,
there will be a tipping point. The question is where and when, and what's the next stable state?
It may be uninhabitable to us. It'll be habitable to life, for sure. But there may be something
like the Permian extinction, where 95% of species go extinct. And there's a 5 to 10 million year gap,
and then life recovers, but without humans. And the question statistically, well, without humans,
but statistically, does that ultimately lead to greater complexity, more interesting life?
Well, after the first appearance of oxygen with the GOE, there was a tipping point,
which led to a long-term stable state that was equivalent to the Black Sea today,
which is to say oxygenated at the very surface and stagnant sterile, not sterile, but sulfurous,
lower down. And that was stable, certainly around the continental margins for more than
a billion years. It was not a state that led to progression in an obvious way.
Yeah, I mean, it's interesting to think about evolution, like what leads to stable states
and how often are evolutionary pressures emerging from the environment?
So maybe other planets are able to create evolutionary pressures, chemical pressures,
whatever, some kind of pressure that say you're screwed unless you get your shit together in
the next like 10,000 years, like a lot of pressure. It seems like Earth, like the boring
building might be explained in two ways. One is super difficult to take any kind of next step,
and the second way it could be explained is there's no reason to take the next step.
No, I think there is no reason, but at the end of it, there was a snowball Earth.
So there was a planetary catastrophe on a huge scale where the sea was frozen at the equator,
and that forced change in one way or another. It's not long after that,
a hundred million years, perhaps after that, so not a short time, but this is when we begin
to see animals. There was a shift again, another tipping point that led to catastrophic change,
that led to a take off then. We don't really know why, but one of the reasons why that I discuss in
the book is about sulfate being washed into the oceans, which sounds incredibly parochial.
But what the data is showing, we can track roughly how oxygen was going into the atmosphere from
carbon isotopes. So there's two main isotopes of carbon that we need to think about here.
One is carbon 12, 99% of carbon is carbon 12, and then 1% of carbon is carbon 13,
which is a stable isotope, and then there's carbon 14, which is a trivial radioactive,
it's trivial in amount. So carbon 13 is 1%, and life and enzymes generally, you can think of
carbon atoms as little balls bouncing around, ping-pong balls bouncing around. Carbon 12 moves
a little bit faster than carbon 13 because it's lighter, and it's more likely to encounter an
enzyme, and so it's more likely to be fixed into organic matter. And so organic matter is enriched,
and this is just an observation, it's enriched in carbon 12 by a few percent compared to carbon
13 relative to what you would expect if it was just equal. And if you then bury organic matter,
as coal or oil or whatever it may be, then it's no longer oxidized. So some oxygen remains left
over in the atmosphere, and that's how oxygen accumulates in the atmosphere. And you can work
out historically how much oxygen there must have been in the atmosphere by how much
carbon was being buried, and you think, well, how can we possibly know how much carbon was
being buried? And the answer is, well, if you're burying carbon 12, what you're leaving behind
is more carbon 13 in the oceans, and that precipitates out in limestone. So you can look
at limestones over these ages and work out what's the carbon 13 signal, and that gives you a kind
of a feedback on what the oxygen content. Right before the Cambrian explosion, there was what's
called a negative isotope anomaly excursion, which is basically the carbon 13 goes down by a
massive amount and then back up again 10 million years later. And what that seems to be saying
is the amount of carbon 12 in the oceans was disappearing, which is to say, it was being
oxidized. And if it's being oxidized, it's consuming oxygen. And that should,
so a big carbon 13 signal says the ratio of carbon 12 to carbon 13 is really going down,
which means there's much more carbon 12 being taken out and being oxidized. Sorry,
this is getting too complex. Well, it's a good way to estimate the amount of oxygen.
If you calculate the amount of oxygen based on the assumption that all this carbon 12 that's
being taken out is being oxidized by oxygen, the answer is all the oxygen in the atmosphere
gets stripped out. There is none left. And yet the rest of the geological indicators say, no,
there's oxygen in the atmosphere. So it's kind of a paradox. And the only way to explain this
paradox just on mass balance of how much stuff is in the air, how much stuff is in the oceans
and so on is to assume that what oxygen was not the oxygen, it was sulfate. Sulfate was being
washed into the oceans. It's used as an electron acceptor by sulfate reducing bacteria just as
we use oxygen as an electron acceptor. So they pass their electrons to sulfate instead of oxygen.
Bacteria did. Yeah. So these are bacteria. So they're
oxidizing carbon, organic carbon with sulfate, passing the electrons on to sulfate.
That reacts with iron to form iron pyrides or fools gold, sinks down to the bottom, gets
buried out of the system. And this can account for the mass balance. So why does it matter?
It matters because what it says is there was a chance event, tectonically there was a lot of
sulfate sitting on land as some kind of mineral. So calcium sulfate minerals, for example, are
evaporitic. And because there happened to be some continental collisions, mountain building,
the sulfate was pushed up the side of a mountain and happened to get washed into the ocean.
Yeah. So I wonder how many happy accidents like that are possible.
Statistically, it's really hard. Maybe you can roll that in statistically. This is the course
of life on earth. Without all that sulfate being raised up, this Cambrian explosion almost
certainly would not have happened. And then we wouldn't have had animals and so on and so on.
This kind of explanation of the Cambrian explosion. So let me actually say in several
ways, folks who challenge the validity of the theory of evolution will give us an example.
No, I'm not. We'll study in this, but we'll give us an example of the Cambrian explosion as like,
this thing is weird. Oh, it is weird. So by the question I would have is what's the biggest mystery
or gap in understanding about evolution? Is it the Cambrian explosion? And if so, how do we,
what's our best understanding of how to explain? First of all, what is it? In my understanding,
in the short amount of time, maybe 10 million years, 100 million years, something like that,
a huge number of animals, a variety, diversity of animals were created. Anyway, there's like
five questions in there. Is that the biggest mystery? No, I don't think it's a particularly
big mystery really anymore. I mean, there are still mysteries about why then,
and I've just said sulfate being washed into the oceans is one, it needs oxygen and oxygen
levels rose around that time. So probably before that, they weren't high enough for animals.
What we're seeing with the Cambrian explosion is the beginning of predators and prey relationships.
We're seeing modern ecosystems and we're seeing arms races and we're seeing
we're seeing the full creativity of evolution unleashed. And so I talked about the boring
billion, nothing happens for one and a half, one billion years, one and a half billion years.
The assumption, and this is completely wrong, this assumption is then that evolution works
really slowly and that you need billions of years to affect some small change and then another
billion years to do something. And it's completely wrong. Evolution gets stuck in a stasis and it
stays that way for tens of millions, hundreds of millions of years. And Stephen Jay Gould used
to argue this, he called it punctuated equilibrium, but he was doing it to do with animals and to do
with the last 500 million years or so, where it's much less obvious than if you think about the
entire planetary history. And then you realize that the first two billion years was bacteria only,
you have the origin of life, two billion years of just bacteria, oxygenic photosynthesis
arising here, then you have a global catastrophe, snowball earths and great oxidation event and
then another billion years of nothing happening and then some period of upheavals and then another
snowball earth and then suddenly you see the Cambrian explosion. This is long periods of stasis
where the world is in a stable state and it's not geared towards increasing complexity, it's
just everything is in balance. And only when you have a catastrophic level of global problem like
a snowball earth, it forces everything out of balance and there's a tipping point and you
end up somewhere else. Now, the idea that evolution is slow is wrong. It can be incredibly fast.
And I mentioned earlier on, in theory, it would take half a million years to invent an eye,
for example, from a light sensitive spot. It doesn't take long to convert one kind of tube
into a tube with nobles on it, into a tube with arms on it and then multiple arms and then one
end is ahead with it, it starts out as a swelling. It's not difficult intellectually to understand
how these things can happen. It boggles the mind that it can happen so quickly, but we're used to
human time scales. And what we need to talk about is generations of things that live for a year
in the ocean. And then a million years is a million generations and the amount of change that
you can do, you can affect in that period of time is enormous. And we're dealing with large
populations of things where selection is sensitive to pretty small changes. And so again, as soon as
you throw in the competition of predators and prey and you're ramping up the scale of evolution,
it's not very surprising that it happens very quickly when the environment allows it to happen.
So I don't think there's a big mystery. There's lots of details that need to be filled in.
I mean, the big mystery in biology is consciousness.
The big mystery in biology is consciousness. Well, intelligence is kind of a mystery too.
I mean, you said biology, not psychology. Because from a biology perspective, it seems like
intelligence and consciousness all are the same, like weird, like all the brain stuff.
I don't see intelligence as necessarily that difficult, I suppose. I mean, I see it as a
form of computing and I don't know much about computing. So you don't know much about consciousness
either. So I mean, I suppose, oh, I see, I see, I see, I see, I see that consciousness you do know
a lot about as a human being. No, no, I mean, I think I can understand the wiring of a brain
as a series of, in pretty much the same way as a computer in theory, in terms of the circuitry
of it. The mystery to me is how this system gives rise to feelings, as we were talking
about earlier on. Yeah, I just, I think, I think we oversimplify intelligence. I think the dance,
the magic of reasoning is as interesting as the magic of feeling. We tend to think of reasoning
as like very, running a very simplistic algorithm. I think reasoning is the interplay between memory,
whatever the hell's going on, the unconscious mind, all of that.
I'm not trying to diminish it in any way at all. Obviously, it's extraordinarily
exquisitely complex, but I don't see a logical difficulty with how it works.
Yeah, no, I mean, I agree with you, but sometimes, yeah, there's a big cloak of mystery around
consciousness. I mean, let me compare it with classical versus quantum physics.
Classical physics is logical, and you can understand that the kind of language we're
dealing with, it's almost at the human level, we're dealing with stars and things that we
can see. And when you get to quantum mechanics and things, it's practically impossible for
the human mind to compute what just happened there. Yeah, I mean, that is the same. It's like,
you understand mathematically the notes of a musical composition, that's intelligence.
Why makes you feel a certain way? That is much harder to understand. Yeah, that's really,
but it was interesting framing that that's a mystery at the core of biology. I wonder
who solves consciousness. I tend to think consciousness will be solved by the engineer,
meaning the person who builds it, who keeps trying to build the thing versus biology,
such a complicated system. I feel like the building blocks of consciousness from a biological
perspective are like, that's like the final creation of a human being. So you have to
understand the whole damn thing. You said electrical fields, but like electrical fields plus
plus everything at the whole shebang. I mean, trying to agree. I mean, my feeling is from
my meagre knowledge of the history of science is that the biggest breakthrough is usually comes
through from a field that was not related to it. So if anyone is not going to be a biologist who
solves consciousness, just because biologists are too embedded in the nature of the problem.
And then nobody's going to believe you when you've done it because nobody's going to be able to
prove that this AI is in fact conscious and sad in any case, and any more than you can prove
that a dog is conscious and sad. So it tells you that it is in good language and you must believe
it. But I think most people will accept if faced with that, that that's what it is. All of this
probability of complex life.
In one way, I think why it matters is that
my expectation, I suppose, is that we will be over the next 100 years or so if we survive at all
that AI will increasingly dominate and pretty much anything that we put out into space going
looking for other well for the universe for what's out there will be AI won't be won't be us we
won't be doing that or when we do it'll be on a much more limited scale. I suppose the same would
apply to any alien civilization. So perhaps rather than looking for signs of life out there,
we should be looking for AI out there. But then we face the problem
that I don't see how a planet is going to give rise directly to AI.
You can see how a planet can give rise directly to organic life.
And if the principles that govern the evolution of life on earth apply to other planets as well,
and I think a lot of them would, then the likelihood of ending up with a human like
civilization capable of giving rise to AI in the first place is massively limited.
Once you've done it once, perhaps it takes over the universe and maybe there's no issue.
But it seems to me that the two are necessarily linked that you're not going to just turn a
sterile planet into an AI life form without the intermediary of the organics first.
You have to run the evolutionary computation with the organics to create AI.
How does AI bootstrap itself up without the aid of an intelligent designer?
The origin of AI is going to have to be in the chemistry of a planet.
But that's not a limiting factor, right? So let me ask the Fermi Paradox question.
Let's say we live in this incredibly dark and beautiful world of
just billions of planets with bacteria on it and very few intelligent civilizations.
And yet there's a few out there. Why haven't we at scale seen them visit us?
What's your sense? Is it because they don't exist?
Well, don't exist in the right part of the universe at the right time. That's the simplest
answer for it. Is that the one you find the most compelling? Or is there some other explanation?
I find that, you know, it's not that I find it more compelling. It's that I find more probable.
And I find all of them, I mean, there's a lot of hand waving in this, we just don't know.
So I'm trying to read out from what I know about life on Earth to what might happen somewhere else.
And it gives to my mind a bit of a pessimistic view of bacteria everywhere and only occasional
intelligent life. And, you know, running forward humans only once on Earth and nothing else that
you would necessarily be any more excited about making contact with than you would be making
contact with them on Earth. So, so I think the chances are pretty limited. And the chances of
us surviving is pretty limited too. And the way we're going on at the moment, the likelihood
of us not making ourselves extinct within the next few hundred years, possibly within the next
50 or 100 years, seems quite small. I hope we can do better than that. So maybe the only thing
that will survive from humanity will be AI. And maybe AI, once it exists, and once it's capable
of effectively copying itself and cutting humans out of the loop, then maybe that will take over
the universe. I mean, there's a kind of inherent sadness to the way you described that. But isn't
that also potentially beautiful that that's the next step of life? I suppose, from your
perspective, as long as it carries the flame of consciousness somehow.
I think yes, there can be some beauty to it being the next step of life. And I don't know if
consciousness matters or not from that point of view, to be honest with you. But there's
some sadness, yes, probably, because I think it comes down to the selfishness that we were
talking about earlier on. I am an individual with a desire not to be kind of displaced from life.
I want to stay alive. I want to be here. So I suppose the threat that a lot of people would
feel is that we will just be wiped out. So there will be potential conflicts between AI and humans
and that AI will win because it's a lot smarter.
Boy, would that be a sad state of affairs if consciousness is just an intermediate stage
between bacteria and AI. I would see bacteria as being potentially a primitive form of
consciousness. The whole of life on earth, to my mind, is capable of some form of feelings
in response to the environment. That's not to say it's intelligent, though it's got its own
algorithms for intelligence, but nothing comparable with us. I think it's beautiful what a planet,
what a sterile planet can come up with. It's astonishing that it's come up with all of this
stuff that we see around us and that either we or whatever we produce is capable of destroying
all of that. It is a sad thought, but it's also hugely pessimistic. I'd like to think that we're
capable of giving rise to something which is at least as good if not better than us as AI.
Yeah, I have that same optimism, especially a thing that is able to propagate throughout the
universe more efficiently than humans can or extensions of humans, some merger with AI and
humans. Where does that come from? Bioengineering of the human body to extend its life somehow
to carry that flame of consciousness and that personality and the beautiful tension that's
within all of us carry that through to multiple planets, to multiple solar systems all out there
in the universe. I mean, that's a beautiful vision. Whether AI can do that or bioengineered humans
can. That's an exciting possibility and especially meeting other alien civilizations in that same
kind of way. Do you think aliens have consciousness? If they're organic.
Organic connected to consciousness. I mean, I think any system which is going to bootstrap
itself up from planetary origins, let me finish this and then I come onto something else,
but from planetary origins is going to face similar constraints and those constraints are
going to be addressed in similar basic engineering ways and I think it will be cellular and I think
it will have electrical charges and I think it will have to be selected in populations over time
and all of these things will tend to give rise to the same processes as the simplest fix to a
difficult problem. So I would expect it to be conscious. Yes, and I would expect it to resemble
life on earth in many ways. When I was about, I guess, 15 or 16, I remember reading a book by
Fred Hoyle called The Black Cloud, which I was budding biologists at the time and this was the
first time I'd come across someone that really challenging the heart of biology and saying,
you are far too parochial. You're thinking about life as carbon-based. Here's a life form which is
interstellar dust on a solar system scale and it's a novel, but I felt enormously challenged
by that novel because it hadn't occurred to me how limited my thinking was, how narrow-minded I
was being and here was a great physicist with a completely different conception of what life could
be. And since then, I've seen him attacked in various ways and I'm reluctant to say the attacks
make more sense to me than the original story, which is to say, even in terms of information
processing, if you're on that scale and there's a limit of the speed of how quickly can something
think if you're needing to broadcast across the solar system, it's going to be slow. It's not
going to hold a conversation with you on the kind of timelines that Fred Hoyle was imagining,
or at least not by any easy way of doing it, assuming that the speed of light is a limit.
And then again, you really can't. This is something Richard Dawkins argued long ago and I
do think he's right. There is no other way to generate this level of complexity than natural
selection. Nothing else can do it. You need populations and you need selection in populations
and a kind of an isolated interstellar cloud. Again, there's unlimited time and maybe there's
no problems with distance, but you need to have a certain frequency of generational time
to generate a serious level of complexity. And I just have a feeling it's never going to work.
Well, as far as we know, so natural selection and evolution is a really powerful tool here on
Earth, but there could be other mechanisms. So whenever I don't know if you're familiar with
cellular automata, but complex systems that have really simple components and seemingly
move based on simple rules when they're taken as a whole, really interesting complexity emerges.
I don't know what the pressures on that are. It's not really selection, but
interesting complexity seems to emerge. And that's not well understood exactly.
I think there's a difference between complexity and evolution. So some of the work we're doing on
the origin of life is thinking about how does, well, how do genes arise? How does information
arise in biology? And thinking about it from the point of view of reacting CO2 with hydrogen,
what do you get? Well, what you're going to get is carboxylic acids and amino acids. It's
quite hard to make nucleotides. And it's possible to make them and it's been done and it's been
done following this pathway as well. But you make trace amounts. And so the next question, assuming
that this is the right way of seeing the question, which maybe it's just not, but let's assume it is,
is, well, how do you reliably make more nucleotides then? How do you become more complex and better
becoming a nucleotide generating machine? And the answer is, well, you need positive feedback loops,
some form of autocatalysis. So that can work. And we know it happens in biology. If this
nucleotide, for example, catalyzes CO2 fixation, then you're going to increase the rate of flux
through the whole system and you're going to effectively steepen the driving force to make
more nucleotides. And this can be inherited because there are forms of membrane heredity that you
can have. And there are, effectively, you can, if a cell divides in two and it's got a lot of stuff
inside it and that stuff is basically bound as a network which is capable of regenerating itself,
then it will inevitably regenerate itself. And so you can develop greater complexity.
But everything that I've said depends on the underlying rules of thermodynamics. There is
no evolvability about that. It's simply an inevitable outcome of your starting point,
assuming that you're able to increase the driving force through the system. You will
generate more of the same, you'll expand on what you can do, but you'll never get anything different
than that. And it's only when you introduce information into that as a gene, as a kind of
small stretch of RNA, which can be random stretch, then you get real evolvability,
then you get biology as we know it, but you also have selection as we know it.
Yeah, I mean, I don't know how to think about information.
That's the kind of memory of the system. So it's not, yeah, at the local level,
it's propagation of copying yourself and changing and improving your adaptability
to the environment. But if you look at earth as a whole, it has a kind of memory. That's the key
feature of it. In what way? It remembers the stuff it tries. Like if you were to describe
earth, I think evolution is something that we experience
as individual organisms. That's how the individual organisms interact with each other.
There's a natural selection. But when you look at earth as an organism in its entirety,
how would you describe it? I mean,
well, not as an organism. I mean, the idea of Gaia is lovely. And James Lovelock originally
put Gaia out as an organism that had somehow evolved. And he was immediately attacked by
lots of people. And he's not wrong, but he backpedaled somewhat because that was more of a poetic
vision than the science. The science is now called earth systems science. And it's really about how
does the world kind of regulate itself so it remains within the limits which are hospitable
to life. And it does it amazingly well. And it is working at a planetary level of kind of
integration of regulation. But it's not evolving by natural selection. And it can't because there's
only one of it. And so it can change over time, but it's not evolving. All the evolution is
happening in the parts of the system. Yeah, but it's a self-sustaining organism.
No, it's sustained by the sun.
Right. So I mean, you don't think it's possible to see earth as its own organism?
I think it's poetic and beautiful. And I often refer to the earth as a living planet.
But it's not in biological terms, an organism. No.
If aliens were to visit earth, what would they notice? What would be the basic
unit of light they would notice?
Trees, probably. I mean, it's green. It's green and blue. I think that's the first thing you'd
notice is it stands out from space as being different to any of the other planets.
So it would notice the trees at first, because the green...
Well, I would notice the green, yes.
Yeah. And then probably notice to figure out the photosynthesis.
Probably notice cities a second, I suspect.
Yeah. First.
They arrived at night, they noticed cities first, that's for sure.
It depends the time. You write quite beautifully in Transformers once again.
I think you open the book in this way. I don't remember.
From space describing earth, it's such an interesting idea of what earth is.
You also, I mean, Hitchhiker's Guide summarizing it as harmless, or mostly harmless,
which is a beautifully poetic thing.
You open Transformers with from space, it looks gray and crystalline, obliterating the
blue-green colors of the living earth. It is crisscrossed by regular patterns and convergent
striations. There's a central amorphous density where these scratches seem lighter.
This, quote, growth does not look alive, although it has extended out along some lines,
and there is something grasping and parasitic about it.
Across the globe, there are thousands of them, varying in shape and detail,
but all of them gray, angular, and organic, spreading.
Yet at night, they light up.
Glowing up the dark sky, suddenly beautiful.
Perhaps these cankers on the landscape are in some sense living.
There's a controlled flow of energy, there must be information and some form of metabolism,
some turnover of materials. Are they alive? No, of course not. They are cities.
So is there some sense that cities are living beings?
You think aliens would think of them as living beings?
Well, it would be easy to see it that way, wouldn't it?
It wakes up at night. They wake up at night.
Strictly nocturnal, yes.
I imagine that any aliens that are smart enough to get here would understand
that they're not living beings.
My reason for saying that is that we tend to think of biology in terms of information and
forget about cells. I was trying to draw a comparison between the cell as a city and the
energy flow through the city and the energy flow through cells and the turnover of materials.
An interesting thing about cities is that they're not really exactly governed by anybody.
There are regulations and systems and whatever else, but it's pretty loose.
They have their own life, their own way of developing over time.
And in that sense, they're quite biological.
There was a plan after the Great Fire of London, Christopher Wren was making plans
not only for St Paul's Cathedral, but also to rebuild in large Parisian-type boulevards,
a large part of the area of central London that was burned.
It never happened because they didn't have enough money, I think.
But it's interesting what was in the plan. There were all these boulevards,
but there were no pubs and no coffee houses or anything like that.
The reality was London just kind of grew up in a set of jumbled streets.
It was the coffee houses and the pubs where all the business of the city of London was
being done and that was where the real life of the city was. And no one had planned it.
The whole thing was unplanned and works much better that way.
And in that sense, the cell is completely unplanned, it's not controlled by the genes
in the nucleus and the way that we might like to think that it is, but it's kind of
evolved entity that has the same kind of flux, the same animation, the same life.
So I think it's a beautiful analogy, but I wouldn't get too stuck with it as a metaphor.
See, I disagree with you. I disagree with you. I think you are so steeped.
And actually the entirety of science, the history of science is steeped in a biological
framework of thinking about what is life. And not just biological, it's very human-centric too.
That the human organism is the epitome of life on earth. I don't know. I think there is some
deep fundamental way in which a city is a living being in the same way that a human-
It doesn't give rise to an offspring city. It doesn't work by natural selection,
it works by, if anything, memes it works by. It's kind of copying itself conceptually as a
mode of being. So I mean, maybe memes, maybe ideas are the organisms that are really essential to
life on earth. Maybe it's much more important about the collective aspect of human nature,
the collective intelligence than the individual intelligence. Maybe the collective humanity
is the organism. And the thing that defines the collective intelligence of humanity is the ideas
and maybe the way that manifests itself is cities, maybe or societies or geographically
constrained societies or nations and all that kind of stuff. I mean, from an alien perspective,
it's possible that that is the more deeply noticeable thing, not from a place of ignorance.
What's noticeable doesn't tell you how it works. I mean, I don't have any problem with what you're
saying, really, except that it's not possible without the humans, we went from a hunter-gatherer
type economy, if you like, without cities. And as soon as we get into human evolution
and culture and society and so on, then yes, there are other forms of evolution,
other forms of change, but cities don't directly propagate themselves. They propagate themselves
through human societies and human societies only exist because humans as individuals propagate
themselves. So there's a hierarchy there and without the humans in the first place,
none of the rest of it exists. So do you, life is primarily defined by the basic unit on which
evolution can operate? I think it's a really important thing, yes.
Yeah. And we don't have any other better ideas than evolution for how to create one.
I never came across a better idea than evolution. I mean, maybe I'm just ignorant and I don't know.
You mentioned, oh, that's no automator and so on. And I don't think specifically about that,
but I have thought about it in terms of selective units at the origin of life and
the difference between evolvability and complexity or just increasing complexity,
but within very narrowly defined limits. The great thing about genes and about selection
is it just knocks down all those limits. It gives you a world of information in the end,
which is limited only by the biophysical reality of what kind of an organism you are,
what kind of a planet you live on and so on. And cities and all these other forms that look alive
and could be described as alive because they can't propagate themselves, can only exist as the
product of something that did propagate itself. Yeah. I mean, there's a deeply compelling truth
to that kind of way of looking at things, but I just hope that we don't miss the giant cloud
among us. I kind of hope that I'm wrong about a lot of this because I can't say that my world
view is particularly uplifting, but in some sense, it doesn't matter if it's uplifting or not,
science is about what's reality, what's out there, why is it this way? And I think there's beauty
in that too. There's beauty in darkness. You write about life and death sort of at the biological
level. Does the question of suicide, why live, does the question of why the human mind is capable
of depression, are you able to introspect that from a place of biology? Why are minds, why we humans
can go to such dark places? Why can we commit suicide? Why can we go suffer, suffer period,
but also suffer from a feeling of meaninglessness of going to a dark place that depression can take
you? Is this a feature of life or is it a bug? I don't know. I mean, if it's a feature of life,
then I suppose it would have to be true of other organisms as well. And I don't know
when we were talking about dogs earlier on, and they can certainly be very sad and upset and may
mooch for days after their owner died or something like that. So I suspect in some sense it's a
feature of biology. It's probably a feature of mortality. But beyond all of that, I mean,
I guess there's two ways you could come at it. One of them would be to say, well, you can effectively
do the math and come to the conclusion that it's all pointless and that there's really no point
in me being here any longer. And maybe that's true. In the greater scheme of things, you can
justify yourself in terms of society, but society will be gone soon enough as well. And you end
up with a very bleak place just by logic. In some sense, it's surprising that we can find any meaning
at all. Well, maybe this is where consciousness comes in, that we have transient joy. But with
transient joy, we have transient misery as well. And sometimes with everything in biology,
getting the regulation right is practically impossible. You will always have a bell-shaped
curve where some people, unfortunately, are at the joy end and some people are at the misery end.
And that's the way brains are wired. And I doubt there's ever an escape from that. It's the same
with sex and everything else as well. We're dealing with it. You can't regulate it. So
anything goes. It's all part of biology.
Amen to that. Let me on writing in your book, Power Sex and Suicide. First of all,
can I just read off the books you've written? If there's any better titles and topics to be
covered, I don't know what they are. It makes me look forward to whatever you're going to write
next. I hope there's things you write next. So you first, you wrote Oxygen, the molecule that
made the world, as we've talked about, this idea of the role of oxygen in life on earth.
Then wait for it. Power Sex Suicide, mitochondria and the meaning of life. Then life ascending,
the 10 great inventions of evolution. The vital question, the first book I've read of yours,
the vital question, why is life the way it is? And the new book, Transformer,
The Deep Chemistry of Life and Death. In Power Sex and Suicide, you write about writing,
or about a lot of things, but I have a question about writing. You write,
in the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, Ford Perfect spends 15 years researching his revision
to the guide's entry on the earth, which originally read harmless. By the way, I would also, as a
side quest, as a side question, would like to ask you what would be your summary of what earth is.
You write, his long essay on the subject is edited down by the guide to read mostly harmless. I
suspect that too many new additions suffer a similar fate, if not through absurd editing decisions,
at least through a lack of meaningful change in content. As it happens, nearly 15 years have passed
since the first edition of Power Sex, Suicide was published. And I am resisting the temptation
to make any lame revisions. Some say that even Darwin lessened the power of his arguments in
the origin of species through his multiple revisions, in which he dealt with criticisms
and sometimes shifted his views in the wrong direction. I prefer my original to speak for
itself, even if it turns out to be wrong. Let me ask the question about writing,
both your students in the academic setting, but also writing some of the most brilliant
writings on science and humanity I've ever read. What's the process of writing? How do you advise
other humans? If you were to talk to young Darwin or the young you and just young anybody and give
advice about how to write and how to write well about these big topics, what would you say?
I suppose there's a couple of points. One of them is what's the story? What do I want to know?
What do I want to convey? Why does it matter to anybody? And very often the biggest,
most interesting questions, the childlike questions are the one that actually everybody
wants to ask, but then quite do it in case they look stupid. And one of the nice things about
being in science is the longer you're in, the more you realize that everybody doesn't know the
answer to these questions and it's not so stupid to ask them after all. So trying to
ask the questions that I would have been asking myself at the age of 15, 16, when I was really
hungry to know about the world and didn't know very much about it and wanted to go to the edge
of what we know, but be helped to get there. I don't want to be too much terminology and so I
want someone to keep a clean eye on what the question is. Beyond that, I've wondered a lot
about who am I writing for? And that was in the end, the only answer I had was myself at the age
of 15 or 16. Because even if you're, you just don't know who's reading but also where are they
reading it? Are they reading it in the bath or in bed or on the metro or listening to an audio
book? Do you want to have a recapitulation every few pages because you read three pages at a time
or are you really irritated by that? You're going to get criticism from people who are
irritated by what you're doing and you don't know who they are or what you're going to do
that's going to irritate people. And in the end, all you can do is just try and please yourself.
And that means, well, what are these big fun, fascinating, big questions? And what do we know
about it? And can I convey that? And I kind of learned in trying to write, first of all,
say what we know. And I was shocked in the first couple of books how often I came up
quickly against all the stuff we don't know. And if you're trying to, I've realised later on in
supervising various physicists and mathematicians who are PhD students and their maths is way
beyond what I can do. But the process of trying to work out what are we actually going to model
here? What's going into this equation? It's a very similar one to writing. What am I going to
put on a page? What's the simplest possible way I can encapsulate this idea so that I now
have it as a unit that I can kind of see how it interacts with the other units? And you realise
that, well, if this is like that and this is like this, then that can't be true.
So you end up navigating your own path through this landscape. And that can be thrilling because
you don't know where it's going. And I'd like to think that that's one of the reasons my books have
worked for people because this sense of the thrilling adventure ride that I don't know where
it's going either. So finding the simplest possible way to explain the things we know
and the simplest possible way to explain the things we don't know and the tension between those two
and that's where the story emerges. What about the edit? Do you find yourself to the point of this
editing doll to most harmless? To arrive at simplicity, do you find
the edit is productive or does it destroy the magic that was originally there?
No, I usually find, I think I'm perhaps a better editor than I am a writer. I write and rewrite
and rewrite and rewrite. Put a bunch of crap on the page first and then see where the edit where it
takes. Yeah. But then there's the professional editors who come along as well. And I mean,
in Transformer, the editor came back to me after I'd sent him two months after I sent the
first edition, he'd read the whole thing and he said, the first two chapters prevent a formidable
hurdle to the general reader. Go and do something about it. And it was the last thing I really
wanted to do. Your editor sounds very eloquent in speech. Yeah, well, this was an email. But
I thought about it in, you know, the bottom line is he was right. And so I put the whole thing aside
for about two months. It's been the summer. This would have been, I guess, last summer.
And then turned to it with full attention in about September or something and rewrote those
chapters almost from scratch. I kept some of the material, but it took me a long time to process
it to work out what needs to change. Where does it need to change? I wasn't writing in this time.
How am I going to tell this story better so it's more accessible and interesting? And in the end,
I think it's still difficult. It's still biochemistry. But as he ended up saying,
now he's got a barreling energy to it. And because he'd told me the truth the first time,
I decided to believe that he was telling me the truth the second time as well and was delighted.
Could you give advice to young people in general? Folks in high school, folks in college,
how to take on some of the big questions you've taken on. Now you've done that in the space of
biology and expanded out. How can they have a career they can be proud of or have a life
they can be proud of? Gosh, that's a big question. I'm sure you've gathered some wisdom that you can
impart to young people. So the only advice that I actually ever give to my students
is follow what you're interested in. Because they're often worried that if they make this
decision now and do this course instead of that course, then they're going to restrict
their career opportunities. And there isn't a career path in science. It's not, I mean,
there is, but there isn't. There's a lot of competition. There's a lot of death symbolically.
So who survives? The people who survive are the people who care enough to still do it. And they're
very often the people who don't worry too much about the future and are able to live in the present.
Because if you do a PhD, you've competed hard to get onto the PhD, then you have to compete hard
to get a post-doc job. And you have the next one maybe on another continent. And it's only two
years anyway. And there's no guarantee you're going to get a faculty position at the end of it.
And there's always the next step to compete. If you get a faculty position, you get a tenure.
And with tenure, you go full professor and full professor, then you go to some kind of whatever
the discipline is. There's an award. If you're in physics, you're always competing for the
there's different awards. And then eventually you're all competing to,
I mean, there's always a competition. So there is no happiness. Happiness does not lie.
If you're looking into the future, yes. And if what you're caring about is a career, then
it's probably not the one for you. If you can put that aside, and I've also worked in industry
for a brief period and I was made redundant twice. So I know that
it's, you know, there's no guarantee that you've got a career that way either.
So live in the moment and try and enjoy what you're doing. And that means really go to the
go to the themes that you're most interested in and try and follow them as well as you can.
And that tends to pay back in surprising ways. I don't know if you've found this as well,
but I found that people will help you often. If they see some light shining in the eye,
you're excited about their subject. And, you know, just want to talk about it.
And they know that their friend in California has got a job coming up. They'll say,
go for this, this guy's all right. You know, they'll use the network to help you out
if you really care. And you're not going to have a job two years down the line. But if what you
really care about is what you're doing now, then it doesn't matter if you have a job in two years
time or not. It'll work itself out if you've got the light in your eye. And so that's the only
advice I can give. And most people probably drop out through that system because the fight is just
not worth it for them. Yeah, when you have the light in your eye, when you have the excitement
for the thing, what happens is you start to surround yourself with others that are interested
in that same thing that also have the light. If you really are rigorous about this, because
I think it does take, it doesn't, it takes effort to make... Oh, you've got to be obsessive.
But if you're doing what you really love doing, then it's not work anymore is what you do.
Yeah, but I also mean the surrounding yourself with other people that are obsessed about the
same thing because depending on... Oh, that takes some work as well, yes. And look.
Finding the right mentors, the collaborators, because I think one of the problem with
the PhD process is people are not careful enough in picking their mentors. Those are people,
mentors and colleagues and so on, those are people are going to define the direction of your life,
the how much you love a thing, the power of just like the few little conversations you have
in the hallway, it's incredible. So you have to be a little bit careful in that. Sometimes you
just get randomly almost assigned, really pursue, I suppose, the subject as much as you pursue the
people that do that subject. So like both, the whole dance of it. They kind of go together really.
Yeah, they do. They really do. But take that part seriously. And probably in the way you're
describing it, careful how you define success because... You'll never find happiness in success.
I know there's a lovely quote from Robert Lewis Stevenson, I think, who said,
nothing in life is so disenchanting as attainment. Yeah, so I mean, in some sense,
the true definition of success is getting to do today what you really enjoy doing,
just what fills you with joy. And that's ultimately success. Success isn't the thing
beyond the horizon, the big trophy, the financials. I think it's as close as we can get to happiness.
That's not to say you're full of joy all the time, but it's as close as we can get to a sustained
human happiness is by getting some fulfillment from what you're doing on a daily basis. And if
what you're looking for is the world giving you the stamp of approval with a Nobel Prize or a
fellowship or whatever it is, then I've known people like this who they eat away by the
anger of the kind of caustic resentment that they've not been awarded this prize that they deserve.
And the other way, if you put too much value into those kinds of prizes and you win them,
I've gotten a chance to see that it also,
the more, quote unquote, successful you are in that sense, the more you run the danger of
growing ego so big that you don't get to actually enjoy the beauty of this life,
you start to believe that you figured it all out, as opposed to I think what ultimately the most
fun thing is is being curious about everything around you, being constantly surprised, and
these little moments of discovery of enjoying beauty in small and big ways all around you.
And I think the bigger your ego grows, the more you start to take yourself seriously,
the less you're able to enjoy that. Oh man, I couldn't agree more. So the summary from harmless
to mostly harmless in Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, how would you try to summarize
earth? And if you were given, if you had to summarize the whole thing in a couple of sentences,
and maybe throw in meaning of life in there, like why, why, why, maybe is that a defining
thing about humans that we care about the meaning of the whole thing? I wonder if that should be
part of the, these creatures seem to be very lost. Yes, I'm always asking why. I mean,
that's my defining question is why people used to make a joke. I have a small scar on my forehead
from a climbing accident years ago. And the guy I was climbing with had dislodged a rock and he
shouted something, he shouted below, I think, meaning that the rock was coming down. And I
hadn't caught what he said. So I looked up and it smashed straight on my forehead. And everybody
around me took the piss saying he looked up to ask why. Yeah, but that's a human imperative.
That's part of what it means to be human. Look up to the sky and ask why. And ask why.
So your question, define the earth.
I'm not sure I can do that. I mean, the first word that comes to mind is living.
I wouldn't like to say mostly living, but perhaps.
Mostly living. Well, it's interesting because like if you were to write
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, I suppose, say our idea we talked about the bacteria is the
most prominent form of life throughout the galaxy and the universe. I suppose the earth would be
kind of unique and would require abundance in that case. Yeah, it's profligate, it's rich,
it's enormously living. So how would you describe that it's not bacteria? It's
eukaryotic. Yeah, well, I mean, that's the technical term, but it is basically.
Yeah, and then. How would I describe that? I've actually really struggled with that term,
because the word, I mean, there's few words quite as good as eukaryotic to put everybody off
immediately. You start using words like that and they'll leave the room. Krebs cycle is another
one that gets people to leave the room. So I've tried to think, is there another word for eukaryotic
that I can use? And really the only word that I've been able to use is complex cells,
complex life and so on. And that word, it serves one immediate purpose, which is to convey
an impression. But then it means so many different things just everybody that actually
is lost immediately. And so it's kind of. Well, that's unnoticeable from the perspective of other
planets. That is the noticeable face transition of complexity is the eukaryotic.
What about the harmless and the mostly harmless? Is that kind of?
Probably accurate on a universal kind of scale. I don't think that humanity is in any danger of
disturbing the universe at the moment. At the moment, which is why the mostly,
we don't know, depends what you want us up to. Depends how many rockets. I think it's
it'll be still even then a while. I think before, before we disturb the fabric of time and space.
Was the aforementioned Andre Carpathia, I think he summarized earth as
as a system where you hammer it with a bunch of photons. The input is like photons and the output
is rockets. Well, that's the hell of a lot of photons before there was a rocket.
You know, maybe maybe in the span of the universe, it's not, it's not that much time.
And so, and I do wonder, you know, what the future is, whether we're just in the early
beginnings of this earth, which is important when you try to summarize it, or we're at the end,
where humans have finally gained the ability to destroy the entirety of this beautiful project
we've got going on, that with nuclear weapons, with engineered viruses, with all those kinds of
things. Or just inadvertently through global warming and pollution and so on. We're quite
capable of that. I mean, we just need to pass a tipping point. I mean, I think we're more likely
to do it inadvertently than through a nuclear war, which could happen at any time. But
my fear is, is we just don't know where the tipping points are. And we will, we kind of think
we're smart enough to fix the problem quickly if we really need to. I think that's the overriding
assumption that we're all right for now. Maybe in 20 years time, it's going to be a calamitous
problem. And then we'll really need to put some serious mental power into fixing it
without seriously worrying that perhaps that is too late. And that however brilliant we are,
it's, we miss the boat. And just walk off the cliff. I don't know. I have optimism in humans
being clever descendants. Oh, I have no doubt that we can fix the problem. But it's an urgent
problem. And we need to fix it pretty sharpish. And I do have doubts about whether politically
we are capable of coming together enough to not just in any one country, but around the planet
to, I mean, I know we can do it, but do we have the will? Do we have the vision to
accomplish it? That's what makes this whole ride fun. I don't know. Not only do we not
know if we can handle the crises before us, we don't even know all the crises that are going to
be before us in the next 20 years. The ones I think that will most likely challenge us
in the 21st century are the ones we don't even expect. People didn't expect World War II.
At the end of World War I.
Well, some people did, but not at the end of World War I, but by the late 1920s,
I think people were beginning to worry about it. Yeah, no, there's always people worrying about
everything. So if you focus on the thing that people worry about, because there's a million
things people worry about and 99.9999% of them don't come to be. Of course, the people that
turn out to be right, they'll say, I knew all along, but that's not an accurate way of knowing
what you could have predicted. I think rationally speaking, you can worry about it, but nobody
thought you could have another World War, the war to end all wars. Why would you have another war?
And the idea of nuclear weapons, just technologically, is a very difficult thing to
anticipate to create a weapon that just jumps, orders the magnitude, and destructive capability.
And of course, we can intuit all the things like engineered viruses,
nanobots, artificial intelligence, yes, all the different complicated global effects of
global warming. So how that changes the allocation of resources, the flow of energy,
the tension between countries, the military conflict between countries, the reallocation
of power, then looking at the role of China in this whole thing with Russia and growing influence
of Africa and the weird dynamics of Europe, and then America falling apart through the political
division fueled by recommender systems through Twitter and Facebook. The whole beautiful mess
is just fun. And I think there's a lot of incredible engineers, incredible scientists,
incredible human beings that while everyone is bickering and so on online for the fun of it on
the weekends, they're actually trying to build solutions. And those are the people that will
create something beautiful, at least I have, you know, that's the process of evolution. It's,
there was, it all started with a Chuck Norris single cell organism that went out from the events
and was the parent to all of us. And for that guy or lady or both, I guess, is a big thank you.
And I can't wait to what happens next. And I'm glad there's incredible humans writing and studying
it like you are. Nick, it's a huge honor that you were talking to me. This is fantastic. This is
really amazing. I can't wait to read what you write next. Thank you for existing. And thank you
for talking today. Thank you. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Nick Lane. To support
this podcast, please check out our sponsors in the description. And now let me leave you with some
words from Steve Jobs. I think the biggest innovations of the 21st century will be at the
intersection of biology and technology. A new era is beginning. Thank you for listening. I hope to
see you next time.
