As you've said, quantum computing, at least in the 1990s, was a profound story at the
intersection of computer science, physics, engineering, math, and philosophy.
So there's this broad and deep aspect to quantum computing that represents more than just the
quantum computer.
Yes.
But can we start at the very basics?
What is quantum computing?
Yeah.
So it's a proposal for a new type of computation, let's say a new way to harness nature to
do computation that is based on the principles of quantum mechanics.
Now, the principles of quantum mechanics have been in place since 1926.
They haven't changed.
What's new is how we want to use them.
So what does quantum mechanics say about the world?
The physicists, I think, over the generations convinced people that that is an unbelievably
complicated question and just give up on trying to understand it, not being a physicist,
I can let you in on a secret, which is that it becomes a lot simpler if you do what we
do in quantum information theory and take the physics out of it.
So the way that we think about quantum mechanics is as a generalization of the rules of probability
themselves.
So you might say there was a 30% chance that it was going to snow today or something.
You would never say that there was a negative 30% chance.
That would be nonsense.
Much less would you say that there was an I% chance, a square root of minus 1% chance.
Now the central discovery that quantum mechanics made is that fundamentally the world is described
by the possibilities for what a system could be doing are described using numbers called
amplitudes, which are like probabilities in some ways, but they are not probabilities.
For one thing, they can be positive or negative.
In fact, they can even be complex numbers.
And if you've heard of a quantum superposition, this just means that some state of affairs
where you assign an amplitude, one of these complex numbers, to every possible configuration
that you could see a system in on measuring it.
So for example, you might say that an electron has some amplitude for being here and some
other amplitude for being there.
Now if you look to see where it is, you will localize it.
You will sort of force the amplitudes to be converted into probabilities.
That happens by taking their squared absolute value.
And then you can say either the electron will be here or it will be there.
Knowing the amplitudes, you can predict at least the probabilities that you'll see each
possible outcome.
But while a system is isolated from the whole rest of the universe, the rest of its environment,
the amplitudes can change in time by rules that are different from the normal rules of
probability and that are alien to our everyday experience.
So anytime anyone ever tells you anything about the weirdness of the quantum world or
assuming that they're not lying to you, they are telling you yet another consequence of
nature being described by these amplitudes.
So most famously, what amplitudes can do is that they can interfere with each other.
So in the famous double slit experiment, what happens is that you shoot a particle like
an electron, let's say, at a screen with two slits in it.
And you find that on a second screen, now there are certain places where that electron
will never end up after it passes through the first screen.
And yet if I close off one of the slits, then the electron can appear in that place.
So by decreasing the number of paths that the electron could take to get somewhere, you
can increase the chance that it gets there.
Now how is that possible?
Well it's because, as we would say now, the electron has a superposition state.
It has some amplitude for reaching this point by going through the first slit.
It has some other amplitude for reaching it by going through the second slit.
But now if one amplitude is positive and the other one is negative, then I have to add
them all up.
I have to add the amplitudes for every path that the electron could have taken to reach
this point.
And those amplitudes, if they're pointing in different directions, they can cancel each
other out.
That would mean the total amplitude is zero and the thing never happens at all.
If I close off one of the possibilities, then the amplitude is positive or it's negative
and now the thing can happen.
So that is sort of the one trick of quantum mechanics.
And now I can tell you what a quantum computer is.
A quantum computer is a computer that tries to exploit exactly these phenomena, superposition,
amplitudes, and interference in order to solve certain problems much faster than we know
how to solve them otherwise.
So it's the basic building block of a quantum computer is what we call a quantum bit or
a qubit.
That just means a bit that has some amplitude for being zero and some other amplitude for
being one.
So it's a superposition of zero and one states.
But now the key point is that if I've got, let's say, a thousand qubits, the rules of
quantum mechanics are completely unequivocal that I do not just need one amplitude.
I don't just need amplitudes for each qubit separately.
In general, I need an amplitude for every possible setting of all thousand of those
bits so that what that means is two to the 1,000 power amplitudes.
If I had to write those down, or let's say in the memory of a conventional computer,
if I had to write down two to the 1,000 complex numbers, that would not fit within the entire
observable universe.
And yet, quantum mechanics is unequivocal that if these qubits can all interact with
each other, and in some sense, I need two to the 1,000 parameters, amplitudes to describe
what is going on.
Now, I can tell you where all the popular articles about quantum computing go off the
rails is that they say what I just said, and then they say, oh, so the way a quantum computer
works is just by trying every possible answer in parallel.
That sounds too good to be true, and unfortunately, it kind of is too good to be true.
The problem is I could make a superposition over every possible answer to my problem,
even if there are two to the 1,000 of them, I can easily do that.
The trouble is for a computer to be useful, you've got at some point, you've got to look
at it and see an output.
And if I just measure a superposition over every possible answer, then the rules of quantum
mechanics tell me that all I'll see will be a random answer.
If I just wanted a random answer, well, I could have picked one myself with a lot less
trouble.
So the entire trick with quantum computing, with every algorithm for a quantum computer,
is that you try to choreograph a pattern of interference of amplitudes, and you try to
do it so that for each wrong answer, some of the paths leading to that wrong answer
have positive amplitudes, and others have negative amplitudes.
So on the whole, they cancel each other out, whereas all the paths leading to the right
answer should reinforce each other, should have amplitudes pointing the same direction.
So the design of algorithms in this space is the choreography of the interferences.
Precisely.
That's precisely what it is.
Take a brief step back, and you mentioned information.
So in which part of this beautiful picture that you've painted is information contained?
Oh, well, information is at the core of everything that we've been talking about.
I mean, the bit is the basic unit of information, since Claude Shannon's paper in 1948, and
of course, people had the concept even before that, he popularized the name.
But a bit is zero or one, so that's the basic element of information.
That's right.
And what we would say is that the basic unit of quantum information is the qubit, is the
object, any object that can be maintained and manipulated in a superposition of zero
and one states.
Now sometimes people ask, well, but what is a qubit physically?
And there are all these different proposals that are being pursued in parallel for how
you implement qubits.
There is superconducting quantum computing that was in the news recently because of Google's
quantum supremacy experiment, where you would have some little coils where a current can
flow through them in two different energy states.
One representing a zero, another representing a one.
And if you cool these coils to just slightly above absolute zero, like a hundredth of a
degree, then they superconduct and then the current can actually be in a superposition
of the two different states.
So that's one kind of qubit.
Another kind would be just an individual atomic nucleus, it has a spin.
It could be spinning clockwise, it could be spinning counterclockwise, or it could be in
a superposition of the two spin states.
That is another qubit.
Because just like in the classical world, you could be a virtuoso programmer without
having any idea of what a transistor is, or how the bits are physically represented inside
the machine, even that the machine uses electricity.
You just care about the logic.
It's sort of the same with quantum computing.
Cubits could be realized by many, many different quantum systems, yet all of those systems
will lead to the same logic, the logic of qubits and how you measure them, how you change
them over time.
And so the subject of how qubits behave and what you can do with qubits, that is quantum
information.
So just to linger on that, so the physical design implementation of a qubit does not
interfere with that next level of abstraction that you can program over it.
So it truly is, the idea of it is, is it okay?
Well, to be honest with you, today they do interfere with each other.
That's because all the quantum computers we can build today are very noisy.
And so the qubits are very far from perfect, and so the lower level sort of does affect
the higher levels, and we sort of have to think about all of them at once.
But eventually, where we hope to get is to what are called error-corrected quantum computers,
where the qubits really do behave like perfect abstract qubits for as long as we want them
to.
And in that future, a future that we can already sort of prove theorems about or think about
today, but in that future, the logic of it really does become decoupled from the hardware.
So if noise is currently like the biggest problem for quantum computing, and then the
dream is error-correcting quantum computers, can you just maybe describe what does it mean
for there to be noise in the system?
Absolutely.
So yeah, so the problem is even a little more specific than noise.
So the fundamental problem, if you're trying to actually build a quantum computer of any
appreciable size, is something called decoherence.
And this was recognized from the very beginning when people first started thinking about this
in the 1990s.
Now what decoherence means is sort of the unwanted interaction between your qubits, the state
of your quantum computer, and the external environment.
And why is that such a problem?
I talked before about how when you measure a quantum system, so let's say if I measure
a qubit that's in a superposition of zero and one states to ask it, are you zero or
are you one?
Well, now I force it to make up its mind.
And now probabilistically, it chooses one or the other.
And now it's no longer a superposition, there's no longer amplitudes, there's just some probability
that I get a zero and there's some that I get a one.
And now the trouble is that it doesn't have to be me who's looking.
In fact, it doesn't have to be any conscious entity.
Any kind of interaction with the external world that leaks out the information about
whether this qubit was a zero or a one, sort of that causes the zero-ness or the oneness
of the qubit to be recorded in the radiation in the room, in the molecules of the air,
in the wires that are connected to my device, any of that, as soon as the information leaks
out, it is as if that qubit has been measured.
It is the state has now collapsed.
Another way to say it is that it's become entangled with its environment.
But from the perspective of someone who's just looking at this qubit, it is as though
it has lost its quantum state.
What this means is that if I want to do a quantum computation, I have to keep the qubits
sort of fanatically well-isolated from their environment, but then at the same time, they
can't be perfectly isolated because I need to tell them what to do.
I need to make them interact with each other for one thing and not only that, but in a
precisely choreographed way.
That is such a staggering problem.
How do I isolate these qubits from the whole universe, but then also tell them exactly
what to do?
I mean, there were distinguished physicists and computer scientists in the 90s who said
this is fundamentally impossible.
The laws of physics will just never let you control qubits to the degree of accuracy that
you're talking about.
What changed the views of most of us was a profound discovery in the mid to late 90s,
which was called the theory of quantum error correction and quantum fault tolerance.
The upshot of that theory is that if I want to build a reliable quantum computer and scale
it up to an arbitrary number of as many qubits as I want and doing as much on them as I want,
I do not actually have to get the qubits perfectly isolated from their environment.
It is enough to get them really, really, really well-isolated.
Even if every qubit is leaking its state into the environment at some rate, as long as that
rate is low enough, I can encode the information that I care about in very clever ways across
the collective states of multiple qubits in such a way that even if a small percentage
of my qubits leak, well, I'm constantly monitoring them to see if that leak happened.
I can detect it and I can correct it.
I can recover the information I care about from the remaining qubits.
You can build a reliable quantum computer even out of unreliable parts.
In some sense, that discovery is what set the engineering agenda for quantum computing research
from the 1990s until the present.
The goal has been engineer qubits that are not perfectly reliable but reliable enough
that you can then use these error-correcting codes to have them simulate qubits that are
even more reliable than they are.
The error-correction becomes a net win rather than a net loss.
And then once you reach that crossover point, then your simulated qubits could in turn simulate
qubits that are even more reliable and so on until you've just effectively, you have arbitrarily
reliable qubits.
So long story short, we are not at that break-even point yet.
We're a hell of a lot closer than we were when people started doing this in the 90s, like orders
of magnitude closer.
But the key ingredient there is the more qubits, the better.
Well, the more qubits, the larger the computation you can do, right?
I mean, qubits are what constitute the memory of your quantum computer, right?
But also for the error-correcting mechanism.
Yes.
So the way I would say it is that error-correction imposes an overhead in the number of qubits.
And that is actually one of the biggest practical problems with building a scalable quantum
computer.
If you look at the error-correcting codes, at least the ones that we know about today, and you
look at what would it take to actually use a quantum computer to hack your credit card number,
which is the most famous application people talk about, right?
Let's say to factor huge numbers and thereby break the RSA crypto system.
Well, what that would take would be thousands of several thousand logical qubits.
But now with the known error-correcting codes, each of those logical qubits would need to
be encoded itself using thousands of physical qubits.
So at that point, you're talking about millions of physical qubits.
And in some sense, that is the reason why quantum computers are not breaking cryptography
already.
It's because of these immense overheads involved.
So that overhead is additive or multiplicative?
Well, it's multiplicative.
I mean, it's like you take the number of logical qubits that you need in your abstract
quantum circuit, you multiply it by a thousand or so.
So there's a lot of work on inventing better, trying to invent better error-correcting codes.
OK, that is the situation right now.
In the meantime, we are now in what the physicist John Preskell called the noisy intermediate
scale quantum or NISC era.
And this is the era.
You can think of it as sort of like the vacuum, you know, we're now entering the very early
vacuum tube era of quantum computers.
The quantum computer analog of the transistor has not been invented yet.
Right.
That would be like true error correction, right?
Where, you know, we are not or something else that would achieve the same effect.
Right. We are not there yet.
And but where we are now, let's say, as of a few months ago, you know, as of Google's
announcement of quantum supremacy, you know, we are now finally at the point where even
with a non-error corrected quantum computer with, you know, these noisy devices, we can
do something that is hard for classical computers to simulate.
OK, so we can eke out some advantage.
Now, will we in this noisy era be able to do something beyond what a classical computer
can do that is also useful to someone that we still don't know?
People are going to be racing over the next decade to try to do that by people.
I mean, Google, IBM, you know, a bunch of startup companies and, you know,
a and research labs and research labs and governments.
And yeah, you just mentioned a million things.
Well, I'll backtrack for a second.
Yes, sure. Sure.
So we're in these vacuum tube days.
Yeah, just entering.
And just entering. Wow. OK.
So yeah, how do we escape the vacuum?
So how do we get to how do we get to where we are now with the CPU?
Is this a fundamental engineering challenge?
Is there is there breakthroughs in on the physics side that they're needed on the
computer science side?
What is there?
And is it a financial issue where much larger, just sheer investment and excitement is needed?
So, you know, those are excellent questions.
My guess. My guess would be all of the above.
I mean, my guess, you know, I mean, you know, you can say fundamentally,
it is an engineering issue, right?
The theory has been in place since the 90s.
You know, at least, you know, you know, this is what, you know, error correction
would look like, you know, we do not have the hardware that is at that level.
But at the same time, you know, so you could just, you know, try to power through,
you know, maybe even like, you know, if someone spent a trillion dollars
on some quantum computing Manhattan project, right?
Then conceivably, they could just, you know, build a an error corrected
quantum computer as it was envisioned back in the 90s, right?
I think the more plausible thing to happen is that there will be further
theoretical breakthroughs and there will be further insights
that will cut down the cost of doing this.
