of radical political movement, of which there will always be a lot in the country,
has managed to do something that a radical movement is not supposed to be able to do in the U.S.,
which is they've managed to hijack institutions all across the country and hijack medical journals
and universities and the ACLU, all the activist organizations and nonprofits and many tech companies.
And the way I view a liberal democracy is it is a bunch of these institutions that were trial
and error crafted over hundreds of years. And they all rely on trust, public trust,
and there's certain kind of feeling of unity that actually is critical to a liberal democracy's
functioning. And what I see this thing is as a parasite on that, that whose goal is, and I'm not
saying each, by the way, each individual in this is, I don't think they're bad people. I think that
it's the ideology itself has the property of its goal is to tear apart the pretty delicate
workings of the liberal democracy and shred the critical lines of trust.
The following is a conversation with Tim Urban, his second time in the podcast.
He's the author and illustrator of the amazing blog called Wait But Why,
and is the author of a new book coming out tomorrow called What's Our Problem, a self-help
book for societies. We talk a lot about this book in this podcast, but you really do need to get it
and experience it for yourself. It is a fearless, insightful, hilarious, and I think important
book in this divisive time that we live in. The Kindle version, the audiobook, and the web version
should be all available on date of publication. I should also mention that my face might be a bit
more beat up than usual. I got hit in the chin pretty good since I've been getting back into
training jujitsu, a sport I love very much, after recovering from an injury. So if you see marks on
my face during these intros or conversations, you know that my life is in a pretty good place.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast. The supported, please check out our sponsors in the description,
and now, dear friends, here's Tim Urban. You wrote an incredible book called What's Our Problem,
a self-help book for societies. In the beginning, you present this view of human history as a
thousand-page book where each page is 250 years, and it's a brilliant visualization because almost
nothing happens for most of it. So what blows your mind most about that visualization when you
just sit back and think about it? It's a boring book. So 950 pages, 95% of the book, hunter-gatherer
is kind of doing their thing. I'm sure there's, you know, there's obviously some major cognitive
and advancements along the way in language, and I'm sure, you know, the bow and arrow comes around
at some point, you know, so tiny things, but it's like, oh, now 400 pages till the next thing.
But then you get to page 950 and things start moving.
Recorded history starts at 976. Right, right.
So basically, the bottom row is when anything interesting happens. There's a bunch of agriculture
for a while before we know anything about it, and then the recorded history starts.
Yeah, 25 pages of actual, like, recorded history. So when we think of prehistoric,
we're talking about pages one through 975 of the book. And then history is page, you know, 976 to
1000. If you were reading the book, it would be like epilogue AD, you know, the last little 10 pages
of the book. And we think of AD is super long, right? 2000 years, the Roman Empire 2000 years
ago, like that's so long. Yeah. Human history has been going on for over 2000 centuries.
Like, that is, it's just, it's hard to wrap your head around. And this is, I mean, even that's just
the end of a very long road. Like, you know, the 100,000 years before that, it's not like, you know,
it's not like that was that different. So it's just, there's been people like us that have emotions
like us, that have physical sensations like us for so, so long. And who are they all? And what was
their life like? And it's, you know, I think we have no idea what it was like to be them. The thing
that's craziest about the people of the far past is not just that they had different lives, they had
different fears, they had different dangers and different responsibilities, and they lived in
tribes and everything, but they didn't know anything. Like, we just take it for granted that
we're born on top of this tower of knowledge. And from the very beginning, we, we know that the
earth is a ball floating in space. And we know that we're going to die one day. And we know that
you know, we evolved from animals and all the, those were all like incredible, you know,
epiphanies quite recently. And the people a long time ago, they just had no idea what was going on.
And like, I'm kind of jealous, because I feel like it, you know, might have been scary to not
know what's going on, but it also I feel like would be, you'd have a sense of awe and wonder all
the time. And, and you don't know what's going to happen next. And it's once you learn, you're
kind of like, oh, that's like, it's a little grim. But they probably had the same capacity for
consciousness to experience the world, to wander about the world, maybe to construct
narratives about the world and myths and so on. They just had less grounded systematic facts to
play with. They've still probably felt the narratives, the myths that constructed as
intensely as we do. Oh yeah, they also fell in love. They also had friends and they had
falling outs with friends. They didn't shower much though. They didn't not smell nice.
Maybe they did. Maybe beauty's in the high of the beholden. Maybe it's all like relative.
How many people in history have experienced a hot shower? Like almost none. That's like,
one more hot shower was invented 100 years ago, like less. So like George Washington never had
a hot shower. It's like, it's just kind of weird. Like he took cold showers all the time or like,
and again, we just take this for granted. But that's like an unbelievable life experience
to have a rain, a controlled little booth where it rains hot water on your head. And then you get
out and it's not everywhere. It's like contained. That was like, you know, a lot of people probably
lived and died with never experiencing hot water. Maybe they had a way to heat water over a fire.
But like then it's, I don't know, it's just like, there's so many things about our lives now
that are completely, just total anomaly. It makes me wonder, like, what is the thing
they would notice the most? I mean, the sewer system, like it doesn't smell in cities.
Incredible. What does the sewer system do? I mean, it gets rid of waste efficiently,
etc. We don't have to confront it, both with our, with any of our senses. And that's probably
wasn't there. I mean, what else? Plus all the medical stuff associated with sewage.
Yeah, I mean, how about the disease? Yeah. How about the cockroaches and the rats and the,
and the disease and the plagues and, you know, and then when they got, so they caught more
diseases, but then when they caught the disease, they also didn't have treatment for it. So they
often would die or they would just be in a huge amount of pain. They also didn't know what the
disease was. They didn't know about microbes. That was this new thing, the idea that these tiny
little animals that are causing these diseases. So what did they think, you know, in the, the
bubonic plague, you know, in the Black Death, the 1300s, people thought that it was an active
God because, you know, God's angry at us because why would, you know, why would you not think that
if you didn't know what it was? And so the crazy thing is that these were the same primates. So
I do know something about them. I know in some sense what it's like to be them because I am a
human as well. And to know that this particular primate that I know what it's like to be
experienced such different things. It's, and like this isn't, our life is not the life that
this primate has experienced almost ever. So it's just, it's just a bit strange.
I don't know. I have a sense that we would get acclimated very quickly. Like if we threw ourselves
back a few thousand years ago, it would be very uncomfortable at first, but the whole hot shower
thing, you'll get used to it after a year. You would not even like miss it. Because there's a few,
trying to remember which book that talks about hiking the Appalachian Trail,
but you kind of miss those hot showers. But I have a sense like after a few months,
after a few years. Well, your skill recalibrates. Yeah. Yeah. I was saying the other day to a
friend that whatever you used to, you start to think that, oh, that the people that have more
than me are more fortunate. Like, it just sounds incredible. I would be so happy. But you know,
that's not true. Because experience, what would happen is you would, you would, you would get
these new things or you would, you would get these new opportunities and then you would get
used to it. And then you would this, the hedonic treadmill, you'd come back to where you are.
And likewise though, because you think, oh my God, what if I had to, you know,
have this kind of job that I never would want? Or I had this kind of marriage that I never would
want. You know what, if you did, you would adjust and get used to it and you might not be that much
less happy than you are now. So on the other side of the, you being okay going back, you know,
we would survive if we had to go back. You know, we'd have to learn some skills and,
but, but we would buck up and, you know, people have gone to war before they were in the, you
know, shopkeepers a year before that, they were in the trenches the next year.
But on the other hand, if you brought them here, you know, I always think it would be so fun to
just bring, forget the hunter-gatherers, bring a 1700s person here and tour them around, take them
on an airplane, show them your phone and all the things that can do, show them the internet,
show them the grocery store, imagine taking them to a Whole Foods. Likewise, I think they would
be completely awestruck and on their knees crying tears of joy and then they'd get used to it and
they'd be complaining about like, you know, you don't have the oranges in stock is like, you know,
and that's the grocery store is a tough one to get used to. Like when I first came to this country,
the, the abundance of bananas was the thing that struck me the most or like fruits in general,
but food in general, but bananas somehow struck me the most that you could just eat them as much
as you want. And that took a long time for me, probably took several years to really
get acclimated to that. Is that- Why didn't you have bananas?
The number of bananas, fresh bananas, I don't, that wasn't available. Bread, yes, bananas, no.
Yeah, it's like, we don't even know what to, like, we don't even know the proper levels of
gratitude. You know, walking around the grocery store, I don't know to be like, the bread's nice,
but the bananas are like, we're so lucky. I don't know. I'm like, oh, I could have been the other
way. I have no idea. Well, it's interesting then where we point our gratitude in the West,
in the United States. Probably, do we point it away from materialist possessions towards,
or do we just aspire that to do that towards other human beings that we love? Because in the
East and the Soviet Union, growing up poor is having food is the gratitude. Having transportation
is gratitude. Having warmth and shelter is gratitude. And now, but see within that, the deep
gratitude is for other human beings. It's the penguins huddling together for warmth in the cold.
I think it's a person by person basis. I mean, I'm sure, yes, of course, in the West,
on average, feel gratitude towards different things, or maybe a different level of gratitude.
Maybe we feel less gratitude than countries that, you know, obviously, I think the easiest,
the person that's most likely to feel gratitude is going to be someone whose life happens to be one
where they just move up, up, up throughout their life. A lot of people in the greatest generation,
you know, people who were born in the 20s or whatever. And a lot of the boomers too.
This story is the greatest generation grew up dirt poor, and they often ended up middle class.
And the boomers, some of them started off middle class, and many of them ended up quite wealthy.
And I feel like that life trajectory is naturally going to foster gratitude, right?
Because you're not going to take for granted these things because you didn't have them.
You know, I didn't go out of the country really in my childhood very much, you know, like, you know,
we traveled, but it was to Virginia to see my grandparents or Wisconsin to see other relatives
or, you know, maybe Florida after going out to the beach. And then I started going out of the
country like crazy in my 20s because I really, you know, became my favorite thing. And I feel like
because I, if I had grown up always doing that, it would have been another thing. I'm like, yeah,
it's just something I do. But I still, every time I go to a new country, I'm like, oh my god,
this is so cool. And in another country, this thing I've only seen on the map, I'm like, I'm
there now. And so I feel like it's a lot of times it's a product of what you didn't have,
and then you suddenly had. But I still think it's case by case in that there's like a meter
in everyone's head, you know, that I think on, at a 10, you're experiencing just immense
gratitude, right, which is a euphoric feeling. It's a great feeling. And it's, it makes you happy.
To savor what you have, to look down at the mountain of stuff that you have that you're
standing on, right, to look, to look down at it and say, oh my god, I'm so lucky. And I'm so
grateful for this and this and this. And, you know, obviously, that's a happy exercise. Now,
when you move the meter down to six or seven, maybe you think that sometimes, but you're,
you're not always thinking that because you're sometimes looking up at this cloud of things
that you don't have and the things that they have, but you don't or the things you wished you had,
or you thought you were going to have or whatever. And that's the opposite direction to look,
right? And that's the, either that's, that's envy, that's yearning, or often it's, if you think
about your past, it's grievance, right? And so then you go into a one and you have someone who
feels like a complete victim. They are just a victim of the society, of their siblings and
their parents and their loved one. And they are, they're wallowing in everything that's happened
wrong to me, everything I should have that I don't, everything that has gone wrong for me.
And so that's a very unhealthy, mentally unhealthy place to be. Anyone can go there. You know,
there's an endless list of stuff you can, it can be aggrieved about and an endless list of stuff
you can have gratitude for. And so it's, it's, in some ways, it's a choice and it's a habit.
And maybe it's part of how you're raised or a natural demeanor, but it's such a good exercise.
You are really good at this, by the way. Your Twitter is like-
Go on.
Well, like, you're constantly just saying, man, I'm lucky. Or like, I'm so grateful for this.
And that's, it's, it's a good thing to do because you're reminding yourself, but you're also
reminding other people to think that way. And it's like, we are lucky, you know, and,
and so anyway, I think that scale can go from one to 10. And I think it's hard to be a 10.
I think you'd be very happy if you could be. But I think trying to be above a five and looking down
at the things you have more often than you are looking up at the things you don't or being,
you know, resentful about the things that people have wronged you and-
Well, the interesting thing, I think, was an open question, but I suspect that you can control
that knob for, for the individual. Like you yourself can choose, it's like the Stoic philosophy,
you could choose where you are as a matter of habit, like you said. But you can also probably
control that on a scale of a family, of a tribe, of a nation, of a society. I mean, a lot, you
couldn't describe a lot of the things that happened in Nazi Germany and different other parts of
history through a sort of societal envy and resentment that builds up. Maybe certain narratives
pick up and then they infiltrate your mind. And then now your knob goes to, from the gratitude
for everything, it goes to resentment and envy and all the- Germany between the two world wars,
you know, like you said, the Soviet kind of mentality. So yeah. And then when you're soaking
in a culture, so there's this kind of two factors, right? It's, it's what's going on in your own head
and then what's surrounding you. And what's surrounding you kind of has concentric circles.
There's your immediate group of people, because that group of people, if they're a certain way,
if they feel a lot of gratitude and they talk about it a lot, that kind of insulates you from
the broader culture because, you know, the people are going to have the most impact on you or the
ones closest. But often, they're all the, all the concentric circles are saying the same thing,
the people around you or they're feeling the same way that the broader community, which is
feeling the same way as the broader country. And, you know, I think this is why I think American
patriotism, you know, nationalism, you know, can be tribal, can be very not, not a good thing.
Patriotism, I think is, is a great thing because really, what is patriotism? I mean, it's, if you
love your country, you should love your fellow countrymen, you know, to patriot, you know,
that's a rigged quote. It's like patriotism is like, I think a feeling of like unity
and, but it also comes along with an implicit kind of concept of gratitude because it's like,
we are so lucky to live in, you know, people, you know, think it's chauvinist to say,
we live in the best country in the world, right? And, you know, yes, when Americans say that,
no one likes it, right? But actually, it's not a bad thing to think. It's a nice thing to think.
It's a way of saying, I'm so grateful for all the great things this country gives to me and this
country has done. And, and I think, you know, if you heard the Filipino, you know, a Filipino
person say, you know what, the Philippines is the best country in the world, no one in America
would say that's chauvinist. They'd say, awesome, right? Because when it's coming from someone,
you know, who's not American, it sounds totally fine. But I think, I think, you know, national
pride is actually good. Now, again, that can quickly translate into xenophobia and nationalism.
And so, you know, you have to make sure it doesn't go off that cliff. But
yeah, there's good ways to formulate that. Like you talk about, we'll talk about like
high rung progressivism, high rung conservatism. Those are two different ways of,
of embodying patriotism. So you could talk about maybe loving the tradition that this
country stands for, or you could talk about loving the people that ultimately push progress. And
those are, from an intellectual perspective, a good way to represent patriotism. We gotta zoom
out because this, this graphic is epic. A lot of images in your book are just epic on their own.
It's brilliantly done. But this one has famous people for each of the cards,
like the best of. Yeah. For you. And by the way, good for them to be the person. Yeah. That,
it's not that I could have chosen lots of people for each card. But I think most people would
agree, you know, that's a pretty fair choice for each, each page. And good for them to be,
you know, you, you crushed it if you can be the person for your whole 250 year page. So.
Well, I noticed he put Gandhi, didn't put Hitler. I mean,
there's a lot of people going to argue with you about that particular last page.
True. Yes, you're right. I could have, I could have put him, I actually, I was thinking about
Darwin there too. Darwin. Einstein. Yeah, exactly. You really could have put anyone.
You think about putting yourself first. Yeah, I should have. I should have. That would have
been awesome. I'm sure that would have endeared the readers to me from right from the beginning
of the first page of the book. A little bit of a messianic complex going on. But yeah,
so the list of people just, you know, so these are 250 year chunks, the last one being from
1770 to 2020. And so it goes Gandhi, Shakespeare, Joan of Arc, Jengus Khan, Charlemagne, Muhammad,
Constantine, Jesus, Cleopatra, Aristotle, Buddha. That's so interesting to think about this very
recent human history. That's 11 pages. So it would be 2750, almost 3000 years.
Just that there's these figures that stand out and then define the course of human history.
It's like the crazy, the craziest thing to me is that like Buddha was a dude. He was a guy with like
arms and legs and fingernails that he may be bit and like, he liked certain foods and maybe he got
like, you know, he had like digestive issues sometimes and like, he got cuts and they stung
and like he was a guy and he had hopes and dreams and he probably had a big ego for a while before
he I guess Buddha totally overcame that one. But like, and it's like who knows, you know,
the mythical figure of Buddha who knows how similar he was. But the fact same with Jesus,
like this was a good guy. Like to me, it's he's a primate. What impact? He was a cell first and
then a baby. Yeah. And he was a fetus at some point. A dumb baby trying to learn how to walk.
Yeah. Like having tantrum. Yeah. Because he's frustrated because he's in the terrible twos.
Jesus was in the terrible twos. Buddha never had a tantrum. Let's be honest. The myth.
The mother was like, this baby is great. Wow. Figure something out. It just but I mean,
this, I mean, listen, learning about Genghis Khan, it's incredible to me because it's just like,
this was some Mongolian, you know, herder guy who was taken as a slave and he was like dirt poor,
you know, catching rats is a, you know, young teen with, you know, to feed him and his mom and his,
I think his brother. And it's just like the odds on when he was born, he was just one of,
you know, probably tens of thousands of random teen boys living in Mongolia in the 1200s. The
odds of that person, any one of them being a household name today that we're talking about,
it's just crazy, like what had to happen. And it's for that guy to, for that poor, dirt poor
herder to take over the world. I don't know. So history just like continually blows my mind.
And he's the reason you and I are related, probably.
Yeah, no, I mean, it's also, that's the other thing is that some of these dudes by becoming king,
by being, having a better army at the right time, you know, William the Conqueror, whatever has,
is in the right place at the right time with the right army, you know, and there's a weakness
at the right moment and he comes over and he exploits it and ends up probably having, you
know, I don't know, thousand children. And those children are high up people who maybe have a ton
of, the species is different now because of him. Like if that, forget England's different or, you
know, European borders look different. Like, like we are, like we look different because of a small
handful of people, you know, when I sometimes I think, I'm like, Oh, you know, this part of the
world, I can recognize someone's Greek, you know, someone's Persian, someone's wherever, because,
you know, they kind of have certain facial features. And I'm like, it may have happened. I
mean, obviously it's that that's a population, but it may be that like someone 600 years ago that
looked like that really spread their seed. And that's why the ethnicity looks kind of like that now.
Sorry. Anyway. Yeah. Yeah. Do you think individuals like that can turn the direction of history?
Or is that an illusion that narrative would tell ourselves?
Well, it's both. I mean, so I said William the Conqueror, right? Or Hitler, right?
Right. It's not that Hitler was born and destined to be great at all, right? I think in a lot of cases,
he's some frustrated artist with a temper who's turning over the table in his studio and hitting
his wife and being kind of a dick and a total nobody, right? I think almost all the times you
could have put Hitler baby on earth. He's a, he's a rando, right? You know, and maybe he's a, you
know, maybe sometimes he becomes, you know, some kind of, you know, he uses the speaking ability
because that ability was going to be there either way, but maybe he uses it for something else.
But, but that said, I don't also, I think you, but it's not that World War II was going to happen
either way, right? So it's both. It's that like these circumstances were one way and this person
came along at the right time and those two made a match made in this case hell.
But he makes you wonder, yes, it's a match in hell, but are there other people that could have taken
this place or do these people that stand out? They're the rarest spark of that genius, whether
it take us towards evil, towards good, whether those figures singularly define the trajectory
of humanity. You know, what defines the trajectory of humanity in the 21st century, for example,
might be the influence of AI, might be the influence of nuclear war, negative or positive,
not in the case of nuclear war, but the bioengineering, nanotech, virology,
what else is there? Maybe the structure of governments and so on. Maybe the structure
of universities. I don't know. There could be singular figures that stand up and lead the way
for human, but I wonder if the society is the thing that manifests that person or that person
really does have a huge impact. I think it's probably a spectrum where there are some cases
when a circumstance was such that something like what happened was going to happen. If you pluck
that person from the earth, I don't know whether the Mongols is a good example or not, but maybe
it could be that if you plucked Genghis Khan as a baby, there was because of the specific way
Chinese civilization was at that time and the specific climate that was causing a certain
kind of pressure on the Mongols and the way they still had their great archers and they had their
horses and they had a lot of the same advantages. Maybe it was waiting to happen. It was going to
happen either way and it might not have happened to sit to the extent or whatever. Maybe or you
could go the full other direction and say, actually, this was probably not going to happen.
I think World War II is an example where I kind of think World War II really was kind of the
work of, of course, it relied on all these other circumstances. You had to have the resentment
in Germany. You have to have the Great Depression, but I think if you take Hitler out, I'm pretty
sure World War I. World War II doesn't happen. Well, then it seems like easier to answer these
questions when you look at history, even recent history, but let's look at now. Let's look at,
I'm sure we'll talk about social media. So who are the key players in social media?
Mark Zuckerberg. What's the name of the Myspace guy, Tom?
Tom, it's just Tom. Yeah.
There's a meme going around where Myspace is the perfect social media because no algorithmic
involvement. Everybody's happy and positive. Also, Tom did it right. At the time, we were like,
oh man, Tom only made a few million dollars. It sucks to not be Zuck. Tom might be living a
nice life right now where he doesn't have this nightmare that these other people have.
Yeah. And he's always smiling in his profile pic.
And so there's that clear page. So with Google, that's kind of intermingled into that whole
thing into the development of the internet. Jack Dorsey now, Elon. Who else? I mean, there's people
playing with the evolution of social media. And to me, that seems to be
connected to the development of AI. And it seems like those singular figures will define the
direction of AI development and social media development with social media seeming to have
such a huge impact on our collective intelligence. It does feel in one way like
individuals have an especially big impact right now in that a small number of people
are pulling some big levers. And there can be a little meeting of three people at
Facebook and they come out and they come in, they come out of that meeting and make a decision
that totally changes the world. On the other hand, you see a lot of conformity. You see a
lot of, they all pulled the plug on Trump the same day. So that suggests that there's some bigger
force that is also kind of driving them, in which case it's less about the individuals.
I think, what is leadership? I mean, to me, leadership is the ability to move things
in a direction that the cultural forces are not already taking things. A lot of times people
seem like a leader because they're just kind of hopping on the cultural wave and they happen
to be the person who gets to the top of it. Now it seems like they're, but actually the wave was
already going. Real leadership is when someone actually changes the wave, changes the shape
of the wave. I think Elon with SpaceX and with Tesla, genuinely shaped a wave. Maybe you could
say that EVs were actually, they were going to happen anyway, but there's not much evidence
about at least happening when it did. If we end up on Mars, you can say that Elon was a
genuine leader there. And so there are examples now. Zuckerberg definitely has done a lot of
leadership along the way. He's also potentially caught in a storm that is happening and he's
one of the figures in it. So I don't know. And it's possible that he is a big shaper if the
metaverse becomes a reality. If in 30 years we're all living in a virtual world, to many people
that seems ridiculous now, that that was a poor investment. Well, he talked about getting 10,
I think it was something like a billion people with a VR headset in their pocket in by, I think,
10 years from now back in 2015. So we're behind that. But when he was talking about that, and
honestly, this is something I've been wrong about because I went to one of the Facebook conferences
and tried out all the new Oculus stuff. And I was pretty early talking to some of the major
players there because I was going to write a big post about it that then got swallowed by this book.
But I would have been wrong in the post because what I would have said was that this thing is,
when I tried it, I was like, some of them suck, some of them make you nauseous and they're just
not that your headsets were big. But I was like, the times when this is good, it is,
I have this feeling, it reminds me of the feeling I had when I first was five and I went to a
friend's house and he had Nintendo. And he gave me the controller and I was looking at the screen
and I pressed a button and Mario jumped. And I said, I can make something on the screen move.
And the same feeling I had the first time someone showed me how to send an email,
it was like really early and he's like, you can send this. And I was like, it goes,
I can press enter on my computer and something happens on your computer.
Those were obviously, when you have that feeling, it often means you're witnessing a
paradigm shift. And I thought, this is one of those things. And I still kind of think it is,
but it's kind of weird that it hasn't, where's the VR revolution?
Yeah, I'm surprised because I'm with you. My first and still instinct is,
this feels like it changes everything. VR feels like it changes everything,
but it's not changing anything. A dumb part of my brain is genuinely convinced that this is real.
And then the smart part knows it's not. But that's why the dumb part was like,
we're not walking off that cliff. The smart part is like, you're on your rug. It's fine.
The dumb part of my brain is like, I'm not walking off the cliff. So I was like, it's crazy.
I feel like it's waiting for like that revolutionary person who comes in and says,
I'm going to create a headset. Like honestly, it's Steve Jobs iPhone of honestly,
a little bit of a comic type guy, which is why it was really interesting for him to be involved
with Facebook is basically how do we create a simple dumb thing that's a hundred bucks,
but actually creates that experience. And then there's going to be some viral killer app on it.
And that's going to be the gateway into a thing that's going to change everything.
I mean, I don't know what exactly was the thing that changed everything with the personal computer.
Does that understood why that maybe graphics? What was the use case? I mean, exactly.
It wasn't the 84 Macintosh like a moment when it was like, this is actually something that
normal people can and want to use. Because it was less than $5,000, I think.
And I just think it had some like Steve Jobs user friendliness already to it that other ones
hadn't had. I think Windows 95 was a really big deal. Because I'm old enough to remember
the MS-DOS when I was like kind of remembered the command. And then suddenly this concept of
like a window you drag something into or you double click an icon, which now seems like so
obvious to us was like revolutionary because it made it intuitive. So I don't know.
Windows 95 was good. It was crazy. I forget what the big leaps was because Windows 2000
was sucked. And then Windows XP was good. I moved to Mac around 2004. So I stopped.
I sold your soul to the devil. I see. Well, us, the people still use Windows and Android.
The device in the operating system of the people. Not you elitist folk with your books
and your what else and success. Okay.
You write more technology means better good times, but it also means bad or bad times.
And the scary thing is if the good and bad keep exponentially growing, it doesn't matter how great
the good times become. If the bad gets to a certain level of bad, it's all over for us.
Can you elaborate on this? Why is there, why does the bad have that property?
That if it's all exponentially getting more powerful, then the bad is going to win in the end.
Is my misinterpreting that? No. So the first thing is I noticed a trend, which was like
the good is getting better every century. Like the 20th century was the best century yet in terms
of prosperity, in terms of GDP per capita, in terms of life expectancy, in terms of poverty
and disease and every metric that matters. The 20th century was incredible. It also had the
biggest wars in history, the biggest genocide in history, the biggest existential threat yet
with nuclear weapons. The depression was probably as big and economic. So it's this
interesting thing where the stakes are getting higher in both directions. And so the question is,
like, if you get enough good, does that protect you against the bad? The dream, and I do think
this is possible too, is the good gets so good. You know, have you ever read the culture series
that Ian Banks books? Not yet, but I get criticized on a daily basis by some of the mutual folks we
know for not having done so. And I feel like a lesser man for it, yes. So that's how I got
onto it. And I read six of the 10 books, and they're great. But the thing I love about them is,
like, it just paints one of these futuristic societies where the good has gotten so good
that the bad is no longer even an issue. Like, basically, and the way that this works is the AI,
you know, the AIs are benevolent and they control everything. And so, like, there's one
random anecdote where they're like, you know, what happens if you murder someone in, because
you're still, you know, there's still people with rage and jealousy or whatever. So someone
murders someone. First of all, that person's backed up. So it's like, they have to get a new
body and it's annoying, but it's like, it's not death. And secondly, that person, what are they
going to do? Put them in jail? No, no, no. They're just going to send a slap drone around, which is
this little, like, tiny, you know, random drone that just will float around next to them forever.
And by the way, kind of be their servant. Like, it's kind of fun to have a slap drone, but just
making sure that they never do anything. And it's like, I was like, oh, man, it could just be,
everyone could be so safe. And everything could be so, like, you know, you want a house, you know,
the AI's will build your house. There's endless space. There's endless resources. So I do think
that that could be part of our future. That's part of what excites me is, like, there is,
like, today would seem like a utopia to Thomas Jefferson, right? Thomas Jefferson is a world
that would seem like a utopia to a caveman. There is a future. And by the way, these are
happening faster, these jumps, right? So the thing that would seem like a utopia to us,
we could experience in our own lifetimes, right? Like, it's especially a, you know,
life extension you get combines with exponential progress. I want to get there. And I think in
that part of what makes it utopia is you don't have to be scared of the worst bad guy in the
world trying to do the worst damage because we have protection. But that said, I'm not sure
how that happens. Like, it's either easier said than done. Nick Bostrom uses the example of
if nuclear weapons could be manufactured by microwaving sand, for example, we probably would
be in the Stone Age right now because 0.001% of people would love to destroy all of humanity,
right? Some 16-year-old with huge mental health problems who right now goes and shoots up a school
would say, oh, even better, I'm going to blow up a city. And now suddenly there's copycats, right?
And so that's like, as our technology grows, it's going to be easier for the worst bad guys
to do tremendous damage. And it's easier to destroy than to build. So it takes a tiny,
tiny number of these people with enough power to do that. So that, to me, I'm like, the stakes
are going up because what we have to lose is this incredible utopia. But also, like,
dystopia is real. It happens. The Romans ended up in a dystopia they probably earlier thought
that was never possible. Like, we should not get cocky. And so to me, that trend
is the exponential tech is a double-edged sword. It's so exciting. I'm happy to be alive now
overall because I'm an optimist and I find it exciting. But it's really scary. And the dumbest
thing we can do is not be scared. The dumbest thing we can do is get cocky and think, well,
my life is always the last couple generations, everything's been fine. Stop that.
What's your gut? What percentage of trajectories take us towards the, as you put unimaginably
good future versus unimaginably bad future? Is it like, as an optimist?
It's really hard to know. I mean, all like, you know, one of the things we can do is look at history.
And on one hand, there's a lot of stories, I actually listening to a great podcast right now
called The Fall of Civilizations. And it's literally every episode is like, you know,
a little like two hour deep dive into some civilization. Some are really famous like
the Roman Empire. Some are more obscure, like the Norse and Greenland. But each one is so
interesting. But what's, I mean, there's a lot of civilizations that had their peak. There's always
the peak, right, when they're thriving and they're at their max size and they have their waterways
it's civilized and it's representative and it's fair and whatever. Not always, but the peak is
a great, you know, if I could go back in time, you know, it's not that you don't, you know,
the farther you go back, the worse it gets. No, no, no, you want to go back to a civilization
during, I would go into the Roman Empire in the year a hundred. Sounds great, right? You don't
want to go to the Roman Empire in the year 400. We might be in the peak right now here, whatever
this empire is. So honestly, I think about like the 80s, you know, the 70s, the 80s. Oh, here we go.
The music. No, no, so much better. No, the 80s culture is so annoying.
It's just like, when I read, when I listen to these things, I'm thinking, you know, the 80s,
the 90s, America, the 90s was popular. People forget that now. Like Clinton was a superstar
around the world. Michael Jordan was exported internationally, then basketball was everywhere
suddenly. You had like music, the sports, whatever. It was a little probably like the 50s, you know,
you're coming out of the world war and the depression before it, it was like this kind of
everyone was in a good mood kind of time, you know, it's like a finish a big project and it's
Saturday. It was like, I feel like the 50s was kind of like everyone was having, you know, the
20s, I feel like everyone was in good mood randomly. Then the 30s, everyone was in a bad mood.
But the 90s, I think we'll look back on it as a time when everyone was in a good mood. And it was
like, you know, again, of course, at the time, it doesn't feel that way necessarily. But I look at
that, I'm like, maybe that was kind of America's peak. And like, no, maybe not, but like, it hasn't
been popular since really worldwide. It's gone in and out depending on the country, but like,
it hasn't reached that level of like, America's awesome around the world. And the political,
you know, situations gotten, you know, really ugly. And, you know, maybe it's social media,
maybe who knows, but I wonder if it'll ever be as simple and positive as it was then. Like,
maybe we are in the, you know, it feels a little like maybe we're in the beginning of the downfall
or not because these things don't just, it's not a perfect smooth hill. It goes up and down,
up and down. So maybe we're, there's another big upcoming.
And it's unclear whether public opinion, which is kind of what you're talking to,
is correlated strongly with influence. Because you could say that even though America's been
on a decline in terms of public opinion, the exporting of technology that America has still,
with all the talk of China, has still been leading the way in terms of AI, in terms of
social media, in terms of just basically any software related product.
Like chips.
Yeah, chips. So hardware and software, I mean, America leads the way. You could argue that
Google and Microsoft and Facebook are no longer American companies, they're international companies,
but they really are still at the, you know, headquartered in Silicon Valley, broadly speaking.
So in Tesla, of course, and just all of its, all of the technological innovation still seems to be
happening in the United States. Although culturally and politically, this is not,
it's not, it's not good. Well, maybe that could shift at any moment when all the technological
development can actually be, create some positive impact in the world that could shift it,
put the right leadership and so on, with the right messaging.
Yeah, I think, I don't feel confident at all about whether, no, no, I don't mean that. I don't
mean, I don't feel confident in my opinion that we may be on the downswing or that we may be on,
because I truly don't know. It's like, I think the people, these are really big macro stories
that are really hard to see when you're inside of them. It's like, it's like being on a beach
and running around, you know, a few miles this way and trying to suss out the shape of the coastline.
It's just really hard to see the big picture. You get caught up in the micro stories, the
little tiny ups and downs that are part of some bigger trend. And also giant paradigm shifts
happen quickly nowadays. The internet came out of nowhere and suddenly was like,
changed everything. So there could be a change everything thing on the way. It seems like there's
a few candidates for it. And like, but, I mean, it feels like the stakes are just high, higher
than it even was for the Romans, higher than it was, were because that we were more powerful as
a species. We have God like powers with technology that other civilizations at their peak didn't
have. And so I wonder if those high stakes and powers will feel laughable to people that live
humans, aliens, cyborgs, whatever lives quality years from now, that maybe, maybe are a little
this feeling of political and technological turmoil is nothing.
Well, that's the big question. So right now, you know, the 1890s was like a super politically
contentious decade in the US. It was like immense tribalism and newspapers were all lying and
telling, you know, there was a lot of what we would associate with today's media, the worst of it.
And it was over gold or silver being this, I don't know, it's something that I don't understand.
But the point is, it was a little bit of a blip, right? It happened, it felt, it must have felt
like the end of days at the time. And then now we look, and most people don't even know about that.
Versus, you know, again, the Roman Empire actually collapsed. And so the question is just like,
is yeah, you know, will in 50 years, will this be like, or like McCarthyism? Oh, they had like,
oh, that was like a crazy few years in America. And then it was fine. Or is this the beginning
of something really big? And that's what? Well, I wonder if we can predict what the big thing is
at the beginning. It feels like we're not, we're just here along for the ride. And at the local
level, and at every level, I try to do our best. Well, how do we do our best? And what's the,
that's the one thing I know for sure, is that we need to have our wits about us and do our best.
And the way that we can do that, you know, we have to be as wise as possible, right,
to proceed forward. And wisdom is an emergent property of discourse.
So you're a proponent of wisdom versus stupidity? Because you can make an,
I can steal man in the case for stupidity. Do it. I probably can't. But there's some,
I think wisdom, and you talk about this, can come with a false confidence, arrogance. I mean,
you talk about this in the book, that's too easy. That's not wisdom, then. If you're being arrogant,
you're being unwise. Unwise. Yeah, I think wisdom is doing what people a hundred years from now with
the hindsight that we don't have would do if they could come back in time and they knew everything.
It's like, how do we figure out how to have hindsight when we actually are not? What if
stupidity is the thing that people from a hundred years from now will see as wise?
I mean. The idiot by the Sieski being naive and trusting everybody, maybe that's the one.
Well, then you get lucky. Then maybe you get to a good future by stumbling upon it.
But ideally, you can get there. I think a lot of the America, the great things about it are a
product of the wisdom of previous Americans. The Constitution was a pretty wise system to set up.
There's not much stupid stumbling around. Well, there is. I mean, with the Sieski's,
the idiot, Prince Mishkin and brothers Karamazov, there's Alyosha Karamazov. You are on the side
of love and almost like a naive trust in other human beings. That turns out to be,
at least in my perspective, in the long term, for the success of the species is actually wisdom.
It's a compass. We don't know. It's a compass when you're in the fog.
In the fog. It's a compass. Love is a compass.
Here's the thing. I think we should have a compass as nice, but you know what else is
nice? It's a flashlight in the fog that can help. You can't see that far, but you can see,
oh, you can see four feet ahead instead of one foot. That, to me, is discourse. That is open,
vigorous discussion in a culture that fosters that is how the species, the American citizens as a
unit, can be as wise as possible, can maybe see four feet ahead instead of one foot ahead.
That said, Charles Bukowski said that love is a fog that fades with the first light of reality.
So I don't know how that works out, but I feel like there's intermixing of metaphors that works.
Okay. You also write that quote as the authors of the story of us, which is this thousand page
book. We have no mentors, no editors, no one to make sure it all turns out okay. It's all in our
hands. This scares me, but it also gives me hope. If we can all get just a little wiser together,
it may be enough to nudge the story onto a trajectory that points towards an unimaginably
good future. Do you think we can possibly define what a good future looks like?
I mean, this is the problem that we ran into with communism of thinking of utopia,
of having a deep confidence about what a utopian world looks like.
Well, it's a deep confidence. That was a deep confidence about the instrumental
way to get there. I think a lot of us can agree that if everyone had everything they needed and
we didn't have disease or poverty and people could live as long as they wanted to and choose one to
die, and there was no major existential threat because we had control. I think almost everyone
can agree that would be great. That communism is a, they said, this is the way to get there,
and that's a different question. So the unimaginably good future I'm picturing,
I think a lot of people would picture, and I think most people would agree. No, not everyone.
There's a lot of people out there who would say humans are the scourge on the earth and we should
de-growth or something, but I think a lot of people would agree that, you know, just again,
take Thomas Jefferson, bring him here. He would see it as utopia for obvious reasons,
for the medicine, the food, the transportation, just how the quality of life and the safety and
all of that. So extrapolate that forward for us. Now, we were Thomas Jefferson, you know, what's
the equivalent? That's what I'm talking about, and the big question is, I don't try to say,
here's the way to get there. Here's the actual specific way to get there. I try to say,
how do we have a flashlight so that we can together figure it out? How do we give ourselves
the best chance of figuring out the way to get there? And I think part of the problem with
communists and people, ideologues, is that they're way too overconfident that they know the way to
get there. And it becomes a religion to them, this solution. And then you can't update once you
have a solution as a religion. And so... I felt a little violated when you said communists and
stared deeply into myself. In this book, you've developed a framework for how to fix everything.
It's called the latter. Can you explain it? Okay, it's not a framework for how to fix everything.
Humor. I'll explain it to Tim Urban at some point. Okay.
How this humor thing works. Yeah, I know. A framework of how to think about collaboration
between humans such that we could fix things. I think it's a compass. It's like a ruler that we
can, once we look at it together and see what it is, we can all say, oh, we want to go to that side
of the ruler, not this side. And so it gives us a direction to go. So what are the parts of the
latter? So I have these two characters. This orange guy, the primitive mind, is this is our
software. That is the software that was in a 50,000 BC person's head that was specifically
optimized to help that person survive in that world. And not even not just not really survive,
but help them pass their genes on in that world. And civilization happened quickly and brains
changed slowly. And so that unchanged dude is still running the show in our head. And I used
the example of like Skittles. Like, why do we eat Skittles? It's trash. It's obviously bad for you.
And it's because the primitive mind in the world that it was programmed for, there was no Skittles
and it was just fruit. And, you know, and if there was a dense, chewy, sweet fruit like that,
it meant you just found like a calorie goldmine energy, energy, take it, take it, eat as much as
you can. Gorge on it. Hopefully you get a little fat. That would be the dream. And now we're so
good with energy for a while. We don't have to stress about it anymore. So today, Mars, Inc.
is clever and says, let's not sell things to people's higher minds, who's the other character.
Let's sell the people's primitive minds. Primitive minds are dumb. And let's trick them into thinking
this is this thing you should eat. And then they'll eat it. Now Mars, Inc. is a huge company.
Actually, just to link real quick. You said primitive mind and higher minds. So those are
the two things that make up this bigger mind that is the modern human being.
Yeah. It's like, you know, it's not perfect. Obviously, there's a lot of crossover. There's
people who will yell at me for saying there's two minds. And, you know, but to me, it's just
still a useful framework where you have this software that has making decisions based on a
world that you're not in anymore. And then you've got this other character, I call it the higher
mind. And it's the part of you that knows that skills are not good and can override the instinct.
And the reason you don't always eat skittles is because the higher mind says, no, no, no,
we're not doing that, because that's bad. And I know that, right? Now you can apply that to a
lot of things. The higher mind is the one that knows I shouldn't procrastinate. The primitive
mind is the one that wants to conserve energy and not do anything icky and, you know, can't
see the future. So he procrastinates that, you know, you can apply this. No, I in this book apply it
to how we form our beliefs is one of the ways. And then eventually to politics and political
movements. But like, if you think about, well, what's the equivalent of the skittles tug of war
in your head for how do you form your beliefs? And it's that the primitive mind in the world
that it was optimized for, it wanted to feel conviction about its beliefs. It wanted to
be sure that it was wanted to feel conviction and it wanted to agree with the people around
there didn't want to stand out. It wanted to to perfectly agree with the tribe about the tribe's
sacred beliefs. Right. And so there's a big part of us that wants to do that that doesn't like
changing our mind. It feels like it's part of our the primitive mind identifies with beliefs.
Feels like it's a threat, a physical threat to you, to your primitive mind when you change your
mind or when someone disagrees with you in a smart way. So there's that huge force in us,
which is confirmation bias. That's where that comes from. It's this desire to keep believing
what we believe and this desire to also fit in with our beliefs, to believe what the people around
us believe. And that can be fun in some ways. We all like the same sports team and we're all
super into it and we're all going to be biased about that call together. I mean, it's not always
bad, but it's not a very smart way to be. And you're actually you're working kind of for those
ideas. Those ideas are like your boss and you're working so hard to keep believing those. Those
ideas are, you know, a really good paper comes in that you read that conflicts with those ideas
and you will do all this work to say that paper is bullshit because you're a faithful employee
of those ideas. Now the higher mind to me, the same party that can override the Skittles can
override this and can search for something that makes a lot more sense, which is truth,
because what rational being wouldn't want to know the truth, who wants to be delusional.
And so there's this tug of war because the higher mind doesn't identify with ideas. Why would you?
It's an experiment you're doing and it's a mental model. And if someone can come over and say,
you're wrong, you'd say, where show me, show me. And if they point out something that is wrong,
you say, oh, thanks. Oh, good. I just got a little smarter, right? You're not going to identify
with the thinking. Oh, yeah, kick it. See if you can break it. If you can break it, it's not that
good, right? So there's both of these in our heads. And there's this tug of war between them.
And sometimes, you know, if you're telling me about something with AI, I'm probably going to
think with my higher minds. I'm not identified with it. But if you go and you criticize the ideas
in this book, or you criticize my religious beliefs, you criticize, I might have a harder time
because the primitive mind says, no, no, no, those are our special ideas. And so, yeah, so that's,
that's one way to use this ladder is like, it's a spectrum, you know, at the top, the higher
mind is doing all the thinking. And then as you go down, it becomes more of a tug of war. And at
the bottom, the primitive mind is in total control. And this is distinct as you show from the spectrum
of ideas. So this is how you think versus what you think. And those are distinct, those are
different dimensions. We need, we need a vertical axis. We have all these horizontal axes, left,
right, center, or, you know, this opinion all the way to this opinion. But it's like,
what's much more important than where you stand is how you got there, right? And how you think.
So this helps if, if I can say this person's kind of on the left or on the right, but they're up
high, I think, I think in other words, I think they got there using evidence and reason, and they
were willing to change their mind. Now that means a lot to me, what they have to say. If I think
they're just a tribal person, and I can predict all their beliefs from hearing one, because it's
so obvious what political beliefs, that person's views are irrelevant to me, because they're not
real, they didn't come from information, they came from a tribe's kind of, you know, sacred
10 commandments. I really like the comic you have in here with the boxer. This is the best
boxer in the world. Wow, cool. Who has he beaten? No one. He's never fought anyone. Then how do you
know he's the best boxer in the world? I can just tell. I mean, this connects with me, and I think
with a lot of people, just because in martial arts, this is especially kind of true. There's this,
this whole legend about different martial artists, and that kind of, we construct, like,
action figures, like, you know, thinking that Steven Seagal is the best fighter in the world,
or Chuck Norris. But Chuck Norris is actually backed up. He's done really well in competition,
but still, the ultimate test for particular martial arts is what we now know as mixed martial
arts, UFC, and so on. That's the actual scientific testing ground. It's a meritocracy. Yeah,
exactly. I mean, there's within certain rules, and you can criticize those rules like this doesn't
actually represent the broader combat that you would think of when you're thinking about martial
arts, but reality is you're actually testing things, and that's when you realize that Aikido and
some of these kind of woo woo martial arts in their certain implementations don't work in the way
you think they would in the context of fighting. I think this is one of the places where everyone
can agree, which is why it's a really nice comic, because then you start to talk about,
map this onto ideas that people take personally. It starts becoming a lot more difficult to
basically highlight that we're thinking with not with our higher mind, but with our primitive mind.
Yeah, I mean, if I'm thinking with my higher mind, and now here, you can use different things for an
idea as a metaphor. So here, the metaphor is a boxer for one of your conclusions, one of your
beliefs. And if all I care about is truth, in other words, that means all I care about is having
a good boxer. I would say, go, yeah, try, see if this person's good. In other words, I would get
into arguments, which is throwing my boxer out there to fight against other ones. And if I think
my argument is good, by the way, I love boxing, right? If I think my guy is amazing, you know,
Mike Tyson, I'm thinking, oh yeah, bring it on. Who wants to come see? I bet no one can beat my
boxer. I love a good debate, right? In that case. Now, what would you think about my boxer if not
only was I telling you he was great, but he's never boxed anyone. But then you said, okay, well,
your idea came over to try to punch him. And I screamed and I said, what are you doing? That's
violence. And you're an awful person. And I don't want to be friends with you anymore.
You would think this boxer obviously sucks, or at least I think it sucks deep down,
because why would I be so anti? Anyone, no boxing allowed. So I think if you're in,
so this, I call this a ladder, right? If you're in low rung land, you know, whether it's a culture
or whatever, a debate and argument when someone says, no, that's totally wrong. What you're saying
about that. And here's why you're actually being totally biased. It sounds like a fight. People
are going to say, Oh, wow, we got in like a fight. It was really awkward. Like, are we still friends
with that person? Because that's not a culture of boxing. It's a culture where you don't touch
each other's ideas. That's insensitive. Versus in a high rung culture, it's sport. I mean,
like everyone in your podcast, whether you're agreeing or disagreeing, the tone is the same.
It's not like, Oh, this got awkward. It's like, the tone is identical because you're just playing
intellectually either way, because it's a good high rung space. At his best, at his best. But
people do take stuff personally. And then that's actually one of the skills of conversation,
just as a fan of podcasts is when you sense that people take a thing personally, you have to like,
there's sort of methodologies and little paths you can take to like calm things down,
like go around. Don't take it as a violation of like that. You're trying to suss out which
of their ideas are sacred to them and which ones are, bring it on. And sometimes it's actually,
I mean, that's the skill of it, I suppose, that sometimes it's the certain wardings
in the way you challenge those ideas are important. You can challenge them indirectly
and then together walk together in that way. Because what I've learned is people are used
to their ideas being attacked in a certain way, in a certain tribal way. And if you just avoid
those, like for example, if you have political discussions and just never mentioned left or
right, or Republican and Democrat, none of that, just talk about different ideas and avoid certain
kind of triggering words, you can actually talk about ideas versus falling into this
path that's well established through battles that people have previously fought.
When you say triggering, I mean, who's getting triggered? The primitive mind. So what you're
trying to do, what you're saying in this language is how do you have conversations with other people's
higher minds almost like whispering without waking up the primitive mind. The primitive
mind is there sleeping, right? And as soon as you say something, the left primitive mind gets up
and says, what? What are you saying about the left? And now, now that everything goes off the rails.
What do you make of conspiracy theories under this framework of the latter?
So here's the thing about conspiracy theories is that once in a while, they're true, right?
Because sometimes there's a natural conspiracy. Actually, humans are pretty good at real
conspiracies, secret things. And then, you know, I just watched the made off doc,
great new Netflix doc, by the way. And so the question is, how do you create a system that is
good at you put the conspiracy theory in? And it either goes, eh, or it says, it's interesting,
let's keep exploring it. Like, how do you put, how do you do something that it can,
how do you assess? And so again, I think the high rung culture is really good at it because
a real conspiracy, what's going to happen is you put it, it's like a little machine you put
in the middle of the table and everyone starts firing darts at it or bow and arrow or whatever
and everyone starts kicking it and trying to, and almost all conspiracy theories, they quickly
crumble, right? Because they actually, you know, you know, Trump's election one is, you know,
I actually dug in and I looked at like every claim that he or his team made. And I was like,
all of these, none of these hold up to scrutiny, none of them. I was open minded, but none of them
did. So that was one that as soon as it's open to scrutiny, it crumbles.
The only way that conspiracy can stick around in a community is if it is a culture where
that's being treated as a sacred idea that no one should kick or throw a dart at because if
you throw a dart, it's going to break. So it's being, it's, and so what you want is a culture
where no idea is sacred. Anything can get thrown at. And so I think that then what you'll find is
that 94 out of 100 conspiracy theories come in and they fall down. The other, maybe four of the
others come in and there's something there, but it's not as extreme as people say. And then maybe
one is a huge deal and it's actually a real conspiracy. Well, isn't there a lot of gray area
and there's a lot of mystery? Isn't that where the conspiracy theories seep in? So it's great to
hear that you've really looked into the Trump election fraud claims, but aren't they resting
on a lot of kind of gray area like fog, basically saying that there is dark forces in the shadows
that are actually controlling everything? I mean, the same thing with maybe you can, there's like
safer conspiracy theories, more less controversial ones. Like, have we landed on the moon?
Right? The United States ever landed on the moon. There's, you know, you can, like the reason those
conspiracy theories work is you could construct, there's incentives and motivation for faking
the moon landing. There's a lot of, there's very little data supporting the moon landing.
Like that's very public and kind of looks fake, space kind of looks fake.
That would be a big story if it turned out to be fake.
That's the, that would be the argument against it. Like, are people really as a collective
going to hold on to a story that big? Yeah. So that, but there's a lot, that the reason they
work is there's mystery. Yeah. There's a great documentary called Behind the Curve about
Flat Earthers. And one of the things that you learn about Flat Earthers is they believe
all the conspiracies, not just the Flat Earth. They're, they're, they're convinced the moon
landing is fake. They're convinced 9-11 was an American con job. They're convinced, you know,
that name a conspiracy and they believe it. And so it's so interesting is that I think of it as a,
as a skepticism spectrum. Yeah. So on one side, you, it's like a filter in your head,
filter in your, in the beliefs section of your brain. On one end of the spectrum, you are gullible,
perfectly gullible. You believe anything someone says, right? On the other side,
you're paranoid. You think everyone's lying to you, right? Everything's, everything is false.
Nothing that anyone says is true, right? So obviously those aren't good places to be.
Now the healthy place, I think that the, so, so, so I think the healthy place is to be somewhere
in the middle. And, but also you can learn to trust certain sources and then, you know,
you don't have to do as much, apply as much skepticism to them. And so here's what,
like, when you start having a bias, just say you have a political bias, when your side says
something, you, you will find yourself moving towards the gullible side of the spectrum. You
read an article written that supports your views. You move to the gullible side of the
spectrum and you just believe it and you don't have any, where's that skepticism that you normally
have, right? And then you move, and then you soon, soon as it's the other person talking,
the other team talking, you move to the skeptical, the closer to the, to the, you know,
in denial paranoid side. Now, flat earthers are the extreme. They are either 10 or one.
So it's like, it's so interesting because they're the people who are saying, ah, no,
I won't believe you. I'm not gullible. No, everyone else is gullible about the moon landing. I won't.
And then yet, when there's this evidence like, oh, because you can't see Seattle,
you can't see the buildings over that horizon and you should, which isn't true. You should be,
if it were, if the earth around you wouldn't be able to see them, therefore it's, so suddenly
they become the most gullible person to hear any theory about the earth flat. They believe it.
It goes right into their beliefs. So they're actually jumping back and forth between
refuses to believe anything and believe anything. And so they're the extreme example,
but I think when it comes to conspiracy theories, the people that get themselves into trouble
are the ones who they, they, they become really gullible when they hear a conspiracy theory that
kind of fits with their worldview. And they likewise, when there's something that's kind
of obviously true and it's not a big lie, they will actually, they'll think it is. They, they,
they just tighten up their kind of skepticism filter. And so, yeah. So I think the healthy
places to be is where you are not, because you also don't want to be the person who says every
conspiracy, you hear the word conspiracy theory and it sounds like a synonym for like quack,
job, crazy theory, right? So, yeah. So I think, yeah, I think it's, it'd be somewhere in the
middle of that spectrum and to learn to fine tune it, which is a tricky place to operate.
You kind of have to, every time you hear a new conspiracy theory, you should approach it with
an open mind. And, you know, and also if you don't have enough time to investigate, which most
people don't kind of still have a humility, not to make a conclusive statement that that's nonsense.
There's a lot of social pressure actually, yeah, to immediately laugh off any conspiracy theory
if it's done by the bad guys, right? You will quickly get mocked and laughed at and not taken
seriously. If you give any credence, you know, back the lab leak was a good one where it's like
turned out that that was at least very credible, if not true. And that was a perfect example of
one where when it first came out, and not only so, so, so Brett Weinstein talked about it.
And then I, in a totally different conversation, said something complimentary about him on a
totally different subject. And people were saying, Tim, you might have gone a little
off the deep end, you're like quoting someone who is like a lab leak person. So I was getting my
reputation dinged for complimenting on a different topic, someone whose reputation was totally
sullied, because they had, you know, they questioned an orthodoxy, right? So you see,
so what does that make me want to do? Distance myself from Brett Weinstein, that's the, at least
they see incentive that's, and what does that make other people want to do? Don't become the next
Brett Weinstein, don't say it out loud, because you don't want to become someone that no one wants
to compliment anymore, right? You can see the social pressure, and that's, and of course,
when there is a conspiracy, that social pressure is its best friend. Because then they see the
people from outside are seeing that social pressure enact, like Tim Urban becoming more
and more and more extreme to the other side, and so they're going to take the more and more and more
extreme. I mean, this, what do you see that the pandemic did, like COVID did to our civilization
in that regard, in the forces? Why was it so divisive? Do you understand that?
Yeah, so COVID, you know, I thought might be, you know, we always, you know, the ultimate example
of a topic that will unite us all is the alien attack. Yeah. Although honestly, I don't even
have that much faith then, I think there'd be like, some people are super like, you know,
pro-alien and some people are anti-alien. But anyway. I was actually excited to interrupt,
because I was talking to a few astronomers, and they're the first folks that maybe kind of said
in that, if we could discover life on Mars, for example, that there's going to be a
potentially a division over that too, where half the people will not believe that's real.
Well, because we live in a current society where the political divide has subsumed everything,
and that's not always like that. It goes into stages like that. We're in a really bad one,
where it's actually in the book, I call it like a vortex, like almost like a whirlpool,
that pulls everything into it. It pulls. And so normally you'd say, okay, you know,
immigration naturally going to be contentious. That's always political, right? But like,
COVID seemed like, oh, that's one of those that will unite us all. Let's fight this
not human virus thing. Like, obvious is no one's sensitive. No one's like getting hurt when we
insult the virus. Like, let's all be, we have this threat, this common threat that's a threat to
everyone of every nationality in every country, every ethnicity, and it didn't do that at all.
The whirlpool was too powerful. So it pulled COVID in and suddenly masks. If you're on the left,
you like them. If you're on the right, you hate them. And suddenly lockdowns. If you're on the
left, you like them. And on the right, you hate them. And vaccines, this is people forget this
when Trump first started talking about the vaccine, Biden, Harris, Cuomo, they're all saying,
I'm not taking that vaccine, not from this CDC. Because it was too rushed or something like that.
But because I'm not trusting anything that Trump says. Trump wants me to take it. I'm not taking
it. I'm not taking it from this CDC. So this was if Trump, this Trump was almost out of office.
But at the time, if Trump had been, it would have been, I'm pretty sure it would have stayed.
Right likes vaccines. The left doesn't like vaccines. Instead, the president switched.
And all those people are suddenly saying, they were actually specifically saying that if you,
that like, if you're saying the CDC is not trustworthy, that's misinformation, which is
exactly what they were saying about the other CDC. And they were saying it because they genuinely
didn't trust Trump, which is fair. But now when other people don't trust the Biden CDC,
suddenly it's this kind of misinformation that needs to be censored. So it was a sad moment
because it was a couple of months, even a week or so, a month or so at the very beginning when
it felt like a lot of our other squabbles were kind of like, oh, I feel like they're kind of irrelevant
right now. And then very quickly, the whirlpool sucked it in. And in a way where I think it
damaged the reputation of these, a lot of the trust in a lot of these institutions for the long
run. But there's also an individual psychological impact. It's like a vicious negative feedback
cycle where they were deeply affected on an emotional level and people just were not their best
selves. That's definitely true. Yeah. I mean, talk about the primitive mind. I mean, one thing
that we've been dealing with for our whole human history is pathogens. And it's emotional, right?
It brings out, you know, there's really interesting studies where like, if they study the
phenomenon of disgust, which is one of these like, you know, smiling is universal. You don't
have to ever translate a smile, right? Certain, you know, throwing your hands up when your
sports team wins is universal because it's part of our coding. And so is disgust to kind of make
this like, you know, face where you wrinkle up your nose and you kind of put out your tongue and
maybe even gag. That's to expel, expel whatever it's because it's the reaction when something is
potentially a pathogen that might harm us, right? Feces, vomit, whatever. But they did this
interesting study where people who in two groups, the control group, you know, was shown images of
and it might be getting two studies mixed up, but they were showing, they were showing images of
like car crashes and like disturbing, but not disgusting. And the other one was shown like,
you know, like, you know, rotting things and just things that were disgusting. And then they were
asked about immigration. These were Canadians. And the group that was had the disgust feeling
going through pulsing through their body was way more likely to prefer like immigrants from white
countries. And the group that was had shown car accidents, they were, they still prefer the groups
from white countries, but much less so. And so what does that mean? It's because the disgust impulse
makes us scared of, you know, sexual practices that are foreign of ethnicities that are not
that don't look like us. It's still xenophobia. So it's ugly. It's really ugly stuff. This is,
of course, also how, you know, the Nazi propaganda with cockroaches and it was, Rwandan was cockroaches,
you know, the Nazis was rats. And, you know, it's specifically, it's a dehumanizing emotion. So
anyway, we were talking about COVID, but I think it does, it taps deep into like the human psyche
and it's, I don't think it brings out our, I think, like you said, I think it brings out an
ugly side in us. You describe an ideal lab as being opposite of echo chambers. So we know what
echo chambers are. And you said like, just basically no good term for the opposite of an echo chamber.
So what's an ideal lab? Yeah, well, first of all, both of these, we think of an echo chamber as
like a group maybe or even a place, but it's, it's a culture. It's an intellectual culture.
True. And this goes along with the high rung, so high rung and low rung thinking is individual,
so I was talking about what's going on in your head, but this is very connected to
the social scene around us. And so groups will do high rung and low rung thinking together.
Basically, it's, so an echo chamber to me is a collaborative low rung thinking. It is,
it's a culture where the cool, it's based around a sacred set of ideas. And it's the
coolest thing you can do in an echo chamber culture is talk about how great the sacred ideas
are and how bad and evil and stupid and wrong the people are who have the other views. And this,
and, and, and it's, it's quite boring, you know, it's quite boring, you know, it's very hard to learn
and changing your mind is not cool in an echo chamber culture. It makes you seem wishy-washy.
It makes you seem like, you know, like you're waffling and you're flip-flopping or whatever.
Showing conviction about the sacred ideas in echo chamber culture is awesome. If you're just like,
you know, obviously this is what makes you seem smart while being, you know, humble,
makes you seem dumb. So now flip all of those things on their heads and you have an, you have
the opposite, which is idea lab culture, which is collaborative high rung thinking. It's
collaborative truth finding, but it's also just, it's just a totally different vibe. It's,
it's a place where arguing is a fun thing. It's not, no one's getting offended and, and
criticizing like the thing everyone believes is actually, it makes you seem like interesting,
like, oh, really? Like, why, why do you think we're all wrong? And expressing too much conviction
makes people lose trust in you. It doesn't make you seem smart. It makes you seem stupid if you
don't really know what you're talking about, but you're acting like you do. I really like this
diagram of where on the x-axis agreement, the y-axis is decency. That's in an idea lab
and echo chamber, there's only one axis. It's asshole to non-asshole. Right. This is a really
important thing to understand about the difference between, you call it decency here, about
asshole-ishness and disagreement. So my college friends, we love to argue, right? And, and no
one thought anyone was an asshole for, it was just for sport. Sometimes we'd realize we're not
even disagreeing on something and that would be disappointing and be like, oh, I think we agree.
And it was kind of like sad. It was like, oh, well, there goes the fun. And one of the,
members of this group has this, she brought her new boyfriend to one of our like hangouts.
And there was like a heated, heated debate, you know, just, just, just one of our typical
things. And afterwards, you know, the next day he said like, is everything okay? And she was like,
what do you mean? And he said like after, you know, the fight and she was like, what fight?
And he was like, you know, the fight last night and she was like, and she had to,
and then she was like, you mean like the arguing and she, and he was like, yeah. And she,
and so that's someone who is not used to idea lab culture coming into it
and seeing it is like, that was like, this is like, are they still friends, right? And idea
lab is nice for the people in them because you're, it, individuals thrive. You don't want to just
conform. That does, it makes you seem boring in an idea, but you want to be yourself. You want to
challenge things. You want to have a unique brain. So that's great. And, and, and you also have people
criticizing your ideas, which makes you smarter. It doesn't always feel good, but you, you become
more correct and smarter. And echo chamber is, is the opposite where it's not good for the people
in it. It doesn't, you're learning skills atrophy. And, and I think it's boring, but the thing is
they also have emergent properties. So the emergent property of an idea lab is like super
intelligence, just you and me alone, just the two of us, if we're working together on something,
but we're being really grown up about it, we're, we're disagreeing, we're not, you know,
no one's set sensitive about anything. We're going to each find flaws in the other one's
arguments that, that you wouldn't have found on your own. And we're going to have epiphany,
double the epiphanies, right? So it's almost like the two of us together is like as smart as 1.5,
is like 50% smarter than either of us alone, right? So you have this 1.5 intelligent kind of
joint being now we've made. Now, bringing a third person in, fourth person in, right? You see,
it starts to scale up. This is why science institutions can discover the relativity and
quantum mechanics and these things that no individual human, you know, was going to come
up with without a ton of collaboration because it's this giant idea lab. So it has an emergent
property of super intelligence and echo chamber is the opposite where it has the emergent property of
stupidity. I mean, has the emergent property of a bunch of people all, you know, you know,
paying field, you know, fealty to this set of sacred ideas. And, and so you lose this magical
thing about language and humans, which is collaborative intelligence, you lose it,
it disappears. But there is that access of decency, which is really interesting because
you kind of painted this picture of you and your friends arguing really harshly. But underlying
that is a basic camaraderie, respect. There's, there's all kinds of mechanisms we humans have
constructed to communicate like mutual respect or maybe communicate that you're here for the idea
lab version of this. Totally. You don't take it, you don't get personal, right? You're not getting
personal. You're not, you're not taking things personally. People are respected in an idea lab
and ideas are disrespected. And there's a way ways to signal that. So like for with friends,
you've already done the signaling, you've already established a relationship. The interesting thing
is online. I think you have to do some of that work. To me, the sort of steel manning the other
side or no, uh, having empathy and hearing out, being able to basically repeat the argument the
other person is making before you and show them like respect to that argument. I could see how
you could think that before you make a counter argument. There's just a bunch of ways to communicate
that you're here not to, uh, do kind of what is it? Low rung, you know, shit talking, mockery,
derision, but are actually here ultimately to discover the truth and the space of ideas and
the tension of those ideas. And I think it's, uh, I think that's a skill that we're all learning as
a civilization of how to do that kind of communication effectively. Cause I think disagreement
is I'm learning on the internet. It's actually a really tricky skill, like high effort, high
decency disagreement. Like I listened to, uh, there's a really good debate podcast, uh,
Intelligent Squared and like they, they can go pretty hard in the paint.
The classic idea lab. It's exactly. But like, how do we map that to the social media? When people
like, we'll say, um, we'll say, well, like Lex or anybody, you're not, you hate disagreement. You,
you want a sense of disagreement. No, um, I love Intelligent Squared type of disagreement. That's
fun. You want to reduce asshole. And for me personally, I don't want to reduce asshole if,
you know, I kind of like asshole or it's like fun in many ways. But the problem is when the
asshole shows up to the party, they make it less fun for the, for the party that's there for the
idea lab and the other people, especially the quiet voices at the back of the room, they leave.
And so all you're left is, was, was with assholes. Well, that Twitter, political Twitter to me is
one of those parties. It's a big party where a few assholes have really sent a lot of the quiet
thinkers away. Yeah. Um, and, and so, so if you think about this graph again,
what, what, what some place like Twitter, um, a great way to get followers is to be
an asshole with a certain, you know, pumping a certain ideology. You'll get a huge amount of
followers. And for those followers and the followers you're going to get, the people who
would let, you know, not the people who like you are probably going to be people who are really
thinking with their primitive mind because they're seeing your, you're being, you're being an asshole,
but because you agree with them, they love you and they think they don't see any problem with
how you're being. Yeah, they don't see the asshole. This is the fascinating thing. Because look,
because look at the thing on the right, agreement and decency are the same. So if you're in that
mindset, bigger the asshole, the better. If you're agreeing with me, you're my man. I love what you're
saying. Yes, show them. Right. And the algorithm helps those people does, those people do great
on the algorithm. There's a fascinating dynamic that happens because I have, I've currently hired
somebody that looks at my social media and they block people because the assholes will roll in,
they're not actually there to have an interesting disagreement, which I love. They're there to do
kind of mockery. And then when they get blocked, they then celebrate that to their echo chamber,
like, look at this, I got them or whatever they or they'll say some annoying thing like, oh, so it's,
so he talks about, he likes, you know, if I've done this, they'll say, oh, he says he likes
idea labs, but he actually wants to create an echo chamber. But I'm like, nope, you're an asshole.
I'm not, look at the other 50 people on this thread that disagreed with me respectfully. They're
not blocked. Yep, exactly. You know, and so they see it as some kind of hypocrisy, because again,
they only see the thing on the right. And they're not understanding that there's two axes or that
I see it as two axes. And so you seem petty in that moment, but it's like, no, no, no,
this is very specific what I'm doing. You're actually killing the conversation.
In generally, I give all those folks a pass and just send them love telepathically. But yes,
getting rid of assholes in the conversation is the way you allow for the disagreement.
You do a lot of like, when I think when primitive mindedness comes at you, at least on Twitter,
I don't know what you're feeling internally in that moment, but you do a lot of like,
I'm going to meet that with my higher mind. And you come out and you'll be like, thanks for all
the criticism. I love you. And that's actually an amazing response, because it just, what it does
is it, it unriles up that person's primitive mind and actually wakes up their higher mind who says,
oh, okay, you know, this guy's not so bad. And suddenly like, civility comes back. So it's a
very powerful, hopefully long term. But the thing is, they do seem to drive away
high quality disagreement, because like, because it takes so much effort to disagree in a high
quality way. I've noticed this on my blog, like my, one of the things I pride myself on is like,
my comment section is awesome. Like there's, there's, there's every, everyone's being respectful.
No one's afraid to disagree with me and tell them and say, say, you know, tear my post apart,
but in a totally respectful way where the underlying thing is like, I'm here because
I like this guy and his writing. And people disagree with each other and they get in these
long intro and it's interesting and I read it and I'm learning. And then I, you know,
I have a couple posts, especially the ones I've written about politics. It's not like
it seems like any other comment section, people are being nasty to me, they're being nasty to
each other. And then I looked down one of them and I realized like, almost all of this is the
work of like three people. That's who you need to block. Those people need to be blocked. You're
not being thin-skinned. You're not being petty doing it. You're actually protecting an idea lab
because what would really aggressive people like that do is they'll turn it into their own echo
chamber because now everyone is scared to kind of disagree with them. It's unpleasant. And so
people who will chime in or the people who agree with them and suddenly like they've taken over
the space. And I kind of believe that those people on a different day could actually do high
effort disagreement. It's just that they're in a, in a, in a certain kind of mood. And a lot of us,
just like you said, with the primitive mind could get into that mood. And it's, I believe it's
actually the job of the technology, the platform to incentivize those folks to be like, are you
sure this is the best you can do? Like if you really want to talk shit about this idea, like do
better. Like, and then we need to create incentives where you get likes for high effort disagreement.
Because currently you get likes for like a something that's slightly funny and is a little bit
like mockery. Like, yeah, basically signals to some kind of echo chamber that this person is
a horrible person is a hypocrite is evil, whatever, that feels like it's solvable with
technology. Because I think in our private lives, none of us want that.
I wonder if it's making me think that I want to like, because a much easier way for me to do it
just for my, my world would be to say something like, you know, here's this axis, this high, this
is, this is part of what I, part of what I like about the latter is it's a language that we can
use. It's like specifically what we're talking about is high rung disagreement, good, low rung
disagreement, bad, right. And so, so it gives us like a language for that. And so what I would say
is I would, you know, my, you know, I would have my, you know, readers, you know, understand this
axis. And then I would specifically say something like, please do the, do the, do it, but why a
favor and upvote regardless of what they're saying horizontally, right? Regardless of what their
actual view is, upvote high rungness, they can be tearing me apart, they can be saying great,
they can be praising me, whatever, upvote high rungness and downvote low rungness.
And if enough people are doing that, suddenly there's all this incentive to try to say, no,
I need to calm my emotion down here and not be yet personal because I'm going to get voted into
oblivion by these people. I think a lot of people would be very good at that. They, they, and they
not are only, would they be good at that? They would want that, that task of saying, I know I
completely disagree with this person, but this was a high effort, high rung disagreement.
It gets everyone thinking about that other axis too. You're not just looking at where do you
stand horizontally. You're saying, well, how did you get there? And how are you, you know,
are you treating ideas like machines or are you treating them like little, you know, babies?
And then there should be some kind of labeling on personal attacks versus idea disagreement.
Sometimes people like throwing both a little bit. Right.
That's like, all right. No, like there should be a disincentive at personal attacks versus idea
attacks. Well, you can also, one metric is a respectful disagreement. If I see, just to say
someone else's Twitter and I see, you know, you put out a thought and I see someone say, you know,
someone say, you know, I don't see it that way. Here's where I think you went wrong and they're
just explaining. I'm thinking that if Lex reads that, he's going to be interested. He's going to
want to post more stuff, right? Because he's going to like that. If I see someone being like,
wow, this really shows the kind of person that you become or shows them. I'm thinking that person
is making Lex want to be on Twitter less. It's making him, and so what's that doing? What that
person's actually doing is they're putting, is they're actually, they're chilling discussion
because they're making it unpleasant to, they're making it scary to say what you think.
And the first person isn't at all. The first person is making you want to say more stuff.
So, and those are both disagreed. Those are people who are both disagree with you.
Exactly. Exactly. I want to, great disagreements with friends in meat space is like you're,
they disagree with you. They could be even yelling at you. Honestly, they could even have
some shit talk where it's like personal attacks. It still feels good.
Because you know them well and you know that that shit talk, because yeah,
friends shit talk all the time playing a, playing a sport or a game. And again, it's,
it's, it's because they know each other well enough to know that this is fun. We're having fun.
And obviously I love you. Like, exactly. You know, and, and that's, that's important online.
It's a lot harder. Yeah. That obviously I love you that underlies a lot of human interaction.
Right. Seems to be easily lost online. I've seen some people on Twitter and elsewhere just behave
they're worst. Yeah. And it's like, I know that's not who you are. Totally. Like, why are you?
I actually, you know, I know who is this human. I know someone personally who is one of the best
people. Yeah. I'm just, I love this guy. Like, one of the best, like fun, funny, like nicest dudes.
And he, if you would, if you looked at this Twitter only, you would think he's a culture
worrier, an awful culture worrier. And, you know, you know, biased and just stoking anger.
And, and, and it comes out of a good place. And I'm not going to give any other info about,
you know, specific, but like, I think you're describing a lot of people. It comes out of
a good place because he really cares about what he, you know, it comes out, but it's just,
I can't square the two. It's so, and that's it. You have to, once you know someone like that,
you can realize, okay, apply that to everyone. Cause a lot of these people are lovely people.
And it's just bring, even just, you know, back in the before social media, did you ever had a
friend who like was just like, they had this like dickishness on text or email that they
didn't have in person. You're like, wow, like email you is like kind of a dick. And it's like,
it just, certain people have a different persona behind the screen.
It has for me personally, it's become a bit of a meme that Lex blocks with love.
But there is a degree to that where this is, I don't see people on social media as representing
who they really are. I really do have love for them. I really do think positive thoughts of them
throughout the entirety of the experience. I see this as some weird side effect of
online communication. And so it's like, to me, blocking is not some kind of a
derisive act towards that individual. It's just like saying, well, a lot of times what's
happened is they have slipped into a very common delusion that dehumanizes others.
So that doesn't mean they're a bad person. We all can do it. But they're dehumanizing you
or whoever they're being nasty to, because in a way they would never do in person,
because in a person, they're reminded that's a person. Remember, I said the dumb part of
my brain when I'm doing VR, like won't step off the cliff, but the smart part of my brain knows
I'm just on the rug. That dumb part of our brain is really dumb in a lot of ways. It's the part
of your brain where you can set the clock five minutes fast to help you not be late. The smart
part of your brain knows that you did that, but the dumb part will fall for it. That same dumb
part of your brain can forget that the person behind that handle is a human that has feelings.
And that doesn't mean they're a bad person for forgetting that because it's possible.
Well, this really interesting idea, and I wonder if it's true that you write,
is that both primitive mindedness and high-mindedness tend to be contagious.
I hope you're right that it's possible to make both contagious, because our
sort of popular intuition is only one of them. The primitive mindedness is contagious as exhibited
by social media. To compliment you again, don't you think that your Twitter to me is like,
I was just looking down, and I mean, it's just high-mindedness. It's just high-mindedness,
down, down, down, down, down. It's gratitude. It's optimism. It's love. It's forgiveness.
It's all these things that are the opposite of grievance and victimhood and resentment and
pessimism, right? And there's, I think, a reason that a lot of people follow you because it
is contagious. It makes other people feel those feelings.
I don't know. I've been recently, over the past few months, attacked quite a lot. It is fascinating
to watch because there's over things that I think I probably have done stupid things,
but I'm being attacked for things that are totally not worthy of attack. I got attacked for a book
list. I saw that, by the way. I thought it was great. But you can always kind of find ways to,
I guess the assumption is this person surely is a fraud or some other explanation. He sure
has dead bodies in the basement. He's hiding or something like this. And then I'm going to
construct a narrative around that and mock and attack that. I mean, I don't know how that works,
but there is a, there does, and I think you write this in the book, there seems to be a gravity
pulling people towards the primitive mind and it's like-
Well, when it comes to anything political, right? Religious, certain things are bottom heavy,
you know, for our psyche. They have a magnet that pulls our psyches downwards on the ladder.
And why? Why does politics pull our psyches down on the ladder? Because it, for the tens of
thousand years that we were evolving during human history, it was life or death. Politics was life
or death. And so there's actually an amazing study where it's like they challenged 20 different
beliefs of a person and different parts of the person's brain, and then you had an MRI going,
different parts of the person's brain lit up when non-political beliefs were challenged versus
political beliefs were challenged. When political beliefs were challenged, when non-political beliefs
were challenged, the rational, like the prefrontal cortex type areas were lit up, when the political
beliefs were challenged, and then I'm getting over my head here, but it's like the parts of your
brain, the default mode network, the parts of your brain associated with introspection and your own
identity were lit up. And they were much more likely to change their mind on all the beliefs,
the non-political beliefs. When that default mode network part of your brain lit up, you were going
to, if anything, get more firm in those beliefs when you had them challenged. So politics is one
of those topics that just literally lights up different part of our brain. And again,
I think we come back to primitive mind, higher mind here. This is one of the things our primitive
mind comes programmed to care a ton about, and so it's going to be very hard for us to stay
rational and calm and looking for truth because we have all this gravity.
Well, it's weird because politics, what is politics? Talk about it's a bunch of different
issues, and each individual issue, if we really talk about it, we don't-
Tax policy. Why are we being emotional about this?
I don't think we're actually that, I mean, yeah, we're emotional about something else.
Yeah, I think what we're emotional about is my side, the side I've identified with, is in power
and making the decisions, and your side is out of power. And if your side's in power,
that's really scary for me because that goes back to the idea of who's pulling the strings in this
tribe, right? Who's the chief? Is it your family's patriarch or is it mine? You might not have food
if we don't win this kind of whatever chief election. So I think that it's not about the
tax policy or anything like that, and then it gets tied to this broader. I think a lot of our
tribalism has really coalesced around this. We don't have that much religious tribalism in the
US, right? Not the Protestants and the Catholics hate each other. We don't have that really.
And honestly, people like to say we have racial tribalism and everything, but
a white, even kind of a racist white conservative guy, I think takes the black conservative over
the woke white person any day of the week right now. So that's the strongest source of the division.
It tells me that the college is way stronger tribalism right now. I think that that white
racist guy loves the black conservative guy compared to the white woke guy, right? So
again, not that racial tribalism isn't a thing. Of course, it's always a thing,
but political tribalism is the number one right now. So race is almost a topic for the political
division versus the actual element of the tribe. It's a political football. It's yeah. So there's
this is dark because so this is a book about human civilization. This is a book about human nature,
but it's also a book about politics. It is just the way you listed out in the book.
It's kind of dark how we just fall into these left and right checklists. So if you're on the left,
it's maintaining where we weighed universal healthcare, good mainstream media, fine guns,
kill people, US as a racist country, protect immigrants, tax cuts, bad climate change, awful
raise minimum wage. And on the right is a flip of that reverse where we weighed universal healthcare,
bad mainstream media, bad people, kill people, not guns, kill people. US was a racist country,
protect borders, tax cuts, good climate change, overblown, don't raise minimum wage. I mean,
it has you almost don't have to think about any of this. Well, it's like literally. So when you
say it's a book about politics, it's interesting because it's a book about the vertical axis,
it's specifically not a book about the horizontal axis and that I'm not talking,
I don't actually talk about any of these issues. I don't put out an opinion on them.
Those are all horizontal, right? So rather than having another book about those issues,
about right versus left, I wanted to do a book about this other axis. And so on this axis,
the reason I had this checklist is that this is a low part of the low rung politics world.
Low rung politics is a checklist and that checklist evolves. Russia suddenly is popular
with the right as opposed to, used to be in the 60s, the left was the one defending Stalin.
So they'll switch, it doesn't even matter, the substance doesn't matter, it's that this is the
approved checklist of the capital P party and this is what everyone believes. That's a low rung
thing. The high rungs, this is not what it's like. High rung politics, you tell me your one view on
this, I have no idea what you think about anything else, right? And you're going to say I don't know
about a lot of stuff because inherently you're not going to have that strong an opinion because
you don't have that much info. These are complex things. So there's a lot of I don't know and
people are all over the place. You know you're talking to someone who has been subsumed with
low rung politics when if they tell you their opinion on any one of these issues, you know
you could just rattle off their opinion on every single other one. And if in three years it becomes
fashionable to to have this new view, they're going to have it. That's you're not thinking,
that's echo chamber culture. And I've been using kind of a shorthand of centrists to describe this
kind of a high rung thinking. But people tend to, I mean it seems to be difficult to be a
centrist or whatever a high rung thinker. It's like people want to label you as a person who's
too cowardly to take stands somehow as opposed to saying I don't know is a first statement.
Well the problem with centrist is that would mean that in each of these tax cuts bag, tax cuts good.
It means that you are saying I am in that I think we should have some tax cuts but not that many.
You might not think that. You might actually come do some research and say actually I think tax cuts
are really important. That doesn't mean oh I'm not a centrist anymore. I guess I'm a far you know
no no no that's why we need the second axis. So what you're trying to be when you say centrist
is high rung which means you might be all over the place horizontally. You might agree with the far
left on this thing, the far right on this thing, you might agree with the centrists on this thing.
But calling yourself a centrist actually like is putting yourself in a prison on the horizontal
axis and saying that you know whatever on the different topics I'm right in between the two
policy wise. That's not where you are. So yeah that's why we're badly missing this other axis.
Yeah I mean I still do think it's like for me I am a centrist when you project it down to the
horizontal but the point is you're missing so much data by not considering the vertical
because like on average maybe it falls somewhere in the middle but in reality there's just a lot
of nuance issue to issue that involves just thinking and uncertainty and changing in the
given the context of the current geopolitics and economics and just always considering,
always questioning, always evolving your views, all of that. Not just about like oh I think we
should be in the center on this but another way to be in the center is if there's some phenomenon
happening you know there's a terrorist attack you know and one side wants to say this has
nothing to do with Islam and the other one the other side wants to say this is radical Islam.
Right what's in between those is saying this is complicated and nuanced and we have to learn
more and it probably has something to do with Islam and something to do with the economic
circumstances and something to do with you know geopolitics. So in a case like that you actually
do get really un-nuanced when you go to the extremes and all of that nuance which is where
all the truth usually is is going to be in the middle so yeah. But there is a truth to the
fact that if you take that nuance on those issues like war in Ukraine, COVID you're going to be
attacked by both sides. Yes people who have who are really strongly on one side or the other hate
centrist people. I've gotten this myself and you know the slur that I've had thrown at me is I'm
an enlightened centrist in a very mocking way. So what are they actually saying? What does
enlightened centrist mean? It means someone who is you know Stephen Pinker or Jonathan Hyde gets
accused of is you know that they're highfalutin you know intellectual world and they don't actually
have any they don't actually take a side they don't actually get their hands dirty and they can be
superior to both sides without actually taking a stand right. So I see the argument and I disagree
with it because I firmly believe that the hardcore tribes they think they're taking a stand and they're
out in the streets and they're pushing for something I think what they're doing is they're
just driving the whole country downwards and I think they're they're hurting all the causes they
care about and so it's not that it's not that you know it's not that we need everyone to be sitting
there you know refusing to take a side it's that you can be far left and far right but be upper
left and upper right. If we talk about the you use the word liberal a lot in the book to mean something
that we don't in modern political discourse mean so it's this higher philosophical view and then
you use the words progressive to mean the left and conservative to mean the right can you describe
the concept of liberal games and power games? So the power games is is what I call the like
basically just the laws of nature as the when laws of nature are the laws of the land that's the
power game so animals watch any David Attenborough special and when the little lizard is running away
from the you know the bigger animal or whatever and I use an example of a bunny and a bear I don't
even know if bears eat bunnies they probably don't but pretend bears eat bunnies right so it's like
in the power games the bear is chasing the bunny there's no fairness there's no okay well what's
right but you know what what what what's legal no no no if the bear is fast enough it can eat the
bunny if the bunny is can get away it can stay living in so that's it that's the only rule now
humans have spent a lot of time in essentially that environment so when you have a totalitarian
dictatorship it's and so the what's the rule of the power games it's everyone can do whatever
they want if they have the power to do so it's just a game of power so that if the bunny gets away
the bunny actually has more power than the bear in that situation right and likewise the totalitarian
dictatorship there's no rules the dictator can do whatever they want they can they can they can
torture they can you know flatten a rebellion with a lot of murder because they have the power
to do so what are you gonna do right and that's that's kind of the state of nature that's our
natural way you know that when you look at the mafia watch a mafia movie you know there's what
we do a lot of we have we have it in us we all have we all can snap into power games mode when
it becomes all about you know just just actual raw power now the liberal games is is you know
something that civilizations for thousands of years have been working on it's not invented by
america or modern times but america's kind of was like the latest crack at it yet which is this idea
instead of everyone can do what they want if they have the power to do so it's everyone can do what
they want as long as it doesn't harm anyone else now that's really complicated how do you
define harm and and the idea is that everyone has their a list of rights which are protected by the
government and then they have their inalienable rights and they're they're protected you know those
are protected again by you know from from an invasion by other people and so you have this
kind of fragile balance and so the idea with the liberal games is you that there are laws but it's
not totalitarian they will build very clear strict laws kind of around the edges of what you can and
can't do and then everything else freedom so unlike a totalitarian dictatorship actually it's it's
very loose you can there's a lot of things can happen and it's kind of up to the people but
there are still laws that protect the very basic and alienable rights and stuff like that so it's
this much looser thing now the vulnerability there is that it so so so the the benefits of it are
obvious right freedom is great it seems like it's the most fair they you know that that equality
of opportunity seemed like the most fair thing and um and you know equality before the law you
know due process and all of this stuff so it seems fair to the founders of the us and other
enlightenment thinkers and it also is a great way to manifest productivity right you know you have
you have adam smith saying it's not from the benevolence of the butcher or the baker that
we get our dinner but from the from their own self-interest so you have you can harness kind of
selfishness for for progress but um it has a vulnerability which is that because the laws it's
like the totalitarian laws they don't have an excessive laws for no reason they want to control
everything and the us you know in the us we say we're they're not going to do that and so
the the second it's almost two puzzle pieces you have the laws and then you've got a liberal culture
liberal laws have to be married to liberal culture kind of a defense of liberal spirit
in order to truly have the liberal games going on and so that's vulnerable because free speech you
can have the first amendment that's the the laws part but if if you're in a culture where anyone
who you know speaks out against orthodoxy is going to be shunned from the community well you're
lacking the second piece of the puzzle there you're lacking liberal culture and so therefore you um
you might as well be in it you might as well not even have the first amendment and there's a
lot of examples like that where the culture has to do its part for the true liberal games to be
enjoyed so it's just much more complicated much more nuanced than the power games it's kind of
it's kind of a set of basic laws that then are coupled with a basic spirit to create this
very awesome and human environment that's also very vulnerable so what do you mean the culture
has to play along so for something like a freedom of speech to work there has to be a basic what
decency that if all people are perfectly good then perfect freedom without any restrictions
is great it's where the human nature starts getting a little iffy we start being cruel to
each other we start being greedy and desiring of harm and also the narcissist and sociopath
and psychopath in society all of that that's when you start to have to inject some limitations on
that freedom yeah i mean if um so that what the government basically says is we're going to let
everyone be mostly free um but no one no one is going to be free to physically harm other people
or to steal their property right um and so we're we're also we're all agreeing to sacrifice that
you know that that 20 percent of our freedom and then in return all of us in theory can be 80
percent free and that's kind of the the bargain um but now that's a lot of freedom to leave people
with and a lot of people choose it's like you're so free in the u.s you're actually free to be
unfree if you choose that's kind of what an echo chamber is to me it's you know um you can you
can choose to kind of be friends with people who uh essentially make it make it so uncomfortable to
speak your mind that it's no actual effective difference for you than if you live in a country
if you can't you know criticize christianity in a certain community that you have a first
amendment so you're not going to get arrested by the government for criticizing christianity
but if you but if you have this if the social penalties are so extreme that it's just never
worth it you might as well be in a country that it in prisons people for criticizing christianity
and so that same thing goes for for wokeness right this is what people get you know you know
cancel culture and stuff so when the reason these things are bad is because they're actually
they're depriving americans of the beauty of the freedom of the liberal games by you know imposing
a social culture that is very power games ask it's basically a power games culture comes in
and you might as well be in the power games now and so liberal if you live in a liberal democracy
it's it's you there will be always be challenges to a liberal culture
lowercase l liberal there'll always be challenges to a liberal culture
from people who are much more interested in playing the power games and and and and there has
to be kind of an immune system that stands up to that culture and says that's not how we do things
here in america actually we don't excommunicate people for not having the right religious beliefs
or not rent you know we don't disinvite a speaker from campus for having the wrong political beliefs
and if it doesn't stand up for itself it's it's it's like the immune system of the country failing
and power games rushes in so before chapter four in your book
and the chapters that will surely result in you being burned at the stake you right quote will start
our pitchfork tour in this chapter by taking a brief trip through the history of the republican
party then in the following chapters we'll take a tim's career tanking deep dive into america's
social justice movement as you started to talk about okay so let's go uh what's the history of
the republican party i'm looking at this through my vertical ladder and what is this this familiar
story of the republicans from the 60s to today what does it look like through the vertical lens
right does it look different and and is there is there an interesting story here that's been
kind of hidden because we're always looking at the horizontal now the horizontal story you'll
hear people talk about it and it's they'll say something like they're the republicans have moved
farther and farther to the right and um and to me that that's not really true like it was trump
more right wing than reagan i don't think so i think he's left left actual policy yeah yeah so it's
so we're using this again it's just like you're calling yourself centrist when it's not exactly
what you mean even though it also is yeah so i again this i was like okay look this vertical
lens helps with other things let's let's apply it to the republicans and here's what i saw is
i looked at the 60s and i saw an interesting story which is i don't think that you know
not everyone's familiar with like what happened in the early 60s but
in 1960 the republican party was very it was a plurality you had progressives like genuine
you know Rockefeller you know pretty progressive people um all the way to you know then you had the
you know moderates like eisenhower and dewey and then you go all the way to the you know farther
right you had goldwater and you know what you might call i call them the fundamentalists um
and so it's this interesting plurality right something we don't have today and what happened
was the the goldwater contingent which was the underdog they were small right the eisenhower
was the president uh had just been the president and was it seemed like the moderates were you
know that was the that's the he said you have to be close to the center of the chessboard that's
that's that's how you maintain power these people were very far from the center of the
chessboard but they ended up basically had like a hostile takeover they conquered their own party
and they did it by breaking all of the kind of unwritten rules and norms so they did things
like they first started with like the college republicans which was like this feeder group
that turned in you know a lot of the politicians started there and they they went to the election
and they wouldn't let the the the current president the incumbent speak and they were
throwing chairs and they were fist fights and eventually people gave up and they just sat there
and they sat in the chair talking for you know they're got their candidate until everyone
eventually left and then they declared victory so basically they they they they came in there
was there was a there was a certain set of rules agreed upon rules and they came in playing the
power games saying well actually if we do this you won't have the power you know we have the power
to to take it if we just break all the rules right and so they did and they won and that
became a hugely influential thing which then they then they conquered california through again
these these people were taken aback these you know these these these proper republican candidates
were appalled by the kind of like you know the insults that were being hurled at them and the
intimidation and the bullying and eventually they ended up in the national convention which was called
like the right wing wood stock it was like you know the republican national convention in 64 was
just they again there was jeering and they wouldn't let their moderates so their their progressives
even speak and there was racism you know you know jockey robinson was there and he was a proud
republican and he said that like he feels like he was a jew in hitler's germany with the way
the blacks were being treated there and it was nasty and but what do they do they they had they had
fiery you know plurality enough to win um and they won they ended up getting crushed in the
general election and they kind of faded away but to me i was like what that was an interesting
story i see it as um i have this character in the book called the golem which is a big kind of a
big dumb powerful monster that's the you know the emergent property of like a political echo chamber
it's like this big giant it's stupid but it's powerful and scary um and to me i was like a golem
rose up conquered the party for a second knocked it on his ass and then and then faded away and to
me when i looked at the trump revolution and a lot and not just trump the last 20 years i see that
same lower right that lower right monster kind of um making another charge for it but this time
succeeding and really taking over the party for a long period of time i see the same story which
is the power games are being played um in a situation when it had always been the government
relies on all these unwritten rules and norms to function but for example you have in 2016
merit garland gets it gets nominated by obama and the unwritten norm says that when the president
nominates a justice then you pass them through unless there's some egregious thing that's what
has happened but they said actually this is the last year of his presidency and the people should
choose i don't think we should set a new precedent where the president can't nominate people nominate
a supreme court justice in the last year so they they passed the through and it ends up being
gorsuch um and so they they they lose that seat now three years later it's trump's last year
and it's another election year and ginsburg dies and what did they say they say oh let's keep our
precedent they said no oh actually we changed our mind we're going to nominate a meek parrot
so to me that is classic power games right that there there's there's no actual rule and what
you're doing is they had the they did technically have the power to block the nomination then and
then they technically had the power to put someone in they and they're pretending there's
some principle to it but they're just extra they're going for the a short-term edge at the expense of
what is like the workings of the system in the long run and then one of the democrats have to do
in that situation because both parties have been doing this is they either can lose now all the
time or they start playing the power games too and now you have a prison prisoner's dilemma where
it's like both are end up doing this thing because and they and everyone ends up worse off the debt
ceiling all these power plays that are being made with these these holding the country hostage this
is power games and to me that's what goldwater was doing in the 60s but it was a healthier time in a
way because there was this plurality within the parties reduced some of the national tribalism
and that there wasn't as much of an appeal to that but today it's just like do whatever you
have to do to beat the enemies and so i'm seeing a rise in power games and i talk about the republicans
because they did a lot of these things first they have been a little bit more egregious but
both parties have been doing it over the last 20 30 years can you place a blame or maybe there's a
different term for it at the subsystems of this so is it the media is it the politicians like in
the senate and in congress is it trump so the leadership is it or maybe it's us human beings
maybe social media versus mainstream media is there a sense of where what is the cause of what
is the symptom it's very complex or as we're clients a great book why we're polarized where he
talks about a lot of this and there's there's there's some of these aren't you know it's really
no one's fault first of all it's the environment has changed in a bunch of ways you just mentioned
and what happens when you take human nature which is a constant and you put it into an environment
behavior comes out the environment's the independent variable when that changes
the dependent variable the behavior changes with it right and so the environment has changed in a
lot of ways so one major one is it used to for a long time actually the the first it was the
republicans and then the democrats just had a stranglehold on senate on congress there was no
it was not even competitive the democrats for 40 years had the majority and so therefore it actually
is a decent environment to compromise it because now we can both you know what you want is congress
people thinking about their home district and and you know voting yes on a national policy
because we're going to get a good deal on it back at home that's actually healthy as opposed to
voting in lockstep together because this is what the red party is doing regardless of what's good
for my home district you know an example is obama care you know there were certain republican
districts that would have actually officially been benefited by obama care but every republican
voted against it so and part of the reason is because there's no longer this obvious majority
every few years it switches it's a 50-50 thing and that's you know partially because
it's become so we've been so subsumed with this one national divide of left versus right
that um that that that that people are not people are whoever you know they're voting for the same
party for president all the way down the ticket now and so you have this just kind of 50-50 color
war and that's awful for compromise so there's like 10 of these things you know that have
redistricting but also it is social media it is you know I call it hypercharged tribalism we've
you know in the 60s you had kind of distributed tribalism you had some people that are worked up
about the USSR right they're national that's what they care about US versus foreign you had some
people that were saying left versus right like they had today and then other people that were saying
that they were fighting within the party but today you don't have that it's it's the you have
ideological realignment so you kind of got rid of a lot of the in-party fighting and then there's
not hasn't been that big of a foreign threat not nothing like the USSR for a long time so you
kind of lost that and what's left is just this left versus right thing and so that's kind of this
hypercharged whirlpool that subsumes everything and um and so yeah yeah it's I mean people point
to Newt Gingrich you know and people like there's certain characters that enacted policies that
stoked this kind of thing but I think this is a much bigger kind of environmental shift
well that's going back to our questions about the role of individuals in human history
so the the interesting one of the many interesting questions here is about Trump
is he a symptom or a cause because he seems to be from the public narrative such a significant
catalyst for some of the things we're seeing this goes back to what we were talking about earlier
right like is it the person or is the times I think he's a perfect example of it's a both
situation I don't think that I don't think if you plucked Trump out of this situation I don't
think it Trump was inevitable but I think we were very vulnerable to a demagogue and if you
hadn't been Trump would have had no chance and so what and why were we vulnerable to a demagogue
is because you have these well I mean I think it's specifically on the right if you actually look
at the stats it's pretty bad like the people who because it's not just who voted for Trump a lot
of people just vote for the red right what's interesting is who voted for Obama against
Romney and then voted for Trump who you know these are not racists right these are not
hardcore republicans they voted for Obama and where did the switch come from
places that had economic despair where bridges were were not working well that's a signifier
you know we're we're paints chipping in the schools you know these little things like this so I
think that you know you had this a lot of these kind of rural towns you have true despair and then
you also have a the number one indicator of voting for Trump was distrust in media and the media has
become much less trustworthy you know and so you you have the all these ingredients that actually
make us very vulnerable to a demagogue and a demagogue is someone who takes advantage right
there's someone who comes in and says I can pull all the right strings and pull it and and and push
all the right emotional buttons right now and get myself power by taking advantage of the
circumstances and that is what Trump totally did it makes me wonder how easy it is for somebody
who is a charismatic leader to capitalize on cultural resentment when when there's economic
hardship to channel that so john height wrote a great article about like the truth we basically
we literally like truth is in an all-time low right now like it's the media is not penalized
for lying yeah right msnbc fox news these are not penalized for being inaccurate or penalized if
they stray from the orthodoxy on social media it's not the truest tweets that go viral right and so
trump understood that better than anyone right he he took advantage of it he he was living in the
current world when everyone else was stuck in the past and he saw that and he just lied he everything
he said you know it doesn't the truth was not relevant at all right it's just it's
truly it's not relevant to him when what he's talking about he doesn't care and and and he
knew that neither do us a subset of the country i was thinking about this just reading articles by
journalists especially when you're not a um a famous journalist in yourself but you're more like in
your times journalists so the big famous thing is the institution you're part of that they're like
you can just lie yeah because you're not going to get punished for it you're going to be rewarded for
of the popularity of an article so if you write 10 articles it's there's a huge incentive to just
make stuff up you gotta get clicks to get clicks that's the first and foremost and like culturally
people will attack that article to say it's not like one half the country will attack that
article for saying it's dishonest but they'll kind of forget the you will not have a reputational hit
there won't be a memory like this person made up a lot of stuff in the past no they'll take
one article at a time and they'll attach the reputation hits will be to new york times the
institution yeah and so for the individual journalist there's a huge incentive to make
stuff up totally it's it's it's and it's scary because it's almost you can't survive if you're
just an old school honest journalist who really works hard and tries to get it right and does it
with nuance like well you can be as you can be a big time substacker or big time podcaster a lot
of people do have a reputation for accuracy and rigor and they have huge audiences but
if you're working in a big company right now it's I mean especially I mean I like I think that
many of the big media brands are very much controlled by the left and but I will say that
that the ones that are controlled by the right are even more egregious not just in terms of accuracy
but also in terms of you know the new york times for all of its criticisms
they have a handful of uh they they every they here and there they put out a pretty
you know an article that strays from the you know Barry Weiss wrote there for a long time and then
you've got um they wrote an article criticizing free speech on campus stuff you know recently
um and they have you know they have a couple very you know left uh progressive friendly
conservatives but they have conservatives that are writing the op-eds fox news you know you're not
seeing thoughtful uh bright bar you're not seeing thoughtful progressives writing there right there's
some degree to which the new york times I think still incentivizing the values the vertical the
high effort so the you're allowed to have a conservative opinion if you do a really damn
good job yeah like if it's a very thorough in-depth art kind of and if you kind of pander to the
progressive senses in all the right ways you know I always joke that you know Ted they always have a
couple you know token conservatives but they get on stage and they're basically like so totally
you're all you know where the the progressives are it's right about all of this but maybe maybe
you know libertarianism isn't all about you know it's this so there is an element but you know what
it's it's something it's better than than being a total tribal I think you can you can see the
New York Times tug-of-war the internal tug-of-war you can see it because then they also have these
awful instances you know or like you know the firing of James Bennett which is this whole
other story but like they have you yeah you can see it going both ways but in the 60s what did
you have you had ABC NBC CBS you know the 70s you know you had these three news channels and
they weren't always right and they definitely sometimes spun a narrative together maybe about the
Vietnam or whatever but they if one of them was just lying they'd be embarrassed for it they would
be penalized they'd be dinged and they'd be known as this is the trash one and that would be terrible
for their ratings because they weren't just catering to half the country they're getting
they all are catering to the whole country so both on the axis of accuracy and on the axis of
neutrality they had to you know try to stay somewhere in the the reasonable range and that's
just gone one of the things i'm really curious about is i think your book is incredible i'm very
curious to see how it's written about by the press because i could see click i could myself
write with the help of chat jpt of course clickbait articles in either direction yeah it's easy to
imagine your whole book is beautifully written for clickbait articles yeah if any journalist
out there need help i can i can help yeah i can write the most atrocious criticisms yeah uh i'm
i'm i'm i'm i'm ready i'm braced um yeah so speaking of which uh you write about social
justice you write about two kinds of social justice liberal social justice and uh sjf social
justice fundamentalism what are those yeah so like the term wokeness is so loaded with baggage it's
kind of like mocking and derogatory and that's i was trying not to do that in this book um if it's
the terms loaded with baggage you're already kind of you're out you're out you're from from the first
minute you're already behind um so to me uh it also that when people say wokeness is bad social
justice is bad they're throwing the baby out with the bathwater um because the the you know the proudest
tradition in the us is liberal social justice and what i mean by that again liberal meaning with
lower case l it is it is intertwined with liberalism so martin luther king classic example his i
have a dream speech he says stuff like this country you know is wrote you know has made a promise
to all of its citizens and it has broken that promise to to its black citizens right in other
words liberalism the constitution the core ideals those are great we are not living up to them we're
failing on some of them so civil disobedience the goal if it wasn't to to hurt liberalism is to
specifically break the laws that were already violating liberal that were the laws that were
a violation of liberalism to expose that this is illiberal that the constitution should not have
people of different skin color sitting in different parts of the bus and so it was it was kind of a
it was really patriotic you know the civil rights movement who was saying this is a beautiful you
know we have a we have a liberalism is this beautiful thing and we need to do better at it
so i call it liberal social justice and it used the tools of liberalism to try to uh
to try to uh improve the flaws and that were going on so free speech you know mario savio in the
sixties was the you know he's a leftist and what what would the leftist doing in the sixties on
berkeley campus you know they were saying we need more free speech um because that's what social
liberal social justice was fighting for that but you can also go back to the 20s women's suffrage i
mean so the you know the emancipation the thing that america obviously has all of it's these these
are these are all ugly things that it had to get out of but it got out of them you know one by one
and it's still getting out of them that's what's cool about america and liberal social justice
basically is the practice of saying where are we not being perfect liberals and now let's fix that
so that that's the idea of liberalism that permeates the history in the united states but
then there's interplay heaven there's so many good images in this book but one of them is
highlighting the interplay of different ideas over the past uh let's say a hundred years so
liberalism is on one side there's that thread there's marxism on the other and then there's
postmodernism how do those interplay together so it's interesting because marxism is and all of
its various you know descendants obviously there's a lot of things that are rooted in marxism that
aren't you know the same thing as what carl marx preached but what do they all have in common
they think liberalism is bad right they actually think that um that the opposite of
what martin leuther king and other people in the civil rights and other movements they think the
opposite they they think he thinks you know liberalism is good we need to preserve it they
said liberalism is the problem these other problems with racism and inequality that we're seeing those
are inevitable results of liberalism liberalism is a rigged game and it's just the power games in
disguise there is no liberal games it's just the power games in disguise and there's the upper
people that oppress the lower people and they convince the lower people there's all about
false consciousness they convince the lower people that everything is fair and now the lower
people vote against their own interests and they and they work to preserve the system that's
oppressing them and what do we need to do we need to actually there's much more revolutionary
we need to overthrow liberalism right so people think is oh you know like what we call a wokeness
is just you know a normal social justice activist activism but it's like more extreme right it's this
no no it's the polar opposite polar opposite and so um now that's that's that's the marxist
threat now postmodernism is kind of you know this term that is super controversial and I don't
think anyone calls themselves a postmodernist or take all of this with a grain of salt in
terms of the term but what's the definition of radical the definition of radical to me is
how deep you want change to happen at so so um a liberal progressive and and a conservative
progressive will disagree about policies the liberal progressive wants to you know change a
lot of policies and change change change right and the conservative is more wants to keep things the
way they are but they're both conservative when it comes to liberalism um beneath it the liberal
kind of foundation of the country they both want to they both become conservatives about that
the marxist is more radical because they want to go one notch deeper and actually overthrow that
foundation now what's below what's below liberalism is kind of the core tenets of modernity um this
idea of reason and um the notion that there is an objective truth and um uh science as the scientific
method right these things are actually beneath and even the marxist if you look at the frankford
school you know these these these post marxist thinkers and and marx himself they were not
anti science they believed in that bottom bottom foundation they were they were they were they
actually wanted to preserve modernity but they wanted to get rid of liberalism on top of it
the post modernist is even more radical because they want to actually go down to the bottom level
and overthrow they think science itself is a tool of oppression they think it's a tool uh where
oppression kind of flows through you know they think that the white western world has invented
these concepts like you know they they claim that there's an objective truth and that there's
you know reason and science and they think all of that is just one meta narrative and right and
it and it goes a long way to serve the interests of the powerful so in the sense that it's almost
caricatured but that that is to the core their belief that math math could be racist for example
oh yeah not the not the educational math but literally math the math the notion in math that
there's a right answer and a wrong answer that they believe is a meta narrative that serves
white supremacy or in in the post modernist might have said it serves just the powerful
or the wealthy but to so what social justice fundamentalism is is you take the the Marxist
thread that has been going on in lots of countries and has and the whoever the upper and lower is
that's what they all have in common but the upper and lower you know and for for Marx was
the ruling class and the oppressed class it was economic um and then uh but you come here and and
the economic class doesn't you know doesn't resonate as much here as it did maybe in some
of those other places but what does resonate here in the 60s and 70s is race and gender and these
kind of social justice disagreements and so what social justice fundamentalism is is basically this
this tried and true framework of of Marxist you know this Marxist framework kind of with a
new skin on it which is American social justice and then made even more radical with the infusion
of post modernism where you know not just as liberalism bad but actually the you know that
like you said math can be racist so it's this kind of like philosophical Frankenstein this
like stitched together of these it and has and and so again it's called you you know they they
wear the same uniform as the liberal social justice they say social justice right you know
racial equality but it has nothing to do with liberal social justice it is directly opposed
to liberal social justice this is fascinating the evolution of ideas if if we ignore the harm done by
it it's fascinating how humans get together and evolve these ideas so as you show Marxism is the
idea that societies is zero some i mean i guess zero some is a really important thing here uh
zero some struggle between the ruling class and the working class with power being exerted
to politics and economics then you add critical theory Marxism 2.0 on top of that and you add to
politics and economics you add culture and institutions and then on top of that for post
modernism you add science you have morality basically anything else you can think of to stitch
together Frankenstein and if you notice and which is not necessarily bad but in this case I think
it's actually violating the Marxist tradition by being anti-science and and and you know and it's
violating the post modernism because what post modernists were they were radical skeptics not
just of they were radical skeptics not just of the way things were but of their own beliefs
that they and what and social justice fundamentalism is suddenly is not at all
self self critical it says that we have the answers which is the opposite of what post
modernists would ever say this and no you just have another meta narrative so and it's also
violating of course the tradition of like liberal social justice in a million ways because it's
it's anti-liberal and so this Frankenstein comes together meanwhile liberal social justice doesn't
have a Frankenstein it's very clear it's very it's a crisp ideology that says we need we they're
trying to make we trying to get to a more perfect union they're trying to to to keep the promises
made in the constitution and that's what it's trying to do and so it's it's much simpler in a lot of
ways so you write that my big problem with social justice fundamentalism isn't the ideology itself
it's what its scholars and activists started to do sometimes around 2013 when they began to wield a
kajo that's not supposed to have any place in the country like the u.s so it's the actions not the
ideas well i'm clear i don't like the ideology i think it's a low rung ideology i think it's
morally inconsistent based on you know it's it's flip-flops on on its morals depending on the the
group i think it's echo chambery i think it's um i i think it's it's it's full of inaccuracies and
kind of can't stand up to debate so i think it's a low but but there's a ton of lowering ideologies
i don't like i don't like a lot of religious doctrines i don't like a lot of political doctrines right
the u.s is a place inherently that is a mishmash of a ton of ideologies and i'm not going to like
two-thirds of them at any given time so my problem but the reason i'm writing about this is not
because i'm like by the way this ideology is not something i like that's not interesting
the reason that it must be written about right now this particular ideology is because
it's not playing nicely with others what what what i if you if you want to be a hardcore you
know evangelical christian go in the u.s says live and let live not only are you allowed to
to have an echo chamber of some kind you're it's actively protected here live and let live
they can do what they want you do what you want now if the evangelical christians started saying
by the way anyone who says anything that conflicts with even evangelical christianity
is going to be severely socially punished and they have the cultural power to do so which they
don't in this case they might like to but they don't have the power but they're able to get
anyone fired who they want and they're able to actually change the curriculum in all of these
schools and to to suddenly not conflict with no more evolution in the textbooks because they don't
want it now i would write a book about why i about evangelical christianity because that's
what every liberal regardless of what you think of the actual horizontal beliefs doesn't matter
what they believe when when they start violating live and let live and shutting down other areas
other segments of society and in kind of it's almost like a you know not to you know it's not
the best analogy but like it's like a an echo chamber is like a benign tumor and what you
but you have to watch out for is a tumor that starts to metastasize starts to forcefully spread
and damage the tissue around it and that's what this particular ideology has been doing
do you worry about it you know as an existential threat to to liberalism in in the west in the
united states is it a problem or is it the biggest problem that's threatening all of human
civilization it's i would never i would not say it's the biggest problem it might be i wouldn't
if someone if it turns out in 50 years someone says actually it was i wouldn't be shocked but i
also i would i wouldn't bet on that because there's a lot of problems i'm a little sorry to interrupt
it it is popular to say that kind of thing though and it's less popular to say the same
thing about ai or nuclear weapons which worries me that i'm more worried about nuclear weapons
even still than i am about wokeism so i've gotten i've had probably a thousand arguments
about this that's one nice thing about spending six years procrastinating on getting a book done
is you end up test battle testing your ideas a million times so i've heard this one a lot right
which is there's kind of three groups of former obama voters one is super woke now another one
is super anti woke now and the third is what you just said which is sure wokeness is over the top
right they're not you're not woke but i think that the anti woke people are totally lost their
mind and it's just not that big a deal right now here's why i disagree with that because it's not
it's not wokeness itself it's that a radical um political movement of which there will always
be a lot in the country has managed to do something that a radical movement is not supposed to be able
to do in the us which is they've managed to hijack institutions all across the country and hijack
medical journals and universities and you know the aclu you know so you know all the you know
activist organizations and nonprofits and and certain NGOs yeah and many and many tech companies
and what so it's not that i think this thing is so bad it's a little like we said with trump
it's that what i'm what the reason trump scares me is not because trump's so bad it's that because
it shows it's it reveals that we were vulnerable to a demagogue to candidate and what wokeness
reveals to me is that we are currently and until something changes will continue to be vulnerable
to a um a bully a bully movement and a forcefully expansionist movement that wants to actually
destroy the workings inner their liberal gears and tear them apart and so here's the way I view
a liberal democracy is it is it it is a bunch of these institutions that were that were trial and
error crafted over you know hundreds of years and they all rely on trust public trust and
there's certain kind of feeling of unity that that actually is critical to a liberal democracies
functioning and what i see this thing is is as a parasite on that that whose goal is and i'm not
saying each by the way each individual in this is i don't think they're bad people i think that
it's it's the ideology itself has the property of its goal is to tear apart the pretty delicate
workings of the liberal democracy and shred the critical lines of trust and so you talk about
ai and you talk about all these other big problem nuclear right the reason i i like writing about
that stuff a lot more than i like writing about politics this wasn't a fun topic for me is because
i realized that like all of those things if they were going to have a good future with those things
and they're actually threats like i said we need to have our wits about us and we need the the liberal
you know gears and and and levers working we need the liberal machine working and so with
something's threatening to undermine that it affects everything else we need to have our
scientific mind about us about these foundational ideas but i i i guess my sense of hope comes from
observing the immune system respond to wokeism there seems to be a pro liberalism immune system
and not only that so like there's intellectuals there's people that are
willing to do the fight you talk about courage are being courageous and there is a hunger for that
such that those ideas can become viral and they take over so i just don't see a mechanism by which
wokeism accelerates like exponentially and takes over like it's expand it feels like as it expands
the immune system responds uh the the the immune system of the of liberalism of of basically a
country in at least in the united states that still ultimately at the core of the individual values
the freedom of speech just freedoms in general the freedom of an individual but that's the battle
which is stronger so to me it is like a virus and an immune system yeah and i totally agree i see
the same story happening and i you know i'm sitting here rooting for the immune system
are you still worried well here's the thing so a liberal democracy is always going to be vulnerable
to a movement like this right and there will be more because it's not a totalitarian dictatorship
because if you can socially pressure people to not say what they're thinking you can suddenly
start to just take over right you can break the liberalism of the liberal democracy quite easily
and suddenly a lot of things are illiberal on the other hand the same vulnerability the same
system that's vulnerable to that also is hard to truly conquer because now the Maoists right
similar kind of vibe they were saying that science is evil and is a you know and that and that they're
the intellectuals are you know it's all the it's all this big conspiracy but they could murder you
and they had the hard cudgel in their hand right and the hard cudgel is scary and
um and and you can conquer a country with the hard cudgel but you can't use that in the us
so what they have is a soft cudgel which can have the same effect initially you can scare people
into shutting up you can't maybe imprison them and murder them but if you can socially ostracize
them and get them fired that basically is going to have the same effect so the soft cudgel can
have the same effect for a while but the thing is it's it's a little bit of a house of cards
because it relies on fear and as soon as that fear goes away the whole thing falls apart right the
soft cudgel requires people to be so scared of getting canceled or getting whatever and as soon
as some people start you know Toby Lutka of Shopify I always like think about you know he just
said you know what I'm not scared of this soft cudgel and spoke up and said we're not political
at this company and we're not a family we're a team and we're gonna do this and you know what like
they're thriving he will be on this podcast he seems like a fascinating he's amazing he spoke up
he's one of the the smartest and like kindest dudes but he's also um he has courage at a time
when it's hard but here's the thing is that it's different than that you need so much less courage
against a soft cudgel then you do the the Iranians throwing their hijabs into the fire those people's
courage just just blows away any courage we have here because they might get executed that's the
thing is that you can actually have courage right now and it's so don't worry about it
oh man the irony of that and you talk about so two things to fight this there's two things
awareness and courage what's the awareness piece the awareness piece is um is is under first just
no understanding the stakes like getting our heads out of the sand and being like technology is
blowing up exponentially we're our society's trust is devolving like we're kind of falling
apart in some important ways we're losing our grip on some stability at the worst time that's the
first point just a big picture and then also awareness of i think this vertical axis or whatever
your version of it is this concept of how do i really form my beliefs where do they actually come
from where do you know did they are they someone else's beliefs am i following a checklist
how about my values it you know i used to identify with the blue party or the red party but now
they've changed and and i suddenly am okay with that is that because my values changed with it or
am i actually anchored to the party not to any principle asking yourself these questions um
asking you know looking for where do i feel disgusted by fellow human beings you know that
maybe i'm being a crazy tribal person without realizing it how about the people around me am
i being bullied by some echo chamber without realizing it um am i the bully somewhere right
so that's the first just just just i think just to kind of do a self audit and and and um and i
think that like just just some awareness like that it's just a self audit about these things
can can go a long way but if you don't if you if you keep it to yourself it's almost useless
because if it doesn't if you don't have without you know awareness without courage does very little
so courage is when you take that awareness and you actually export it out into the world and it
starts affecting other people and so courage can happen on multiple levels it can happen
by first of all just stop saying stuff you don't believe if you're being pressured by a
kind of a ideology or a movement to say stuff that you don't actually believe
just stop just just just stand your ground and don't say anything that's that's courage that's
one first step start speaking out in small groups starts you know actually speaking your mind see
what happens the sky doesn't usually fall actually people usually respect you for it like you know
and it's not not every group but like you'd be surprised and then eventually you know maybe
start speaking out in bigger groups start going public you know go go public with it but
and you don't need everyone doing this look some people will lose their jobs for it I'm not talking
to those people most people won't lose their jobs but they have the same fear as if they would right
and it's like what are you gonna get criticized or you can get a bunch of people you know angry
twitter people will will criticize you like it yeah it's not pleasant but actually that's a little
bit like our primitive minds fear that really back when it was programmed that kind of ostracism
or or criticism will get leave you out of the tribe and you'll die today it's kind of a delusional
fear it's not actually that scary and the people who realize that it can can exercise incredible
leadership right now so you have a really interesting description of censorship of self
censorship also as you've been talking about uh who's king mustachion uh this gap I think I hope
you write even more even more than you've written in the book about these ideas because it's so strong
this censorship gaps that are created between the dormant thought pile and uh the kind of
thing under the speech curve yeah so first of all so I like to think of I think it's a useful tool
is this thing called a thought pile which is if you have a on any given issue you have a horizontal
spectrum and just say I could take your brain out of your head and I put it on the thought pile
right where you happen to believe about that issue now I did that for everyone in the in the
community or in a society and you're going to end up with a big mushy pile that I think will
often form a bell curve if it's really politicized might form like a camel with two humps because
there's like concentrated here but for a typical issue it'll just form you know a fear of AI you're
going to have a bell curve right you know things like this that's the thought pile now the second
thing is a line that's I call the speech curve which is what people are saying so the speech curve
is high when not just a lot of people are saying it but it's being said from the biggest platforms
being set in the you know and then you know in the New York Times and it's being said
by the president on you know in the state of the you know those things are the top of the speech
curve now and then as you know and then when the speech curve is lower it means it's being said
either whispered in small groups or it's just not very many people are talking about it now a healthy
when a when a free speech democracy is healthy on a certain topic you've got the speech curve
sitting right on top of the thought pile they mirror each other which is naturally what would
happen more more people think something it's going to be said more often and from higher platforms
what censorship does and that's the censorship can be from the government I so I use the tail
of king mustache and king mustache he's a little tiny tyrant and he's very sensitive and people are
making fun of his mustache and they're saying he's not a good king and he does not like that so what
does he do he enacts a policy and he says anyone who has heard criticize anyone who has heard
criticizing me or my mustache or my rule will be put to death and immediately at the town
is because his father was a very liberal there was always free speech in in his kingdom but now
king must have just taken over and he's saying this is a new new rules now and so a few people
yell out and they say that's not how we do things here and that moment that's what I call a moment
of truth did the king's guards stand with the principles of the kingdom and say yeah king
mustache it's not what we do in which case he would kind of have to he's nothing he can do
or are they going to execute so in this case it's as if he laid down an electric fence over a
part of this thought pile and said no one's allowed to speak over here the speech curve
maybe people will think these things but the speech curve cannot go over here
but the electric fence wasn't actually electrified until the king's guards
in a moment of truth get scared and say okay and they hang the five people who spoke out
so in that moment that fence just became electric and now no one criticizes king
mustache anymore so I use this as an allegory now of course he has a hard cudgel because he can
execute people but now when we look at the US what you're seeing right now is a lot of pressure
which is very similar an electric fence is being laid down saying no one can criticize these ideas
and if you do you won't be executed you'll be cancelled you'll be you'll be you'll be fired
now what is that fence electrified from there no they don't they can't actually
they're not working the company they can't fire you but they can start a twitter mob when someone
violates that speech curve when someone violates that speech rule and then the leadership of the
company has the moment of truth and what the leaders should do is stand up for their company's
values which is almost always in favor of the employee and say look you know even if they
made a mistake they make people make mistakes we're not going to fire them or maybe that person
actually said something that's reasonable and we should discuss it but either way we're not going
to fire them and if they said no what happens is the the twitter mob actually doesn't have
they can't execute you they they go away and the fence has proven to have no electricity
what's been the problem with the past few years is what's happened again and again
is the leader gets scared and they don't they get scared in the front when they fire them
boom that fence has electricity and now actually if you cross that it's not just you know a threat
like you will have you'll be out of a job like it's really bad like you'll have a huge penalty
you might not be able to feed your kids so that's an electric fence that goes up now what happens
when an electric fence goes up and it's proven to actually be electrified the speech curve morphs
into a totally different position and now these new people say instead of having the kind of marketplace
of ideas you know that turns into a kind of a natural bell curve they say no no no these ideas
are okay to say not just okay you'll be socially rewarded and these ones don't that's the rules
of their own echo chamber that they're now applying to everyone and it's working and so the speech
curve distorts and so you end up with now instead of one region which is a region of kind of active
communal thinking what people are thinking and saying you now have three regions you have a little
active communal thinking but mostly you now have this dormant thought pile which is all these
these opinions that suddenly everyone's scared to say out loud everyone's thinking but they're scared
to say everyone's thinking but no one's saying and then you have this other region which is this
the the approved ideas of this now cultural kind of dictator and those are being spoken
from the largest platforms and they're being repeated by the president and they're being
repeated all over the place you know even though people don't believe it and that's this distortion
and what happens is the society becomes really stupid because active communal thinking is the
region where we can actually think together and now no one can think together and it gets it gets
siloed into small private conversations it's really powerful what you said about institutions
and so on it's not trivial to from a leadership position to be like no we we defend the employee
or we defend the um the yeah the employee the person with us on our like because we don't
there's because there's no actual uh ground to the any kind of violation we're hearing about
so the mob they resist the mob it's ultimately to the leader I guess of a particular institution
of a particular company and it's difficult oh yeah no no it's not I don't if it were easy
it wouldn't there wouldn't be all of these failings and by the way this is that's the immune system
failing that's the liberal immune system of that company failing but also then it's an example
which means that a lot of other you know it's failing to kind of to the country it's not easy
of course it's not because why because we have primitive minds that are wired to care so much
about what people think of us and even if we're not gonna you know maybe first of all we're scared
that it's going to start a because there's you know what you know what what do mobs do
they don't just say I'm going to criticize you I'm going to criticize anyone who still buys
your product I'm going to criticize anyone who goes on your podcast so it's not just you it's now
suddenly if if if if Lex becomes tarnished enough now I go on the podcast and people are saying oh
I'm not buying his book you went on Lex Friedman no no thanks right and now I get by there it's a
call I call it a smear web like you've been smeared and it's so we're in such a you know bad time
that it smeared travels to me and now meanwhile someone who buys my book and tries to share it
someone said you're buying that guy's book you know he goes on Lex Friedman you know you see how
this happens right so that hasn't happened in this case but that so we are so wired not and
hey that is kind of bad right like that is actually like bad for you but but we're wired to care about
it so much because it meant life or death back in the day yeah yeah and luckily in this case we're
both uh probably can smear each other in this conversation this is wonderful I smear you all
the time given given the nature of your book um what what do what do you think about freedom of
speech as a term and as an idea as a way to resist the mechanism this mechanism of dormant
thought pile artificially generated speech this ideal of the freedom of speech and protecting
speech and celebrating yeah well so this is this is kind of the point I was talking about earlier
about King Westash made a rule against for he's created officially guys just I just love the one
of the amazing things about your book as you get later and later in the book you cover more and more
difficult issues as a way to illustrate the importance of the vertical perspective but
there's something about using hilarious drawings throughout that make it much more fun and it
takes you away from the personal somehow and you start thinking in the space of ideas versus like
outside of the tribal type of thinking so it's a really brilliant I mean I would advise for
any way to do when they write controversial books to have hilarious drawings it's true like put the
silly stick figure in your thing and it it lightens it does it lightens the mood it gets people's
guard down a little yeah you know and it works it reminds people that like we're all friends here
right like we're you know let's like laugh you know laugh at ourselves laugh at the laugh at
the fact that we're like in a culture war a little bit and now we can talk about it right as opposed
to like getting like religious about it but but basically like King Westash had no first amendment
he said we the government is censoring right which is very common around the world right government
censor all them the US you know again there's some you can argue there's some controversial
things recently but basically the US the first amendment isn't the problem right no one is
being arrested for saying the wrong thing but this graph is still happening and so so freedom of
speech when people what if what people like to say is if someone's camp complaining about a
cancel culture and saying you know this is this is you know an anti-free speech people like to
point out no it's not the government's not arresting you for anything this is called like
you know the free market buddy like this is called you know you're putting your ideas out and you're
getting criticized and your precious marketplace of ideas there it is right you know I've gotten
this a lot and this is not making a critical distinction between cancel culture and criticism
culture um criticism culture is a little bit of this kind of high rung idea lab stuff we talked
about criticism culture attacks the idea and and and and encourages further discussion right it
enlivens discussion it makes everyone smarter cancel culture attacks the person very different
can't criticism culture says here's why this idea is so bad let me tell you cancel culture says
here's why this person is bad and no one should talk to them and they should be fired and what
does that do it doesn't enliven the discussion it makes everyone scared to talk and it's the
opposite it shuts down discussion so you still have your first amendment but first amendment
plus cancel culture equals you might as well be in king must you might as well have government
censorship right first amendment plus criticism culture great now you have this vibrant marketplace
of ideas so there's a very clear difference um and so when when people criticize the cancel culture
and then someone says oh see you're so sensitive now you look you're doing the cancel culture yourself
you're trying to punish this person for critics like no no no no no no every good liberal and I
and I mean that in the lower case which is that anyone who believes in liberal democracies
regardless of what they believe should stand up and say no to cancel culture and say this is not
okay regardless of what the actual topic is and that makes them a good liberal versus if they're
trying to cancel someone who's just criticizing they're doing the opposite now they're shutting
so it's the opposite things but it's very easy to get confused you can see people take advantage of
the and sometimes they just don't know it themselves the the the lines here can be very
confusing the wording can be very confusing and without that wording someone suddenly it looks
like someone who's criticizing cancel culture is cancelling but they're not you apply this
thinking to universities in particular um I've that there's a great yet another great image
on the trade off between knowledge and conviction and it's what's commonly actually can maybe explain
to me the difference but you it's often referred to as the dunning kruger effect where you uh when
you first learn of a thing you have an extremely um high confidence about self estimation of how
well you understand that thing you actually say that dunning kruger means something else
so yeah it's everyone I post this everyone's like dunning kruger and it's and it's what everyone
thinks dunning kruger isn't dunning kruger is a little different it's it's you have a diagonal line
like this one right which is the place you are it's the I call it like the humility tight row but
the humility sweet spot it's exactly the right level of humility based on what you know if you're
below it you're insecure you actually have too much humility you don't have enough confidence
because you know more than you're giving yourself credit for and when you're above the line you're
in the arrogant zone right you're you need a you need a dose of humility right you think you know
more than you do so y'all want to stay on that tight rope and dunning kruger is basically a
straight line that's just a has a lower slope so you start off you still are you still are getting
more confident as you go along but you start off above that line and as you learn more you end
up below the line later so but anyway so this wavy thing this wavy thing is is is in different
phenomenon and it's just it's just related but so this idea so for people just listening
there's a child's hill pretty damn sure you know a whole lot and feeling great about it that's in
the beginning and then there's an insecure canyon you crash down acknowledging that you don't know
that much and then there's a growth mountain grown up mountain grown up mountain where after you
feel ashamed and embarrassed about not knowing that much you begin to realize that knowing how
little you know is the first step in becoming someone who actually knows stuff and that's the
the grown-up mountain and you climb and climb and climb you're saying that in universities
were pinning people at the top of the child's hill so for me this is a very you know I think of
myself with this because I went to college like a lot of 18 year olds and I was very cocky I just
thought I knew a lot you know and when it came to politics I was like bright blue just because I
grew up in a bright blue suburb and I wasn't thinking that hard about it and I thought that
you know and what I did when I went to college is met a lot of smart conservatives and a lot of
smart progressives but I've met a lot of people who weren't just going down a checklist and they
knew stuff and when I and it suddenly I realized that like a lot of these views I have are not
based on knowledge they're based on other people's conviction everyone else thinks that's true so now
I think it's whoa you know I'm I'm actually like I'm I'm transferring someone else's conviction
to me and who knows why they have conviction they might have conviction because they're transferring
from someone else and I'm a smart dude I thought why why am I why am I like giving away my own
independent you know learning abilities here and just adopting other views so anyway it was this
humbling experience and it wasn't just about politics by the way it was that I had strong
views about a lot of stuff and I just I got lucky not or not lucky I sought out you know the kind
of people I sought out were the type that loved to disagree and they were man they knew stuff
and so you're quickly in you know in in again idea lab culture it was an idea lab and also I
also went to I started getting in the habit I started loving listening to people who disagreed
with me because it was so exhilarating listening to a smart when I thought there was no no credence
to this other argument right the this side of this debate is obviously wrong I wanted to see an
intelligence squared on that debate in particular I wanted to go see I actually got into intelligence
squared in college I wanted to see a smart person who disagrees with me talk it became so
fascinating to me right it was the most interesting thing that was a new thing I didn't think I like
that and so what did that do that that shoved me down the humble tumble here number three it shoved
me down where I started to and I and then I and then I went the other way where I realized that I
had been a lot of my identity had been based on this faux feeling of knowledge this idea that I
thought I knew everything now that I don't have that I was like I felt really like dumb and I felt
really almost like embarrassed of what I knew and so that's where I call this insecure canyon I
think it's sometimes when you're so used to thinking you know everything and then you realize
you don't it's like it's and then you start to realize that actually really awesome thinkers
they were they they don't judge me for this they totally respect if I say I don't know anything
about this to say oh cool you should read this and this and this they don't say you don't know
anything they don't say that right and so and not that I'm by the way this is not to say I'm now
on grown-up mountain and you should all join me I am often find myself drifting up with like a
helium balloon oh I think I read about the new thing and suddenly I think I have all I think I
you know I read three things about you know a new AI thing and I'm like I'll go do a talk on this
and like no I won't I don't I just I'm going to just be spouting out the opinion of the person
I just read so I have to remind myself but it's useful now what the reason my problem with colleges
today is that it's I was graduated in 2004 this is a recent change is that all of those speakers
I went who disagreed with me a lot of them were conservative so many of those speakers would not
be allowed on campuses today and so many of the discussions I had were in big groups or classrooms
and this is still you know this was a liberal campus so many of those disagreements
they're not happening today and you I've interviewed a ton of college students it's chilly
it is you know people keep to themselves so what's happening is not only are people losing that
push off the child's hill which was so valuable to me so valuable to me as a thinker it kind of
started my life as a better thinker they're losing that but actually would college a lot of the
college classes and the vibe in colleges a lot of what is now saying that there is one right set
of views and it's this kind of you know woke ideology and it's right and anyone who disagrees
with it is bad and anyone and and don't speak up you know unless you're going to agree with it
it's teaching people that child's hills that you know it's it's nailing people's feet to child's hill
it's teaching people that these are right this user right and like you don't have any you nothing
to you should feel a complete conviction about them yeah how do we fix it is a part of the
administration is a part of the culture is a part of the uh is a part like actually instilling in
the individual like 18 year olds the idea that this is the beautiful way to live is to embrace
the disagreement and the growth from that it's awareness and courage it's the same thing so
first of all just get when that awareness is people need to see what's happening here that
kids are getting losing the they're not going to college and becoming better tougher more robust
thinkers yeah they're actually going to college and becoming zealots they're getting taught to be
zealots and the at in the website still advertises you know wide variety of i've you know the website
is a bait and switch you listen to all the universities yeah it's a bait and switch it's
it's still saying here you're coming here for a wide intellectual basically they're advertising
this is an idea lab and you get there and it's like actually it's an echo chamber that you're
paying money for so if people realize that they start to get mad hopefully and then courage i mean
starts you know yes brave students there's been some very brave students who have started you know
big think clubs and stuff like that where it's like we're gonna have you know present both sides
of a debate here and that that takes courage but also um courage and leadership um like the it's
it's like if you look at these colleges it's specifically the leaders who show strength
who get who get the best results remember the the cudgel is soft so if a leader of one of these
places says you know the the college presidents who have shown some strength um they actually
don't get as much trouble it's the ones who pander the ones who um uh in that you know
in that moment of truth they they they shrink away then they get a lot more trouble the mob
smells blood for the listener uh the the podcast favorite live burry just entered and your friend
just entered the room uh do you mind if she joins us please i think there's a story she has about you
so live you mentioned something that there's a funny story about we haven't talked at all about
the actual process of writing the book is is there you guys made a bet of some kind
yeah is this a true story is this a completely false fabric no no it's it's true live is she's
mean when you i didn't i did not know mean live she's like she's like a bully she's like scary i
have to have that have that screenshot so live was FaceTiming me and she was like she was like
being intimidating i took a screenshot and i made it my phone background so every time i opened it
i was like ah so to give the background of this it's because if you hadn't noticed tim started
writing this book how many years ago six 2016 mid 2016 right as a sort of a response to like the
trump stuff and not not even yeah it was just supposed to be a mini post i was like oh i'm so
like i was like i'm looking at all these like future tech things and i feel this like uneasiness
like ah we're gonna like mess up all these things why there's like some cloud over our society let
me just write a mini post and i opened it up to wordpress to write a one day little essay
and things went on politics it was going to be on like this feeling i had that like this feeling i
had that um we were our tech was was just growing and growing and we were becoming less wise what's
up what's up with that and i just wanted to write like just like a little like a little
thousand word essay on like something i think we should pay attention to and that was the
beginning of this six year nightmare did you anticipate also the blog post would take a long
while um i don't remember the process fully in terms of i remember you saying oh i'm actually
writing this is it's turning into a bigger thing and i was like mmm you know and because the more
we talked about remember we were talking about it i was like oh this goes deep because i didn't
really understand the full scope of the situation like nowhere near and and you sort of explained
it i was like okay yeah i see that and then the more we dug into it the sort of the deeper and
deeper and deeper it went but no i did not anticipate it would be six years let's put it that way
and when was your ted talk on uh procrastination so that was that was march of 2016 and i started
this book three months later and fell like to the biggest procrastination hole that i've ever
fallen into oh wow the irony isn't lost on me i mean it's like it's i i just like i like how much
cred i have as as for that ted talk i'm like i am legit procrastinator that is no i'm not just
saying it like it wasn't just that because i mean you did you know you did intend it to start out
as a blog post but then you're like actually this needs to be multiple actually let's make it into
a full series you know what i'll turn it into a book and then that's what and and and what
but also what live witnessed a few times and my wife has witnessed like 30 of these is like
these these 180 epiphanies where i'll be like i'll like i'll have a moment when i'm and i don't
know what you know sometimes it's that there's a really good idea sometimes it's like i'm just
dreading having to finish this the way it is and so there's epiphanies where it's like you know what
i need to start over from the beginning and just make this like a short like 20 little blog post
list and then i'll do that and then i was like no no i have like a new epiphany i have to and it's
these and and yeah it's kind of like the crazy person a little bit but anyway can i tell the
story of the the bed all right so things came to a head when we were in we were all in vacation
on dominican republic uh tim and his wife me and ego and we were in the ocean and i remember you'd
been in the ocean for like an hour just bobbing in there becoming it and we got talking and and
we were talking about the book and you know you were expressing just like this you know just the
the horror of the of the situation basically you're like look i just i'm so close but there's still
this and then there's this and um an idea popped into my head which is the you know poker players
often uh we we will set ourselves like negative bets you know like uh essentially if we don't
get a job done then we have to do something we really don't want to do so instead of having
a carrot like a really really big stick um so i had the idea to ask tim okay
what is the worst either organization or individual uh that you if you had to you know
that you would loathe to give a large sum of money to and he thought about it for a little while
and he gave his answer and i was like all right what's your net worth he said his net worth all
right ten percent of your net worth to that thing if you don't get the draft because oh sorry but
just before that i'd asked him how long like if you had a gun to your head or to your wife's head
and you had to get the booked into a state where you could like send off an edit to the
or to a draft to your editor how long he's like oh i guess like i could get it like 95%
good in a month i was like okay great in one month's time if you do not have that edit handed
in you have scared by the draft hand it's really scary really scary ten percent of your net worth
is going to this thing that you really really think is terrible but you're forgetting the kicker
the kicker was that because you know procrastinators they self-defeat that's what they do and then
Liv says i'm gonna sweeten the deal and i am going to basically match you and i'm going to put in
i'm gonna send this like a huge amount of my own money there if you don't do it so and i can't
that's that would be really bad so not only you screwing yourself you're screwing a friend
and she and she was like and and as your friend because i'm your friend i will send it i will
send the money i mean like that you know like tyranny um and um i got the draft in yeah i got
the draft in just i know i well i was ego could attest to this like actually it was it was funny
because it was it was like supposed to be by the summer solstice or whatever it was it was like a
certain date and it was like four i got it at four i got no i got it at four a.m like the next morning
but then and and and and they were both like that doesn't count i'm like it does it's still for me
it's the same day still it's okay do you imagine how fucked in the head you have to be yeah so like
literally technically pass the deadline by four hours i for an obscene amount of money to a thing
you loathe that's how bad the his his sickness because i knew the hard hard deadline i knew that
there was no way she was going to actually send that money at because it was four a.m so i knew
i actually had the whole night so yeah i should actually punish you and just i should send i should
send like a nominal amount to that thing no thanks no but is there some micro like lessons from that
from how to avoid procrastination writing a book that you've learned yes well i've learned a lot of
things i mean like first don't take don't write like a dissertation about like proving some grand
theory of society because that's really procrastinating like i would have been an awful phd
student for that reason some and so like i'm gonna do another book and it's going to be like a bunch
of short chapters that are one-offs because that's like it just doesn't feed into your book is like
a giant like framework there is grand theories all through your book i know and i learned not to do
that again i did it once i don't want to do it again oh with the book yeah yeah i i learned the book
is a giant mistake yes don't do another one of this looks look some people should it's just not for me
i i you just did it i know and it and it almost killed me okay so that's the first one but secondly
yeah like basically there's two ways to fix procrastination one is you fix it's like a picture
you have a boat that's leaking and it's not working very well you can fix it in two ways you can get
your hammer and nails out and your boards and actually fix the boat or you can duct tape it
for now to get yourself across the river but it's not actually fixed so ideally down the road i have
repaired whatever kind of bizarre mental illness that i have that makes me procrastinate in a very
like i just don't self-defeat in this way anymore but in the meantime i can duct tape the boat by
bringing what i call the panic monster into the situation via things like this and this scary person
and having external pressure to have external pressure of some kind is critical for me uh it's
it's yes i don't have the muscle to do the work i need to do without external pressure by the way
i live is there a possible future where you write a book uh and meanwhile by the way huge
procrastinator that's the funny thing about this yeah no i'm yeah i mean i'm how long did you last
video take oh my god is there advice do you give to live how to get the videos done faster
well it would be the same exact thing i mean actually i can give good procrastination advice
panic monster um yeah well we should do it together it should be like we have this date but
right you know it's it's um we should actually just do another bet i have to have my script
done by this time yes if i go to get the third part out because then you'll actually do it um
and um and and it's not the thing is the time in but it's like if you if you could take three weeks
on a video and instead you take 10 weeks it's not like oh well i also i'm having more fun in
those 10 weeks you're the whole 10 weeks are bad yeah it's torture bad so you're just you're just
having a bad time and you're getting less work done and less work out and it's not like you're
enjoying your personal life it's bad for you for your relationships it's bad for your your own but
you keep doing it anyway yeah well a lot of people a lot of people uh have troubles keeping a diet
right yeah primitive mind why'd you point at me that was offensive what's your procrastination
weakness do you have everything everything everything everything it's everything preparing
for a conversation i had your book amazing book i really enjoyed it i started reading it
i was like this is awesome it's so awesome that i'm going to save it when i'm behind a computer
and can take notes like good notes of course that resulted in like last minute everything
everything everything i'm doing in my life not everyone's like that you know people
self-defeat in different ways some people don't have this particular problem adam grant is a he
calls himself a pre-crastinator where he gets an assignment he will go home and do it until it's
done and handed it which is also not necessarily good you know it's like you you're rushing it
either way but it's better but some people have the opposite thing um where they will um that the
the the the the looming deadline makes them so anxious that they go and fix it right and the
the procrastinator i think has a similar anxiety but it they they solve it in a totally
different way or they don't solve it they just live with the anxiety right right they just live
with the exact now i think there's a even bigger group of people so there's these people that adam
grants there's people like me and then there's people who have a healthy relationship with deadlines
but they're still part of a bigger group of people that actually they they um they need a deadline
there to do something so they actually they they still are motivated by a deadline and as
soon as you have all the things in life that don't have a deadline like working out and like
working on that album you want it to write they don't do anything either so there's actually like
that's why procrastination is a much bigger problem than people realize because it's not
just the funny last second people it's anyone who um actually can't get things done that don't have a
deadline you dedicate your book quote to tannis who never planned on being married to someone who
would spend six years talking about his book on politics but here we are uh what's the secret
to a successful relationship with a procrastinator that's maybe for both of you um well i think
the the first most important thing you already started with a political answer i can tell okay
go ahead no the first and most important thing is because people who don't procrastinate if you
know it's like you will they people and the instinct is to judge it as like uh that's either
either just think think they're just being like a loser they're taking it they'll take it personally
you know uh and instead to see this is like this is this is a uh of some form of addiction or some
form of um ailment you know they're not just being a dick right like they have a problem and so so
some compassion but then also maybe finding that line where you can you know maybe apply some tough
love some middle ground on the other hand you might say that you know you don't want the the
significant other relationship where it's like they're into one nagging you maybe that's you don't
want them even being part of that and i think it maybe it's you know better to have a live do it
instead right having someone who can like create the infrastructure where they aren't the direct
stick you need a bit of carrot and stick right maybe they can be the person who keeps reminding
in them of the carrot and then they set up the friend group to be the stick and then that keeps
your relationship yeah in a good place stick like looming in the background that's your friend group
okay at the beginning of the conversation we talked about how all of human history
can be presented as a a thousand page book uh what are you excited about for the one thousandth
probably say that first page uh so the next 250 years what are you what are you what are you
most excited about i'm most excited about um have you read the fable of the dragon okay well
it's an allegory for death and it's you know nick bostrom and he talks about the he compares
death to a dragon that eats 60 million people or whatever the number is every year and you just
every year we shepherd those people up and they feed them to the dragon and that there's a stock
home syndrome when we say that's just a lot of man and that's what we have to do and anyone who
says maybe we should try to beat the dragon they get called vain and narcissistic um but someone who
tries to someone who goes does chemo no one calls them vain or narcissistic they say they're
they're you know good good for you right you're a hero you're you're you're fighting fighting the
good fight so i think there's some disconnect here and i think that if we can get out of that
stock home syndrome and realize that death is just the machine the human physical machine
failing and that there's no law of nature that says you can't with enough technology
repair the machine and keep it going until no one i don't think anyone wants to live forever
people think they do no one does but until people are ready and i think when we hit a world where we
can we we have enough tech that we can continue to keep the human machine alive until the person
says i'm i'm done i'm ready i think we will look back and we will think that anything before that
time that'll be the real ad bc you know we'll look back at bc before the big advancement and it'll
seem so sad and so heartbreaking barbaric and people say i can't believe that humans like us
had to live with that when they lost loved ones and they they died before they were ready
i think that's the ultimate achievement but we need to stop criticizing and smearing people
who you talk about it so you think where that's actually doable in the next 250 years
a lot happens in 250 years especially when technology is really exponentially yeah
and you think humans would be around versus ai completely takes over where i mean i mean
look the optimist in me and maybe the stupid kind of 2023 person in me says yeah of course we'll
make it we'll we'll figure it out but you know i mean we are going into a great you know i have
a friend who knows as much about the future as anyone i know i mean he's really he's a big investor
and you know future tech and he um he's really on the pulse of things and he just says the future
is going to be weird that's what he says future is going to be weird and it's it's going to be
weird don't look at your the last few decades of your life and apply that forward and say that's
just what life is like no no no it's going to be weird and different well some of my favorite
things in this world are weird and speaking of which it's good to have this conversation it's good
to have you as friends this was an incredible one thanks for coming back and live thanks for talking
with me a bunch more times this was awesome thank you lex thank you thanks for listening to this
conversation with tim urban to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the
description and now let me leave you with some words from Winston Churchill when there's no enemy
within the enemies outside cannot hurt you thank you for listening and hope to see you next time
