Trigger warnings, safe spaces, microaggressions, unconscious bias and lived experience.
The language of therapy is now used widely and indiscriminately.
We live in a time where stoicism and rationality are seen as antiquated, harmful even.
Instead, we are encouraged to normalise eccentricities and perversions,
while endlessly focusing on our needs, our emotions, self-care and our inner child.
And yet, more and more of us are looking out at our culture and society
and feel like we are observing a psychiatric ward.
Male rapists in women's prisons, racial segregation in schools,
the censorship of books and the rewriting of history.
The world's gone mad, many of us cry.
But do we even know what madness is anymore?
Have our mental health professionals got our best interests at heart?
Is sanity still the goal?
Or, instead, has the psychiatric profession become a battleground
for warring versions of reality with the patients sacrificed and made a casualty of the cause?
As a mental health nurse, I've worked closely with patients suffering from a wide range of mental health conditions.
And while I have experience working with a range of treatments,
my real interest is in talking therapies.
However, like many, I'm concerned about the radical, harmful and authoritarian ideologies
that are destroying this profession.
While training to become a psychotherapist at the Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust,
I soon became aware that critical race theory was being used to encourage unequal treatments,
judgments and generalisations about people based on the colour of their skin.
When I spoke up about this and advocated for the colour-blind approach
of treating people of all races equally as individuals and without prejudice,
I was told that this was discredited and outdated.
By disagreeing with the view that all white people are racist,
I was told that I had created a traumatising environment.
Not content with threatening to bar me from the profession of psychotherapy,
one lecturer attempted to have me struck off as a nurse,
claiming that I had caused race-based harm and was unfit to work with diverse patients.
The course lead would later give a pre-written speech,
declaring that I had made the learning environment unsafe due to my oppressive hate speech.
I was subsequently prevented from finishing my clinical work
and told not to be present in the clinic's reception area
because the sight of my face could cause trauma.
Without the generosity of those donating to my legal crowdfund,
I would have been left with no way of fighting back and protecting my career.
I spoke to Dr Valerie Thomas about the effects that woke ideology,
also known as critical social justice, is having on psychotherapy.
Once critical social justice is introduced into any arena,
it has a totalising and an authoritarian agenda,
and its agenda is to dismantle and disrupt
all the pre-existing approaches to that particular arena.
So in the case of counselling and psychotherapy,
once you introduce CSJ into the territory,
it wants to decolonise the field,
it wants to remove any different view of the human condition,
it wants to completely obliterate that.
So a really good example would be different approaches
to contentious areas of race.
So it won't allow any other view than its own anti-racist perspective.
So ideas such as colour blindness won't be allowed to exist separately.
It will go out of its way to demolish and deconstruct
all the other approaches that have those different views.
So the end result of CSJ coming into counselling and psychotherapy
will be homogeneity.
Providing a perfect example of what psychotherapists describe
as reaction formation or describing the opposite of what you are doing,
the Tavistock racism was presented as fervent anti-racism
as it declared itself to be an anti-racist organisation.
There's a range of third-party organisations that have been brought in by
universities who are trying to achieve the top
ranking as an anti-racist university, an inclusive
open university on the question of racism.
They have lots of overseas students, they have lots of students from ethnic
minorities, they don't want to be seen as racist.
They bring in organisations who put forward
a critical race theory approach to racism
and we know that with that comes all manner of problems,
an inbuilt sense of grievance, an assertion of white supremacy
and of white privilege, a guilt to be associated with your skin colour if you're
white, an introduction of a victim mentality if
you're non-white and these things and you know power
relations critiqued in a particular way.
In an academic university setting it's perfectly reasonable to be familiar
with those theories, in fact I would advocate that
young people would be familiar with them because they're very popular
but they should be familiar with them as a set of theories
not as fact, not as the only policy that counts and that in fact if you
challenge those theories you can actually be called out as a bigot
discipline and so on and so forth so that's the problem with them if they
were introduced as part of an academic package of
you know we should be familiar as I say with
critical theory is a major intellectual movement.
I would expect that lots of students particularly in the humanities would be
familiar with it but to then say you have to live by that
and for a university to think that its status as an anti-racist or inclusive
organisation needs to go along with this I think is very problematic, very
dangerous for a free speech, a real assault on academic freedom.
Unfortunately my experience at the Tavistock is not an exception.
In 2022 a report conducted by Dr Carol Sherwood
and Dr Kirsty Miller showed that clinical psychology training courses
across the UK are encouraging trainees to decolonise traditional
evidence-based treatments by removing anything that could be considered
white and Eurocentric. Increasingly mental health professionals
are being bullied or denied their careers for disagreeing
with woke dogma. You know I hear from trainees who have kind of paused their
studies pending the outcome of cases such as ours
because they just want to see what the lay of the land is before they continue.
Other trainees who literally and it's causing them a lot of pain inside
because they feel that they just cannot speak out but they desperately
need a qualification and so they're just going to keep their head down
and they feel that they're not being true to themselves which I think can eat
someone up inside but the alternative is to speak out to get kicked off and then
to lose their livelihood. So some people feel that they don't have
an option in that respect but yes we have new members joining us
all the time you know looking for something else.
On the flip side as I've said earlier there's a lot of therapists out there who
have kind of taken on board this ideology and now
fully embrace it and you know it's quite worrying to see. I mean
I was invited last year to a conference by a group called the Society for
Extential Analysis to give a general talk about what
happened to me and gender identity theory more generally.
You know it's a group of therapists so one would hope they would be able to
handle difficult conversations and and hear things they don't
necessarily agree with you know this is part and parcel of what it is to be a
therapist but I was told that there were boycotts of the event
people didn't show up. After my session finished there was a
what they called an emergency safe space that needed to be held
because some therapists were so traumatised by the sight of my face
in the building that they couldn't you know kind of bear to go on
without having a safe space to debrief in.
This worries me. It sounds very similar to what's happened to me it's almost cut
and paste I've been told I'm unsafe I'm traumatising these
you know how this language is weaponised.
Yeah I mean it's hysteria isn't it it's you know it's
an extreme form of catastrophising and emotionality it's
it's not healthy response regardless of the politics or what your
beliefs are about anything reacting you know I wouldn't react like that to
someone who had a different opinion to me on anything really
like it's it's it's so extraordinary that mental health
professionals are behaving like this because they are the
group that you would expect to be able to think and you know
manage their own emotions. Exactly these are the bloody therapists
I mean what what hope do clients have if their therapist crumbles
under the slightest bit of pressure or something that they don't agree with I
mean you know it's a fundamental principle of being a
ethical counselor therapist of bracketing your own personal views and
beliefs because you're going to encounter clients
who think and view the world very differently to you.
The origins of psychiatry as we know it today can be traced back to 18th
century France a group of doctors began focusing
more on understanding and caring for the mentally unwell
rather than just incarcerating them a century later
neurologist Jean-Martin Chaco considered the founder of modern
neurology began diagnosing and treating hysteria
or excessive emotionality Chaco had put on displays of his patients
during his teaching sessions in Paris one observer of this was the Austrian
neurologist Sigmund Freud. Freud was particularly interested
in the link Chaco made between mental illness
trauma and conflicted sexuality Freud theorized that an impeded or
disrupted sexual development was the underlying cause
of many psychological issues he outlined a triangular
edipal configuration whereby the child has to navigate
his or her position desire and attachment
in relation to the parental couple for Freud repressed fears and fantasies
with a key to understanding human behavior making the unconscious
conscious through talking therapy would lead the patient to greater
self-awareness and a reduction of symptoms
and so the 20th century saw a flourishing of various forms of talking
therapies as Freud's practice of psychoanalysis
developed those that followed on from him all differed in their own theories
and practices but they formed a broader tradition of
focusing on the interplay between the patient's own inner psychic reality
and the reality of the external world the aim being
to identify and understand patterns of thinking
and behaving which were hindering or harming the patient
being able to accept and manage life's harsh disappointments and limitations
was a key part of this and being able to separate subjective feelings from
objective facts was vital to healthy functioning
and what Freud termed reality testing. However alongside the development of
psychoanalysis another theoretical framework
also began to emerge one with a very different agenda
originating in the 1930s the Frankfurt school were a group of radical
far-left academics who sought to merge Freud's
psychoanalytic theory with Marxism. This merger would become to be known
as critical theory and it would seek to dismantle an
upterm prevailing power structures as defined from a purely communist
perspective and so psychoanalysis and
psychological concepts and terms more broadly
became co-opted by a narrow and extreme political agenda.
The most influential among the critical theorists was Herbert Marcuse.
Building on Freud's emphasis on repression Marcuse proposed that a
tolerant liberal society should be fought as exhibiting a form of societal
repression a notion he termed repressive
tolerance. A truly liberated and unrepressed society could only be
realized through communism.
And to achieve this would require an intolerance and even violence towards
anyone who opposed communism. Alongside this anxiety and alienation
signaled being in contact with the reality of your own oppression
whereas happiness belonging and positivity
were a sign that you had developed false consciousness
and internalized your own oppression and what was the cure for your false
consciousness to awaken a critical consciousness to become
woke to become just as resentful and cynical as the critical theorists
themselves. So real tolerance is being
intolerant negative thinking is positive
and happiness is oppression. If this all sounds insane
it's because it is. As we know critical social justice
has a genius for rhetorical strategies and a rhetorical strategy that was used
in our field was the positioning of critical social justice
as an evolved form of previous social justice
and anybody who wasn't on on board with that
was out of date potentially reactionary. So therapists and
counselors generally were sold this and they bought it
and something that myself and my colleagues have really
struggled with is that none of our or hardly any of the
the leaders in our field stood up against this. So there has been no
public critique. I mean for a radically different approach to
counseling and psychotherapy I'm just going to say it again
no public critique and I find that absolutely astonishing.
The critical theorists began to notice a problem preventing their communist
utopia. Living conditions had improved so
dramatically for the working classes they lacked a desire for full scale
revolution. In response to this a shift began to
happen. Oppression in economic terms began to
be replaced by oppression in relation to identity
namely gender, sexuality and race. In the 1950s the French
Algerian psychiatrist and psychoanalyst France Fanon
joined the Algerian National Liberation Front.
In his writings Fanon praised the Nazis for resolving Germany's border issues
by force and he urged a similar violent
revolution in Algeria to achieve the same cultural
purification. During this time Fanon was making his own
contributions to critical theory specifically on the subject of race
paving the way for the decolonization movement.
In keeping with the Marxist separation of people into either oppressors or
oppressed Fanon saw people not as individuals
but as colonizers or colonized Fanon took the Nazi prejudices applied to Jews
that they were all rich, all powerful and to blame for all the evil in the
world and he applied this to white Europeans.
A denial that it's legit that it's a good thing to treat people as
individuals and to take people as we find them
according to what they say and how they act and instead we'd see people as
cyphers or proxies of a collective identity based on race and that's
that's really harmful it's harmful because it's dehumanizing
and when you start dehumanizing groups of people
it then becomes very much easier to politically and
in reality treat people in ways that are unequal and cruel and can be very
very dangerous. For Fanon revolutionary murder is a necessity
political violence is presented as being therapeutic
and the mass killing of Europeans a kind of psychiatric treatment
he describes how the native cures himself of colonial neurosis
by thrusting the settler out through force of arms
and what exactly did so-called decolonization look like for Fanon?
A complete destruction of political and economic systems
brought about through violent genocide in Fanon's words
decolonization is quite simply the replacing of a certain species of men
by another species of men. With contemporary calls to decolonize
school curriculums museums and literature
psychotherapy has not unsurprisingly escaped the decolonization movement.
They're conflating the processes of knowledge accumulation
with the processes of imperialism and colonialism in the past
just like the British appropriated cotton from India and brought it back to
Britain remade it and sold it again etc
they've done that with knowledge and culture and that's the really fatal
flaw that's why if they do if you accept that
then what you are accepting that knowledge and ideas and imagination
have no reality of their own which is why I would call it
an anti-realist position regarding knowledge and culture because they're
conflating it with political and historical processes
and I think there is an analytical distinction to be made
and I think we need to observe that distinction to allow us
the freedom to engage in critique. I also think they're wrong historically
in their characterization of knowledge because
the idea that science or mathematics or philosophy
questions about existence questions about
nationhood have all kind of been you know
since the Westphalian agreement in whatever century that was have all been
entirely white Europeans is patently untrue
you know you only have to look at the readings of
the nationalist leaders in Africa the writings of Tagore in India
people in Latin America to see that you know these ideas were
contributed to and engaged with by a wide variety of people
across the world and so you know to sort of say that they're
white or western is to me to give up far too much far too easily
to quite a kind of limited quite racist argument really.
Yeah I mean when I was at the Taverstock I was told
one of the lecturers said that psychoanalytic theories are white
theories and I asked how how can a theory be white
that you know while the person who came up with the theory might be white the
theory in itself if it's accepted and it has a
consensus around it it becomes universal and it's for everyone
and I was told that that was an attack and I'd harmed people for just
for just questioning it's very concerning how
race is being attached to ideas and knowledge where it's almost very
as you say kind of possessive that people need to we can't share ideas that
this is you know white person came up with this
idea so that you know that means that only you know
white people can you view it or listen to it or
or whatever. It's a real stay in your lane message isn't it
and it's I mean it actually flies in the face of reality today because
you know if you actually look at what is happening
the kind of cultural hybridity that is is around at the moment the
intellectual excitement that is there to be had
from exchanges across across continents across
countries is phenomenal. The merger of Marxism and
psychoanalysis marked a change of course with regards to the purpose
and use of psychotherapy the original focus of
examining the individuals in a life was now making way for a psychology that
was focused on telling people to change the world
rather than change anything about themselves.
One of the things that will be automatically happening
through this approach is like a weakening of the individual who comes
for treatment. So the the client will
will not be encouraged to develop any agency
everything has been done to them.
Thoughts and ideas of victimhood and resentment will be encouraged
so they won't be interrogated in any way and in fact
anything that the client presents is going to be
supported or endorsed without question. So instead of this
very strong drive and traditional therapy which is all about developing
insight, insight into the self, insight into others
what happens with a CSJ driven agenda is that the insight is given to you.
Psychiatry largely determines diagnosis based on individuals relationship
with reality but how exactly is reality being defined?
It seems there is an increasingly narrow concept of reality
which is less about what is objectively true
and is more concerned with diagnosing those who have dissenting views.
There is a historical precedent for this. In the Soviet Union
those who disagreed with the regime were incarcerated in psychiatric facilities
and those protesting for reform were diagnosed as having
delusions of reformism and while we aren't quite facing this level of
corruption within the mental health profession
there is a growing concern in the way psychology is being used
to push a political agenda, wield power and pathologize
disagreement. It's a very very strange moment in time
that we have now where the idea of you know that kind of pursuit of truth
from knowledge is seen as dangerous and dangerous in a particular way.
It has been seen as dangerous in the past politically
because it can unsettle truths that people in power have used and
needed to maintain their position but today as you as you point out it's seen
as psychologically damaging. The very idea of questioning
questioning an orthodox belief is seen as
somehow equivalent to damaging the person holding that belief.
So it's now understood that it is acceptable for
therapists to use manipulative tactics
in order to bring the client around to their agenda
and when I looked at the guidelines that were issued by the American
Psychological Association in 2017 and these are the guidelines for
multicultural practices they are completely explicit
that it's crucially important that the therapist
helps their client start to engage with identity talk.
So no matter what the client is bringing the therapist believes it's important to
get the client to examine the role that their
identity plays in the difficulties that they're bringing
and it suggests that you can use therapeutic skills
to overcome the client's resistance to shifting the focus of the
conversation away from their own issues to
issues of identity. I mean this is a complete reversal
of the ethics of psychotherapy and counseling
where it's always a client's agenda that takes precedent.
In 2019 the American Psychological Association
issued guidelines to supposedly improve men's mental health
by declaring traditional masculinity to be psychologically harmful.
They specified achievement, adventure, risk taking and anti-femininity
to be part of this harmful constellation.
Similarly recently published APA guidelines to clinicians
outlined that children should lead the way in carving out their own self
descriptions and assignments of gender. These categorizations include gender
fluid children, gender smoothies, gender bi-season children
and gender bilocation children. It may be worth noting at this point that
there has been a significant demographic shift
amongst psychologists since the early days of Freud and Jung.
Around 70 to 80 percent of psychologists and psychotherapists
are now female. Look man Freud was no dummy when he pointed to the fact that
the devouring mother was one of the major impediments to proper
human development. He knew that looking deep into the darkest families
and seeing this proclivity of the overprotective mother
to destroy the developing integrity of the child,
to keep the child infantile, to cling to that relationship instead of developing
life for herself and letting the child go flourish.
That's Hansel and Gretel.
I mean I guess it's interesting isn't it to think from a psychological
perspective as to why so many people are drawn to
woke ideology. I often see that a lot of these activists seem to be very
unhappy and in a lot of pain and it seems as though
woke ideology gives them an outlet for their anger and their resentment
and I guess certainly at the Tavistog as some of the people that were bullying
me it seemed to me that they were very damaged
and of course if you have experienced some kind of trauma you would feel anger
and resentment but I guess what I notice is that
woke ideology or critical social justice it doesn't bring about healing.
It keeps you in that state of anger or upset.
What are your thoughts on that? Well just to pick up on your last statement
it isn't a healing practice it's a political practice
and certainly from my perspective it's
I mean it's actually a toxic practice and so it's the exact opposite
anti-therapeutic. In Ida Client when I was still
practicing who had seen other therapists before
and generally the message he was being given he said was that
he didn't really have much to complain about because he was in the privileged
position of being a straight white man
and actually he had plenty to complain about he had a lot of he had a lot of
crap going on in his life that he needed to unpack
but the message from society is he was privileged and he should step aside and
actually let someone speak who's got real problems and I think
that can only be encouraging like mental turmoil in people.
The 1950s saw the discovery of anti-depressant
and anti-psychotic medications alongside this
diagnosis became more specific and formalized.
The American Psychiatric Association published the diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders and to this day it remains the leading
authority for psychiatric diagnosis. The original DSM
contained 106 distinct psychiatric diagnosis.
Five editions later this has since increased to 298.
In 1980 gender identity disorder was introduced as a diagnosis
and the Tavistox Gender Identity Service, GIDS,
was set up 10 years later. In 2013 gender identity disorder was replaced
with the term gender dysphoria. This change occurred in response to
political pressures claiming that the term disorder
was stigmatizing. From as early as 2005 staff at the Tavistox
GIDS clinic were expressing concerns about the use of experimental
medical treatments being used on children experiencing dissatisfaction
with their biological sex. Internal reports
outlining the lack of research around prescription of puberty blockers and
cross-sex hormones were ignored. Safeguarding whistleblowers were
bullied and put through disciplinary procedures.
Similarly those in the public eye who were the first to speak out
were turned on by the media and ostracized by their peers.
But I just kind of thought well once people find out that children are
being uh told that they will become um you
know boys are being told they'll become girls if they if they cut off their
penises and girls are being told they will become
real boys if they cut off their breasts.
Once they find out that the the medical complications that come with
taking cross-sex hormones like testosterone
for girls you know the side effects include osteoporosis.
Early menopause everyone who's on testosterone all these women who are on
testosterone will go into early menopause 30 years too early in some cases.
Multiple sclerosis is is associated with
men taking cross-sex hormones so I thought well
all you have to do is tell people about all this
and it will you know it will gather momentum and people
will try and stop it but that was six years ago nearly
and no one did no one seems to care.
Proper scrutiny of the tabastock only came when a former patient
Kira Bell brought a legal case against the clinic.
Kira was prescribed puberty blockers when she was 16
and went on to have her breasts surgically removed.
She later regretted going through these irreversible procedures
like many she came to understand her mental distress
as being the result of a range of issues rather than being born in the wrong
body. Kira Bell's judicial review led to the 2020
High Court ruling that under 16s were unlikely to be able to consent to
puberty blockers. Subsequently the UK government
instructed esteemed pediatrician Dr. Hillary
Cass to take an objective look at the tabastock's
gender services. The findings of the Cass review
aligned with many of the concerns raised by whistleblowers.
Then evidence based from an affirmation only model
was severely lacking and that the use of puberty blockers
came with many risks. Following this outcome the tabastock gids clinic was
closed leaving many wondering why it took the
government so long to act. But on the tabastock they then think it's an
NHS clinic full of experts you trust them
you would think wouldn't you and they are told by whistleblowers as a problem
but it's an area that they feel difficulty in intervening in. Now if
that's what the conservatives feel like then the Labour Party who are much
more prone to embrace a lot of the diversity
orthodoxies with even less thought I hardly need
mentioned the Lib Dems and the Greens and that's kind of your political class
right and you know I don't really count I'm just
like a non-affiliated relatively new peer in the House of Lords
that let's be honest a bit of a maverick. So there aren't enough
mavericks in a way and also political parties
in general have become stuffed with technocrats,
careerists all sorts of you know there's a real collapse of
a political class of people with great integrity,
open-minded independent thinkers that used to exist within parties and now
that doesn't really feature and so consequently you do get
people just nodding along to things but I think it's been a great
again a great indictment of the political
parties and the political leadership of this country
that allowed the tabastock issue to continue just one quick final point is
I think when they started to hear about it
they then thought oh my god now we're going to get blamed
you know can you imagine the situation it's your worst nightmare
right your worst not you think you're doing the good thing and everyone will
love you for it and then some people start to
imply that you have set up a medical facility
that is actually institutionally offering abusive
medically abhorrent practices on children that will cause
enormous psychological if indeed not physical damage
you don't want to accept responsibility so you think that can't be true it can't
be true but because you have trusted the medics
because I think that you would you just want to look the other way and I think
that they just look the other way until they were absolutely forced to
stare it in the eyes and stare it in the face
Mr Speaker thank you the CAS review interim report
found that to date there's a profound lack of evidence on the best approach
to treat gender dysphoria in children does my right hon. Friend share my
concern that in spite of this the NHS insists on making a child's
express gender identity the start point for treatment
and also my surprise that the NHS has chosen so far
not to track patient outcomes particularly for under 18s
Mr Speaker I do share my hon. Friend's concerns and that is why the NHS
commissioned this review from one of our top paediatricians
it is already clear to me from her interim findings and for the evidence
other evidence that I've seen that the NHS services in this area are too narrow
they are overly affirmative and in fact they're bordering on
ideological you know the Tavistock closed down in the
UK that was the big gender surgery performing institute in the UK
how was that closed down what happened government closed it down
so yeah because they knew that they figured out in the UK that
wow the rates of transgender transformation requests were skyrocketing
and even the people at the clinic knew that they were rushing people along the
transformation pipeline way faster than they should have
without proper clinical evaluation there's a thousand lawsuits out against
the Tavistock in the UK now a thousand but like it's
you know if you tell a child that it's even possible they were born in the
wrong body that is grooming because it's not
true and you're planting a dangerous idea in a child's head
so I think grooming has always been the perfect word for what's going on
we're all being groomed into accepting things that we shouldn't be accepting
another example is children's books written by so-called queer
creators you know they keep slipping in drawings of women of
young people with double mastectomies yeah yeah
just the little stitches on the chest and
this is portrayed as the most wonderful inclusion
you know and what it's actually doing is normalizing the idea
that you can find your true self through mutilation
one of the most shocking details of the Tavistock GID service was that around
80% of the children placed on a medicalized pathway
were gay reportedly there was a dark joke at the Tavistock
that soon there will be no gay people left and yet
such regressive and harmful ideas were being pushed by people claiming to
want to promote inclusivity care and compassion
the staff at the Tavistock seemed to be unable to question
and stand up to ideologically driven external organizations
such as transgender charity mermaids reportedly due to the fear of being
labelled as bigoted I met a young lady called Kirabelle
she was a lesbian she was a lesbian who told me
the horrific experience that she had in the Tavistock clinic
it was an eye-opening experience I know that the member for Kikordi and
Cowdenbeath talked about transing away the gay in his speech
in Westminster Hall debate we are seeing I would say
almost an epidemic of young gay children young gay children
being told that they are trans and being put on a medical pathway for
irreversible decisions and they are regretting it
that is what I'm doing for for young LGBT children I am making sure
I am making sure that young people do not find themselves sterilized
because they are being exploited by people who do not understand
what these issues are it seems to me as though
organizations like the race equality charter and
stonewall they're almost acting like a sort of protection
racket in that institutions don't want damage to their
reputation so they pay money for these organizations to come in so that they
can say that they're progressive and they're anti-racist
and then these organizations essentially set about
bullying staff and students into confessing their white fragility and
all sorts I guess I'm curious as to how a
movement which seems to be about what money making but also
oppressing workers and students and infringing their rights
when they don't have the power to fight back how that can consider itself to be
progressive or left-wing it seems to be the opposite
it does seem it does seem the opposite and you know I'm from a
left-wing background I think probably the word progressive I mean I think I
probably would have always considered myself to be progressive but now it's
such a tainted term the term left wing is is tainted as well
increasingly people across the political spectrum are realizing the
tyrannical nature of critical social justice
it's not only preventing good psychological treatments
but it's often contributing to a worsening of mental health
it is unclear at this point whether the profession can survive
and return to sanity often held up as a genius of the 20th century
Sigmund Freud's statue sits here outside the Tavistock
one can only imagine what he would make of all the harm
malpractice and lawsuits going on behind him
that have left his practice of psychoanalysis hanging in the balance
in terms of the fight I think in the UK
we've kind of won already we've kind of we've reversed you know the fact that
mermaids are under statutory investigation is fantastic
the fact that Tavistock closing is fantastic there's more
there's more scrutiny on how we get
got here and so as a result the kind of a completely incoherent set of beliefs
that these people have is being exposed
there's something that remains constant for me
and the constant thing is that the drive for healing
is a universal drive and it seems to operate across all societies and as
far as we know you know all historical periods and
there's a vocation to offer sucker psychological
help to people who are suffering
so no matter what happens to our professions
that drive to heal will still exist it will take new forms
you
