Educing, going through the labor pains of giving birth to yourself, that is to be on
the horizon of wonder.
It is to be in a place in which you are calling yourself and your world into question so a
new self in a new world can deeply be born.
Welcome back to episode 2 of After Socrates.
First time we looked at four ways we are after the way of Socrates and we also reviewed
the basic format of the series.
Now let's continue being after Socrates.
Right now at the beginning as we orient ourselves to find our way, let's follow Socrates.
In order to follow Socrates we have to understand how he understood himself and this is going
to be perplexing.
Socrates' self-knowledge, he found himself and frequently described himself as a tipos,
not belonging to any particular category, like our word atypical but deeper, more powerful.
He explicitly refers to himself sometimes and Plato has other characters refer to him
in terms of monsters, as monstrous, he's like a satyr, he's like a stingray, he compares
himself to a titan, many different kinds of monsters, this is a recurring thing across
many of the dialogues.
Namely, he describes himself as metaxu, as fundamentally in between, in between the human
and the divine.
I'm going to come back to that because Socrates never thinks that he becomes anything other
than a human being, so he says we like him, at least he's challenging us to realize that
we like him, are somehow in between human finitude and the transcendence of the divine.
Drew Highland, excellent book and we'll come back to it, talks about finitude and transcendence
in the platonic dialogues.
Socrates does something really interesting when he says that he's metaxu, he says so
is eros, eros isn't a human but it's a transhuman force, it's not a god, eros is a daemon, d-a-e-m-o-n,
not a daemon but a daemon, a being that is between and therefore mediates and unites
the human and the divine, just think about it, isn't there something really insightful
in that about love?
So Socrates he understands himself as fundamentally liminal, he's within and without, sort of
fits our categories but he doesn't, he's monstrous, the monster takes the normal categories
and distorts them in a way that is startling and challenging and disruptive.
Somehow Socrates transcends our normal framing in a way that is challenging and even at times
threatening.
How is Socrates within and without, how is he liminal, how is he monstrous in a way that's
constantly challenging and threatening to us but nevertheless beneficial to us?
And how does he do this while never claiming to be anything other than a mortal?
A mortal doomed to die human being.
So Socrates enters into these intensive in terms of how he's involved with people but
extensive in terms of how much scope they take in, how much they zoom in and zoom out,
probative conversations with people.
And in these conversations questioning, not just questions, questioning, it's even better
perhaps to hear a related word to questioning, questioning.
Questioning plays a central part rather than concluding.
These exploratory dialogues are often centered on what is virtue, what is wisdom, related
things, what is knowledge, what is goodness, what is real?
And these are questions and this is the importance.
These are questions we cannot ignore, this is why we cannot ignore Socrates, we can't
ignore these questions, we can pretend to ignore them, but then we're just giving answers
to these questions given to us implicitly, unconsciously, automatically and we reactively
acting them out rather than acting on principle.
Yet these dialogues frequently and frustratingly and profoundly inconclusively, inconclusively,
everybody including, really hear that, including Socrates, they've been talking about courage
at the end of it.
Everybody says, I don't know what courage is, including Socrates.
Socrates claims to have achieved human wisdom in that he, by practicing this kind of dialogue,
has come to know that he does not know and we go, what, that's it, we're all ignorant,
I know, there's tons I don't know, well how is this, what's going on?
Socrates doesn't mean that generic belief.
Existentially in the situation, specific realization in both senses of the word, it's a palpable
reality and one is coming to a deep understanding awareness of how one is ignorant in this situation
in a way that matters because one has been pretending deeply, unconsciously, automatically
reactive to know, know both the situation and know oneself relevant to and relative
to that situation.
This is a profound kind of realization.
It requires disciplined mindfulness.
He has cultivated, and this is going to become an important phrase, he has learned, learned
ignorance.
In fact, when I say learned ignorance, I want you to hear both pronunciations, learned and
learned.
He has learned ignorance.
He has become aware of his ignorance in a way that makes a huge difference to specific
actual concrete situations.
So let's explore the dynamics of this a little bit better.
So we have, on one pole, we have conversation.
Socrates is engaging in a conversation.
I want you to start to get a feel for this.
I want you to think of those conversations you've been in, where you're asking each other
questions and you're not giving sort of pat answers.
You're really opening up, a person's opening up and you're opening up, you're reciprocally
opening, and the conversation starts to take on a life of its own.
And it's not wandering aimlessly, it's wandering fruitfully, and you both find you're getting
to places and having insights, realizations that you couldn't have had on your own.
When the conversation comes to an end, you say, that was one of the greatest moments
of my life.
Socrates is like that.
He talks about it.
You may not get that sense when you're reading the dialogues, because it seems like there's
a lot of conflict and argumentation.
But Socrates says, in more than one place, but in one space specifically, he says, I'm
willing to follow the logos, dia logos, and we're going to come back to, what is this
logo he's talking about?
But he's willing to follow the logos wherever it goes, like the wind.
Isn't that amazing?
The wind.
It seems to have a life of its own, but the wind, spiritus, wind, inspiration, aspiration,
spirituality.
When Jesus is talking to Nicodemus and telling him he has to be born again, he talks about
the wind is like, the spirit is like the wind.
It comes and goes as it would, and you know where it's coming from, and you don't know
where it's going to, but you can get caught up in it and follow it and breathe it and
been inspired to aspire by it.
That's one pole.
It's important to realize that Socrates is being just as surprised by the way the conversation,
the dialogue, is going.
He's just as much surprised by the dia, by way of, by means of logos, the dia logos as
anyone else participating, and you'll see how much he comes to deeply value this.
He's not experiencing this just as rough, you know, back and forth adversarial thing.
There's a deeper thing going on, and you'll see this in what he says about this practice.
Now, this is one pole.
The other pole is this learned ignorance.
You say, what's, like, why is that valuable?
Well, think about it.
What the dia logos is doing is it's taking you to the horizon of wonder.
Securiosity is when I don't know something, I need that information, there's a gap in
my knowledge, hey, look, this fills it, and now I'm done.
I have what I need.
It's very much as Fromm would say in the having mode, but wonder, at least the way Fuller
and others argue about it, wonder is the being mode.
You come to the horizon, now think about the horizon, you can actually never reach it,
but there's a horizon, and at the, when you look at the horizon, you have a sense of what
is within your understanding, but how it is, how it is on the cusp of what is beyond your
understanding.
The horizon of wonder.
Socrates famously said that wisdom begins in wonder.
Why, what's going on?
In wonder, you're not filling the hole.
You're opening it up to the horizon.
You are calling yourself and the way you have framed the world into question, but in a way
you feel called to, in a way that is somehow beautiful to you, that is drawing from you.
This is, the word for it to draw forth is educe, this is where we get the word education
from, but think of it, it's a different kind of education.
This isn't here's, the knowledge you need, and so you can service the workplace and the
market until you die, and otherwise meaning was death.
They don't mean education like that.
You mean inducing, going through the labor pains of giving birth to yourself.
That is to be on the horizon of wonder.
It is to be in a place in which you are calling yourself and your world into question, so a
new self in a new world can deeply be born.
That is what's going on in this process.
So notice, there's a discipline.
What does the word discipline mean?
It means to follow.
It means to track.
It means to follow and track so that you are transformed by that following.
There's a discipline to following the logos, dia logos, letting it call you into question,
letting it call your world into question, so that you and the person you're in dialogue
with are giving birth to yourselves, mutual midwiving.
Socrates was clear that he was not only examining others and helping them give birth to themselves.
He repeatedly emphasized it was reciprocal.
He was also examining himself and giving birth to himself.
They were mutually interwoven.
So the discipline of following the logos that allows us this mutual midwifing allows the
logos to take on a life of its own and thereby transform the way we are living.
Socrates, and it's often talked about using this practice called unlinkus, this questioning
and answering and probative.
And as we'll see, the unlinkus slowly in the hands of Plato becomes dialectic.
This disciplined following of the logos, this mutual midwifing and affording of the logos
to take on a life transforming life of its own.
So we've got a discipline.
So there are a set of practices.
Let's call those with Plato dialectic, this is not Hegel's dialectic, this is a way of
structuring dialogue in a disciplined manner so that it will take on the features of the
logos.
So there's a practice, there's something we can do dialectic, it's doing this mutual
midwifing and affording the presencing of the living logos.
That practice can result in a process that we do not make.
It's a process between us and between us and the world, the taxu, and it's like eros,
it's like love, especially in the platonic sense.
You don't make love, well we do say you make love, but what I mean by that, let's think
of it as analogous, oh it's a kind of love itself too, in fact it's a kind of platonic
eros.
Platonic love, friendship, profound friendship.
You can't just make somebody your friend.
You can't say you're my friend now, that's it, I've decided it, I make it so.
That's in fact, that's going to go nowhere, in fact it's probably going to have the opposite
result.
You can't just sort of passively wait around, someday a friend will come, somebody will
come up to me and say I'm your friend, probably not.
That's why we use metaphors of like falling in love, growing in love, we participate in
it.
So it's a practice we can do, we can discipline ourselves, to follow the logos, to mutually
midwife, to afford the logos taking on a life of its own.
That's dialectic, but the process of the logos is not something we do, it is something we
participate in profoundly, the way we participate in love, friendship, it is between us and
between us and the world.
The practice of dialectic, the process of the logos, that's why Fowler put in both
the logos and dialectic in the classical tradition, but there's also a state, here's
the the logos and learned ignorance and they're mutually affording each other, the the logos
gets us to the horizon of wonder and that opens us up and makes it possible for us to
reciprocally open with each other and reciprocally open with the world and then that affords the
logos and the the logos affords learned ignorance and we cycle the practice of dialectic, the
process of the logos and the paradoxical state of learned ignorance.
But is not all of this problematic, you should say to me, you should say, this looks like
you know a lot of knowledge, a lot of learning and Socrates is claiming, right, that all
he knows is that he does not know. That's actually not accurate. Many people put that
talk, all that Socrates ever said is that he know that he know, no, no, he doesn't
say that. He said that's what his wisdom consists in. Socrates actually claims to know a bunch
of things. So first of all, we have to modify it, but then we'll come back to your point
because you are making a good point in posing that problem. What does Socrates claim to know?
He famously claims to know erotica. He knew he knows about the erotic things. That doesn't
mean he's really good in bed or he just knows about sex. He's talking about eros in a much
more comprehensive sense about how we seek to bind ourselves to things. And this seems
inherent to us. We seem by nature to be looking for things other than ourselves to complete
us. And notice how that gets us into self-transcendence. I'm looking for something that's other than
me to become me so that I am more than me, but completed as me. And so as you think about
this, you start to go, oh, how does that make sense? Hold on to that vertigo. We're going
to come back to it. Socrates knows how to track eros. Do you? Well, I know what it's... Yeah,
I know you know what it's like to feel eros. I do too. But can you feel eros in a way so
that you don't do all the self-deceptive, self-destructive things you've done because
of that feeling? Because when you track, you're following, but you're also able to know and
see where something is going to go. When you're tracking a storm and following it, you're
trying to predict where it's going to go so you can avoid being overwhelmed by it. Socrates
knows how to track eros. He knows how to follow the trail of signs. He knows how to properly
apprehend and appreciate the significance of eros. He knows what to care about. He would do this
provocatively. As I already said, he would go into people and he'd say, why are you spending so
much time on your hair and your clothing and how you smell? And so little time on your psyche,
so little time on your mind and your soul and your character. You go, yeah, why am I?
Socrates would walk into the marketplace and say, look at all the things I don't need.
You go, oh, right. Why don't I do that? That's the socratic question. It's a question about
Socrates that reverberates back and becomes a question, a wondering about yourself and the world
that you live in. So Socrates knows erotica.
How can we know this? How can we do this in practice? How can we realize it in practice?
We will come back to this. Socrates also, and he states it very confidently, he knows the difference
between belief or opinion and knowledge. He knows it. Now, how can he know this when he claims to
know that he doesn't know anything? He actually claims to know a lot of things.
He knows how to do geometry with Domino.
He'll often say he knows how this practice works, how this art, or actually more specifically,
more technically, how this technique, how this particular kind of expertise works.
See, what Socrates means is he knows how to track, he knows how to follow, he knows how to quest
after knowledge in a way that's not just haphazard.
That doesn't mean he's got there. He knows what virtue is in a sense the way you know by being.
He certainly doesn't claim to have wisdom.
But he doesn't claim to be completely ignorant of it. He claims to be a lover of wisdom. There's
the connection to love, except this time it's not eros, and this is important. It's philea.
It's the kind of love between friends, or even more importantly, fellowship,
people working in concert together. He knows how to work with people.
In order to be properly oriented towards wisdom. When you really love your friend,
when you really love your romantic partner, have you got them?
Like, I figured you out. We're done. I don't need to learn it. I got it. We're finished.
I've got the perfect framing for you that holds you perfectly in place,
reveals everything that there is possibly to know, but I've got you. Yep.
I say to you, in fact, if you say that, that's a strong predictor that your relationship is actually over.
What are you actually?
You have a faithfulness to this person.
You know how to follow them, to track them. They're going to change, and you know how to
dash. You don't know where they're going. You don't know what kind of changes you're going
to go through, how you're going to dance with them. But you keep teaching each other how to
follow each other. And the person, although you have a continuity of contact and you're
loving them, and they're opening up to you, and you're opening up to them with supercal opening,
there's always that which exceeds. It's funny, you can meet people
been together for a very long time, and this has probably happened to you.
Our friends come up to you and say, you know, I've been with her for like 10 years. And then,
wow, I just like, she did that. And wow, totally caught me by surprise. I just, poof.
Because you have to remember learned ignorance. How much you really don't know,
because of how really dynamically complex another person is.
And wisdom and virtue are excellences of persons. And you can never fully know a person. How could
you possibly fully know the excellence of personhood? But you can love it the way you love
a particular person.
Think of the connection between able to really wonder, not in the sense we sometimes overlap
with anxiety, but wonder about your friend or your partner to be amazed by them.
I'm very fortunate to have a romantic partner that she's one of the best people I've met in my life.
And she constantly exceeds. And this is something I have to keep remembering,
relearning. Sati, mindfulness means to remember, not in the sense of just recalling, but reminding
yourself, bringing that memory into action. Mindfulness, I have to constantly remember,
remind myself that she exceeds all of my personal experience, all of my professional expertise.
And she does this so regularly. And yes, so beautifully. I have profound friends. You're
going to meet one of them, Christopher Master Pietro. Same thing within friendship.
Wonder. Love. The cultivation of wisdom. Deep continuity of growing contact.
They're all bound together and learned ignorance.
Socrates also claims to know two really deep and fundamental things.
He famously, in his defense at his trial,
knows that the unexamined life is not worth living.
He knows this with such confidence that he is willing to die for it.
No propositional argument could convince you of that.
But somebody with such powerful presence as Socrates was willing to die for it.
That's at least challenging. He claims a life without dialectic into deologos.
Affording learned ignorance is not worth living.
Socrates is as ignorant as we thought when we just thought, oh, he just doesn't know that he
knows. He says, I know that I don't know. I'm skeptical of a lot of things. I'm cynical. I live
in modernity, postmodernity. No, no, no. This is not knowing that at the same time
gives him the confidence to die as he's telling you and I, because I'm feeling it too.
The unexamined life is not worth living. And what do you do with that? Think about it.
Because I'm sure my life is pretty unexamined. I don't have that self-knowledge.
My life's not worth living. Sometimes I wake up at 3 a.m. and he's sort of right.
I don't want to think about that. He's saying that. And then relatedly, he's saying
that doing this dialectic into deologos and cultivating this learned ignorance, this wonderful,
wonder-filled, learned ignorance is the best activity that human beings can engage in.
It's the best kind of life.
But how? How could a practice that is so frequently frustrating
it does not produce conclusions? It does not produce clear answers? It does not give us
resolution in the sense of completion and finality?
How could that be worth dying for? That sounds like an utter waste of time at best
and endlessly annoying and frustrating and undermining of all of our projects.
How could that be? How could that be?
Savor that question because I've actually returned to the question you asked a few
minutes ago and I've made it deeper on your behalf. By the way, that's me exemplifying Socrates,
taking your question and making it deeper on your behalf.
Take that question in. Savor it. Let it roll around in your mind.
Try to feel into its monstrous challenge.
Think about how it challenges all of our assumptions,
how it crashes into so many of our presuppositions about success and purpose
and achieving your goals and completion, consummation, conclusion, and how all of these
are so central to a good life. That question about Socrates just smashes into all of that
monstrously.
How could this Socratic proposal possibly be true in any way? In fact, in any way that we could
actually realize in regular practice.
But the problematic around Socrates, the way he's liminal, atypous, monstrous is even deeper.
Socrates clearly and repeatedly argues for three things. Number one,
the best life is the life of virtue. First of all, really how? It's a provocative statement
and therefore claiming to know this is again really important. Socrates claims to know that
the life of virtue is the best kind of life. He claims to know that virtue depends on knowledge.
Sometimes some people have rendered that as an identity claim. I won't do that because that's
controversial. But at least virtue depends on knowledge. But what kind of knowledge does virtue
depend on? Okay, good question. We'll come back to it. But first of all, life of virtue is the best
life. Virtue depends on knowledge, at least a particular kind of knowledge. And then Socrates
repeatedly, and we've already seen it, claims that he does not have the knowledge needed for virtue.
How do those hang together? How can that be the case?
And you can say, well, maybe Socrates, if you put those three together, you can put them together
and say, well, Socrates is just realizing he's just kind of a buffoon. And of course, there were
people that thought that, Aristophanes famously in his play the clouds.
But Socrates claims to know what a good life is such that he is willing to die for it.
How does that fit in with that, right? That doesn't fit in with being a buffoon.
And Plato clearly and repeatedly presents Socrates as the most virtuous person living the most
worthwhile and virtuous life.
At the end of the phato, this is the dialogue in which Socrates actually dies.
After Socrates is dead, these last words are spoken.
Very last words. Super salient. The culmination point of the dialogue. Not really, but yes,
here salient, at the end, we're supposed to reflect upon everything else.
Such was the end,
Echocrates, of our friend. Socrates was just died.
Of our friend whom I may truly, wow, call the wisest
and justice most just and best of all men, best of all men.
Who am I ever known?
How is this the case? How could this be the case?
How could that learned ignorance give Socrates the knowledge of the good life,
the confidence in it, for which he's willing to die?
How could that, that thing that challenges all of our assumptions about the good life,
how could that make him the wisest, the most virtuous,
living the most worthwhile life? How?
How could we possibly realize this, understand it, and such that we could put it into practice?
When you roll this around in your mind, it feels like a profound paradox.
He seems to be not knowing, and yet he seems to have all of the results
of the knowing that he says he does not have and does not know.
This feels monstrous, doesn't fit in any of our categories. He's not a buffoon,
but he's not the typical successful person. He doesn't seem to have knowledge,
but he seems to be wise, like what's going on?
Now in response to this, and many people have done this, they even do it in the dialogues,
Plato repeatedly shows that, you can just reject Socrates.
You can say, he's just confused, he's just all messed up.
You can just turn away. You can reorient yourself away from the Socratic path.
It's easy to do, but that ease is only superficial, because if you stop and reflect
at a deeper level, it's actually harder to turn away, to disorient yourself from the Socratic way.
When you read these dialogues, and when you start to practice what Socrates does,
you see Socrates disclosing so much self-deceptive, pretense, bullshit,
misframing, failure to appreciate properly, failure to understand appropriately,
failure to love wisely. Socrates is powerful, and you go, I need all of that, and I put it to you.
Is this not needed now, more so than ever?
Yes, it seems to be. Socrates affords transframing.
What do I mean by that? Well, it's a combination of transcendence, transformation, and reframing.
You know when you have an insight, and you realize you've been misframing,
not properly proportioning and directing your attention, I thought she was being aggressive,
afraid. Oh, I've just been mishandling this whole thing. I was mistaken.
It's insight. But you can also get what John Wright following Iris Murdoch, and I talk a lot
about this in Awakening for the Meaning Crisis, called Sensibility to Transcendence. I can get
simultaneously an insight into that person, and a reflective insight into me,
that the way I have habitually been framing or thinking about things or being with people
also needs to be reframed. And I can be reframing that person and reframing my sense of who I am
and how I look at the world. And that means I start to reciprocally open. I start to transcend
myself. I start to afford that person to transcend my conception of them. I start to be transformed.
They start to be transformed in how they are and can be to me.
Transframing. Socrates affords that. And here's the thing. That transframing ability seems to be
central to becoming wiser. It seems central to a lot of spirituality. And if we want wise
spirituality, and don't we, can we afford to turn away from Socrates?
Socrates deeply inspires, affords aspiration of the Platonic tradition, the Stoic tradition,
and the Neoplatonic tradition. And all of these are going through significant revivals right now.
And for good reason, they are needed in our times. And if they are needed, so is Socrates,
because Socrates is at the heart of them. You can't pull apart Plato and Socrates.
Stoicism is the religious philosophy or the philosophical religion, I don't know which,
what to call it, of internalizing Socrates. At least central aspects of everything I've been
talking about. Neoplatonism is, and we'll see this, the profound pathway into the deepest
possible learned ignorance. We can't turn away from Socrates.
Socrates is like all the other sages who are paradoxical, atypos and strange. If we turn
away from Socrates, we turn away from Siddhartha Gautama, we turn away from Jesus of Nazareth,
we turn away from Swangsha, we turn away from Lao Tse, we turn away from etc, etc.
Can you afford to turn away from all those sages? Are you so confident
that you can reorient away from all of them and find the path to wisdom, virtue, meaning in life?
Think about it. Be honest. I propose, and this is an honest proposal, in the sense that this
isn't my life, this is how I try to live. I propose trying to move deeply into this problematic
of Socrates. I want to allow it the real possibility of challenging me, of transforming me,
of calling me into transforming. I want to move through, like the through of my lenses.
I want to move through this Socratic problematic. I aspire to this. I have tried to dedicate my life
to it. To do this deeply, we need to confront further dimensions of this problematic.
Socrates does not have a method. So how do we move forward in a practice? How do we
forward into the problematic? Is Socrates just Plato's mouthpiece? Are the words of Socrates
equivalent to what Plato wants us to get from the dialogue? That's problematic too.
The third wave, people like Gonzales and Hyland,
just several rapes, just so many people, so many of those books.
I'll argue, no. Plato wrote in a dialogue form in which he is only in one, I think in the apology,
in just very minor way, actually present. He's absent. He never puts himself in the dialogue.
And the dialogue is not there as sort of literary ornamentation around Socrates.
In fact, and this will be central to following Socrates,
the collective intelligence and the distributed cognition of all of the characters in the dialogue
is actually central to us following the Socratic path. Socrates is central. He's important in the
dialogue. But he's also in service to the Deologos, the way other people are drawn out, the way other
people represent alternative perspectives, alternative ways of being that Socrates takes into account,
which is one interpretation, one translation of the word logos, by the way,
taking into account, giving an account.
One way in which we can understand this is can we
get into a flow state, logos with the life of its own,
of the collective intelligence of distributed cognition,
that has the capacity to cultivate both individual and collective wisdom. Can we be
Socrates to each other? Because if we need Socrates to do this, and all of the traditions say,
in one sense we do, but in another sense we don't, then of course we couldn't do it.
We need to know how to internalize Socrates, both within us individually and between us collectively.
One function of the dialogues, I think, and how they're not replaceable by just capturing,
this is an argument made by Socrates, and this represents Plato's theory.
One function of the dialog format is it affords internalization. What's internalization?
This is a notion drawn from Bogotsky. This is the notion that, let's say a child is learning,
and for some of you you've heard this before, but for some of you maybe not.
How does learning? They're taking a particular perspective on a problem.
The adult comes in to try and teach them. I've raised children.
The adult has a more encompassing and penetrating perspective
that includes but transcends. Hear that, it includes but transcends the child's perspective.
But the child does imitate the adult. And as they imitate the adult, they start to
enact the perspective that the adult has. As they presence the adult in imitation,
they start to fill in the perspective that the adult had on their perspective.
And eventually they do this to such a degree that they do not need the adult present. They
can do it for themselves, and then they get metacognition. They can step back and reflect
on their own cognition. They could perhaps come to know that they do not know.
You see that? See, when you're in a perspective, remember when we compared the first person
perspective, there's a third person perspective, when you're asking your friend about the problem
that they're having. When you're in a perspective, that framing, it blinds you to what's outside
the perspective. You can't see the biases of your perspective, and you can't take on new
interest beyond your perspective. But when you internalize other people, you transcend,
and you get the capacity to itself transcend,
you get the capacity to self-correct, to overcome bias, and to orient more properly
and appropriately towards reality. But as the child is to the adult,
the adult is to the sage, just as a child you needed to internalize adults.
As an adult, you need to internalize a sage. Why could you possibly think you're done?
Okay, but Socrates problematizes this. What? How? Well, he often speaks and presents himself ironically.
In fact, this is one of the most famous aspects of Socrates. He's ironic. Now, he's not ironic in
sort of our modern cynical sense of irony, but he's often saying something that's opposite
to what he actually holds to be the case, even though he asks people to always state honestly
what they believe. So Socrates is often speaking and presenting himself ironically.
Imagine if the parent was constantly being ironic with the small child.
That's going to destroy the internalization.
Socrates' irony seems to thwart the function of the dialogues, which is to help us deeply
internalize Socrates, have his perspectival knowing, see the way he sees, realize the way he
realizes, have his participatory knowing, transform our character, our identity, the way he does,
transform our self-knowledge. But the irony seems to be undermining all of that.
Is the irony just so that Socrates or Plato can avoid political censure?
People have argued that, but most people, most of the people I've been reading,
the scholars I've been reading, saying no. Is it because Socrates can't sort of directly
challenge people? There's truth to that, but many of the people that he's talking with know he's
being ironic. And he does seem to really challenge them at times.
Yet maybe, in a deeper way, irony is actually connected to learned ignorance.
And in that sense, it affords the right kind of internalization.
I'm going to throw that out, tantalizing, and we're going to give a special place to that.
When Chris and I enter into
dialogue and hopefully deal logos about Socrates and Kierkegaard,
because Kierkegaard reflects deeply on Socratic irony. And other people, especially people like
Drew Highland, Kirkland, and his work on the ontology of Socratic questioning, they all do great
work around this. So what are some points to ponder, points that we want to reflect upon so that we
can realize them in practice? We want to realize on one hand, the dialectic and to deal logos and
how it's in this reciprocal relationship with learned ignorance on the horizon of wonder.
We want to really let it roll around in our mind, banging and crashing like a loose cannon
on a ship at sea.
This problematic around Socrates, only by passing through this problematic,
this paradoxical problematic, will we have any chance of genuinely following Socrates.
And for those of you who follow other sages, Siddhartha, Jesus, Maimonides,
I put it to you that following the way of this sage has the real potential
to deepen your ability to be a disciple of the sage that you are most trying to internalize.
Perhaps even it would be best if you had an inner symphony of sages.
One of them can be preeminent. I do not want to call anybody away from a living allegiance
that is breathing into them wisdom and orientation towards reality,
that's maturing them in virtue.
But perhaps a symphony of sages not only will help disclose what any particular sage is,
but also allow you to participate in a way of wisdom that allows you to understand
not superficial, polite, liberal tolerance or ideological yelling at and not really quite
sure you know what it means, diversity or whatever word you're using. These can be good,
they can be bad, but I'm trying to point to something more profound.
Could you understand other people's sages such that you could enter into deal logos with them?
You don't have to agree with them, they don't have to agree with you.
You don't have to come to a conclusion if Socrates is right,
but if Socrates is right that would still be part of the best, maybe the best kind of life
we could live with each other.
It is superficially easy to turn away from Socrates and not orient ourselves socratically,
but it's actually in reality hard to turn away.
Before we move into learning our new practices, rooting and humble wonder,
I remind you to continue always doing your dialogical reflection,
your imaginal engagement and enactment and your study.
So we're going to do two practices. The first one is going to help us build on
the mindfulness practice of centering. This first practice is called finding your root.
It has to do with developing the right kind of relaxation
in your meditative practice. Many people come to meditation because they want to learn
how to relax. The problem is our normal way of relaxing is opposite to what we want to be doing.
We are making our body more insensate. We're letting our mind slowly shrink and become clouded,
somewhat confused, sort of warm and fuzzy until we lose consciousness because the point of that
relaxation is to move us towards sleep. We may not go all the way, but that is its function and
it often ends in us falling asleep. That's not what we want to be doing in a meditative practice
in which we are trying to learn and we're trying to become more aware of the forms, the formations,
the functions and the processes within our mind and body. I think of the kind of relaxation
that a martial artist engages in. So very often you'll see martial arts. I teach Tai Chi Chuan
and you'll see them take a particular stance. They'll bend their legs, they'll sink,
they'll sink their arms into a position, they might close their fists, they might have open hands,
but they do this thing. It's called rooting. Why are they doing that?
Well, they're trying to do two things. They're trying to stabilize
their arms, their legs, their body. They're trying to stabilize,
but they're also relaxing. So if you tense your arm like this and you touch, you'll feel there's not
very much sensation, but when you relax and you find that sort of stable point and you can relax
into it, you'll realize, oh wait, this is a lot. I've really increased my sensitivity. So you see
what's happening here? The rooting is a kind of relaxation that simultaneously sensitizes the mind,
makes it more alert, more acute, but also stabilizes it so it doesn't start running off
and getting scattered. So you're trying to get this sensitization and stabilization that are
interpenetrating to each other. Now think about how much that would matter in a martial art situation.
You're coming into a situation, there's going to be all this unexpectedness.
If you start flailing around because of the unexpectedness, you're easily uprooted.
If you just sort of lock in, your ability to sense what's going on and respond is lost.
You want to find this optimal relationship between sensitivity and stability.
Now you may be saying, well, I'm not going to get into any fights.
I hope that's right, by the way, because when if you're fighting, even if you win,
you lose. You lose a little piece of your soul. So what's the point of, well, the point is transfer.
Think about entering into a situation in which you want to enter into a deep dialogue
with another human being the way Socrates does. And Socrates is all just sort of scattered.
Then his capacity for entering into the deep conversation is lost.
But if he's just rigid and closed in upon himself and holding on to his position no matter what,
you can't move me, I am so stable. It's true, I can't. But then what's the point of the conversation?
How will the dialogue take? How will it lead both people?
So you want to be sensitive yet stable, stable yet sensitive, so that you can optimally flow
within any situation, especially situations of dialogical encounter. Being able to root,
really important. So often when I'm doing these discussions that I have with people and engaging
in these Socratic practices in a way that they might not know, I'm doing Tai Chi Chuan. They
don't know it. Sometimes they do. I've had people look at one of my videos, especially when the
other person was sort of very interruptive or hyperactive, and they'll say, you were like doing
really good Tai Chi there. Yes, exactly. I take that as a very encouraging compliment for which
I'm grateful because I aspire to that. I aspire to be able to have that rootedness so that I'm not
easily overwhelmed, but I can also flow into the situation. I'm aware of what's going on.
In the meditative tradition, this is called sitting as still as a mountain, but as alert as a warrior.
This is a phrase used, by the way, within Buddhist traditions that are often committed to non-violence.
So how do we do it? How do we do it? How do we get that? And how do we learn it in a way that can
transfer to most of our life? Well, if you think about Taoism, you can think about
that the very famous Yang Yin symbol with the black and the white and the black dot and the
white dot and the white dot in the black area, showing that they're flowing. They have this
flowing balance and they interpenetrate each other.
We're trying to get a mind that is open, yet centered and stabilized.
It can flow out into Yang, but it can also return to Yin,
and it has these so that they interpenetrate each other.
Now, how would you do this practice? Well, first of all,
you go through your centering practice. You do all three centers. I won't repeat that now,
but you make sure you center mind and body. You center your attention. You center your attitude.
Get centered. Now, I'm going to describe the practice to you and what it looks like,
what it feels like. Let's say you're centered. Your eyes are closed.
I want you to imagine a space just slightly above your head,
and then as you inhale, you're expanding in all directions, almost like you were inflating a balloon,
a perfectly spherical balloon in all directions. You inhale. This is you opening up. This is you
expanding your awareness, expanding your connection to the world. Right? As you inhale,
don't hyperventilate, but you inhale and you expand.
And then as you exhale, you let everything gather back together.
This is the end. You come in. You come in. So inhale, exhale, and then you find that spot.
Oh, right there. That's about right. Where it is for you is where it is for you.
Don't imitate what I'm doing. Imitate the way I'm doing something.
Inhale, exhale. And the last little bit of the exhale and that little space in between the breaths,
it's like I'm opening and melting and draining, and I'm coming to what's called the third eye
traditionally. And from there, but even from the center of my head on that axis, I inhale out,
I exhale in, opening, melting, draining to the throat. Inhale, remember all directions, 360.
Inhale, opening, exhale, gathering,
opening, melting, draining to the heart.
Inhale, opening, exhale, gathering,
opening and melting and draining to the solar plexus.
Inhale, opening, exhale, gathering and falling back towards the center.
Yang into Yin, Yin into Yang. Do you see? Opening, melting, draining to this area called the Dantian.
This is eventually where you want your breathing to be when you're meditating.
Don't force it there. Let it naturally fall there over time. But here you center around there.
The tradition says one finger below your navel, three fingers in.
I don't know if that's precise, but something like that. Inhale, exhale.
And then opening and melting, draining to where that center axis is touching what you're sitting on.
Feel that point. Everything is drained there like a pool of liquid.
And now you let it sink into the earth. Imagination for the sake of enhancing perception.
You let it sink like the root of a tree, rooting. It's sinking into the earth, connecting you,
stabilizing you downward, but also nourishing you, energizing you, sensitizing you upward
so that you're then sitting as still as a mountain.
But as alert, as a warrior. So you center, find your three centers.
Go through that rooting practice. You may want to replay that sequence.
So I can talk you through it while you're doing it.
Once you feel that sweet spot, that optimal grip between Yin and Yang,
you feel rooted into the earth, then begin your meditation, following your breath,
labeling your distractions, befriending yourself. That is the rooting practice.
The other practice is specifically oriented towards
the learned ignorance that we've been talking about in this episode.
This is a practice that I call the humble wonder practice. Humility and wonder were both
central and integral to the Socratic practices, especially the practice of learned ignorance.
How does this practice work? I recommend first centering and rooting and doing two or three
minutes of basic meditation. Then bring your awareness to your heart area. You can put your
hands on your heart. I won't put them right there because I don't want to screw up my mic.
Then I say as mindfully, and you've been cultivating mindfulness now, I say as mindfully as I can.
There is so much I do not know about myself because of all of the facts.
There is so much you do not know about your mind, your psyche, your body,
the amount of information available to you is combinatorial explosive.
But instead of keeping it as a safe, propositional thing you store over here, you're realizing it.
There is so much I do not know about myself because of all of the facts.
If you want to add all the facts about myself, feel fine. Feel free to do so.
Next, there is so much I shall never know about myself because of all of the
faith. Faith, what do you mean by faith, John? I don't mean your cosmic destiny or something
written down. I mean faith in the sense that it's in the word fatal. You're born at a particular
time in a particular place. You're exposed to particular people, to particular events,
none of which you have control over, and they deeply shape you. If you do not acknowledge
your faith in that sense, your inherent finitude, then your capacity for really
realizing your self-knowledge is truncated in hamstrung.
There is so much I shall never know about myself because of all of the faith.
Next, and they're all Fs to help you remember.
There is so much I refuse to see about myself because of all of my foolishness.
All the processes that make us adaptively intelligent make us perennially and sometimes
pervasively beset by self-deception. How often? Be honest. Really honest, please. How often do
you really, not in thought or in belief, but actually in perspective and in how you participate
in your identity, how often do you actually challenge your egocentrism and the way it might be
bias in you? Igor Grossman found, he asked people to describe a really hard problem they're
involved in. They inevitably describe it from the first person perspective without thinking,
automatic framing. And then if you say to them, and think about Socrates here, questioning people,
if you say to them, well, can you re-describe that problem from a third person perspective,
how your friend might see it and describe it? And will people do this? They inevitably have
an insight. They realize, oh, I didn't see this. I didn't realize that. You know that what I'm saying
is true. Think about how wise you are about other people's problems. Don't you realize it, Jim?
You're doing that same self-destructive pattern in your romantic life. I can see it so clearly,
and Jim is like, I don't really see it. And you think, ha, ha, ha, but then the roles are reversed
and Jim is saying to you, hey, you're doing that thing you do with relationship to your career.
You're doing it again. Don't you see? And you go, I don't really see it. You know that.
Part of what we're going to learn in these Socratic practices is how to be Socrates
for yourself. And that's inexorably bound up with how can we be Socrates to each other?
Okay, so back first. Let's repeat. Let's review. There's so much I do not know about myself because
of all of the facts. Realize it. Don't just state it. Live it. There's so much I shall never know
about myself because of all of the fate. Realize it. Become into deep awareness. Make it real.
There's so much I refuse to see because of all of my foolishness.
Realize it. And then there is so much I'm unable to see about myself because of all of my faults.
And you're probably saying, oh, this is a real downer. Stick with it. Stay with me.
It doesn't end that way.
Then you can turn your hands outward like this.
We go through the same procedure. There is so much I don't know about the world because of all of the facts.
There is so much I shall never know about the world because of all of the fate.
There is so much I refuse to see about the world because of all of my foolishness.
There is so much I am unable to see about the world because of all of my faults.
Then relax your hands back down to your meditation. And here's now where it flips.
You did the humility. And if it was just humility, it could be humiliating,
but it's not just the humility. Now as I inhale, both inwardly and outwardly,
I experience wonder, not curiosity, where I'm trying to find missing information.
And we'll talk more about this, but wonder, where I'm able to call the world and myself
into question, but in a way that is positive, that is enriching, that is growing me.
As I inhale, I wonder into the center of my mind outward to the circumference of the world,
inhaling, wondering, and then exhaling, receiving, receiving, being open to receiving from the world
and receiving from the depths of my psyche, the depths of the world and the depths of the psyche,
receiving, inhaling, wonder, wondering inward, wondering outward.
Exhale, receiving, receiving from the depths of the psyche, receiving from the depths of the world.
Do that practice with the breath at least four times. You may want to do it longer
and get the sense of the wonder and the receptivity actually interpenetrating,
mutually affording and enriching each other, so that you have wonder filled receptivity,
wonderful, wonderful receptivity. You have a profound humility,
but a transcendent wonder. That is the humble wonder of practice.
I recommend still doing your basic meditation practice, centering and rooting,
and then do this practice, both sides of it. The humility practice and the wonder side
and that usually only takes about five to ten minutes. You can shave a little bit off
the meditation if you really want to limit yourself to staying under 25 minutes in total,
but try it. See if it goes the full length and it doesn't bother you if it takes maybe 25 minutes.
And you may be saying, John, you're going to add all these practices and I'm not going to have time
for them. I bet you do. Take out your phone. How much screen time have you put in today?
How much did it actually make you wiser? How much did it actually make you more virtuous,
connect you to yourself, to other people, to the world? How much?
I bet a significant portion of it, maybe even most of it, was wasted time.
How about fasting a little bit from your phone so that you can feed more from the fount of wisdom?
As always, thank you very much for your time and attention.
What is dialectic into the logos and how does one practice it?
The related question is, what is this logos that I've sort of been only referring to intuitively
that's so central to the logos? We're going to start with the first question
and as we answer it, it will give us what we need to answer the second question. So what is,
what is dialectic into the logos? Everything is coming down to this.
