Humor is inherently multi-perspectival, multi-espectual, and dialogical.
Same thing with tragedy, right?
So now here, again, like I did last time, I want to do this sort of semi-provocative
thing with you because I can deeply trust you, right?
Cryptoguard to me is great evidence of the capacity to bring humor and tragedy into a
disclosure of how one can see the world the way Christ, the way Jesus did all, use my
language if that's okay.
Right.
And we see humor clearly in Socrates.
We see it clearly in Cryptoguard.
We see it clearly, right, in many great sages, like Schwangse from the Taoist tradition is
just humor after humor after.
I don't see it in the Bible.
Welcome back to After Socrates, episode 18, and we are continuing the series within the
series where I am being joined and helped by my dear friend and collaborator, Christopher
Master Petro, in which we are trying to exemplify dialectic into the logos, well, especially
the logos, and the Socratic orientation.
And we are also trying to bring this discussion about the logos within the logos from both
the Socratic-Platonic perspective and the Christian perspective by putting Socrates and
Cryptoguard into deep dialogue.
And last time we had, I thought, well, I think it really caught fire, and for me of the three
we've done so far, that one was the most dialogical, and the logos was there.
It was in the other two, but almost completely last time, and you're nodding in agreement.
And it was around, I think, a very important reflection about irony and paradox and following
the logos.
And so, Chris is back, and he is going to take us into something that follows on that,
that he's something he really wants to bring into this conversation, and I think it's really
opportune.
So, Chris, welcome.
All right.
Thanks, John.
So we've talked a lot about irony, and we've made side-long gestures back and forth to
humor quite a lot when we've been talking about Socrates and Cryptoguard.
Both of them are very funny.
Whatever else they are, they're very, very funny.
The role of humor in Philea Sophia, I think, is very underappreciated.
It's not an accessory.
It's not an affectation.
There's some necessity about it.
There's something actually important.
There's something we needed.
Yeah, this is a point that Anderson Todd has made to me previously as well, so please
be careful.
Right.
Right.
Yeah.
And so, I have with me, this is a really great book, my dear friend Patrick Kelly put
me onto this, The Humor of Cryptoguard.
It's an anthology.
It's edited by Thomas Oden.
It's basically like a compendium, a compilation.
You show the audience.
The Humor of Cryptoguard.
And it's basically a compilation of excerpts from Cryptoguard's body of work that, at least
in the estimation of Thomas Oden, are funny.
Either are about humor.
Most of them aren't about humor.
Most of them are just funny because he's very funny.
And in his irony, he's very funny because he's often indirect.
He makes very clever veiled references.
One of the reasons that he was such a find, he was such a fine polemicist, is polemicist
the term?
I think that's right.
Polemicist.
One of the reasons he was such a fine polemicist is that he was, in fact, some people have
remarked about him that his writing actually reached its absolute pinnacle when he was
immersed in a polemic and when he was trying to undress his opponent.
He was really quite, he had a wicked sense of humor and an ironical one at that.
And anyway, so I wanted to read something I think is quite apropos.
It's more, I think, insightful than it is funny, but you see the traces of the humor
too.
And it has, we've been talking about this idea of following the logos, how Cryptoguard
takes up the task.
He takes it up with a slightly different focus in his crosshairs.
But fundamentally, he takes up the task of following the logos from Socrates.
Right road, wrong direction, that's the title given to this excerpt.
And the question given to it by the editor is, does it represent a bold advance in the
spirit to master arguments for the existence of God?
It's like, oh God, God's existence.
What are we talking about?
Any qualification that claims to render the God directly knowable is undoubtedly a milestone.
But a milestone on the way of approximation, registering a retrogression rather than progress.
It marks a movement away from the paradox, not toward it, missing the point of Socrates
and Socratic ignorance.
Close attention should be paid to this, lest the same thing happen in the spiritual world
that happened to the traveler who asked an Englishman if the road led to London and was
told, yes it does.
But he never did arrive in London because the Englishman had omitted to mention that he
needed to turn about in as much as he was going away from London.
The metanoia, the right turning around, the reorientation.
I want to share a parable, and I think it's the right word because it's a story that undermines
itself as a narrative, by Kierkegaard, and I think it's telling that there's very few
people, Plato's clearly one, Jesus of Nazareth is the maestro of the parable, but Kierkegaard
is capable of the parable.
He tells this story about a bunch of geese that file into a beautiful building and sing
and sing about flying, but they've walked in, they sing and sing about flying, and then
they walk out and go home.
That's vintage.
That's vintage Kierkegaard.
And it's geese, and of course there's all kinds of stuff about geese.
You get this amazing, like the irony is coming through and the humor is coming through, and
you can see how that's part of his critique of Christendom, right?
The birds singing about flight who never ever take flight, yes.
And you laughed, which is the proper response.
So I think it's very important that we explore this.
First of all, there's a deep connection, like there's a continuum even I would propose
between, and Nago says the same, in his seminal essay, The Absurd, between humor and The Absurd.
And of course, Monty Python was excellent at really walking the place where they overlap.
So I just watched the scene again about the Trial of the Witch.
Oh, it's great.
Which is...
I'm duck.
I just always...
Who are you?
I'm so wise in the ways of science and all that wonderful stuff.
And so it's important because there's a sense in which a refusal to incorporate humor into
the following of the logos as a spiritual orientation actually innervates us with an
ability to have a human transcendence with respect to The Absurd.
That's a proposal I'm offering.
So first of all, and I talked about this in Awakening from the Meeting Crisis, but Nago's
beautiful article, at least the first half of it, where he's talking about absurdity,
and he says, we give all of these arguments that are supposed to both justify and generate
our sense of absurdity.
But he takes each one of the arguments and he demolishes them.
They don't actually...
Well, what you're doing won't matter a million years from now, but that's symmetrical.
What people are thinking a million years from now shouldn't matter to you.
Exactly.
Exactly.
I'm so small.
Well, if I made you really, really big, would you somehow find the life more meaningful?
No.
Right?
And he says, okay, so the arguments are after the fact.
And then he goes into...
And he gives an example that's humorous.
I think you remember it, right?
So there's this...
And this is...
Is it the call?
The phone call?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
From the dark before times, before we had smartphones.
Yeah.
Right?
And we actually had physical phones and we had these archaic devices called voice recorders
so people could leave you a message.
A what?
Yeah, yeah, that's right.
And so it goes like this, there's this fellow, he's summoned up his courage to call this
woman he loves, let's say Susan, and it's almost like a Bob Newhart routine.
And he, like, Susan, hello, don't say anything.
Right?
I just, I have to tell you, I love you, I love you, I love you.
And then he hears, Susan is not here right now, and you laugh, right?
And then Nalisa says, why is that funny?
And it's because we've got two...
And this is the thing you were saying that was like stepping into the traffic and I do
start going into the...
Getting running over by the carriage.
Right, right.
Because what you have is from that guy's perspective, right, everything he's doing is so rich with
meaning and he's in the first person perspective and he's trying to set up an I-Thout relationship.
And then the machine suddenly introduces the impersonal third person perspective that takes
all of that away.
And we're reminded that we have these two perspectives and they can be juxtaposed in
a way in which one undermines the other.
Now what's interesting is, of course, he uses that example and it's humorous.
When I use that example in class, I first just tell it like that and everybody laughs.
But then sometimes what I'll do is I'll go back and I'll get in, yeah, but really think,
I don't know what to say, but then I'll say it's John, right?
John went home and really reflected on that.
But all of these moments that are so first person perspective meaningful to him are in
this third person perspective and then you can see their faces change into, oh my gosh,
I've woken up at 3 a.m. and wondered, does this all mean anything?
And then they feel the family resemblance proximity between humor and absurdity because
both of them, and this is really important, both of them involve perspectival clash.
But here's a proposal I have for you and this is why we should talk about the two in relation.
I think humor involves perspectival clash that we resolve with a kind of insight.
I think absurdity involves a perspectival clash that drops us into participatory paradox
where our existence is fundamentally called into question.
And then I think the response there is something that, again, can overlap with humor, but it's
different.
I think the response there, the proper response is wonder, the proper response is to call
both your world and yourself into deep question, right?
And so I put it to you that I think that humor bears the same relationship to the absurd that
irony does to the paradox in the sense not of being one-to-one maps, but one is on the
same continuum and affords us and prepares us.
So if we do not develop the capacity of humor, of bringing perspectives, notice how I'm emphasizing
perspectival and participatory knowing, if we can't bring them into this and then look
for an insight in humor, then we are not properly educated, adduced to when we confront the
absurdity, not having a propositional, not even having a fully perspectival insight, but
something that requires a fundamental restructuring of our being, a metanoia, right?
So the humor prepares us within perspectival transformation for a perspectival participatory
transformation.
Exactly.
That's my proposal.
Yes.
Okay.
I think that the proposal, at least, I think I'm in total agreement, at least with the
gist of it.
I think that we can talk about exactly what the relationship is between irony and humor.
I think that the idea that irony, I think what you said as humor is to the absurd, what irony
is to paradox.
Right.
But I wasn't trying to draw an equivalence between irony and humor.
Right.
The proportion, the developmental relationship was all I'm drawing into the analogy.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And so I think that the crux of the move you're making is exactly right and very kick-a-guardian.
That humor is a kind of intercategorical response that changes and reorders our fundamental
stance in relation to the absurdity of existence.
Right.
Right.
And I think that's what you said in so many words.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Humor does that.
No.
But the humor that takes us forward is wonder.
The humor that begins in irony, not all humor begins in irony, but some humor begins in irony.
The irony that begins with the vis-à-vis of those two perspectives, when they see one
another and are aghast at one another.
That irony, that particular kind that turns into humor is the kind that we're talking
about, which is the preparation for, which is the receptivity to paradox and the assumption
of the paradox happens through humor.
We're going to have to do a little bit of qualification about what humor, what we actually
mean by this.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Because you're right.
There are different kinds of humor.
Yes.
And also, people kind of think of humor as just like, you know, just like when we talk about
irony, we're not talking about a kind of social affectation.
We're not talking about a temperamental accessory.
We're not talking about a reaction spontaneously to a situation, although cultivated irony can
produce ironic reactions just as cultivated humor can produce moments of humor.
But we're talking about a fundamental attitude.
We're talking about a cultivated way of being, a life view, a way of understanding and making
sense of the world, a way of ordering, a kind of meta-meaningful way of putting things
into right arrangement.
And we're not talking about that on a propositional level.
We're talking about a posture in response to the absurdity of life.
So when we're talking about humor, we don't just mean, I laugh at something that's funny.
We're talking about an attitude that we carry into a situation, not simply something that
we're foist with as a spontaneous moment of reacting.
So is this like, because Highland talks about this infinitude and transcendence, the ancient
sense of comedy and tragedy, where comedy is a particular way, and they're not opposites,
maybe opponent processing, the aspectualizations of the absurd, where what comedy does is it
makes you laugh at the absurd so we don't take ourselves too seriously, whereas tragedy
makes you wonder at the absurd so we realize that we should take ourselves seriously.
Right.
Right.
And you've got the playoff between those two.
Right.
Right.
Exactly.
So the comic actually kind of helps to almost to elasticize your relationship by being
able to multi-aspectualize.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Right.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
All right.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
In a sense.
Right.
That's totally what it is.
That, those, those aspects shifts are at the core of insight.
Right.
Right.
And of course, humor when it's cultivated well is productive of insight.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
You hear good humor.
What?
Sorry.
The humor we're talking about, I mean, good in that sense.
to what the really good joke is actually not found
in the propositional content of the joke,
though that too can be funny.
The joke, the master ironist who is also a humorist
finds the source of his humor, or her humor,
as the case may be, in the way they stand
in relation to the joke that they have made.
It is a characterological move that they're making.
Their position relative to what is uttered
is actually where the humor is.
It's not simply within the semantic content of the joke.
That's why I did the story of the geese,
because they're doing something absurd,
and you get the juxtaposition,
and it's like the two perspectives
in the story of the person with the voice recorder,
and it's funny there, but you realize,
but the joke's actually on us because we often
are the geese that sing about flying and never fly.
Exactly, exactly.
So in Kierkegaard, or Odin, I think makes a,
and I can't do it justice right now,
but I highly, highly recommend it,
this book, The Humor of Kierkegaard.
He makes an argument that goes something like this,
that basically, just as irony,
waking up inside the dream,
waking up within the mirage of ideality
that has us extend ourself infinitely,
but somehow within time, right?
That just as irony wakes us up
within the aesthetic stage of life
and prepares us for transition to the ethical,
for commitment, for commitment to an either-or,
instead of the impasse of either-or,
because irony prepares us to live within the bounds
of commitment, still somehow under the aspect of the eternal.
Humor, for Odin, he makes the argument
that in Kierkegaard, humor does something similar
in the transition from the ethical to the religious.
Oh, oh, oh.
That's the move he makes.
That's very, that's very good.
So that irony is to the aesthetic
what humor is to the ethical.
Right, right.
A way of waking up inside of it,
and realizing that it is not ultimate.
Right, right, and of course,
a lot of Socratic humor is that way too.
And I even-
You're corrupting the youth.
Actually, Socrates says,
I think that you should be paying before it.
Yes, exactly, exactly.
Right, and you're paying the apology, right?
I can't remember exactly,
but it's something like that.
What do you think your just punishment should be?
You should give me state sponsorship
for the rest of my life.
That's right, yeah.
Right, exactly.
So-
No, I like this proposal.
I think this is really,
I just wanna make sure I'm understanding it.
So irony sort of gives you
the requisite cognitive flexibility
to get an insight out of the aesthetic into the ethical.
And then humor,
at least the kind of humor we're talking about here,
gives you an insight out of the ethical
into the religious.
That's right.
But could tragedy also do that?
Because what I just said,
that pairing between comedy, right,
in which-
I don't think you have one without the other.
No, no, of course.
And Jonathan Miller made it famous
that when you're putting on,
as she experienced tragedy,
you emphasize-
You lean into the humor.
You lean into the humor.
And we do the same.
And we do the same.
That's right.
Because they're yin-yang with each other.
That's right.
And good drama, good dramatists know that.
In general.
Because what I'm proposing is,
we've got the humor telling us,
don't, they're saying to the ethical person,
don't take your ethical framework so-
Seriously.
That's right.
But the tragic figure is saying,
you know what?
You need to take your life
and your aspiration to virtue.
Seriously.
That's right.
And there is no algorithm for resolving that.
Right?
It's a point of process.
That's right.
We were talking about this earlier.
I just wanna bring it out
because I think it's solely also appropriate
to both Kierkegaard and Socrates
because I see them both as taking on this role.
So you've got somebody that's doing humor, right?
And what you just said about challenging the frameworks,
that's the gesture before the king.
Yeah, that's right.
Right?
You have all this authority and all the laws,
but here I am reminding you,
don't take yourself too seriously.
Because you are not what is ultimate.
Right, but you also have the prophet.
Now, I don't mean prophet in the person
who tells the future, the fortune teller.
I mean the biblical prophet,
the person that's not foretelling,
they're telling forth.
They're trying to get people to see more deeply
into what's happening.
And you have Nathan coming before
the greatest king of the Old Testament, David.
And he's a prophet and he tells them this story.
He tells them the story about this guy, right?
Who has one sheep and there's this other guy
who has all these sheep
and David's outraged.
And then he says, that's what you did with Bathsheba.
And David goes, oh, right, right?
And that's, he makes David see the tragedy
of what he has done, right?
And that's also something that takes you out of
the ethical into, so they're both.
There's the prophet and the gesture.
And then here's my proposal, both Socrates
and Kierkegaard are both.
Yes, a hundred percent, a hundred percent.
Absolutely, I couldn't agree more.
So, okay, so, okay.
So let's take that proposal.
Let's presuppose it for a moment.
And then let's talk about maybe both aspects.
Totally.
Discreetly.
And then we'll bring them back together.
Okay, okay.
Because each one, right, the tragedy reminds us
of transcendence while we're finite.
And the humorous reminds us of the transcendence
coming into the finite.
That's right.
That's why humor, the good humorous,
one of the things that the good humorous does
is show performative contradiction.
Yes.
The humorous actually, it's one of the ways
that the humorous alerts, alerts.
I just want to make clear what performative contradiction
is for, right?
So, and it's important because performative contradiction
is something that moves us outside of the propositional.
Yes.
So a classic example of a performative contradiction
is I am sleeping.
Yes.
Because that statement in so far
is how it's referring objectively.
Of course I sleep.
But when I utter that statement,
I can't be asleep in order to utter it.
So there's a contradiction between the proposition
and the perspectival and participant point.
That's right.
That's right.
Good, good, good.
And you see how that the performative contradiction,
one of the things that it does is it de-idolizes
the ethical of the religiosity
with which it is often unduly invested.
What I mean by that is this.
It shows that we can be beholden
to the custom of an ethic
while at the same time depicting
and coming into awareness of the fact
that we do not in fact live in accordance with it.
We do not live in a way that presupposes it
as the highest good and index of what is true.
So this is Jesus.
The Sabbath was made for human beings,
not human beings for the Sabbath.
Right.
Right, right, right, right.
I'll give you my favorite example.
So I had a great conversation a little while back
with Sevilla King about this.
My favorite current humorist
who is also an ironist is Dave Chappelle.
And I don't think there's anybody around
that does it better than him right now.
And he has this joke that I think
basically sums it all up.
He says at one point, one of his specials,
he goes, he's talking to an audience
that is, I would say politically speaking,
kind of generally left leaning.
As is he by all accounts, by his own admission.
But he's very hard to pin down when he does a standup
because he assumes different identities and perspectives.
And he often leads you down a road
thinking you're being set up for one thing,
but the joke comes in from the left side.
That's very quick of the guardian.
Very.
So he says at one point,
he's talking about a variety of political topics
and he's talking about gun control.
And he just sort of shakes his head and he goes,
I hate guns, I can't stand them.
And of course the audience, someone cheers,
yeah, no guns.
And he goes, yeah, but I have several.
And that to me is one of the most well-crafted jokes
imaginable because what it does is,
he means it when he says he doesn't like guns.
He can't stand them.
And he means it when he says he has several.
Right, right, right.
And what he's doing is he's,
so he's making, now there's an obvious joke
about two perspectives, right?
Clashing, yes.
A very obvious performative contradiction.
So that's the first order of the joke is this.
There's a performative contradiction,
he's woken up to it, right?
He goes, I am at quits with myself
because I espouse an ideological position
that is in accordance with a prevailing ethical framework.
And it's a framework that, at least in our ethos,
many people are aligned with, right?
And on the one hand, he realizes that there is something
about him, about the way that he lives,
the way that he behaves, that there's that variance
with that ethic, that he can't comport himself.
He can kind of, he can stand to it, he can espouse it,
but there's something in him that issues it,
that eludes it, that bucks it, right?
So that's one level of the joke,
but the higher order of the joke,
which is really the source of the joke,
is that he's standing beside himself,
looking at the performative contradiction going, Jesus.
Yeah, yeah.
And he's pointing implicitly at his audience and going,
see, see, yes, yeah.
See that?
See that, right?
Don't, do you see that?
Do you see how I am quite beside myself?
How I am quite not myself?
How I am quite at variance with myself.
Right, and these are the Christian guardian themes
you've been at, versus.
He is, he is the source of the joke.
He is its object, right?
Right, right, right.
He's showing the performative contradiction,
but he's turning in the direction
of the performative contradiction and wondering at it.
Okay, so let me, I-
And finding himself in a moment of absurdity
allowed before an audience.
So I just want to slow this down,
because this is really brilliant.
So he does this first move, which is,
as you properly described it,
how humor gets you to undermine, right,
the sort of self-righteous absolutism
of a particular ethical framework.
But then, you can't then defer to him as the authority
that is now going to be made sacred,
because he's also in the performative contradiction
undermining himself.
Oh, that's very good, that's very good, that's very good.
Right, he does something very similar.
He has a joke, he picks these remarkably contentious topics.
He has a joke about, he talks about abortion, right,
and then immediately gets an audience
on the edge of its seat, right?
Yeah, they're really a, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Even someone who's watching this right now is like,
oh God, what's he about to say?
And he says, and he goes, he stops it again,
he's talking to a relatively left-leaning audience.
And he looks at the audience and he goes,
I gotta tell you, I'm not for abortion.
There's maybe two people clapping.
And he goes, I'm not for it, and I'm not against it either.
It all depends on who I get pregnant, right?
The same thing is happening there.
The exact same dynamic is happening, right?
And then he takes it even further,
and he says, and he takes up this,
he sort of takes up a kind of a caricature
of a moralizing persona, and he says,
I honestly believe, and I think he means it,
I honestly believe that I believe
in a woman's right to choose,
and I believe that right is unequivocal and unquestionable,
and she should not have to consult anybody
except for a physician as to how she applies that right.
Gentlemen, that is fair, it's their choice.
And then he says, and ladies, to be fair to us,
I also think that if you choose to have the baby,
the man should not have to penny.
If you can kill this kid, I can at least abandon him.
Now, imagine the blood rushing to the face
adhering to something like that,
but the fact of the matter is-
So what does the audience do?
Do they laugh, or what do they do in that situation?
Well, are they laughing nervously?
Yes, I think so, I can't remember exactly,
but they're definitely laughing.
There's a little bit of, there's an intake of breath,
there's a nervous laughter, there's a mixed reaction,
but it's very uproarious.
So I wanna get this, first of all, he calls this up,
and everybody sees their commitment,
and then he calls out a contradiction, right?
And then he's also placed himself, right,
that this isn't an abstract thing, it involves me,
and I'll be egocentric when it involves me.
Exactly.
And he's got all this going, and you're going, wow.
So first of all, he is making us aware
of all of these different perspectival clashes,
and how there's a complexity there
that we are, in many instances, trying to avoid.
That's right, and what he's showing is that
this doesn't make sense, like when we put these pieces
together, they don't fit.
Don't, do you see everybody?
I'm putting all the pieces together,
I'm fitting the perspectives, I'm putting them
face to face, and they don't agree,
and they don't make for a coherent life view.
That means that something about the way
that we've, I'm editorializing him a little bit,
and that in some ways I shouldn't even be doing this much.
But for the sake of explanation, I think,
what he's doing is something like this,
is like he's putting all of these perspectives together,
and he's gathering them into this,
he's trying to squish them into the ethical frame
that we have decided to use as a way of arbitrating
the norm, and it doesn't all fit together,
and he's going, look everyone,
we are full of performative contradictions
when we try to absolutize this ethical framework.
And it doesn't fit, so something is missing.
And that removes our capacity for empathy
and understanding of people who have ethical position
other than ours.
Like if we fail to grasp the humility of our humanity
that we are caught up in performative contradictions,
it is very easy for us to defy our side
and demonize the other side.
Right, right, right.
Which of course undermines what ethics
is supposed to be doing.
Right, of course it's.
That's a huge performative contradiction
of the entire frame.
Huge, huge.
Okay, so that's just to kind of tie that back in.
Essentially what the ironic humorist
who can pit perspectival frames against one another
and fit them under the same overall marquee of normativity
that is espoused by a particular culture
does so to reveal how when you actually frame it properly,
when you try and step back and see it
in any kind of final way.
And if you try and see through that.
Ironically.
That's beautiful.
When you try and look at your ethical frame,
unironically it results in an aporia.
It becomes absurd because it does not fit together.
He's opening up exposure to the absurdity
within the ethical and in so doing gestures outside of it.
Right, and so what you're saying is
both Kierkegaard and Socrates are doing this.
And so I'm thinking of when Socrates is talking
to Euthyphro who knows what all what,
he knows what piety is.
And he's about to prosecute his father for being impious.
Right, and then Socrates says the famous,
well, what, right, right.
First of all, he gets from Euthyphro.
Well, what is it?
Well, it's to do what the gods tell us.
Well, do the gods tell us to do something
because it's good?
Or is it good because the gods do it?
And Euthyphro wants it both ways
because either way undermines his position,
puts him into performative contradiction,
and he realizes, and so what does he do?
He literally runs away from Socrates.
Right, yeah, yeah, right.
That's right, and you know what?
That's what people often do in face of the humorous.
They turn and they run.
But here's the thing.
Put all that, there's all that humor,
but where's Socrates going?
He's going to the courtroom to face his charges
that are gonna lead to his death.
Yes, yes, yes.
There's the humorous and the tragedy.
And the tragedy.
Bound up together.
Unfolded together.
Yeah.
And you really can't, because they are simply
as specializations of the same condition of existence
that has us fraught with the contradiction of our humanness,
that you can't have one without the other, right?
So this makes me think again,
of dialectic into Deologos
and when people are doing the practice.
Like, there's two ways in which it can go wrong.
We can get so serious
that we start to choke the flow of insight
that is the life breath of a Logos.
But we can also fail by not taking it seriously enough
so we do not put ourselves at stake in the practice.
So we need both the prophetic and the gesture, right?
The prophet and the comedian, right?
Both have to be,
we have to be constantly toggling between them
as we participate in the practice
because we can fail.
This is Aristotle's classic idea
about how you do the virtual engineering of a virtue.
You have constraints that limit and constraints that afford
because we're always moving between deficit and access.
We can take ourselves too seriously
and we can fail to take ourselves seriously enough.
And when we put the two together
in the practice of dialectic, we can get again,
this is yet another way of how we can lean into
and start to take up the orientation
of finite transcendence
that really is the place that gives birth to the Logos.
That's right, well said, well said.
And when we undertake that practice
to remain sufficiently mobile
to be able to migrate our perspective properly.
And also to develop the kind of,
to develop the kind of,
to socialize the process properly, right?
That's another function that the humor has, right?
Of course, of course.
Is that it helps establish the relation, right?
Right, because you can't tell a joke on your own.
A joke is inherently,
humor is inherently multi-perspectival,
multi-espectual and dialogical.
Same thing with tragedy, right?
So now, here, again, like I did last time,
I wanna do this sort of semi-provocative thing with you
because I can deeply trust you, right?
Cryptoguard, to me, is great evidence
of the capacity to bring humor and tragedy
like into a disclosure of how one can see the world,
the way Christ, the way Jesus did.
I'll use my language if that's okay.
There, right.
And we see humor clearly in Socrates.
We see it clearly in Cryptoguard.
We see it clearly, right?
In many great sages,
like Shwangza from the Taoist tradition
is this humor after humor after.
I don't see it in the Bible, in the New Testament.
We were talking about this the other day.
We were, and that's interesting.
Because we have an overwhelming presentation of the tragic
in the sense we've been talking about here, right?
It's, right?
And we also get presentation of human beings being foolish,
but it's not, but it's always filled with pathos.
That's true.
That might be true on its own terms,
although it puts me in mind, again,
of some of Kirkegaard's thoughts on the topic
because one of the things that he takes pains to point out,
and that Odin does a good job of pointing out,
is that he understands the incarnation
as being something remarkably comic, right?
Really?
Yes.
Yes.
Oh, you're gonna have to unpack that for me,
because like the sort of green shadow
of my Christian sensibility, right?
It's like getting irked, and it's like,
I'm even surprised in this moment right now
that I'm getting irked by that,
because like, what's going on in me?
But anyways.
Well, I know, and it's a kind of calculated,
Socratic heresy, for him, it's no such heresy, right?
Because for him, humor is, humor is in some sense,
the birth canal towards the serious and the religious,
to use your language from yesterday, right?
The canal.
I mean, think for a moment of,
in the same way that,
you know what makes me think there's that old like,
fable about Phaelies that, you know,
he's gazing up, right?
One of the earliest philosophers,
he's looking up at the sky.
The stars and he falls into the well.
And he's beholden into the well.
Yeah, and he falls into the well.
It's something very much like that, right?
Or Heraclitus.
Did you know how he dies?
Oh, buried in a horse manure.
Horse manure.
Right.
Right, yeah.
So you have this,
you have the impregnation of the finite by the infinite.
Okay, so you have something like that.
And for Kierkegaard,
the fact of the Son of God being born into a stable
in the lowliest of conditions
and the most impoverished of settings,
isn't simply paradoxical.
I mean, it is.
But the attitude that accompanies the paradox,
the affective manner of that paradox for him
is the comic, right?
So how do you get,
so, okay, this is,
I wanna really slow down on this
because you're really intriguing me with this.
So I get the paradoxical and how even the tragic
are so such perfect vehicles for the numinous.
Yes.
And of course, many people,
I do this, you know,
I don't consider myself a Christian,
but at Christmas time,
I insist on there being a nativity seen put up
because there's something numinous going on, right?
And so, like I say,
and, you know, auto, the fascinating and the tremendous.
And so the tragedy and the tremendous
go well together, the fascinating, right?
How does, how would the,
do you see what I'm trying to get at?
How would you,
how did the comic and the numinous come together?
Well, one of the things that the comic does, I think,
think of this physiologically for a second, right?
Like we're talking about humor
as though it's this sort of abstract thing,
but think of it like viscerally.
Think of what happens affectively, right?
Think of what happens when something strikes you as comic
and you will laugh
and you'll get that sensation in your body.
It is a way of,
I think what it does is it disrupts your categorical thinking
by re-disposing the attitude you take
in the face of something that on its face,
one taken literally doesn't add up.
But one thing that humor does is I think
it softens our attention, right?
It's a certain form of sensitization.
And I think in the case of this biblical example,
I think what it does is it helps to inoculate
the literalism that would accompany
the self-seriousness taken towards such a thing.
Oh, okay, okay, I wanna savor this.
I wanna savor this, this is good.
So the idea is if we only look at it one way,
there's a tremendous temptation to literalism
and a kind of fundamentalism,
which of course is anathema to all of this stuff
we've been talking about.
Anathema to everything.
Yeah, yeah, okay.
And so what you're doing is to remember the comic
means you don't take the literal presentation.
So seriously, so it's like the way the parables
undermined the narrative framework.
Right, right, so that they don't calcify the perspective.
Okay, so excellent, excellent.
While you were saying that something else came to mind
and I wanna see if they go together,
I was realizing, oh, but John,
you have been so inculturated to regard laughter
as always ridicule.
But the moments in which I have really laughed
have not been moments of ridicule.
They have been moments of joy.
So I grew up in Dundas and I was going to a school,
high school, and I had a really close friend.
And one day after school, we were in a room
and I said, what's that on your shelf there?
And he said, well, there's a game we can play.
And so I said, well, let's play it.
He said, okay, and then we get it out
and there were colored spheres.
And he was blue and my were green.
He says, okay, so count your spheres.
And he said, I have 13 and I said, I have 14, do I win?
And we laughed for 10 minutes after that.
Because it's all this setup and the game is just to count.
Beautiful.
Which of course it wasn't.
Beautiful.
Right?
And I'm not ridiculing him.
There's no ridicule at all.
The laughter is about, again,
a capacity to suddenly see through,
and again, to really properly move
between taking things seriously
and not taking them seriously.
Beautiful.
And there's a joy there.
Beautiful.
And I'll put these two together, right?
If we can think of,
if we can broaden our sense of the comic
to that which induces or conduces laughter.
And then if we can remember that a lot of our laughter
is not the laughter of ridicule,
but the laughter of celebration of our ability
to open up to reality.
And then if we can put that with laughter and comedy
as reminding us not to get entrapped
in an idolatry of the literal,
I'm getting a sense now of how the comic
can be part of the numinous.
So another moment that comes to mind about this,
so now this is really singing for me,
is that scene in C.S. Lewis
where the kids haven't met Aslan yet.
And they say, is he a tame lion?
And all the animals go, oh, of course,
and they're laughing, but he's good.
Yeah, yes.
So there's a punchline and there's humor,
and there's, right?
But nevertheless, the humor is in service of how numinous.
And it is ironic.
And it's ironic, I'm getting it now.
And it's so ironic about that is what the kids are saying,
what the kids are asking is, can we trust him?
Yes.
That's the question, right?
Yes.
And the irony is yes, but you have no idea
just how much.
Right, and you also don't,
it's the sensibility transcendence.
Not only do you need to have an insight into him,
you need to have a reflective insight in it.
You really don't understand trust yet.
Right.
You think of trust as, can I predict somebody?
Right, right, right, right, right.
Does what you're saying,
what you're saying participates in what is real,
unknowingly and yet beautifully and continuously,
and to such a degree that you can't begin to imagine
how it participates.
Yes, exactly, exactly.
It's, your story inspires me to tell one too,
which is, I think, a similar friend of mine,
Leslie Giley, who's one of the funniest people I know,
and who's, and incidentally, who's Catholicism,
I think is quite beautiful and quite inspiring,
quite sophisticated.
So I think of him at a moment like this.
And this was many years ago,
we were gathered together,
a few of us friends we were watching the Olympics.
And the Olympic hockey, which was a big deal in our house.
Canada.
Big deal.
The official religion of Canada.
The official religion of Canada, yes.
The ethical religion,
but sometimes it borders on the religious.
Yeah, right, well said, well said.
We can teleologically suspend the ethical for hockey.
And it was the Olympics that was actually held in Canada,
where Team Canada won the gold medal for hockey.
And so it was quite an uproarious, okay?
It's right.
It was about as sacred as it could be
without being in the proper category of the religious.
And like we said, it's pretty close.
Right.
And so we go out for a walk afterwards
and just really flesh, identifying very personally,
very closely with this victory,
which is interesting to me now.
I don't think I would necessarily have the same reaction,
but at the time it was very important.
And we're walking down the street
and there's a man who's,
what is it, one or two?
And he walking in our direction
and they're clearly evangelizing.
And I don't know what denomination they are,
but they're evangelizing and they look at us
and they sort of, they take on this sort of
kind of solicitous manner like,
oh, we're going to engage you in conversation.
And we walk closer together
and then my friend Leslie says,
have you heard the good news?
Now this is coming from a person
who's properly religious, right?
Yeah.
And yet the irony of the way that something
that is by all comparison, relatively profane,
participates in what is sacred, right?
If only by indirection.
Right, right.
It's something that is present in the humor
and present in the joke.
That's really good, that's really good.
Anyway, so I think, so this connection,
the other thing that the humorist does,
and this is again, present in what is comical about Christ
and comical about the incarnation.
Again, not ridicule.
No, comical.
Right, the comic is not,
so you've taken pains to say this
and we should take more.
The comic, comedy is often associated with cruelty
and it needn't be, right?
It really needn't be.
So when I say, and when he says
that the incarnation is comic,
he is not debasing it.
We're ridiculing it.
He's not dispraising it.
He's not ridiculing it.
He's not trying to remove its sacredness.
The profanity of the absurdity of the incarnation
taking place in the lowliest setting imaginable
in dexes to the sacred.
And he dies, the death of a criminal and a terrorist.
Right, you were talking earlier about,
in one of our previous sessions,
about the Socratic eros and how it transmutes
from the lowly and sexual, the lowly and sexual.
You know what I mean?
To the anagogic.
To the anagogic.
And we have to think of this in the same way, right?
Yes, there's a sense in which returning to the cave,
of course, makes you susceptible to tragedy
and that's in Plato's mind.
But it also has, Plato puts a comedy in there
because there's a joke there
because when he comes back,
he's stumbling around
because his eyes aren't used to the dark
and he's saying things that nobody believes.
There's a then story like that about two frogs
and one is at a pond and another one goes away.
And it comes back.
And the first frog says to the second,
what happened?
And he said, well, I saw the ocean.
And the first frog says, is it half as big as my pond?
And the first frog goes, no, it's bigger.
It's a three quarters the size of my pond.
And the second frog goes, no, no.
And then he goes, well, is it as big as my pond?
And then the second frog says, no, it's way bigger
than you can, and then it says,
and then the first frog's head explodes.
But it's the same kind of thing.
Like you realize that when the person comes back,
in some sense, and there's something
like you have to be really careful about here,
the person that comes back after,
the enlightened person that comes back, right?
Can see him a buffoon, can see him a buffoon.
Absolutely, and that's why the irony
in order to be transmuted into a religious attitude
needs to become humorous
because the, oh, wait, I see it.
That way the person takes up, oh, this is almost like Girard
about like the sacrifice undermining the scapegoating.
What the person, the sage, takes up,
allows the projection of potential buffoonery and ridicule,
and that but plays with the humor in there
in order to turn it properly back on the person.
That's right.
So this reminds me of Woodruff's discussion
in his book, Virtue, sorry, Reverence to Lost Virtue.
He says, we now think of irreverence,
and we take it as a compliment,
but he said the job, satire is not ultimately
about irreverence.
It's about getting you to find irreverence for the idol
so you get into proper reverence for the reality.
Exactly, exactly.
Irreverence toward the king means reverence to God.
Exactly, exactly.
Render unto, right?
Yeah, yes, yes.
That's exactly right.
That's exactly right.
And that's why great humorists,
that's why the irreverence of a great humorist
conceals a deep reverence for what is real.
Only so much.
It's like al-Athea.
It's concealed, but it's also revealed.
Yes.
Those who have the eyes to see and the ears to hear, right?
Yes, yes, because they stand outside of the arena,
right at its outer perimeter, out on the horizon.
That's right.
The horizon of wonder.
That's right, they stand on the horizon of wonder,
and their irreverence refers attention to that horizon.
If it is understood properly, and often it isn't,
that's why we kill them.
We kill them, literally or figuratively,
we are in the business right now of killing good humorists
as much as we possibly can, right?
Right, now think of the idea of offense, right?
Kierkegaard's idea of offense as the denial,
the refusal of the beholding gaze of agape
that reforms your relationship to yourself
and the ground of your being to take offense at that,
the idea of taking offense at that, right?
Think of the offense we have at the comedian
that has us know ourselves by some measure
that is well beyond our capacity to self-determine,
to auto-poeticize, and to manage for ourselves.
We take offense at the idea that we could be so known
and so naked by some measure
that we have not the control over.
We take offense at the idea that we do not know ourselves.
Yes, exactly, and we refuse to be known.
You shall not know me,
I shall not know myself through you.
No, I shall not.
I refuse that love.
Remember, knowing and love,
we've made this identity claim before.
I refuse that love,
I refuse your knowing,
I refuse the knowing of myself on your terms
because they are not mine.
Our offense at the comedian is in some sense
a version of our offense at the Christ.
So it's the opposite of the Socratic know-thyself
as the aspirational, right?
And it's mythology going back to that term again, right?
Okay, so again, this is deepening the point
about this sort of primary orientation,
the fundamental framing, the meta-optimal grip,
the meta-orientation,
the orientation to our orientation, right?
That we're bringing into the practices, right?
We're adding all of this nuance.
We're building the mythos around, right?
We're building a mythos scaffolding
to help people take up the orientation
that is needed for practicing dialectic into the elogues.
That's right, that's right.
So,
so what,
what do we, like, what am I trying to say?
We've hit something, just.
Yeah, no, no.
Well, there's an aporia here.
Hold it for a second, yeah.
But there's a connection too.
Because I can think of, like this stance
of being able to challenge the ethical in service
of religio, the connectedness, the relatedness.
The ratio religio, right?
And I'm thinking not only of, like we,
there are, I think the proper practice of this
within a spiritual community dialectic into the elogues.
I'm thinking of work that people like David Fuller
and others are doing of having the conversations
that we're not allowed to have.
Not because we want to espouse a racism or a sexism
or any kind of unethical behavior,
but because we want to seek beyond these ethical frameworks
a way of re-grounding the ethical in something
that it is in the service of, right?
And that we can't have these conversations.
And so what I'm thinking of is another dimension
of the scaffolding, which is,
and this is of course requires tremendous care
in both the sense of caution and taking care of,
that in addition to what we just said,
getting this finesse between taking ourselves too seriously
and not taking ourselves seriously enough.
Dialectic in the elogues also requires an ability
to talk about things that we're not supposed to talk about,
to have the difficult conversations.
And to understand that those conversations are,
they're not the end and object.
No, because the conversations are not driven
towards coming to a conclusion.
They're trying to get us both to a kind of giving birth
to ourselves that we're not capable on our own.
And so like just as an example on it,
I'm not going to get into it
because YouTube is not the place to do this,
but there is so much invocation of justice right now
and so little deologos about justice,
which Socrates and Plato and the Republic
would find so abhorrent, so deeply, deeply disgusting.
And that's what I mean about standing back and saying,
why are we invoking this so much?
And yet we pretend it's pretentious
as if we completely get what justice is
and we know it and we have it and we've got it
and there's no question.
And it's like, to me, that is also an example
of people stuck in the ethical, right?
The reduction of justice to law,
the reduction of justice to law,
whether it be formally or informally,
however we define it, right?
But that non-identity is precise
that has a non-identity.
I want to have deep discussions like this.
I want to get into deologos like Socrates does
in the Republic about justice.
And I feel like we can't do it right now
because anything that we say
that calls particular slogans about justice
into proper question for reflection
will brand us immediately as unethical individuals.
Right, well, but this goes to Beck,
and this is as you know,
we can gesture to dozens of hours of lectures
to this effect.
This is one of the consequences
of the meaning crisis.
Yes, yes.
Is that the loss of the religious category
of thought and action has resulted in the idolatry.
The idolatry of the ethical.
Right, and that's why we have pseudo-religious,
meta-meaning systems, systems that were meaningful
but not meta-meaningful,
that had no capacity to govern intercategorically
the way that we arrange meaning, right?
Like political ideologies
that have no business being religious
but are elevated and deified to that category
because they are.
They're trying to fill the vacuum.
They're trying to fill the vacuum
and it is a deeply, deeply dangerous case
of mistaken identity.
Yes, yes.
Right, and we can just like, you know, the examples are so,
they're so voluminous, they're so obvious.
We don't even need to enumerate them
but they're rife right now.
And it's because when we lose that category of orientation
we drop a tear down.
It's a pretty significant tear, right?
It's a difference of kind, fundamentally.
But it's exactly parallel, proportionally parallel
to the person living the aesthetic life
who, right, tries to.
The Puerta Ernest, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, right, who's trying
to find a spiritual, right?
He's even trying to, there's a vacuum
of ethical orientation.
Totally, yeah, yeah, yeah, you're right, you're right.
Well, as you pointed out, I think very wisely yesterday
when we talk about the aesthetic
and it's a rough mapping but I think it's very apt.
It's to the aesthetic and the ethical and the religious
as the child is the adult, the adult is the aesthetic.
Right, the child is the aesthetic,
the adult is the ethical and the sage is the religious.
And incidentally, I mean, I think we've made this clear
but just in case there is necessary
and independent value in each of these stages, right?
Of course.
We don't want to lose, we don't want to lose
the ideality of playfulness that belongs
to the province of the child.
There's a reason that Kierkegaard
really got along with kids, right?
And in Jesus, you have to be like children
to enter the kingdom.
That's right, that's right.
Our development comes through serious play, right?
Which children, of course, exemplify, right?
And of course, there is tremendous value
to the ethical, right?
And you see the great figures, like Socrates,
criticizing the laws of Athens
but refusing to leave when they have pronounced his death.
Jesus saying, I haven't come to throw away the law
but to fulfill it, right?
And you get these constant,
where you get St. Paul.
Once again, the paradox of that.
Right, wrestling between law and love, right?
Or the parable of the prodigal son,
where if you, like the prodigal son for me
is I come back to it again and again
because if you land on any one of the identities
and absolutize it, you don't get the parable.
And that's the classic, and that is that by definition,
I think by Schindler's definition is what mythology is,
that the denial of the logos, the hate of the logos
is mistaking the part for the whole.
Mistaking any, the part of any one of these perspectives,
the part of any one of these stages
as being absolute in itself,
rather than being something that participates in what is.
And let's add the two things to it.
They go exactly with it.
The mythology is also that the logos
is always instrumental and in service of something else.
Yes, but what is all of this for?
What if it's for what it is, right?
It's about the abundant life, the life worth living.
And then the other is, well, let's get to a conclusion.
Let's get to the bottom line, right?
Give me something final.
What's the bottom line in the parable of the prodigal son?
You tell me.
What's the bottom line in the crucifixion?
What's the bottom line in Socrates' trial?
Like, you're not understanding it.
Exactly, exactly.
And so mythology is also that which has us take offense
at the possibility of agape,
which is a form of knowing and being known
that is inexhaustible and is not brought to anything
so final as what is so desired.
Right, and therefore it is also,
and this is one of the great, to my mind,
one of the reasons why I think Christianity
hasn't profunded it yet,
which is the deep co-identification
of agape and the logos, right?
Because the mythology is not only the foreclosure
on agape, it is the foreclosure, therefore also,
of the logos, and we have to understand them.
And I think in this paradox that he talks about,
in this paradox, they are co-identified.
So there's a way in which, right,
and I'm not, I don't propose we resolve it right now,
but what I'm seeing, again, to help get people oriented,
is I'm seeing this interplay between comedy and tragedy,
not taking ourselves too seriously.
In order to take ourselves seriously.
Right, right, and then there's also this interplay
between logos and agape, and they're like,
I see them as these opponent things,
and then there's the nexus between them,
and that's the place we wanna be in
when we are exercising the practice.
Yes, and it is not a place that we can articulate.
No. It is ineffable.
No, no, but what we can do, we can live in it.
Yeah, we can live it, and we can triangulate ways
in which, like Tillich, in which we can find the tonos,
and we can find the tonos,
and we can find the tonos between the different, right,
and where they touch on each other and bear on each other.
That's right.
Yeah.
I think this was wonderful.
I think this was fantastic.
So thank you so, so much.
This was excellent.
It was.
Can I maybe just finish us off with one more?
Oh, please.
Because this one is, this one is a little less obvious,
but I think all the better for it.
So bear with me.
Okay. Bear with me.
Bear with me.
Instantly transforming oneself,
how to become a jellyfish.
And the question is,
how does the self acquire its own selfhood
if it is merely a receptacle for absorbing external values?
There was a creature about which I fall into reverie rather often.
It is the jellyfish.
Have you noticed how this gelatinous mass
can flatten itself into a plate
and then slowly sink, then rise so still and firm
that one would think one could step on it?
Now notice, now it notices its prey approaching,
then it funnels into itself,
becomes a pouch and sinks with prodigious speed,
deeper and deeper with its speed snatching in its prey.
Not into its pouch, for it does not have a pouch,
but into itself, for it is itself a pouch and nothing else.
It is so able to contract itself
that one cannot imagine how it could possibly extend itself.
It is just about the same with you.
And you must forgive me that I have not had
a more beautiful creature with which to compare you.
And also that you perhaps can hardly keep from smiling
at the thought of yourself as nothing but a pouch.
That is so consonant with everything,
like we've been talking about and also, you know,
being tracking Socrates and trying to follow the logos.
And it also reminds me of L.A. Paul's stuff
about people offering to turn you into a vampire
and you can't possibly know what that is like.
But the humor gets you into the serious play
between the perspectives.
That was perfect for ending it.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, everyone.
For your time and attention.
Take good care.
Kierkegaard seems to be also presenting it
as a positive and good thing,
but he's suffering it in this profound way.
This is what I'm hearing you saying.
This is almost ripping him to pieces.
And yet in Socrates,
it seems to be sitting there harmoniously together.
