Welcome everyone to Another Voices with Reveki. I am here with Kazara Mirzai.
Kazara is going to be part of this ongoing discussion. We're having on this channel
with people who are practitioners and also researchers about IFS, Internal Family Systems
Theory. And I'm very excited about this. I've met Kazara offline and we've got a really interesting
conversation. I'm rather looking forward to this one. But Kazara, why don't you introduce yourself,
tell us a little bit more about your background, and then maybe we can talk about some of your work
and how it weaves into what we're doing here at the Reveki Foundation. And then we'll just take
it from there. Yes, thank you very much, John. Thanks for having me. Oh, great pleasure. Yeah,
so I'm a psychotherapist by training. I'm a practitioner. I'm a clinician. And I'm a researcher
and teacher at the university in Hildesheim in Germany. And what I focus on is like there are
a couple of things I focus on. So my research is on emotion regulation and developmental
psychopathology. So I'm looking mostly on adolescent, on the adolescent age and the age group. And
what I'm doing there is I look at how psychotherapy has an impact on it. So we know that
psychotherapy works, but we don't know why to a lot of degrees. And I have a more of a dynamical
systems theoretical view on it. And I look at affect dynamics and see how affecting emotion
fluctuate and have their ups and downs and look at those in especially teenagers. But at the same
time, I'm also more oriented to more global view, more theoretical view. And I'm also deeply
influenced by one of my doctoral supervisors, Werner Greve. He's a professor for developmental
psychology. And he's actually, I'm in this academic ancestral line of Balthus and Staudinger.
You mentioned them in the meeting process. So Werner Greve, he actually, he did his PhD under
Paul Balthus. So he has this lifespan, lifespan perspective on, on development. And
yeah, I try to bring in those aspects, but also the theoretical aspects. And he's also deeply
into action theory and philosophical psychology. So I also follow this, this trend to look more
broadly onto meaning making, I would say. And this is where IFS comes in. And as a practitioner of
IFS and a research, I also do research on it. Yeah, I'm deeply interested in the also in the
cocci of it and the cognitive science of it. And yeah, and this whole machinery of meaning
making. So yeah, that's where I come from. What would you like to talk about first? I mean,
we could pick up on a particular thread and give people, you know, a more specific example of
what your work looks like and how it's related to meaning and the meaning crisis, perhaps that
would be great. Yeah, I think, oh, that's a good question where to start. I think there are several
paths, paths that could, that we could take. And maybe start, I know that your audience knows
IFS by now, but maybe just to sum up for them. I think we could, we can always talk more about
it. I mean, I, yeah, the work with, with Seth, Seth Allen, Seth Allison has been
really, really profound. And, but I think having many voices articulate what it is could be very
helpful to our listeners. Yes. And I really enjoyed those videos. I also wanted to extend that and
tell you that I think you both have done a very wonderful job. It was, it was actually really
different to experience both of you. I mean, Seth does, you know, did an excellent job. He has this
wonderful personality. And you also show different sides and aspects of yourself, John. So I really
like that too. Yeah, well, thank you for saying that. And I apologize to Seth. I think when I
first mentioned him, I confused him with Seth Dillinger. I apologize about that. But Seth Allison,
yes. Yeah, he, we spoke before time and he proposed doing this. And yeah, I knew it would be
challenging. But I thought people needed a concrete example in order to get a deeper sense of what
was going on. I agree. I agree. Hey, I think sometimes we tend to be way too abstract and
theoretical. So we need something to ground ourselves again. So yeah, maybe to connect to that.
Yeah, just really, really briefly, shortly at what I, what I think or my take on IFS is that
it's actually a model of a living and self organizing psyche that is composed of, I would say
living things. And Dick Schwartz would say sub personalities or we could call them parts.
And yeah, those interact with each other in a certain, and again, this is my language in a
certain qualitative space and relationship that we would call the self. And so you see again,
this is my notion of it. It's actually tainted there. I don't assume a monadic self. I rather
assume a relational, flexible, and the self is more as a process than a product.
So in that sense, IFS assumes the multiplicity of the psyche or a multiplicity of the psyche.
And yeah, I would, I would, I would want to start maybe by linking it to the meaning crisis,
because I think this is so deeply important. And then we can come to my work and how
my perspectives from I also forgot to mention that I worked many years in psycho oncology and
pediatric psycho oncology. And, and I currently work at a residential adolescent residential
crisis center where I work like with borderline personality disorders and very, very traumatized
young people. And I'm so confronted with this whole absurdity and the meaning crisis that
you automatically you try to find ways and try to make sense out of it. So, and I see deep,
deep connections there. And so I would say the short answer is that IFS helps both the cognitive,
as well as the existential and spiritual machinery of meaning making. So that's, yeah,
that's very powerful. Yeah, and I think via a dialectic, it's a dialectical approach.
And, and I think we can add in more mythos. And I mean, not only the logos, but also the mythos.
And fundamentally, IFS, again, is a dialogical practice and a form, I would say a form of
serious play to use one of your terms or you to use your language. And the serious play,
it helps to systematically modify salience, in a sense. And, and, and obviously to switch and,
and change perspectives. So this perspective taking is very, very important. And I think
IFS is powerful in doing so. And it helps you forward and come into contact with your,
yeah, with different aspects of your, of your being and your identity. And, and, and, and, and
doing so get a grasp on your inner conflict in a platonic sense. And to resolve, hopefully resolve
those inner conflicts. That was just, wow, that was just wonderful. So let me see, I want to,
I want to make sure I get all these. So as you mentioned, salience and perspective taking,
you, you mentioned people get sort of an enrichment of their self awareness. They, they
discover, uncover, realize different aspects of themselves. And then
there's also you, you were talking a little bit. Well, let's start with those three, first of all.
And then we can pick up on any threads that are remaining. So I get, I, I get that it alters
salience. Because it gets people to pay attention to things they weren't previously paying attention
to within their psyche. Is that the main, that's the salience? I know I might be oversimplifying.
I'm just trying to get the initial idea. No, I think, I think that's, that's totally fair.
And, and I think there was, there was again, a machinery behind that. And I think this has deeply
to do with, I think, dynamical systems theory can here can help us understand what we mean also
by this idea of salience. So what I understand, or what I mean when I talk about salience is that,
and again, I would say this is deeply psychodynamic or depth psychological. That's
IFS is really related to that. That you're not the master in your own house. Something is driving
you. Right? Yeah. And that's the poconic theme you were bringing up earlier about. Yeah. Yeah.
Exactly. Something is driving you. So those different forces. And they have their own framing.
They have their own sets of glasses that they put on, right? Yeah. They see the world
from their perspectives, because they have their own agent arena relationship.
Yeah. Yeah, that's what this is what I was bringing in. And, and what I mean when I talk
about dynamical systems theory is that I think those forces that drive us, they, they are a system,
in a sense that they are a complex system, biological system. That's why I'm talking about
living things, which means, and living things are memory systems. And I think this is, this is an
aspect of dynamical systems theory that is often overlooked. But we're, it's, they are deeply,
so biological systems are memory systems. And this has to do with this technical notion of
non-urgidicity. And I don't know if we should expand on this or not, but... Well, we could.
I mean, it overlaps with some of the significant work Michael Levin's doing in some of the
conversations I've had with him. Can I, can I, can I, can I ask you a question at this point?
Yeah. So I get that this is wonderful. So let's at least say there are sort of autopoietic systems
right there. They, they're, they're seeing the world in a certain way, and they have a certain
function, and they're trying to maintain themselves and, and satisfy that function or functions. I
don't want to be simplistic. Is that okay so far? Absolutely. And then, and I like this idea of they,
they each have a different framing and agent arena relationship. And that means, of course,
they can come into conflict in some significant way. And this is the platonic model you were
alluding to earlier from the Republic, right? You've got this inner conflict. And then I,
I've been wondering about this. So I have a question to ask. So Plato posits the idea that
we have metadrives. We have two fundamental metadrives. One is a kind of inner justice,
inner peace. We, we, whatever it, however we try to satisfy our goals and our desire, sorry,
satisfy our desires and reach our goals. We don't want that to cause more internal conflict. We
want it to bring resolution to that conflict and an inner binding and an inner religio. And then we
have another important drive, which is we want to be most in contact with what is most real. We
don't want whatever is satisfying our goals or satisfying our desires to be illusory, fraudulent,
anything. And so the question is this, I, I'm not very happy with, you know, thinking about the
self as some sort of thing. And you seem to be also like that. You described it as a space. And I,
I'm thinking, I'm wondering if it's a functional space. What do I mean by that is maybe perhaps
the self is understood as that which is these two metadrives. The self is that which is driving
for the resolution of inner conflict and bringing us into conflict, sorry, bringing us into contact
with reality. What do you think about that as a proposal? That that is maybe how we could understand
the fundamental functionality of the self. Given that you raised the platonic model, it seems like
there's a way of understanding the self in terms of that platonic model. That's wonderful.
Can you repeat that again? That's so, that's so rich. I have to think about this again.
Yeah. So Plato has this proposal, right? He doesn't state it like it explicitly as a,
as a standalone proposition, but it very clearly comes out in many places, in many dialogues,
most prominently in the Republic, which is the one you were alluding to, that we, we have a desire
for inner peace. But this is not just, that's why he also uses the word justice. It's that,
Yes, it's the optimal gripping. It's the optimal gripping. It's this harmonic interplay, right?
Yes. Yes. And so we want, we have this, there's a, there's a meta drive to bring about that
harmonic interplay. So you can call it sort of this vertical optimal gripping, if I can allow
that. And then we also have this meta drive of horizontal optimal gripping with the world
and other people. And the self is those two functions. And what Plato talks about is it's
possible to actually coordinate the satisfaction of those two functions. And I would put it to you
that it sounds to me like IFS is exactly a practice for coordinating them, because you're
trying to get the parts in this harmonious sense so that you can get a better grip on reality
thereby. Wonderful. That's exactly what I'm, when I'm thinking, there's so many things there
that I can, I can follow up on maybe. So I absolutely think it's about meta desires,
because, and I, and I would bring also in the good, the true and the beautiful, especially the good.
Yeah, it's these two axes, right? The two are good and the beautiful are going both ways. Yes.
Because when you actually do parts work, and, and they, they get into this harmonic
self organization and self realization, is that now, at least it feels like they're committed to
something that they share, what parts share, and if this transcends their individual desires and
needs. So there are meta desires and meta needs. And I think that is to be deeply in contact with
reality. That's one aspect. And, and for, for this harmonic interplay to go on, because it's an
iterative game, right? So I, so, so the, the efficient, the resiliency is in this long term
efficiency. So not only for the sake of self maintenance and in an auto poetic sense. And,
and I think this makes it deeply human. And we should definitely talk about anthropology
as well. And this connects to my work in, in oncology, and also as in psychiatry,
because I think it's missing, we have deeply dehumanized anthropology going on. But
what I mean by, by, make us human is to not only to care for ourselves, but also to care for others.
I think that's, I think that's wonderful. So this, this, so Plato has a term, and you might
have heard me talk about it, the anagoge for, right? And, and, and so I, I think you're in
agreement, the self is kind of the anagoge function. It's these two meta desires, right,
coordinated together to bring about the reciprocal opening of the human being,
the flourishing with the world. And I think this connection is, I think, really, really
powerful. Because I think if we, if we agree that what Plato is proposing is something that
increases our inner peace, our connectedness to a reality, affords our capacity for self-transcendence,
cultivation of wisdom, we're not talking about something that can properly be called spiritual
without having to invoke any supernaturalism. And this, I think, and as I've had discussions
with people doing IFS, many of them want to sort of bring out the fact that IFS has this sort of
spiritual dimension to it. And I think that lines up with your wanting to bring in the mythos and
the imaginal. Yes, yes, yes. Yes. Wow. Thank you, John. That's, you're exactly saying what I am,
what I was thinking. Thank you for watching. This YouTube and podcast series is by the
Verveke Foundation, which in addition to supporting my work also offers courses, practices, workshops,
and other projects dedicated to responding to the meeting crisis. If you would like to support
this work, please consider joining our Patreon. You can find the link in the show notes. I want to,
I want to propose something to you. And this is really something to do with your work. And,
and I hope I get your work right. And you can now see if I get your work right. And if not,
please correct me or add or compliment to it. Yeah, we'll work, we'll work through,
we'll work through anything that comes up together as friends. I want to compare you to Kant,
okay? So I want to see where both overlap. So the way I understand your work is,
and where I see you both in agreement, so Kant and Verveke, is that you both understand that
reality ultimately cannot be framed, right? So where I see you both differ is that what
reality ultimately is. Now whereas Kant sees reality as this thing outside of our cognitive
and rational faculties that uses frames and filters to make sense out of experiences,
which leads Kant to the conclusion, right, that we cannot have this access to the thing in itself,
this thing on sich, the Númena, and that we are ultimately trapped within our mind, I would propose
John Verveke would say that although our frames prevent us of grasping the whole reality,
we can still participate in it, right? We nonetheless participate in reality via
these things like myth-making, mythos, mythopoieses, music, symbols, art, rituals, poetry, and all of
that. So I want to go on, if you just allow me, and this dance and this serious play between,
so basically the imaginal, what I wanted to say. So basically the dance and serious play between
the ultimate and the finite is a constant process of opening and closing. I would also say of homing
and adventuring, right? So getting back to your home, to your basis, but also, you know, leaving
this safe haven and also going to exploration, this meta assimilation, accommodation that you
talk about. And this leads me to following conclusion. And now let's see if you agree,
and because this brings, again, back in the idea of self. And where I see IFS overlap, but at the
same time also different, where I also have problems with it, obviously. So I would say
there is no soul beyond the body, that that's my first proposition. So there is no soul beyond the
body. So the self-organizing process of me being in the world, being in space and time, infuses
in nature, physical, right, is the soul. So the whole, the soul is that emergent thing out of the
body, the interaction of the body, but at the same time that that emanates back, right? So the
idea of emanation is important. So at this animating principle, the anima, the suke that we talk about.
And the second proposal is there is no self beyond otherness. That's what I would propose. So
meaning the self is this emergent thing out of the interactions of those parts. And again,
this is why I think dynamical systems theory is so important, also from a scientific perspective,
because it brings in this whole idea of myriology, this part's whole relationship.
Yes, yes. And one of the many. Yeah, exactly, one of many, exactly. So the self that is that which
homes otherness as spectrality, at the same time, it's the, you know, it's the parts and the otherness
that gives home to the self. So I mean, Kirkegaard has this, has this, what's the quote, the self is
a relation that relates itself to itself. So what I mean by relationship and process, and that's why
I would agree it's not a monadic thing is that the self isn't is a constant process. And I love the
idea that it's, that it's this two axis kind of thing that you mentioned, those two dimensions,
the inner conflict, the resolution of inner conflict, as well as
getting into contact with reality. Now, the third one, when I what I want to propose is that
there was no, no thing, not a thing, no thing beyond the spirit of intelligibility. So beyond,
in other words, beyond this organizing principle, the God beyond, beyond God's that you're talking
about. And so, and I think this is what, what Jung would call the anima mundi or the uns mundos,
and I think this is similar to the idea of self. So I think it's Jung is not talking about this.
I mean, there are parts we're talking about this monadic self, but I assume he, I think he assumes
something different when he talks about self, and it becomes clear when he talks about the mandala,
like this four dimensions. To me, they are similar to those four dimensions of meaning-making,
the nomological, the normative, and the narrative, as well as the connectedness. So,
yeah, not to intellectualize too much now, but what I was trying to refer to is that
in IFS, you often talk about the self as the part that is not a part. And to me, this
eludes a lot, or there sounds very similar to the God that is not a God, or the God beyond God,
the religion that is not a religion, so that it doesn't have this thinness to it.
Yeah. What do you think? Well, that was incredibly rich. Yeah. Okay. So I'll try and trace through
some of this. I think, yeah, what you said about my relationship to Kant is amazing. I take, of
course, from Kant, the idea of framing, and then that's what the relevance realization,
but unlike Kant, I don't think the mind is the author of framing. I think the mind participates
with the world in framing. So I would add that E, right? There's in framing going on,
relevance is something co-created by the world and the mind. And that's what makes me fundamentally
different from Kant and makes me a plateness, because I believe in this sense of participation.
So I think if that lands back with you well, I think we understand each other very well. You
understand me very well. I think that's true. Yes. I even think I understand why you think that
that is. And I think it's because of those bioeconomic constraints that we have. I mean,
it has to be to make, so that we can give an account of evolution as well. So we have to
participate in being in contact somehow with reality. So it wouldn't make sense with evolutionary
theory in a deep sense. And it also means that we can sidestep a lot of significant contradictions
in Kant. Kant denies, because the mind does, in his view, mind frames only in terms that are
relative to human experience. We can have no knowledge of God. But as other people pointed
out almost immediately, that same argument applies completely to the thing in itself,
which means Kant becomes a kind of Berkeley and idealist, and he resisted that. And I don't want
to get into the technicalities. But I think you very much have caught the deep gist of what I'm
saying. Thank you. That's important to me, John, because I think in this way, I understand you
better. I think if I speak your language, we can communicate better. So that's why it was
important for me to get your feedback on that. I appreciate that. Now, I want to thank you.
Sorry, this may come off as arrogant. I don't mean it to you. It's just because of my
particular education. It's usually me trying to reach the language of the person I'm talking to.
Yes, I get that. And so I really appreciate this. The idea that I think there's two
ideas. Your first two proposals about the soul, I put them together. I think they belong together
in the claim that the self is not substantial. The self is not a substance. The self is not an
independently existing thing. We give up that Aristotelian model that the self is a substance.
And I think a standard model of the soul, not all models of the soul in all versions of Christianity
by any means or in Islam or anything like that. But many central models of the soul is that it is
a substance. It is a standalone thing to which all properties and relations and actions belong.
And I think that is fundamentally misplaced. I think it is to get things exactly the wrong
way around. I think this goes to what you were saying about no-thingness and other things. I
think the relationality, the intelligibility is primary and that relata emerge out of that
relational field. And this maps very well to the bottom of our physics and the top of our physics.
And so I'm not saying anything really bizarre or weird. And I won't go into that argument,
but I am totally in agreement. And therefore, understanding the self as inherently dialogical
as self and other bound together. And I think of it as there being a deep continuity. I think
John Verweyke is a distributed cognition of the collective intelligence of parts of his brain
all the way down to sorgans and systems and cells. And I think John Verweyke is part of systems of
distributed cognition and collective intelligence that make up various cultural
environments and historical environments that he's operating in. And I think there's deep
continuity down and up. And I think that means the self is inherently non-substantial. So it's
not a thing. If by thing we mean a bounded, basiotemporal, independently existing thing.
And I think there is this deep continuity down into the depths of our body and up to the heights
of our spirit, because that's what we're actually talking about here. And in that sense, it is a
body double. And I agree with that, right? It's sort of, it's bound to the body in this and our
embodiment in a very powerful way. And then this idea that we, like the cosmos, are enmeshed in
the issue of the one in the mini, the emergence and the emanation. I think that is correct. And I
think that's a profound example of participatory knowing. It's not that we know the one in the
mini. We are the one in the mini. We know it by participating in its very principle and processes.
Of course, the content of your cognition and mine are different, but they share this same
fundamental grammar and we share it together with reality. And I think that is a deep, deeply
important thing. And so I like the final proposal. I'm coming to your final proposal and then I'll
shut up, which is there's something. Thank you. There's something in us that is like the neoplatonic
one. There is something in us that is that participates, but, but it is not a part because
it is the very principle of participation itself. And there is something in reality that is no kind
of thing. It is the very principle of thingness, right? That of things emerging, of them being
intelligible, of them entering into relationships with each other. And so I do think they're,
and Proclas talked about this. There is the one within us that participates in the one without us,
but of course they are ultimately just in some important and very hard to articulate sense one.
And so I like that proposal. I like the proposal. Turning young, young into more of a neoplatness
would be, I think, a wonderful thing to do. He's very platonic. I often call him the plate
of the psyche. His notion of archetypes is just the notion of the forms, right? And so I think all
of this deeply resonates. I hope I've done it justice in my reply to all of your proposals.
Thank you, John. That's wonderful. And especially the last part that reminded me of
we being the one that reminded me, I mean, that's such a platonic idea.
So I want to circle back to the meaning crisis with that. I'm really grateful for
you bringing back also this Persian heritage into the meaning crisis. I'm an Iranian.
I'm Persian. And so first of all, thank you for that. Well, my partner, my partner, who is
the profound beloved love of my life, is Persian. I didn't know that. Okay, that hits my heart.
She's easily one of the best people I have met in my entire life.
Yeah, I believe that.
And what you said with the one, we being the one, this reminded me
of a Persian myth by one of those Persian mystics and Sufis,
Attar. I think he's one of the teachers of Rumi, if I'm not mistaken.
The name is familiar to me. I'm learning a lot about the Sufi heritage right now.
And there is this philosophical Silk Road. Yeah, it's so interesting. And there is this
mythological being. It's called Seymour. Seymour is actually the spirit of intelligibility.
I didn't know this. Say this again. How would I spell that?
So S-I-M-O-R-G-H. Okay. The spirit of intelligibility. That's amazing.
Yes. And Attar had this idea that, I think it's the conference of the birds, I think it's called.
If I'm not mistaken. Parliament of the birds, I think I've heard of the birds ones.
There are like thousands of birds that fly to find Seymour. And they have to go through seven
valleys. And that's one is the valley of self-deception, one is the valley of detachment,
and all those things. And ultimately, what happens is that out of those thousand birds,
only 30 survive and they get there. But they don't find Seymour. They don't find this thing,
this big bird, this mythological creature. They understand that they are Seymour. And you know
what Seymour means in Persian is C means 30 and more means bird. So 30 birds, they survive and
they realize they are actually the one. Yes. Yes. So that reminded me totally of that.
I got to get this. I've heard of this and I've never read it, but I'm going to order it once
we're done speaking because I've got to read this. This is wonderful mythos. So this brings us into
that by which, and this is where Kant struggles, in fact, and where I'm trying to be very much
more influenced by Corban. Yes. Ibn Arabi, Corban, in some ways sort of already the imaginal as that
which bridges between the one and the mini and the inner and the outer. And it's not the imaginary.
We don't look at these images. They are like icons. We look through them like the way I'm
looking through my glasses. But it is also the way in which the world can reach back through them
into us. It is not that way. It's both ways. It is in a sense. Go ahead. It's so wonderful that
you invoke this idea. And I think this is so important to understand that the imaginal is,
again, not a thing. And that's why we think imaginary or imagination or imaginal is not
something real, but it is deeply real because it has this power. It's something like a catalyst.
And I learned this also when you look at, and that's why I love coming from the place of children
and adolescents as a psychotherapist for children and adolescents and working and researching on
them. You learn so many things. And again, this is also what I want to add to IFS and to this whole
ecology of awakening to meaning and all of that because you can learn so many things from them.
I mean, Rodgers, Carl Rodgers, he was a school counselor, guidance guide. And you learned
so well from developmental psychologists. Like when you take Piaget or other development psychologists
Mahler or even Winnicott, when you have this kid, let's say it's two or three years old,
right? And it has to learn this normative developmental task of separation, the modern infant
separation. And in psychoanalytic theory, you would call, what it needs to is it has to have this,
how would they call this object, like the doll?
There's the, it's a transitional object.
Transitional object, exactly. They have the transitional objects. I only had the German name
for it. And it's a serious play. It's a catalyst. It's this imaginal thing that they involved in
so that they can understand. And I think this is where it comes together, is that how can I have
my mother's love, while at the same time, be able to differentiate, right? So you bring in
the spirit of the mother of the caregiver, into this liminal space, and I would say into the
playground, when we talk about this, when we talk about this play. And Winnicott would too.
Yes, exactly. And I would, and this is where I would want to add Vygotsky to, right? Yes.
Yeah. I love what you're doing here. You're bringing Vygotsky and Winnicott together
with the imaginal. Please go, go on. Yes. And I think it's so important because
what it does is that the doll or the transitional object that I'm playing with, what I do is I
immerse into, into something that, that catches me, that is outside of my faculties. At the same
time, it's in me and it grips me. And I think where Vygotsky comes in is that
it's, it's this, the zone of proximal development. I think where we really transform and develop
is this imaginal space, because it is between this overload and the under load. It's between
the infinite and the finite. And that's why I think it's into essay, right? So it's my interest
that guides me, that guides me into this imaginal, liminal space where I can, where I can have,
you know, have the cake and eat it too, right? So I have the spirit of the caregiver at the same
time I have the spirit of individuation. And this only can happen when I have this catalyst,
this, in this sense, transitional object or the serious play. And I think interest is such a
wonderful marker. And what happens is that there's so interesting research, I'm sure you know about,
about private speech, right? So when you, and I think, again, this is where IFS comes into play.
It's this dialogical practice. Now, what, what developmental psychologists
talk about when you talk about private speech or self talk is that you can observe this behavior.
A kid is in exactly in this liminal or, or imaginal space or in the zone of proximal
development when it starts to talk to itself, but not internally, they talk loudly to themselves.
Yes. Yes. They
have to talk aloud to
exactly. And what I think what happens is that we, we, we, we, we complexify, we
particularly raise, we individual way, no, sorry, not individual but
individual in a sense, but you know, differentiate in a sense. And what we do is then by this,
we learn how to internalize those voices, let's say of the caregiver or the parent,
and then we talk to ourselves. And I think this aspect of dialogical self is so important.
And this is actually where development happens. And I think IFS, and I would say now two things
about this. In one sense, IFS helps us through this inner dialogical self process. At the same
time, I think IFS can still also learn from the practice of children and adolescents and enhance
its own methodology. And that's why I think it's so important to bring in back those aspects of
of childhood and adolescence too. So yeah, I'm sorry, I shut up now. So what do you do?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, that was beautiful. First of all, I'm going to have to
remember to cite you on this, this bridging between you made between the imaginal and then
transitional object and Winnecott, and then integrating that with Bogotsky. And of course,
when the child starts to talk to themselves, that's how they develop metacognition,
exactly essential for essential for rationality. And I think that and for self direction,
long term planning, all of that stuff, even sense of self is modified significantly.
I think that's right. I think the fact that I have a book, I haven't read it yet,
a person looking at self talk. That's another name for the private speech, right? And the
fact that we devote so much time for it means it probably has some very powerful adaptive
functionality. And yet we don't investigate it. We treat it as noise or silliness or some bad habit.
This is because we're bound up to the buffered self that Charles Taylor's talked about. We're
bound to the monadic self. We don't realize, no, no, talking to yourself is like, you will kind
of go insane if you don't do that. I imagine there might be some people who transcend to a
witness consciousness. But I think of Castaway and I think of Wilson and how powerful Wilson
became, right? And the profound grief, a spoiler, by the way, the profound grief that
Tom Hanks's character has when he loses Wilson. And I think all of that is just
so pregnant with something that is deeply culturally relevant, significant, pertinent to
addressing the meaning crisis. Because I'll just make a quick proposal to you. I think part of
what drives the meaning crisis is this notion of the monadic self, the single static substance
self. And because that drives us into a kind of nominalism, it drives us into a radical
self other adversarial kind of processing. It's an important driver. And it makes us resistant
to alternative states of consciousness, because they are seen merely as deviants from the true
self or something like that. And so I think I'm proposing to you that I think IFS and related
practices, you know, there's, you know, empty chair therapy. Yes. There's ally work. And I'm
talking a lot with Barnaby about this, right? I think all of these things are attempts to both
bottom up from practice, real transformative practice and top down from theory, provide us with
a significant and rich alternative to the monadic self. I absolutely agree. I think this whole idea
of monad is difficult. Because I think it's also bound to this idea of having and being in the
having. Oh, yes. And I think this is much about, yeah, it's modal confusion all the way through.
It's modal confusion. And this and being trapped in the having mode, I think is one of the most
important drivers of the meaning crisis. And again, now we can circle back to what I, how I, you know,
in my own biography, saw how not only the the bad place that we are in, but also how IFS played
in into this. So, and again, I think there are two ways now to where we can connect to the
meaning crisis again. And one is via the mental health crisis in adolescence and the in the
meaning crisis in adolescence. And we can talk about this in a second. And the other one is,
again, this missing anthropology that I see in modern human science, and to related fields like
medicine, psychiatry and psychotherapy, etc. And I think it's devastatingly contributing to the
meaning crisis. And I saw this. And again, I see this in practice. And also in my research,
and because there we have these deep problems with the current notions and our theoretical
notions of of psychopathology, that's one, but also as well with this evidence based translation
into into treatment. And, and there are several reasons that we can, you know, have have a whole,
you know, podcast on this alone, but they're like, understanding illness is something
as symptom aggregates, which is, you know, a deception or, again, the ignorance of non-urgidicity,
right? So independent, assuming independent events, then committing ecological fallacies,
right? The generalizability to individual problem. There are like deviation from protocols. If you
if you deviate from the protocol, which is actually only protocol for randomized control trial,
then it's, it's not, you know, it's bad practice or pseudoscience. And there, there are plethora
of problems, which I again, I would say it's a lack of proposition and non propositional knowing.
So by reducing, again, I'm not, I'm not saying or advocating that evidence based is wrong or
bad. I want to be clear about this. I think evidence. Yeah, I get and you get that. I think we
have to go beyond this notion of non propositional, of propositional and bring back all those other
piece you talk about into this. And this is where I really see this landscape that it's missing. And
it's, and it's, it is deeply problematic because we have this dehumanized anthropology. And
it's so interesting. Roland May talks about this and the discovery of being, he actually,
he points to the behavior modification therapies. And by training, I am a behavioral therapist.
So I have deep sympathy for that. I think there was a lot of wisdom in it, because there is,
it's embodied, you do things, you experience things. So, but what he wonderfully points out is that
especially in those types, we have this, we have this missing anthropology, we actually don't have
a conception of men, of human beings. So, and I think this is deeply, deeply difficult. And now,
I don't know if you know this, John, but what happens right now in the field of bioethics is
that there is a return to phenomenology, actually. Oh, that's good news. That's really, really
interesting. There is this philosopher. He's called Frederick Sveneos. He's a, he's Swedish.
And he has this book, even it's called Phenomenological Bioethics. And it's so interesting,
because there are several scholars and people in this academic field that argue now for even a
definition of illness, being defined as a meaning crisis, as a crisis. Oh, wow. Yes. And that's so
interesting. It's even called illness as, and now listen to the language as an unhome-like being in
the world. DSEs, like going back to the etymology of the original word. Yes. So, fortunately,
this happens. But I think all those technological advancements, and we know this, you talk about
this all the time, that they, the technological changes happen before the meaning crisis and
et cetera. So there is this whole disenchantment that runs through this modernity, also runs through
medicine and psychotherapy, et cetera. So I think this is what I'm really concerned about. And again,
meaning is, so what we can, the lesson that we can get out of is that meaning is not an epiphenomenon.
It's not easily dispensed with. It's crucial. It's necessary, even from a bioethical standpoint,
right? And again, because we're more than just a sum of, you know, cogs and gear wheels and
this mechanistic, reductionistic thing. And now there's Thomas Fuchs. He's actually a professor
of phenomenological psychiatry. He has this Carl Yaspas. He's a professor for Carl Yaspas in
Heidelberg, I think. He makes this. Oh, I love. Yeah, he makes this wonderful point that medicine
is actually a relational medicine is relational. It's a relational, I don't know what to call
science, but a practice. It's a relational practice. So. Wow. Who is that second person? Does he have
a book or Thomas Fuchs? He has lots of books. Oh, I think he even has one in English. He publishes
a lot in German, but there is one. I will forward it to you or I can look it up in a second. Thomas
Fuchs. Really interesting. I had the privilege to talk to him once in a conference. So, yeah,
it's, I mean, it is there, but it's still concerning. And so to me, to me, it was, again,
by gravity to link my work to the meaning crisis and to IFS is that to me, it was clear from the
get go from the beginning that we're not only in a funerary predicament, but also in the spiritual
one. And yeah, obviously due to our affinity and it's related to that, but there is this deep
spiritual deprivation that we have. And you see this when you work. I mean, I worked in oncology.
Meaning is really, really important. And even the evidence based practice,
you have meaning centered psychotherapy that is actually you have efficacy right there. So it's
actually Victor Frankl's logotherapy revisited and done for oncology. It's done by Breitbart,
his called, he's a wonderful researcher. And it's getting there. And again, working with adolescence
and especially those auto line types and in this crisis center that I'm working with is that
it's so salient. It's so present. And it's so
obvious that we are lacking this how we meet a person. And, and IFS helps me there to to again to
meet and not to reduce it to some, I mean, obviously a model is always prone to reductionism, and I
can reduce you to your protectors or managers or exiles to, but it helps me if done correctly again,
I think it helps me to, to connect to the human being again. And, and this is where I see IFS
helping because John, ultimately what I think, and let's see what do you think about this?
I'm sorry, if I'm talking that much. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, you're great. Keep going.
Ultimately, what I see what is happening is that
this momentum of healing in especially experience in IFS, but I think it goes beyond IFS. I
think IFS is just the proxy. It's a placeholder for what is happening is there.
What happens is that agape heals. I see it as a deep agape love that happens. And I see this
in therapy interpersonally, right, this, this, this horizontal axis you're talking about. But I
also see it in the, within the model itself in those, in this, in those technical steps
you do, especially for example, you talk about the Socratic shift, right. And, and I want to propose
that before we do the Socratic shift, we need the process of validation. I can't get you to change
and to into the state of a poria. I mean, I could, but it's only, maybe it's not long lasting,
I get back into this attractive state after a while. But if I really am with a part, I am with
a partner, it's like being with a part, right? It's like I validate you. Validating means that
you are valid. Your whole reason, your raison d'être, the reason of being, it's, it's valid. You,
you have a reason to be there. You're functioning, you're, you're framing whatever you do. It's,
it's so important that you get acknowledged because what I think, I think I want to propose
to you, John, that we do the Socratic shift a little bit later. So before we do the Socratic
shift, we validate, because if we don't do this, we get into again, the having mode, and then it's
again the court, not the courtyard, but the courtroom of debate. It's not the courtyard of, of the
dialogue, but it's the courtroom of debate. Because if I just spill this over you, and I, and I, and I,
it's, it's, well, well, let me reply. Yes, yes, please. Okay. So first of all,
to your point, a couple minutes past that, you know, propositional tyranny has infected medicine,
and we've lost, we've lost touch with the non propositional knowing, and that's where a lot of
the meaning participation occurs. And the meaning participation is a fundamental being together,
being with, and that's part of what participatory knowing is, knowing by being with.
Exactly. And so all of that, I think, I think that tracks very well. It goes to the work I'm
doing with Terry Dentry about trying to open up what we mean by health and, and, and medicine.
And so I'm completely constant with that. I think the thing you're, you're saying right now, I, I take,
I mean, it is, it is exemplary constructive criticism. I think you're right. I, and this goes
to what Seth Allison was talking about, where, where you're talking about Agapa, he talks about
integrating attachment theory and IFS, and you actually have attachment relationships with
your parts. And you have to bring in sort of EFT, Emotion Focus Therapy kind of techniques
to get into proper relation. And then I said to him, once you're doing that, what I've done,
though, is I've also brought, and maybe this is the bridging, I sort of bring some of the
Socratic into my interaction with my parts, because I try to get them to recognize their
function. I try to recognize, get them to, I try to enhance their own self-awareness and their own,
therefore, responsibility to themselves. So they go from just enacting their functionality to
reflecting on it, which also opens up spaces of possibility for them, which I think is.
And that's great. I learned that actually from you. And I, and I actually,
now I'm trying to incorporate it more into my practice. I love this Socratic move and shift.
Actually, when you, when you said that in, I think it was episode eight in, in, after Socrates,
it's like, whoa, yeah, I've never done this, you know, do the Socratic shift on the part. It's like,
wow. Yeah. But I think that you and Seth are correct that it's premature to do that unless the
attachment issues and the, and the, and the, and the reciprocal recognition has taken place. The
being with has to be in place, right? In order to shift you out of the having mode, in order to open
you up for the real possibility of genuine Socratic practice, as opposed to just using or having a
Socratic technique, that's how I would put it. And I think you are exactly right about that.
And I've been trying to incorporate that in to my practice, and we are going to try and see how we
can feed this in. We see the problem the Verveke Foundation faces is we, we, one of our stead
past principles is we are not offering therapy because we are not properly vetted or certified
to do that. We have, we have affiliate relationships with therapists who can come in if people
hit crisis or distress, but we, our practices are not therapy and trying to figure out how to get
that what you just said, which I agree. Do you see the problem we're struggling with? Absolutely.
Right. It's like what you said, I think is deeply right, but we will not offer therapy
for principled reasons, right? I think then genuine bioethical reasons, we will not do that. And so
there's a struggle here. And maybe, you know, off-camera, you know, you and Chris and Taylor
and I could talk about maybe a way of doing this that could, could pick up on, I think, the very
legitimate point you just made while still respecting our ethical requirements of not
engaging in therapy. And can I add to that? I want to compliment you for that. I think
it is actually, even from, from the ethos, it's the right or the tell us, it's the right move.
I think, and this is again, the problem that I have and that I was trying to allude to when I,
when I talk about evidence-based practices in psychotherapy, I think it's, it's, it's a fatal
mistake. And again, contributing to the meaning crisis, if we pathologize everything, not everything
has to be a psychotherapeutic modality and intervention or technique. Now, obviously,
it can inform our practices, but I, but for it to be pathological, I think it's way more important.
So I think therapy can help there, the techniques. And to be fair, the Socratic move that I'm
proposing, IFS accounts for it. Now, this is when you do the integration, what you do when you talk
to the exile, for example, and then you have this unburdening, and now we don't have to go into the
details right now, but you invite back the protector. And now you do do Socratic move,
now you hopefully do the aporian. And you say, now how can you contribute to the,
to the state after the alleviation of pain and suffering, after the unburdening? Now, again,
I still think that you're right. And I think, and I, and I love that you're doing the pathological
work because again, I think it's, I'm, I'm actually really afraid of the fact that we,
that we are pathologizing everything, especially when it comes to adolescence. And
you know, we talked about the archetype of the adolescent, and we should talk about this maybe
another time, but it's the idiosyncrasies of, of adolescents are so important and crucial.
And we tend to, I mean, not only with regards to adolescents, we tend to pathologize a lot of
things. So I'm deeply grateful for the work of the Viveki Foundation, but not just, you know, being
psychoterapeutical, but it's more pathological. I think it's a wonderful and noble thing to do, John.
Thank you. But and you, of course, are coming back because I do want to talk about the archetype
of the adolescent and how it fits. I can talk about everything for like, or anything for like hours
with you. Well, honestly, I think talking with you and having other people hear what you have to
say, I think is extremely valuable. Yeah, I mean, so I just, yeah, I do want to pick your brain
and your colleagues about that particular problem. I, we don't, I'm not asking us to solve it here,
and this is not the right place to try and solve it. But I do think, you know, there's a way of,
I want to recognize, I want to recognize and be responsible to the truth you've articulated,
while still, still being governed by the principle, the ethical principle that I've
articulated. And that's a tricky thing to do. And trying to figure out how to do that is
something I'd like to talk about. Yeah, it's a dance. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it's, it's,
it's a very careful dance. I want to, I want to bring back a little bit about, because you've,
you've said it a few times and it's deeply, deeply impactful to me. And we had to talk about other
things. I wasn't able to pick it up, but I want to pick it up now. Yes. So you've often invoked,
you know, and I think the self is metaxu. This is the ancient Greek word for between. I think the
self, well, I should be careful. This is Highland's interpretation of what the, the central argument
of Plato was, which is we are the relationship between finitude and ultimacy, between finitude
and transcendence. And if we, if we try to identify with either one of the poles, and if we lose the
polarity and try to identify with either one of the poles, we either fall into cert, into
servile despair, or we, we go through inflationary hubris and spirituality in the, in the proper
sense, in the, or at least sorry, that was inappropriate. Spirituality in the Platonic
sense that would be proper to Plato's framework is that we enable, we induce and educate, we draw
out and we also transform people so that they are capable of holding that tonus, that creative
tension between that, like a profound opponent processing that gives them the most profound
optimal grip on their fundamental orientation reality is you have to get this opponent processing
between your finitude and your transcendence, right, between, right, how you are as a, as a single
being and the relationship you have to ultimacy, but that you are that tonus. You're like the
tension of the bow as Heraclitus talks about the logos of the, of the psyche, right? And that,
and that, that is kind of the deepest, most profound opponent processing and that is the
source of our deepest, most profound optimal gripping, our most profound orientation.
And I want, I want to know it because you've invoked the, that, those, that pair multiple
times in our conversation. How does that proposal land to you that that's a deep thing? I'm about
to teach a course for the Reveki Foundation on literature and the meaning crisis and wrestling
with these books in which you see human beings wrestling with the meaning crisis and it's
precisely the way the meaning crisis throws this tonus into WAP and either drives people into despair
or drives them into inflation. The heart of darkness is a, is a classic example or Moby Dick,
right? Do you think, sorry, this was a long preamble, but I hope it's landing. Do you think that
IFS, especially because it's doing the imaginal, it's getting us related to the transitional
object, it's moving us out of the matter itself, getting us to inhabit and be a Metaxu, a pure,
a purely relational being in the deep relation to relationality, which is ultimate. Do you think
IFS in there for can help us with this fundamental commitment to our true humanity, which is the
tonus, the creative tension, the opponent processing between finitude and transcendence? Do you think
that is that just too far afield or is it a good situation? Because to me, it seems that a big part
of the meaning crisis is the way we lose the polarity and we get attracted to either one of
these poles in either nihilism or narcissism and they're not opposites. They are two sides of the
same coin. Yes. Wow, what a question. I hope I can be fair to this question because obviously I'm
not, I cannot speak for the whole IFS community, but only from my perspective of it. But I think IFS
has the potential to do so. Now, again, with the monad, I think, or the having mode, I don't think
it's the panacea. You said it yourself. It cannot be a panacea. It has to be embedded in an ecology,
and no matter what method, technique, paradigm, whatever you want to use,
there are ways to do it good or better and worse. So I think it has the potential to do so.
And I think if IFS is done properly with this whole sapiential framework around it,
then I think it's so powerful. But I've also seen people, again, being trapped in the having mode
at the same time using IFS and do the spiritual bypassing. So I think it's a matter of, it's the
how-ness, how we do things that matters more than the what-ness, right? Well, you know, that's a
standard definition, or at least the distinction between knowledge, which is a what, and wisdom is
the how. Yeah. So again, to be, yeah, I think if done properly, it has, because I think of this
essentially agopic element to it. And I really think, and this is what I see happening in therapy,
John, there is this magical moment happening if you, and I'm at, in this time, I'm really proud
to be part of it, to participate in it. When you, when, and I'm, and I think I'm privileged to witness
healing at times. Now, and this is so interesting, I don't consider myself as, as the one that
heals. I only participate in it. And it's so interesting because Plato has this critique of
therapy, a theon, and anything, because it relates to this, to God, right, to theon. And, but, but
therapy, a theon, I think it's, if you properly do it, what therapy means, or theon means, or
therapy means in this case is that, in its deep sense, etymologically, is it's your certain,
your servant of God. Now, I think what happens in those moments in the therapy room is when
you witness healing is that you are part of something bigger, what you're relating to. And,
and, and it's a beautiful thing that happens. And that's why there, you can invoke the
anesthesis, right, the, the perception, the aesthetics, these, and that's why I think that
beauty is the, as the primary thing is absolutely correct. It has this beautiful, elegant thing
to it. And, and, and what IFAS brings here is this moment of not only of logos, where the good,
the true, and the beautiful, I think where, where they are one is actually the logos, I think in
meaning is where the good, the true, and the beautiful are actually, you cannot, they're not
the same thing, but at the same time, you cannot, you know, they're not separated, right? And, and,
and, and this, this wonderful, you said that IFAS is platonic and Jungian, I would also say it's
Augustinian, in the sense that it's, it's agape, right? This moment of love that's happening is
what transcends both. And this is what Jung also referred to is that when it's, or Rogers too,
in the sense that when, when good, when you need a soul, there is this potential transformation
for both of them. And I often have this, have this feeling that when I go out, you know, when I
have my session, when they're done, I am changed myself. Yeah. Yeah. So I hope I was fair to your,
to your question. You're more than fair. You brought, I really, really enjoy talking with you.
This is really just catching fire. Thanks for me. So I thought, thought what you said was great.
We're, we're coming to a close. I'd like to bring up one question. And then I want to,
but first I want to propose what we could talk about next time. First of all, I think I want to
give you space and time to talk about the archetype of the adolescent. I think that's
important. Yeah, that will be, and I think that, I think it's essential. Yeah, necessary, especially
for the mental health crisis, especially for the meeting crisis. I think, I think you're
bang on about that. The second thing I want to talk to you about is now that we broached,
you invoked Agape, you invoked the possibility of something bigger and God, the logos. I mean,
this has to do, and there's also Jung, and you know, the red book, and he has Philemon, and he has
these, these, these, these, you know what I'm talking about, and there's no good name for them. I
mean, Ralph calls them allies. And of course, I've had this experience, and I've been doing ally work,
and I'd like to hear, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not expecting you to be an expert on this or anything.
I just want your reflections from an IFS. I've been asking Seth Allison about this and other people
about this. And we, so if we could talk about those two things, we'll talk about the, the, well,
that we got a triple A here, the archetype of the adolescent and the ally. If we could talk about
that next time, I would appreciate that. That would be great. Okay. And so thank you for that.
Thank you. And what I'd like to talk to you about right now is our final point. And it, it's a
Socratic point, which means I hope it comes off as constructive. So I think all of, all of this is
very, very well said. And then a Socratic concern would be, and this is one of the critiques I've
had of sort of romanticism, right? Which is, how do we look for notice and ameliorate self-deception
that might arise in all of this work? Because pretending that there's no self-deception at
play in this, I think is foolish. And I seriously doubt that you would make, engage in that pretense.
So how, so here, here's the concern. Within therapy, I understand you are beholding to the
goal of healing. And that is important. But given a lot of things we've said, and given that we're
trying to make connections outside of therapy, to pedagogy, and where there are deeper goals of,
you know, right relationship to reality and the true, the good and the beautiful, the virtue,
then this issue around self-deception, I think comes up. And I would like to know, and if you want,
if you want to bleed into the next, our next conversation to address this more, that's fine.
But maybe just an initial concern. How do, and I mean, I mean it in that, I mean it in the
Platonic sense. How is rationality as the concern for self-deception, which can often mask as
self-transcendence, right? How is that concern properly, properly met? How can we be responsible
to that within an IFS practice? Is that a fair question? That's a very important question.
I really have to think about it more deeply to give an appropriate answer. But I would say the
initial, the initial response would be, and this goes back to the question you had before,
and I forgot to mention it because I also have critique for IFS. And I think now this comes
together, I think what IFS still can do better is to enhance the notion of something like
evil. And I think the ally work that you're alluding to and the archetypal work,
you know, the Hillman work, that is, I think that is still missing. Now, to be fair, IFS
is not one thing. This community has very diverse thinkers and there are, of course,
beautiful people that bring, that bring different aspects to it. But I would say to answer your
question is to address the self-deception is that I think it needs to be embedded within a system
of systems. And I think what we need to do in order to overcome self-deception is that
we cannot overlook the body. And I think this is very, very important. And there is this
brand of IFS, which is called Somatic IFS. Susan McConnell, she's wonderful. She's actually one
of those that close friends to Dick Schwartz who actually made the whole curriculum for the training
of IFS. So she's a brilliant mind. And she has this book, I have Somatic Experience, I don't know
if you know this. I have it. Oh, awesome. She writes really poetically and beautifully. I think so,
the body work is needed. And this is, I think, something you know as a practitioner of Tai Chi
Chuan and Greg Kelly. And we need to bring back the body. But we also need feedback systems and
people can be feedback systems, right? So if I do this work alone, so I have to have a community
to do so. And this witnessing of healing is, again, it's tenfold if you witness it in the
community of healing. And I was privileged or I'm privileged to experience that over and over again
and say what happens when a collective comes together. Now, I think there is also a danger,
right? And this is also what Jung talks about when he talks about being one and not a zero.
It's like, okay, well, you have this or Nietzsche when he talks about the mass is going to one
direction, the ideological thing. So I really have to think about it.
Well, I mean, it links what, so let's just say that that's your initial foray and we'll come back
to it next time. But what you said does connect with what you said before about IFS needs to be
situated within a sapiential framework and ecology of practices. But I like your invocation of,
you know, Rafe Kelly's work, the stuff on embodiment. I think that is deeply appropriate.
This is Marla Ponti that the body is really fundamental to keeping us anchored to the world
in a way that if we train the mind to properly listen, can act as, you know, a significant
counterbalance to spiritual bypassing and hubristic self-deception and other things.
So let's pick that up then. We'll pick up that in addition to the archetype of the adolescent
and ally work. We can talk a little bit more about bringing Ratio, a logos in the in
rationality in the Socratic-Platonic sense into conversation with IFS. So I really look forward
to this. I love my guests. This was, first of all, just, wow, really catching fire. Love this,
love this. You have a brilliant and scintillating mind, and yet it is clear that it is connected to
your heart. And I just, just enjoyed that. I talk about, you know, how certain people taste,
right, like the way, a work of art, you know, you taste really wonderfully. So that, I really
appreciate that. But I'd like to give my guests, I'd like to give my guests the last word.
Thank you, John. I deeply appreciate it. I don't know what to say. I'm grateful to be able to,
you know, to be talking to you. It's something that I've wanted now for years. And I think now
the time is right. And also, with regards to your viewers and followers,
I really think it's, it's, it's a kairos. I think we are at a pivotal point where things now come
together. And I want to thank you for everything you've done and you do. And I consider you a
really close friend. I mean, we haven't met personally yet. We can become that.
Yes, I hope so too. And we are 10,000 kilometers apart. But I don't know if you know this, but
you are, your voice and your spirit is, you know, fills my home and life and work every day. So,
in a sense, you're, you know, very close to me on a daily basis. And to be able to participate in
this whole endeavor is I'm really, really grateful for. And I want to thank you for also allowing
and giving the platform to come together. So thank you for that, John.
So we will speak again very soon. I would like that. I would love that, actually. Thank you.
Hello, everyone. I'd like to announce a new course. I'm going to be teaching at Halcyon Academy.
It's called Ultimate Reality, God and Beyond. I'll talk in a minute about that very provocative title.
First important things. It's going to be starting April 5th. It will be eight weeks,
not eight consecutive weeks, because I'm attending conferences, but it's all scheduled out. The link
to the home page for the course will be put in the notes to this promo. And each session will be
two hours. There'll be one hour of me doing a lecture and then one hour of Q&A. Now, there are
options you can purchase where you can attend the lecture live and participate in the live Q&A,
or you can also go through this course asynchronously and you can purchase it at that level if that
works better with your schedule and or your finances. I've done one of these courses before,
Beyond Nihilism, and I thoroughly enjoyed it. I consider it, by all the feedback, a success,
and I very much wanted to follow it up, which gets me to the title. The Beyond was a way of
pointing to some continuity with the previous course, Beyond Nihilism, which is also available
asynchronously on Halkian, if you wish to take a look at that. I'm not assuming that people
have gone through Beyond Nihilism. The course Ultimate Reality, God and Beyond, is a standalone
course, but I've also structuring it so those people who have taken Beyond Nihilism will find
connection and continuity. That's a bit of a tricky thing to do as a teacher, but I do have quite a
bit of experience with doing that kind of thing for my many years of teaching at the university.
So that's one reason for the title. Now, the other title is God and Beyond. What could possibly be
beyond God? What could that mean? That's just a silly contradiction, isn't it? Well, that's the
issue. That's the issue that the course is going to wrestle with. When we come into or try to enter
into a philosophically reflective and deep relationship with what we consider to be Ultimate
Reality, is that relationship best captured by what we think of when we think of God? Now,
what many of you will say to me is that there's many different possible meanings,
and that's exactly what this course will explore. But the idea that there is a somewhat standard
notion, Abrahamic notion, perhaps, of God is one we'll be making use of, and whether or not
that actually is the best way of understanding Ultimate Reality.
So in order to do that, we'll be taking a look at a bunch of thinkers. The one is Robert Carter
in his amazing book, The Nothingness Beyond God, and you can see the title of that book,
Resonating with the title of the course, in which he explores the work of Nishita from the Kyoto
School, which is somebody deeply influenced by both Heidegger and Zen. And of course, Heidegger
famously, in his famous critique of ontotheology, criticized that our standard notion of God as a
Supreme Being fundamentally misrepresents being itself, because being itself is no kind of individual
thing or being. And that's the no-thingness beyond God. If God is some kind of super thing,
then Ultimate Reality is a no-thing beyond that. And that was explored, of course,
by Nishita, making use of both Heidegger and Zen. And we want to enter into discussion about this.
Please understand that this is a very exploratory thing. This course is helping me
do some deep thinking in dialogue with others who are coming in good faith and want to engage in
deep reflection and discussion in preparation for the next series I'm doing on the Philosophical
Silk Road. And so being part of the course is a way of participating in the contribution of
that project. We'll also be taking a look at the work of the Canadian atheist, Schellingbert,
especially in his book Evolutionary Religion, but we'll also be taking a look at all, at least,
be bringing in his book Religion and Religion After Science, and also talking about the
hiddenness argument. He is famous for being the author of the hiddenness argument,
which is considered a sort of new argument against the existence of a personal God. Now,
you may say, oh, an atheist. Be very careful. Schellingberg is not a typical atheist.
Schellingberg is somebody who wants us to look at, take very seriously the possibility of ultimate
reality and very seriously what he calls a triple transcendence. That ultimate reality
is transcendent in being most real. And also, it's also, in some sense, most valuable, you know,
beyond the true, the good, and the beautiful, and also most transformative. And he thinks this
proposal that human beings, that there is such an ultimate reality, that human beings can enter
into a relationship with it and be transformed by it, is one that we should take very seriously,
but within a particular frame. He says he points to deep time, how science has discovered deep
time, billions of years in the past, billions of years in the future. The species has existed
for 200,000 years. We seem to be spiritually oriented from about 40,000 BCE. So we have all
of this going on, and yet we also have this deep future ahead of us. And he poses this question.
He says, given the depth of the questions we're asking about ultimate reality, is it like
that we are mature enough as a species that we have got complete answers to this? When, of course,
we don't have complete answers about the nature of the atom, or that we don't have complete answers
about how disease works, or how the mind works, or how the body works. Isn't it presumptuous to
think that we have finished complete answers about ultimate reality? So he wants us to engage in
the reflect upon the proposal that we might be as a species, not individual, spiritually immature.
And then he asks, what do we need to do in order to mature ourselves across time and across generations
such that we could come into the kind of work that would give us
a plausible claim on getting an answer to that question of whether or not ultimate reality
has that triple transcendence for us. And I think this is a very profound idea, because I think the
deep time aspect of our reflections upon ultimate reality within standard axial age religion,
and philosophy has not been properly understood or taken into account. And so this is very
provocative. It opens us up and it, of course, allows science at the table. Now, of course,
he also criticizes, and this is what makes him so interesting, he also criticizes the atheists
who think they can come to a complete conclusion about ultimate reality from a framework that
is very plausibly one of spiritual immaturity. So we will be taking a look at that, and we'll be
looking at what happens if we adopt deep humility with respect to the question of ultimate reality,
God and beyond. What happens? What do we open ourselves up to? And what becomes really important
for him is the role, the aspirational role of imagination, especially in the imaginal sense.
We'll then be taking a look at the astonishing work of James Filler, who I will actually be
meeting in person in April. Unfortunately, his book is quite expensive, so instead we'll be reading
three papers where he makes the argument that the Neoplatonic tradition made an argument,
which is that ultimate reality is pure relationality rather than a substance. Now,
when he uses substance, he's ultimately meaning it in not just a Cartesian sense,
but in Aristotelian. Substance is our individual things that are considered to be able to exist
independently and are the subjects of properties. They're the owner of properties,
and they enter into relations with other things. And so there are things from which
relations emerge. And Filler's arguments go to show that that seems to have things exactly
the wrong way around. It looks like relationality is ultimate, and the things emerge out of it.
And so, of course, this relationality is a no thing, because that's just what things emerge from.
And this meshes, of course, with some of the fundamental arguments of Neoplatonism.
And I think moving off of that thing-based substance ontology is a fundamental shift,
a new way of thinking profoundly and relating to ultimate reality that takes us into that space
of God and beyond. The final person is Bracken, whose book The Divine Matrix is written from a
Whiteheadian perspective, which I think is very important, because Whitehead, in some ways,
integrates that pure relationality with the dynamic view of the world given to us by science.
But what he does is he takes a look, Bracken, at the Western traditions, reflections on ultimate
reality, and Eastern reflections, Taoism, Vedanta, Buddhism. And he is trying to propose
what we can see being held in common. And this, of course, is very much like a through line,
like the philosophical Silk Road. And he comes to some very interesting
conclusions from this argument about what ultimate reality is and how we could come to
a shared understanding. It doesn't mean we all will become Hindus, or we'll all become Buddhists,
or we'll all even become Whiteheadians, or that we will all become Christians or Jews.
What he says is this gives us a shareable relationship to ultimate reality between people
who talk about that ultimate reality as a God, and people like Taoists with the Tao,
or the Vedantas with Brahmin, or the Buddhists with Shunyata, who do not talk about ultimate
reality as God, but nevertheless consider it to be triply transcendent. And so this is all in
service of an observation that I have been sharing with a lot of the people that I enter
in deep discussion with, which is in response to the meaning crisis, there seems to be an advent
of the sacred taking place in many different parts of the world, different communities,
different philosophical currents. And I've just pointed to you a bunch. There's many,
many more that converge on this. People are fundamentally reframing our relationship to
ultimate reality. And I think this is a way of trying to give us a new way of living in
relationship to the sacred, which will offer people a living response to the problem of
the meaning crisis. Now, this is all something I am proposing. And I am proposing that we discuss
it together. And you help me as much as I try to teach you that we discuss it together as we
try to wrestle with this question about ultimate reality, God and beyond. So I look forward to
seeing you in the course. As I said, the notes for both the date, which starts on April the 5th,
and the link and how you can register will be found in the end, will contain the information
in the notes to this promo. So thank you very much. And I look forward to seeing you in ultimate
reality, God and beyond.
