Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis.
Last time we took a look at the advent of the Scientific Revolution and we looked at
the work of Copernicus and how the important advent of a scientific description of reality
had with it the consequence that most of our sensory experience was questionable as
illusory in nature.
Galileo also developed that idea of the math as the language of reality and used that with
the new experimental method, a method also born out of the idea that most of our cognition
is deceptive and biasing in nature and he used that to discover inertial motion and
that changed the notion of matter into something that exists and resists our will.
But that had the effect of killing the universe and making it purposeless in nature.
And thus we become odd islands of meaning and purpose in a vast ocean of meaningless
material motion.
So all of that of course is going to have an impact on people's self-understanding,
their demeaning that they're using to make sense of their existence.
And look what's happening here, that Aristotelian idea that the structure of your experience
and the structure of reality conform has been radically undermined and now you are trapped
within your own mind behind veils of illusion disconnected from the world.
And God has become progressively more and more a matter of will.
There's an individual that takes all of this up and he does more than just think about
this or speak about it or write about it.
He's one of those really titanic individuals who exemplifies the chaos and the anxiety of
his time.
This is Martin Luther.
He's definitely deeply influenced.
He's German.
He's deeply influenced by the Rhineland mystics.
He's influenced by that growing tradition of the self as radically self-negating inner
conflict being at the core of spirituality.
He's an Augustinian monk.
He's deeply influenced by Augustine's ideas of self-depravity and our inability to achieve
mystical union with God unaided.
And through Augustine, Luther of course is deeply immersed in and impressed with Paul's
ideas about our inner conflict and now that parallels a conflict within God between God's
love towards us and God's justice driven anger and wrath towards us.
And Martin Luther is very terrified of that wrath.
He's very terrified of it.
And he has taken that notion through taller of mystical self-negation and it has become
radicalized because of the influence of Augustine and Paul and his own inner conflict.
So that the self-negation in Luther's psyche has become self-loathing.
He experiences the self as radically folded into itself, obsessed with itself in a completely
immorally self-centered fashion.
So the self is this radical self-feeding self-negating because as the self is unfolded and obsessed
with itself, it is simultaneously being cut off from God and cut off from reality.
So it is very much a self-destructive process and I really want you to hear that self-destructive
process that he sees as the essence of the self.
So this is Luther's interpretation of the biblical notion of pride and rebellion against
God that we are intrinsically self-obsessed in this self-aggrandizing self-destructive
fashion.
So try to think of moments in your life that will give some substance to what Luther is
saying.
You have discovered a pattern of behavior self-destructive.
For example, perhaps you keep dating the same kind of person and you keep going back to this
and it keeps turning out to be wrong for you, perhaps also wrong for the other person.
So you step back and you've talked to friends and you reflect it and you make a deliberate
conscious effort.
No, no, I'm not going to date this person, this kind of person anymore, I'm not going
to date that type of person.
I'm going to date this type of person and that will change things.
I'll break this pattern and you go in and you find somebody, they seem to be totally
different and you start dating them and then lo and behold, against your will, even though
it seems to be something that you willfully brought about, you find yourself caught in
the same destructive pattern again.
Of course Freud and Jung and the whole psychodynamic tradition, very much, part of the legacy of
Luther by the way, are going to make much of that fact that we keep repeating, even
in our conscious efforts to change our behavior, we keep repeating these self-destructive patterns.
So although I'm critical of Luther, there's a deep truth here in Luther, there is the
touching of the way in which our unconscious processes, our unconscious cognition can be
beset with these, we've talked about it, these parasitic processes that have a life of their
own and can consume us.
So Luther is convinced that he cannot do anything to save himself.
He takes Augustine's notion that the Neoplatonic mystical ascent is insufficient on its own
and has to be supplemented with the love of God through Christ.
He takes that and he radicalizes it in a very powerful way.
Because of his own personal wretchedness, he comes to the conclusion that there is nothing
he can do.
And that leads into a startling interpretation of Paul, an interpretation that is going to
put him at odds with the Catholic Church.
This is the interpretation that we are saved by faith alone, where faith becomes nothing
more than a complete acceptance of God's saving grace.
So let's unpack this very carefully because it's become so enmeshed in our way of thinking
and being.
The idea here is that faith is, notice what's happened, all that sense of participatory knowing,
the sense that we're participating in a process.
Remember the Israelite notion that we're participating in our cultural history, we're participating
in the creativity of God.
All of that is now gone.
It's gone.
And your sense of what it's like to be you, your sense of self, is completely twisted
and illusory.
So all the perspectival knowing, all the participatory knowing is being eradicated.
It's being reduced down to the acceptance of a proposition.
And an acceptance that cannot in any way be based on evidence or argument.
Because that would be your mind participating in your salvation.
It has to be a radical, pure acceptance.
So the self-negation of the Rhineland mystics has come to fruition in Luther's ideas here.
Now what does that mean?
That means that what you radically, radically have to accept is there's absolutely nothing
you can do.
And even your affirmation of the proposition of the creed of Christianity is something
that has to be given to you.
And what does that mean from God's side of this equation?
It means that God's act of saving you is completely arbitrary.
There is, since there is nothing you do, there's no thought, word or deed that you perform
that in any way earns or has any causal effect upon God's behavior.
And I'm not over-representing this.
Look at the debate between Luther and Erasmus.
Erasmus tried to propose what he called synergy, that the human being and God were working
together in a participatory fashion for salvation, with God, of course, having the bulk of the
work.
And Luther rejects that utterly.
God's saving of an individual is completely arbitrary.
So God has become, remember what we talked about in Occam, that God's will supersedes
his reason.
God's reason is now not involved at all.
It is just an arbitrary act of will that saves us.
And we have to radically accept that arbitrariness.
Now think about what that means.
And there's a weird, there's an irony here.
There's an irony here, and it's almost a self-referential irony.
Because Luther is trying, and I think he's very sincere, but he's trying to rescue us
from the fact that we are obsessed with ourself in an idolatrous fashion, and that that obsession
is a source of deep suffering for us.
We know that that self-obsession cuts us off, separates us.
But the irony is, in his endeavors to deal with that, look at what Luther is teaching.
What is he putting into our cultural grammar?
That we are inherently worthless, and that our inner life is one of self-loathing.
And the only solution to that is arbitrary, unearned regard.
This is the cultural training for narcissism.
Narcissism is to be trapped, to be self-obsessed within self-loathing, and that what you want
to alleviate is unearned positive regard.
Not for any reason, not for anything you've done, completely amoral unearned positive
regard.
That's narcissism.
One of the deep ironies of Luther's revolution is that, and I think there says something
about what's going on at the time, one of the deep ironies is he actually lays the grammar
for cultural narcissism.
We are all being trained to experience ourselves as wretched, self-obsessed, and that the only
solution is unearned positive regard.
And so we can see the spirit of Luther in our obsession with Instagram, in our obsession
with Snapchat.
We constantly want unearned positive regard.
Now, there are other consequences of this radical change.
Of course, immediate consequences, Luther comes into conflict.
He protests against the Roman Catholic Church.
That's what Protestant comes from, because the Catholic Church has a different doctrine
of salvation, that it's one in which the human being still has a participatory role.
And because of that, the Church also thinks that it's cultural history.
Think about how this is still an Israelite notion.
The Church still thinks that its tradition matters for human salvation, that participating
in that tradition, the tradition, the cultural history of the Church, is also something that
is needed.
Now I'm not advocating for Catholicism here over Protestantism.
I'm trying to get you to understand what the two sides were standing for.
So Luther is attacking all of that.
He's attacking the authority of the Church.
He's attacking the authority of tradition.
So history and tradition and institution don't matter.
Why?
Because Luther is a child of his time.
He is trapped inside his own mind.
He advocates that all that really matters in matters of faith are individual conscience.
And please remember what this word means.
It means knowing yourself, science, conscience, knowing yourself.
The one thing you know is yourself.
And so Luther refuses to recant.
He refuses to change his interpretation, to be in line with the Church, and he valorizes
individual conscience as the final authority over a person's spiritual life.
This lays the foundation.
So do you see what's happened here?
This withdrawal of meaning into the individual mind, isolated individual mind, is now being
appropriated as, well that must mean that the mind, the individual conscience, is the
final soul authority of what matters.
It's a radical idea.
Many other cultures find this a bizarre idea that we possess in the West.
And so of course there's a lot of discussion nowadays about individual responsibility, individual
authority.
We have, as Adorno talked about it, we have a cult of authenticity.
That being true to yourself, and this is Lutheran, being true to yourself is the ultimate authority
by which you should judge and evaluate your life.
Now notice what has happened.
The connection to reality, being true to reality, has been superseded by being true to yourself.
And that is also emerging with a cultural grammar that is training us in narcissism.
Now because of this, Luther was a monk, and yet he comes to the conclusion that the monasteries
should be shut down.
Why would he come to that conclusion?
Well, the West, for a long time, had these paired institutions.
We had a knowledge institution that has already emerged and is being developed in the Middle
Ages, and this of course is the university, where it's supposed to get a universal education,
come to understand as much of reality, the universe as you can.
And that was paired to a place where you have to go through transformation in order to acquire
wisdom, and this is the monastery.
And so this is the idea here, that here you're seeking that self-transcendence.
This is the legacy of the Axial Revolution.
This of course is a response to the emergence of first Aristotelian science, and then the
new science of people like Bacon, Copernicus Galileo.
And the two are supposed to represent an important synthesis of how human beings are to make sense
of themselves and to find a meaningful life.
But this institution places a huge premium on self-transcendence, as we've seen.
And for Luther, this is the Grand Illusion, the idea that human beings are capable of
self-transcendence is something he thinks is the greatest lie that our self tells us.
He sees that as the greatest instance of the sin of pride.
See if you lose the perspectival participatory sense of faith, if faith just becomes assertion
born out of radical acceptance, then the idea of this being even possible to you disappears.
And so what happens is that these institutions are being shut down.
Now that means the university now needs something else in order to take this knowledge and give
it existential transformative relevance to individual lives.
The university has to be attached to something else that transforms people's lives, gives
structure and purpose to their existence.
And of course, we know what that's going to be.
That's going to be the state.
And knowledge is not going to be linked so much to wisdom.
It's going to be linked to politics.
And of course, that is going to be supported by the new science, people like Bacon famously
arguing that knowledge is power, the forerunner of the work of Michel Foucault and others.
So we get the loss of all the psychotechnologies of wisdom, of cultural communities that are
committed to providing guidance and support to people who want to cultivate wisdom, of
a historical tradition that can relay to us the patterns of success and failures and
give us practices that we can use to test out and try for transformation.
All of that is being lost.
So you know where to go for information.
You know where to go for knowledge, but now today you do not know where to go for wisdom.
We have sapiential obsolescence of our knowledge.
And we have knowledge being inextricably bound to the machinery of the state and to politics,
such that it is becoming increasingly difficult right now for us as a culture to distinguish
politics from knowledge, from the willful assertion of things that we must simply accept
because of an arbitrary will wielding power.
So the Protestant Reformation is titanic.
It is really inappropriate if you're trying to understand the advent of the meaning crisis
to only look at the scientific revolution.
You must look at the scientific revolution and the Protestant Reformation together.
They are conjoined.
Now there are other important aspects of the Protestant Reformation that come to the fore.
Because of his attack on tradition and institution, Luther advocates what he calls the priesthood
of all believers.
There is nothing in between.
There is no mediator between you and God.
There is no church.
There is no priest.
There is nothing here.
There is just a direct personal relationship.
Again this idea of your own personal spirituality has its root here.
Because of this, Luther argues that for the priesthood of all believers, everybody has
an equal spiritual authority.
Because of course learning processes of growth and self-transformation, those are no longer
important criteria.
All that matters is the degree to which God has saved someone.
Now we've talked about some of the negative consequences of that, but a positive consequence
for that is that Luther argues for a complete form of democracy within the church.
Everything should be decided democratically because there should not be any significant
authority or hierarchical structure.
Because Luther is rejecting all of that.
This of course is why the Catholic Church is so resisting to him, why they are so inimical
to him.
This idea eradicated because it undermines the very structure and existence of the institution
of the Catholic Church.
Now Luther doesn't propose political democracy.
He only proposes democracy within the church, but nevertheless that is going to give people
in their day-to-day lives experience with democratic processes, democratic decision-making.
In fact, in the areas that they consider most important about their lives, they are going
to be acting democratically.
Now Luther thinks that there shouldn't be democracy in the world outside of the church,
and when the peasants revolt in Germany because they are being influenced by this idea of
the importance of the individual, individual conscience and authority, Luther does not
side with the peasants, he sides with the princes, he sides with established authority.
He has a two-worlds doctrine, there is a doctrine within the church and that is a world that
is, remember how God is divided, right?
That is the world of God's love and that is where we act democratically.
But outside the church we don't know who is saved and who is not saved, we will come back
to that point.
And because of that, that is the world under God's wrath, then that is the world that has
to be kept in check by political authority, wielding the sword of power.
Again, that is a dark aspect of Luther, but it also brings with it the beginning of an
idea of the separation of church and state, radical new idea.
And Luther of course is proposing it because he is proposing it that within the church,
under God's love, people should be treated one way and outside of the church, which is
under God's wrath, there should be a different way in which people are treated and politically
operate and the state should not interfere with the church.
So we get the beginnings of separation of church and state, which we take for granted,
but this is going to further drive the secularization of the culture, it's going to further drive
the secularization of the culture, because more and more people are experiencing that
sacred as something private, separate, secluded unto itself, separate from the state and politics
and of course also science and the university.
Now that not knowing who saved, of course, also brings with it terrific problems.
This was made into a classic argument, which has come under some criticism, but I think
the core insight is still a value by Max Weber.
The problem with Luther's model is there's nothing you can do to know that you're saved,
because there is nothing you can do to bring, you have no causal role, which means there's
no causal evidence, there's no evidence, how do you know if you're saved?
Because God chooses people arbitrarily.
So this provokes terrific anxiety, there's tremendous anxiety about whether or not you're
saved.
You have your own, and Luther gives you, there's this dramatic tension in Luther, he gives
you this double bind.
He tells you that what you ultimately have to rely on is your individual conscience,
but he tells you that that inner world is one of overwhelming self-deception.
And so what do you do with this anxiety?
Well, you can't do anything officially, but what you can do is you can work hard to make
your life good.
Because if you're succeeding in the world, especially socioeconomic success, that surely
is a sign that God has chosen you, that God loves you.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to develop what becomes called the present work ethic.
Because my only way of knowing is this unofficial way, this relatively unconscious way of knowing
that I'm saved, is if I'm succeeding well, so I'm going to work hard to succeed.
And I'm not going to use my wealth in any way to promote myself.
I'm not going to do what would later be called conspicuous consumption, because that would
be a sign of pride.
So I work hard, and in order to avoid pride, I'm going to push the money, the wealth I
acquire back into my business.
I'm going to get the present work ethic.
And this is going to align so well with the emerging corporations.
We talked about the emerging ascendancy of the commercial class, and we get the advent
of capitalism.
As Weber's book famously puts it, the present work ethic and the spirit of capitalism.
And this worry is a real worry.
This is what you watch happen.
And what's amazing is how Luther was surprised by this.
For a man who is in many ways brilliant, he translates the Bible into German, by the way.
He makes the Bible readable for everybody because of the priesthood of all believers.
And he's a brilliant translator.
Many people consider him as one of the foundational figures of modern German.
But he honestly thought that everybody would read the Bible the same way he did.
So he thought we'd gotten rid of the Pope, but there would be a unifying thing that would
hold Christianity together, which is the idea of the Bible.
So the Bible becomes very holy, and many people have said that what Protestants have is a
paper pope.
The Bible takes the role for them that the pope does for the Catholic world.
And of course, we are facing struggles right now in our culture because we don't quite
know what to do with this terrible and awesome book, The Bible.
What shocked Luther and shouldn't shock us is that Protestantism quickly fragments because
when you give people no authority other than their own individual conscience, when you
separate them from any claims upon them of tradition, any claims upon them of history
or institution, any claims upon them of knowledge, the idea that they will all agree is actually
a ridiculous idea.
And so what happens and continues to happen to this very day is the huge and ongoing and
accelerating fragmentation of Protestantism into denomination after denomination after
denomination.
You get what has been called in other quarters, but can be applied here, the narcissism of
small difference, right?
You have to find that piece of evidence that shows that you are unique, that shows that
of all of the damned masses, God has elected you, your uniqueness, your specialness, your
unearned unique specialness has to be guaranteed.
And the more I'm like these other people, the more that comes into question.
So not only am I driven by my own radicalized subjectivity in my interpretation, I'm also
hungry for a mark of specialness for me that will show that I am saved.
And so the narcissism and the fragmentation of Protestantism walk, march, in lock, step
together, mutually accelerating.
So notice what's happened.
Take a look, you're getting, God is withdrawing, God's withdrawing.
By the time of Luther, God has become very much this arbitrary will in a world that is
nothing but a battle of wills.
Think about how not that long after Luther, you have Shakespeare.
Luther is the great writer of German, Shakespeare is the great writer of English.
Notice how somebody who is plumbing the depths of the human psyche, Shakespeare, in a way
that of course has struck most of us as perennially profound, how absent God is from that world
of Shakespeare.
There's supernaturals there, there are the witches in Macbeth, there are ghosts in Hamlet,
but God is not ever present and the supernatural is absurd and arbitrary and largely an agent
of chaos and a destiny that thwarts people in their endeavors.
It's telling how much God has withdrawn into being an arbitrary, absurd supernatural agency
that largely thwarts and undermines human activities.
So the Protestant Reformation is fundamental to our grammar of how we understand ourselves
and the problem is even though many of us are children of the secularization that is
accelerated by the Protestant Reformation, we still carry that grammar around in our
head.
We have to work hard, we have to work very hard and if we don't work hard, it's going
to be revealed how worthless we are.
And that we hunger for that unearned positive regard.
We need to find that mark of our uniqueness that shows that we are chosen from the damned
and that we will not disappear into nothingness and meaninglessness, but instead we will be
adored for simply who we are.
Now, all of these factors, the scientific revolution, the advent of the beginnings of
capitalism, especially corporate capitalism, and the Protestant Reformation are all mutually
reinforcing each other, they're giving people tremendous anxiety.
So the scientific revolution is basically cutting you off from the world and the Protestant
Reformation is basically offending you from the mother church and tradition and history.
Look, you have to bear it all.
You alone, by yourself, you have to bear it all while simultaneously being told you don't
have the resources or the capacity within you to do it.
There are nothing that has to bear it all.
You cut off from the world, you cut off from reality, behind illusion, there's a restless
battle of wills, you cut off from wisdom institutions with sapiential obsolescence.
So this is a time of a lot of existential dread.
You see the very thoughtful response of people like Pascal, who is now experiencing the cosmos
not as a cosmos.
Remember what cosmos means, a beautiful order that we can participate in and that will afford
our self-transcendence.
No, Pascal, who's a mathematical genius, he gets the new math, he looks out at the cosmos
and he says, those infinite spaces terrify me.
The cosmos is now cold and terrifying.
Its vastness is inhuman and crippling of the human spirit.
There's an individual who arises at the same time and wants to address this anxiety.
And we'll talk about the comparison between Pascal and this person.
This person's Rene Descartes.
Descartes wants to take this grammar of the scientific revolution about math as the marker
of reality and he wants to use it to come up with, on his own, like a good Protestant,
although he's Catholic, but on his own, from his own individual consciousness.
He wants to come up on his own, forget the history, forget the tradition.
This is Descartes.
I'm going to use the new math to come up with a solution to this emerging meaning crisis.
Descartes is a genius.
And what he does is he invents a new psychotechnology, one of the most powerful psychotechnologies,
a psychotechnology that has been so internalized into our culture and our cognition that it
is almost transparent to us.
We do not realize it is the lens by which we see and understand the world.
Descartes liked to sleep in.
It's probably led to his death because when he had to go to Sweden, they didn't let him
sleep in and he had to go out in the cold air and that's probably what led to his death.
So he liked to sleep in.
So one day he's laying in bed and it was the fashion at the time, the architectural fashion,
further to be tiling on the floor and tiling on the walls.
There's a fly flying around the room.
Now, for most of us, that's where we, that's, that's it.
That's all we get, fly in a room.
But Descartes notes that if he, he noted that if he counts the number of tiles along, right,
these three axes, he can come up with three numbers that will plot wherever the fly is
in the room.
Descartes invents Cartesian graphing, the system we use today, the XYZ system.
He takes the new algebra, the new way in which, right, the new way in which Galileo had been
using math and he pushes it even further.
He invents graphing.
And what, what psychotechnology, because that's what it is.
This is a standardized strategy.
Learn from your society, a socialized, standardized strategy for information processing.
What psychotechnology more means science to you than a graph.
When I can make a graph, I'm doing science.
When I can think graphically, I'm thinking scientifically.
This is one of the most powerful and pervasive psychotechnologies, and he invents it.
And this brings with it a powerful idea, because he invents analytic geometry.
Any geometrical shape can be converted into an algebraic equation.
Equations capture reality, because, remember what Galileo has done, math doesn't have to
look like, it doesn't have to share the same gestalt as what it's representing.
That has now been taken to its fulfillment in Descartes.
Equations are not in any way like what they represent, but nevertheless, following up
on Copernicus and Galileo, they are what cut through illusion into reality.
Now this is a radical idea.
Because of graphing and analytic geometry, we get this idea that we can grasp the world
with equations.
So you think that this captures something deep about the world, E equals MC squared,
and you should.
Because when you really understand this, you can take a paperclip worth of matter, and
you can smash a city to the ground, men and women, like gods.
It's intoxicating the power that it puts at our fingertips.
It seems to provide overwhelming evidence that this way of thinking puts us deeply in
touch with the fiber and fabric of reality.
We are fundamentally in contact, but it's not a contact of experience.
It's not the Aristotelian conformity.
It's not participatory.
It is purely propositional.
It is purely abstract.
It is purely symbolic.
Now that's going to bring with it a radical idea.
Descartes thinks, well you know what, this is how I can understand the meaning crisis.
All this anxiety, he didn't of course call it the meaning crisis, so that's anachronistic
on my part.
But I'm putting words into his mouth so that we can talk to him across space and time.
There's all this anxiety.
There's all this sense of disconnection.
So Descartes understands the meaning crisis as a lack of a search for certainty.
Conformity in the Aristotelian, the Neoplatonic sense, participatory, perspectival conformity
has been replaced by propositional certainty.
And of course the thing about math for Descartes is it gives you certainty.
That's why math cuts through all the illusions.
That's why it allows us access to such power.
So Descartes thinks the answer to the crisis is to transform our minds, not in any kind
of spiritual transformation, but to transform our minds into machines of certainty.
Equations that will only work mathematically and logically in terms of equations.
The way to get certainty is to turn myself into a machine that represents the world to
abstract symbolic propositions and then manipulate those propositions in a purely logical mathematical
function.
What Descartes is proposing is that the way to address the anxiety of the age is for each
one of us to adopt a method that will turn us into computers.
That's what a computer is.
Computer is originally a word applied to people, by the way.
In the 1930s or 40s, you could have a job as a computer.
If that was your job, you would be given the task of taking equations and processing them
in a logical mathematical fashion.
So reasoning is being reduced to computation.
We'll talk about what that might mean in a minute.
The idea is if we can make our minds into purely computational machines, then we will
achieve certainty.
Certainty in our beliefs will give us what Descartes thinks we need in order to alleviate
the anxiety that we're suffering.
Of course, we do that, right?
On one hand, we have the cultural grammar of Luther and the narcissism and the radical
self-doubt.
On the other hand, we have the Cartesian grammar.
We seek certainty.
We won't believe anything until it's certain.
Of course, we vacillate between, I must accept it without any evidence or reason, Luther.
I can only accept it if it's absolutely certain and beyond question, Descartes.
And both of these, of course, are pathological.
The first is pathological because if you completely remove people's agency in how they come to
their beliefs, then you radically undermine any meaning in life they might possess.
The other one, the pursuit of certainty.
And there are individuals who seem to speak as if mathematical science will still give
us certainty.
That's an illusion.
Part of what we discover after Descartes, and Descartes was also surprised in that people
ended up disagreeing with him, is that science doesn't and can't provide certainty.
These two equations I put up on the board.
This is from Einstein.
This is from Newton.
What Einstein showed is things that Newton thought were certain, absolute space and time,
these kinds of formula, actually don't possess the certainty that Newton thought they did.
We'll talk a little bit later about why we can't accept in very limited context.
There are deep, deep reasons why we can't pursue certainty.
And therefore we can't seek certainty as a solution to loss of connection, connection
to our self, connection to the world, connection to other minds.
Now, why does Descartes, again this radical irony, very similar to Luther, why does Descartes
attempt to address this burgeoning loss of connections?
What does it actually result in exactly the opposite, increased sense of disconnectedness?
Part of it, of course, is the failure of the project of certainty.
You can understand the 18th and the 19th, and especially the 20th centuries as scientific,
historical, and philosophical undermining of the idea that we can achieve certainty.
Of course, one of the great principles of modern physics is the uncertainty principle.
But let's go back.
So Descartes proposes that we should do this, but there's an individual at his time who's
a contemporary of Descartes, who makes it explicit and radical, and then challenges
Descartes with that radical derivation.
Hobbes says, well, you know, all of this, what this means is that cognition is computation.
Hobbes says that, he uses an older word, he says, rathiosination, what we would now say
is cognition.
By rathiosination I mean computation.
Computation is computation.
Now, there's a lot of people who were going to disagree with this model of computation.
There's a lot of discussion right now, Brian Cantwell-Smith, a colleague of mine at the
University of Toronto, does a lot of important work on the metaphysics of computation.
I am not trying to state that this is the absolute truth about computation.
That, of course, would be ironic, given what I just said about certainty.
All I am arguing is, historically, this has been the interpretation of what computation
was for people like Descartes and Hobbes.
That's all we need for this argument.
But Hobbes says, cognition is computation.
And then here's the radical idea he proposes.
He takes a new idea, current at the time, remember the idea that matter is a substance.
Remember the old Aristotelian idea is matter is pure potential, but with Galileo, matter
is a reality, right, in the sense of a substance.
It resists, and it's good that it resists because I need something that resists my will
in order to help me with my biases.
So matter is inert, it's resistance, it's really there, I push on it.
Notice that again, all that's left of conformity is resistance of will.
Hobbes says, well, matter is real, and what if I built a material machine
that did computation?
If cognition is just computation, and I can build a machine that does computation, and
some of the first automatic machines are being built at this time, calculating machines,
if I can make a material machine that does computation, I will have made cognition.
I will have made mine.
Right there, at the heart of the scientific revolution, Hobbes is proposing artificial
intelligence.
Notice how artificial intelligence is a child of the advent of the meaning crisis and the
scientific revolution.
It's not a modern idea.
Artificial intelligence goes back to this time.
What is Hobbes doing with this?
I said Galileo kills the universe and Copernicus kills the reality of our sense experience,
but Hobbes is doing something way more personal because up till now, you've been isolated
inside your own mind, but at least still there.
I still have something special, unique, something spiritual.
Hobbes kills the soul, no soul, because if artificial intelligence is right, if I can
build a machine, purely material machine that is capable of computation, then I will have
made a mind and I didn't have to involve any soul stuff, any spirit stuff in making it.
And that's radical.
Take a look at how Descartes responds to that and how deep that response is woven into our
culture and the meaning crisis and how we move between AI and Descartes even today.
Thank you very much for your time and attention.
