Welcome everyone to uh, I've really been looking forward to this voices with revaking I'm going to be talking with and I'm introducing you to Elizabeth O'Fields she had me on her show on the sacred and I had such a wonderful
Personally powerful interview and discussion with her she really drew me out in a powerful way we got into some very deep stuff and I was very moved by it and I've seen her on a couple other videos
Conversations very impressed I asked Elizabeth for two things to gifts to send me a copy of her book and to come back on my show and talk about it. The book we're going to be talking about is her wonderful book fully alive
Which is a very interesting it's very Augustinian it's a mix of a kind of autobiographical confession and psycho spiritual theological reflection and so I'm putting you there in some very August company
August company literally August company so yes and I'm going to introduce Elizabeth in a sec and let her tell her a little bit about herself and what I thought we do and I proposed Elizabeth is
I'm going to pick out some parts of her book that really sank to me really resonated either like they called to me deeply or they provoked a question in me and the intent is all say how
What it evoked or provoked in me share that with Elizabeth give her a chance to respond reflect and hopefully we'll get into a good flowing dialogue us and so that's the intent but first Elizabeth great welcome very much appreciate you coming
And why don't you just say a little bit about yourself we're going to get into some of you because your book is autobiographical but maybe just a little bit of framing you think might be helpful for some of my listeners who haven't met you before
Gosh how does one describe themselves well I am speaking to you from a very small and I've realized right in this book that the phrase intentional community is more jargon than I realized that it is that doesn't actually make a lot of sense to everybody so I'm using the phrase micro monastery a small community of families that live together and drawing on monastic rhythms in South London in the UK and
I think the thread of my life has been being really interested in these questions of what is a good life how do we live together well how do we learn to love each other more.
And what are the stories that culture is telling us that make that easier easier or harder.
And theological questions have been woven through that I've been in and out of faith and in all different kind of flavors and but those are my those are my.
Abiding questions what does it mean to really live what does it mean to grow in love what does it mean to connect with each other and have all done all kinds of jobs related to that but that's the kind of underground river.
Well thank you that's very very helpful so I guess as I said I want to just pick up on a few things and I want to pick up on.
I guess the first thing and that really struck me is and I found kind of a simpatico between us is you you say at one point so many people I speak to and I think it you mean when you were writing or when you were doing your show.
So many people I speak to create places to belong and ways to settle their soul and I thought wow that's because for me how that resonated with me is the sense of belonging the sense of connectedness meaning in life relevance realization I do a lot of work on that.
And then also this idea of you know getting the various elements of the psyche levels kinds of knowing a line is very platonic right inner justice outer connections reality and they're reinforcing each other so that's what landed with me.
And I wonder how what I just said lands with you is that was that something you were noticing in general that people are seeking.
I mean Plato proposed that there is the sort of two metadrives we want this kind of inner fullness piece and we want this fullness of contact and not just an intellectual we want to belong in some way.
What do you think what what what comes up for you when I say that.
Yes that's beautiful my knowledge of philosophy is patchy at best and so the main thing is allowing to learn more and to understand the different the ways different wisdom traditions use language.
That often feel like they're trying to get to something similar right something unspeakable something beyond language but certainly the the thread that I've been pulling on is what does it mean.
I used the phrase to someone recently and honestly as soon as I said it was like oh that sounds so smug.
But that we were talking about psychedelics and the psychedelics renaissance and what that might mean and the way it's changing the spiritual landscape and she said have you have you ever been tempted and I said well sure in a like curious way.
But I don't feel a need because I have a deep sense of existential satisfaction and then I was like that's like check your existential satisfaction privilege.
That's true like I need to be honest about that.
And I wonder if that like internal coherence.
That you use this lovely thing about different parts of our psyche lining up that actually the very deepest part of ourselves are very I sometimes think of them as our very deepest values the things we want to define our lives.
We are conscious of them for one thing.
And then we are making choices around them we are seeking to stay loyal to them rather than just sitting there thinking actually I'm not living the life I wanted to I'm not staying I'm not paying attention to myself I'm not staying loyal to my values.
And I'd love to I'd love to hear more I'm really interested in the way most wisdom traditions seem to.
Have reached for language to indicate that there are different parts of us right you might think of the ego and the it's super ego my tradition it's the flesh and the spirit of the you know there's actually broken up in different ways and different parts of scripture and different parts of my tradition.
Is that what Plato is grasping towards do you think there.
Well there's there's there's two different I mean because Plato there isn't one Plato just like there's not one voice in the Bible right so one of the great mistakes that was predominant in academic philosophy philosophy and research on Plato with for a long time that has now been pretty much overturned was this idea that there's a single voice of Plato and we can get a single
theory theory out of that single voice and we've largely come to realize no that's not how his philosophy works but to to them are and this one really prefigures Freud in major ways there's sort of three centers in us.
There's one you could call he calls it a monster that's sort of in your abdomen in your genitalia and it works in terms of super salient very present it's in the present moment super salient it's very urgent it works in terms of.
Appetites and drives.
Yeah yes and then you have this thing that's there's no real good translation for it I'm sort of touching my heart area but when I say heart all kinds of romanticism rolls in that's not important or relevant or even important.
So I'm going to the Greek word.
It's kind of where our sociocultural emotions are how we want to be connected to other people recognized and values by others is where we have things like pride and shame and admiration and envy that so it's working at this sort of social connectedness level.
And then there's this and he represents that with a lion lion hearted and where we get you know courage and lions are social animals and then forgive the sexism but compared to a lot of people played it was you know very far ahead he actually said women could be philosophers they could be in the army they could be governed they could be rulers of the state.
Right but there's a man in your head and they that man can pursue long term abstract goals and they work in terms of true he works in terms of truth and falsity and then he talks about.
Right so they're working at these different scales and they have different goals and his point which is I think very well I think he develops better than Freud in some ways because he talks about the cognitive dimensions of these things.
Is that each one of these has got pretty good sort of psychological cognitive scientific evidence for it that we have these different kinds of motivations.
And then his point is they often come in conflict with each other because they're working according to different criteria and at different scales and then what part of it is to be wise.
Is to figure out the optimal relation each one seeks to be maximal but the degree to which it's maximal it damages the other two right and so you have to get a way of getting them all working as optimally together and that's a fullness of life because then everything is being as fully as live to use your phrase as possibly can.
And if you give me one more minute and then the idea is that inner conflict is the driver and this is where it overlaps with Freud of a lot of.
Our self deception of a lot of our projection our defensiveness our neurosis and right and as we ameliorate that inner conflict we start to cleanse the doors of perception and see more deeply into reality.
As we see more deeply into reality we get better at seeing more deeply into reality and then we can more better realize the real patterns of the psyche.
We can align the psyche better we can then see more deeply into reality and this is the ascent out of the cave this rolling reciprocal opening that's going on.
That's the and Plato's idea is that is the way to mutually satisfy our two meta drives.
Our two meta drives are in addition to whatever satisfies our desire we want the satisfaction of our desire to not create inner conflict and undermine our agency.
We want it to lead to a piece of fullness.
And in addition to whatever satisfies our desires we want what satisfies our desires to be real not fake not an illusion not a fraud.
And when we can mix though when we get those two together we get that sense of inner peace and connectedness to what's most real.
And that's his proposal for human happiness.
Thank you.
I'm going to go away and chew on it.
Sorry I didn't know I didn't want to get it.
No it's really helpful because it.
The the sort of working thesis I have about sin and again this is pretty personal.
Just ponderings allowed rather rather than and well he and in the book I'm not claiming a kind of.
Closed thesis or.
You know one of the things I had to liberate myself actually from in order to be able to write was this desire that in a thing you say in this deep area you have to be completely certain of and you need to approach in this very academic fashion and liberate
liberating myself honestly to sort of in play to his language to draw on wisdom from all of those right and to say particularly this bit for me.
Connection is everything fully alive.
This is everything relationship is everything and it's not that he's completely abandoned you know reason or the man in our head or or or whatever but that the primacy of that post enlightenment post reformation the way.
The way we have.
Disconnected we have made wisdom subsumed under knowledge.
And scripture is my scriptures are incredibly clear that wisdom is not the same thing as knowledge that you can learn a bunch of facts.
And it puffs you up.
Wisdom builds you and other people up.
And so my kind of getting to the point of thinking what do what do I think is getting in the way of my fully aliveness and the fully aliveness in the world.
Why do we do what we do not want to do and not do what we do not want what we do want to do.
Why can we not tackle the climate crisis.
Why do we not seem to be able to live together well.
Why is tribalism polarization exploding.
What is it about humans.
Right.
Given we are so beautiful and so tender and have so much potential for glory and goodness.
What are we doing.
And that deep sense of actually the tradition that was in the background in my childhood and that I had rejected once that says that's a sin that this is what's tripping us up.
And I was like sin.
Yeah.
It's unfashionable.
Well I don't care.
I think you're saying something really important.
First of all I agree wholeheartedly with the distinction between knowledge and wisdom.
Knowledge is about overcoming ignorance.
Wisdom is over about overcoming foolishness and those are different things.
Ignorance is a lack of knowledge.
Foolishness is a failure to grasp the proper significance of what you know and apply it appropriately.
Live it.
Yes exactly.
And that's when talking about different kinds of knowing and getting them aligned could be important.
But let's not get into that right now.
I see.
So I once proposed this definition and I was trying to create a bridge and I don't know.
I don't think it succeeded because I don't think anybody got it or they didn't seem to pick up on it.
So I'm going to try again.
Sorry.
I was trying to bridge between the theological language and this philosophical language around foolishness where foolishness isn't just you do this thing.
No it's more like this system of self deception that takes on a life of its own.
And one of the papers I published with Leo Ferraro we called it parasitic processing.
It's this kind of thing that takes you over and narrows you down and narrows you and flattens your world and you get sort of locked in.
Very much like the machinery that my friend Mark Lewis talks about with addiction.
You know your cognitive flexibility and your sense of who you could be diminishes and the world shrinks and they reciprocally narrow which is the opposite.
And here's the connection with love because love is reciprocally opening right.
And so I said I think and so if you can get to this notion of foolishness is kind of anti love.
I said I wonder if we could understand sin as a failure to love wisely.
I wonder what you think of that as a proposal as I know it's very Augustinian but if you object I'm happy to hear but what do you think about that.
I in my current working ponderings love and sin are opposites.
And so for me fully alive this is connection is moving towards life moving towards our own soul moving towards each other moving towards the earth actually and moving towards the divine.
Yes.
And it's the withdrawal and the disconnection that is the sort of blanket category for sin.
Luther and Augustin use this phrase homo incanvatis in say I don't know.
No one knows how you pronounce that.
Man or humanity turned in on ourselves and the sense of an in growing toenail.
And so the idea that love that sin is love not applied wisely or foolishly.
I'd have to sit with that a little bit I think it for me for me.
I haven't given much thought to foolishness but what you're making me think about foolishness is it's a real category in the book of Proverbs spoken about a lot.
The wise man and the foolish man and the wife man and the foolish man and some of that.
Jesus does too.
Yeah.
And I guess for me the sort of outworkings of what I've been grasping towards is that foolishness is a failure to understand that life is connection.
That love is what draws us that love is what defines us and pride as the sort of kings in is the idea that we can manage without it.
That we can manage without other people that we are not relational that we're not interconnected that actually we are the solipsistic autonomous self actualizing self creating.
So maybe there is some overlap because that's a withdrawal from love.
I think so.
What I heard when you were doing the in grown toenail is very much what.
First of all let's get the idea that the self is not a monad that the self is not an Aristotelian substance independently existing possessing its properties and being the sole author of its business.
Let's go to 40 cogs and say the self is inherently dialogical.
It's inherently relational.
And then that inward turning is what we were trying to get at with this notion of reciprocal narrowing.
Right.
Where I I'm I'm not I'm less and less tapping into the depth of myself and less and less opening tapping into the depth of the other.
And that seems to mean like the hardening of the heart.
Yes.
Yeah.
Right.
And to me I was I was trying to get at the idea that when we're not loving wisely we're we have chosen to go into reciprocal narrowing and harden our heart.
And the heart is what we're behind as we engage in the bullshit pretense of being autonomous substances completely self making and self interpreting.
That that was what I was trying to get at.
Yes.
Yeah.
I think that's brilliant.
I love that language of of patterns because I'm obsessed with formation.
This this you know the this interconnects with the way McGill Chris work about attention and the and I was the the hardening the heart thing came up for me because I was talking to someone about what is going on with these people having very spiritual experience on psychedelics and what is the role of attention and what is it.
That means that I feel.
Able to have what certainly seemed to be experiences of the divine in a ways that people with a different temperament formation history than we find would long for but find really difficult.
Yes.
Yes.
And whether these types of attention.
Can yeah that they shape what we can see right they shape what's possible for us they should and that that that what did you call it reciprocal narrowing.
The reciprocal opening.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And that when we've tried when we try and live in ways practices and rituals and themes and communities crucially communities that mean that our formation is towards love.
We will increasingly open to the world and open to reality and open to each other.
And now I want to read that paper.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So so that notion of connectedness I mean this is what I do a lot of my actual scientific work on.
So the core of one of my central theses is that general intelligence the kind of intelligence we demonstrate and the kind that they're trying to make with artificial general intelligence at the core of it is this ability.
There's two things interlocked anticipation the more you can sort of anticipate the future the more intelligent we the more intelligence we attribute an organism.
But interlock with that is Mike the core problem which is relevance realization there's so much there's so much information available it's astronaut astronomically vast.
There's so much information in your memory and all the ways you could combine it there's so many different sequences of behavior sounds you could utter.
There's so many logical possibilities you could consider and the thing that you do and this is kind of like the Zen Cohen is your intelligent by ignoring almost all of that information.
But you don't ignore it randomly because if you ignore it randomly you to have an astronomical chance of doing the wrong thing somehow you zero in on the relevant information.
And here's the thing relevance isn't in me and relevance isn't in the object it's how the object and I are fitted together how we belong together for a certain task.
And it's not cold calculation because it's what's grabbing my attention it's what's arousing my affect it's what's committing my agency and so it's always bound up with care.
So relevance realization is this is this homing and notice the word I'm using homing in on something a deep connectedness a deep caring a deep evolving involvement and I use the I use the Latin word religio to talk about that sense of connectedness.
And then that's the first thesis and I won't give you all the arguments and evidence for that I've been doing that for like, I don't know, 25 years making that argument, tons of publications and other people publishing on that and all that so I'm just going to take that.
And so, I think that's the core of our agency as intelligent beings, and I think it also plays a significant role in consciousness, we could get back to that if you wish.
But then here's the second proposal that that religio that sense of connectedness.
So that's coming out of the part of psychology that studying intelligence one of the problems in psychology is the different parts don't talk to each other. That's why I'm a cognitive scientist.
And then you have two other streams. You have people doing meaning in life and people doing the psychology of belonging like Kelly Allen.
Here's my proposal that what the psychologists are talking about and measuring when they're measuring meaning in life is they're measuring that that how much people have a celebrated sense of religio of connectedness that is deeply relevant to them and affords them
solving problems and in and using your language forming their identity and their agency. And that's also what people are talking about in that sense of belonging in the belonging literature and then if you don't have a sense of belonging, you're in trouble psychologically
social socially, even physiologically. And I think all three of these converge on this sense of religio and that sense of connectedness.
And the way you can sort of test for meaning in life. I think you and I might have talked about this is you can ask people three questions. What do they want to exist even if they don't.
How real is it and how much of a difference do they make to it right now. The more answers you have to those questions and the deeper you think your answers are, the more I will predict you say your life has meaning in life.
What do you think about that is trying to unpack this, because you do you and wonderfully so you keep coming back this sense of connectedness, this movement towards an opening up to but also letting other letting the world and letting other people into one
like this seems to me to be exactly what you're talking about. And this scientific literature would plug into that. I think I mean it just it makes so much sense to me on such a deep level and it is essentially what I think most of theology is about which makes sense.
If you believe that we are made in the image of a God who is relationship in and of God self right if you believe in the Trinity.
Oh, I want to talk to you about that. We're going to talk about that. That's great. I think the other the other real thread that I pull on a lot is Martin Buber and I thou and the phrase that he uses about when we see and I say two thirds of I thou the very short
is about moments between us and other people and the last third is about moments between us and the divine us and God, but it.
He says the moments of religio you could I think replace me when we turn and other people stop to stop being objects to us or symbols or ciphers or just collections of pre like pattern recognition predictions what we already know about them, you know we put out into the world and we don't really need to take the cognitive
time to we just people do what you expect them to do the moments we cut through that and we really see them and we see them as a you and we were taking a new information we were seeing them.
That is all that is really real.
That is that that is living that is life that is fully aliveness that is that's it that's that's everything that's the game and he and another book of his he writes about how we spend a huge amount of time in different disciplines thinking about the individual self which
neither you or I really believe in but you know on all different disciplines health and psychology and sociology and politics and then we spend a lot of time thinking about ourselves as groups as like.
You know sociology how do groups work how do they integrate how do we define but there's a third category which is the between yes exactly the between.
The between the religio and this we don't it's so hard to it's so intangible it's so difficult to talk about.
And so the idea I didn't know that I didn't know your thesis on this I know there was a whole scientific way attempt I know that there's someone being done in philosophy on it but.
Yeah, I that that awareness that the thing that's hard to talk about might be the really real like might be the ball game is very exciting to me.
So and this is a this is an idea from what's called for ecog sigh.
But I've coined a term I talk about the religio as neither subjective nor objective but transjective it's exactly the between don't know what that means.
Well what it's a new term what it means is it's it's it's beyond in between the subjective and objective it's what binds the subjective and objective together so that meaning and truth are possible because neither subjectivity or objectivity will give you meaning nor truth.
Because meaning or truth are inherently relational in nature and then you combine together meaning religio and truth in a powerful way.
Let me let me let me show you what what you're talking about.
So I want to take the I want to take the boober and I agree with you I thou I think is a very central book talked quite a bit in other places about boober.
But I want to I want to then shift to a murdoch example that John Wright talks about murdoch talks about the mother in law who has his daughter in law that she regards is really kind of course and you know and rude and a little bit disorganized.
And then one day she has this realization and notice the word I just used she has this realization that wait.
Maybe her daughter is spontaneous and rounded and really authentic and maybe she's been understanding you know things these phenomena in exactly the wrong way.
So notice she's she's getting an insight that's going in both directions and here's that opening.
She's getting an insight into who this person might be beyond all of her pattern predictions.
But she's also realizing that her way of framing it that way of doing this was also problematic and she needs to unlock the two together.
And Wright calls that sensibility transcendence and what I'm trying to get you to note is what's happening there is this reciprocal opening of the relevance realization machinery.
It's like it's an insight it's like oh I was treating the wrong I was treating that I was seeing this in the wrong way was considering the wrong things I was ignoring the wrong things and the way I was framing it the way I was homing in on it was wrong.
I have to open both up together and we get a sense like you said and this and then I want to drill down on another one of your quotes.
We get a sense of the really real and that's why I want to pause because you said that right and we use realization.
And it's this betweenness and that's the really real and I want to talk about your.
First is that fair conversion I don't know what language is not offensive but you talk about I believe you're at a camp or something and you talk about it and you let me try and see if I can quickly find the actual quote because I thought it was really wonderful.
You talk about having an ecstatic experience you quote Murdoch and the unselfing that I was just referring to so that's and you talk about it as terms of.
Here, my question had been answered with an overwhelming felt presence.
An encounter with a you which you put in scare quotes which means don't use that word we the way we typically use it defined by love and acceptance and peace.
And you also go on to talk about my life had acquired another dimension so reality is opening up this is a real real for you it's a realization it's a transformative realization.
And it's the sense of a felt presence that right is something like but not the same as what we are normally capturing by you.
And this is wonderful and I want you to unpack that a little bit more if you can and I know and we're both smiling and I appreciate your smile.
I'm not expecting you to you know to be Thomas Aquinas here or anything like that nor am I expecting that I would be that.
But what I want is I just want to play with you about this like real serious good faith play around.
These things are all coming together the sense of the really real the betweenness the loveless the love the connectedness presence.
And you're not talking about like you're not talking about you know the presence of the terminate thing.
I think Boober is very clear about that right and you want to you want to say this is in the second person.
It's not the first person subjective it's not the third person objective it's the second person right transjective if you'll allow me my neologism and you're playing with all of this.
And I think this is all resonant with what we've talked about so far but can just more say more like can go back on that because like that is so.
Like this because I and later on when you're talking about God you talk about God more adverbial you talk about God as a way of paying attention.
Right which is really really interesting much more relational much more adverbial rather than the properties of a thing.
It's a way in which there's a presence presencing if I can put it that way that seemed to be fair to how you're talking.
And the reason so part of this is selfish on my part part of it I'm doing a lot of work on this there's a book out.
Oh I can't remember it called Presence right now on some of the COGS I about sense a felt sense of presence and we can sort of induce a little bit of it in the labs.
Which doesn't mean it's an illusion because we can make you see a car when there's no car and that doesn't mean cars are illusion right that's a bad argument.
But right so I'm part of me is the selfish scientist I really wanted you know somebody like you give me some data.
Well give me some data but but but but but I promise you I'm not going to just I'm going to really listen also as a you.
Right I'm going to listen because I care about this also as a person because I think right think about it wisdom is about this loving enhancement of our connectedness of our ability.
The wise person can go into a complex messy ill-defined situation and home in on what's relevant some in their agency in the right way so that they are properly responsible.
And so there's a connection between the realization of this and the ability to be wise.
Sorry I'm talking too much because I'm enthusiastic I'm going to shut up and open a space for you.
Thank you.
No it is a very it's a tender and powerful invitation and as you know sort of when I approach with fear and trembling and the book where the bit in the book we're trying to address it directly is.
It's like four paragraphs of explaining why this is hard.
Yeah so.
What we're talking about in the source my most simple and familiar language is God is.
Which I sometimes use the cinnamon of love for with a capital L.
And that experience.
Even though I've written about in the book someone's I'm currently trying to write about it again for someone who is fascinated by an essay for them and that they're like.
I know you say words can't get at it but will you try like will you will you go more will you go deeper and so I'm really reaching for I want to help you.
The edges.
Yeah.
Yeah the edges of language with it and the things that.
The things that.
The things that come up for me.
Are just the undeniability of.
That moment of encounter and how.
How about how impossible it is because.
Honestly like I can close my eyes now and.
Know my know myself.
Seen and.
The.
The deep the deep knowing of present of the presence of love in my life.
And the way that every other moment of love and encounter and intimacy and reflection reflects that is.
Is the ground is the ground of my being you know in Kierkegaard's.
Understanding of it and.
In that moment it was really like.
Night and day it was people have been theorizing theorizing about God around me and I've been a bit interested and.
Questioning and been like maybe I believe maybe I don't believe asking loads of hard questions of this youth group that I randomly ended up in through a friend and then at this festival that I randomly ended up in because of fancy some of the boys.
Not from a particularly Christian family at all like it wasn't a big deal in my childhood I didn't have it shaping my imaginative world as a child in a way that.
Lots of people did for good or ill.
I know that was complex for you but it.
It went from a theory to reality in that moment I asked a direct question and received a direct answer and.
You know the other thing that gets close to it and I quote is Pascal's what's known as the night of fire when he says.
Not the God of the philosophers or the scholars.
The are attempts to tame and theorize and analyze just get like.
And you're left with.
He says fire fire fire joy joy joy.
You know.
And as I've gone back to it and it feels.
Feel there's a chapter in the book on sex and writing about sex felt less intimate and vulnerable than trying to write about the moment yes.
Because it feels so holy and personal but.
What I've been thinking about it is when I first when I when I had my babies.
When I met my babies for the first time and it was this weird mix of surprise and deep recognition.
Surprise and recognition excellent that's that's.
Like hello of course it's you.
Also who are you.
I know you I don't know you.
Who are you.
You're so here.
And.
Honestly that's that.
I want to make sure I'm getting the connection sorry for interrupting.
Please do that that that moment of.
Let's call it like encounter.
It's almost like platonic and amnesis you remembered something you didn't know you had in you like Plato talks about this weird kind of remembering.
Where like when we're doing when we're doing the dialogical practices with people they'll often say I discovered a form of intimacy.
That I did not know about but I've always been looking for that kind of weird.
Yeah.
Okay.
Okay.
So that's landing.
Good.
So.
And are you saying that that obviously also you're experiencing a particular kind of love you're pro you're experiencing the prototypical instance of agape.
You're not loving this person because you want to consume them.
They're consumable.
You're not loving them because they're a great friend and you've had a life together.
You're loving them because you're caught up in the process of.
You know there's a possible there's a person that I'm going to participate in them in the creation of which is like analogous to God creating persons something like that the Bible uses that metaphor.
And am I understanding you correctly you're using and saying that that intimate remembering of and surprise when I encountered my my babies is a close analogy to that sense of God.
Am I am I I'm trying to get the make sure I'm not connecting it inappropriately.
I mean the thing about this is everything every time I go okay it's like this I'm like yes but it's also not like it is.
Yeah of course of course of course it's all these.
It is literally a space beyond language and so the poet poetry gets closest.
Music gets closest like and it really helped me I was reading I think Mike McHarg was and this might be one of those bullshit studies so forgive me I did not go check my references or look at the you know look at the rigorous rigorous.
That's how seriously I've been here but in some ways it's a metaphor but he was saying when when when researchers are trying to do fmi scanning on people in in sort of deep ecstatic states or deep prayer deep contemplative prayer particularly nuns that
have prayed prayed for a long long long time.
The other type ecstatic states like akin to the kind of ones that I have the language center of the brain is just quiet.
Yep nothing is in the default mode network goes down to right which is your sense of self which is why you get that unselfing experience.
Interesting that that is fairly good evidence by the way it has it's it's not bad.
Great wouldn't want to be quite a bunch of science but it really helped me because I'm a writer right this is my thing.
I love words.
The not the feeling like my sentences would like ricocheting off this memory and and that was something almost dishonorable about attempting to capture it.
I both want to because I so want I so want to share this yeah it's the treasure.
But also it is so personal and it's where I saw I don't believe in individuals but I do believe in persons and I do believe in human particularity and who knows what the soul is but it's the closest language I've got for.
The particular me that has connection with religio was encounter with either with divine love.
And that you can't it has to be particular it has to be personal.
To be the really real.
I think that's right I want to pick up.
But first of all, you I want you I think you know this you're safe here to talk to me.
I'm not out.
I'm not gunning for anything.
I know I do feel that.
Okay, good.
Good.
Thank you.
Secondly, I've had several of these kinds of experiences in my life.
And I also have practices that are designed and succeed in bringing me into a more reliable conformity to that realization of the really real.
So this is something I think we deeply share.
I think there's so there's a couple of things that are very one is this Agape and the great, you know, the great statement in the epistle of John, right?
God is Agape.
It's this got the this is an identity claim which we don't get very many of the Bible.
And the identity claims there's basically for and they're all inherently relational.
God is love Agape club.
God is light, which is also relational.
You don't see light.
You see by means of light and the way it creates relations of intelligibility between things.
God is the logos and logos doesn't mean just word and we've tend to reduce logos to logic.
But logos means this what you're trying to get at this ground of intelligibility.
Right.
And of course, God is also life.
Right.
And it's right.
And life is inherently relational too.
And I wanted to I wanted to I wanted to.
So we've got this right.
And yeah, I think persons are inherently relational things rather than substantial things.
And there's something particular about them.
The Buddhists have this term suchness.
Everything actually has its suchness in some ways.
It's absolute.
Like because anything, any words I use to talk about this is our categorical and they don't pick up on the suchness of this, the way it's not the way it's different from every all the other things in the category.
And then there's also a moreness that that suchness is somehow non logically identical with all of the relations and connections that it bears.
And I think persons are a particular kind of nexus there.
And I wonder if that you find that language helpful.
This surprise and recognition.
I like Plato talks about this a lot.
This is how we this is how we recognize the forms.
We go.
Oh, but and then we go.
Oh, but of course, right?
It's that it's that it's that simultaneous like in and it's like and beauty is that combination is why beauty is so important to play.
Beauty is a combination of surprise.
But yet, right, of course.
Yes.
I didn't I see it that way before.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
And so that is all background and I'm not I didn't try to thread it as a premise by premise argument.
I was just laying it out as okay.
Yeah.
Because this is the thing that and I mentioned logos and light because they bring out that yes, we don't see the light and there's nothing in terms of which we can understand the logos.
The Neoplatonists talk about the one is that by which you understand everything, but it's nothing.
You can't conceive of the one because you can't put it outside of it of it in order to conceive of it as an object because it permeate that you keep trying to step out and looking and it's already behind you.
Right.
Yeah.
Right.
Making it possible for you to live and move and have a being in.
Exactly.
Exactly.
But here's the thing.
And I get the reverence.
Right.
The deep care because the importance notice the heightening of a legio, the deep care and the importance of this.
And so I'm not trying to trespass on your reverence.
But the question is like this.
The thing that I'm driving at is maybe it's even asked its quest maybe is, but it doesn't mean that there is any disconnect from all of that intelligibility and that ground of intelligibility.
The fact that the words don't capture it doesn't mean that there is this gap or space.
In fact, it, it reaches into the words.
It permeates them.
It grounds them.
Right.
And it's, it's, it's, it's loving in that sense.
It embraces them.
It affords them.
It makes them possible.
It is the inexhaustible fount of flowing intelligibility.
And so, and it's, and the reason why I get like that, it's that connection.
That's why we have the weirdness of the connection, I think, because the surprise is I can't capture it.
But the, of course is, ah, but it's intimately interwoven with all of my sense making, all of the light of my world, all of the logos of my world.
And for me, that's what I'm trying to, and you can see now I'm doing the same thing.
I'm struggling.
I'm doing things with my, my hands.
Yeah.
Exactly.
But did that, I'm trying to take a baby step here, but does that land for you what I was trying to get at?
Because part of the, part of what I want to challenge and push against is people who think what we're doing is a kind of a kind, I don't know, something like a mystification, a kind of fundamental right otherness.
It is, but it's, and you quote Williams about this, but it's, but it's also, as he points, it's anotherness that somehow embraces us, right?
And isn't even competing with us, not one, not one Iota.
I'm trying to get at, I'm trying to get that the surprise and the recognition are sort of the two sides of this, right?
The ineffable, but that is also nevertheless sourcing all of our intelligibility.
Sorry, that was a lot, but that's, I want, my question is, does that resonate with you?
Does that sing true to how your experiences are?
I think so.
I'm not sure if I've understood you, but I, the things that's making me think about are how the, that experience and the experiences that I have now felt like the cultural scripts around them were irrational.
Right.
That they were sort of, yeah, that my identity, you know, I worked at the BBC for five years.
I want to run a think tank in Westminster.
I have two degrees.
You know, I'm a feminist.
I'm sort of sickeningly metropolitan intelligentsia, at least in this aspiration.
I read the New Yorker.
Right.
And so that seriously is disgusting.
Self-making of my formation, you know, smart girl at school, jump the academic hoops.
And honestly, when I was young, there was like two parts.
You're going to be the hot girl or the smart girl.
I'm going to be the smart girl.
That's who I am.
That's surprising.
You're quite a beautiful woman.
Thank you.
Okay.
Teenagers, teenagers, you know, weird.
Okay.
But it, when, when you're thinking about the self that we make from the messages we get from the culture around us, intelligent became one of my things I wanted people to perceive me as.
And it, it's very left homophoric, actually very male, disembodied.
Increasing these science leaning, not humanities leaning, you know, that kind of.
Okay.
In order to be respectable, in order to be impressive, in order to, to, to, to connect with the kind of people I'm interested in, in the world of ideas and the books, this bit of me that like lay flat on the floor weeping at the feet of Jesus when I was 15.
I couldn't hold those two things together.
And so it, it fell apart and the bit that the things that we can't talk about the emotional experiential encounter of the really real.
I didn't have categories for and no one around me had categories for and the kind of person I was wanting to be becoming required me to let it go.
And I think part of what the sort of quest I'm on is to push back against that and say.
And I think your work and McGill Chris work on a bunch of other people in the last five years to go.
Expand our understanding of what intelligence is, expand our understanding of how we access the real of what, how we perceive the world of what it might, what wisdom might mean.
And it, like, honestly, I'm full circle.
I'm back, I'm back, like, waving my praise flag, praying in tongues.
And a part of my brain is like, what are you doing?
And starts doing the like, you know, all the, all the, all the, all the, all the, all the theories, all the psychology, all the crowd dynamics, all the credulity, all the, my friends who take psychedelics have these experiences is just induced all these things like some of that's going on in my brain.
But this bit, you know, you talked about this, like, so the middle bit in the Plato thing, what I would call my soul is like, I need this.
Is it Pascal again?
I'm obsessed with Pascal.
Like, I would, Pascal would be my boyfriend if he was alive now.
He said, the heart has reasons, reason knows not.
Yeah.
And I'm like, and he talked about the difference between the spirit of geometry and the spirit of finesse, which prefigures Ian's work.
I was, I just saw in a couple of weeks ago, we were at a conference celebrating his work together.
And he and I have had several conversations together.
So, I think we share that project.
What, let me just say, for example, there's a paper.
First author by Johannes Yeager, but I'm also a co-author on it with some other people.
And we're in third round of revisions.
We had two reviewers and we went through all their edits.
We're ready to go.
And then the third reviewer out of other blue finally sends in the review.
We have to start the whole process over again, which is, yes, those are some of the yuckiness of the academic world.
But I'm very confident we're going to get it published.
And basically, and I presented this argument directly to Ian, like he was literally four feet away from me facing him.
And he liked it.
But it's around the fact that.
So logic is logic is an example of a formal system.
Math is an example of a formal system.
Like it's completely self-contained rule defining.
And there's Godelian problems with it.
And so remember that, but that's what a formal system is.
And the proposal is that's what the left hemisphere likes.
The left hemisphere likes to use formal systems to solve well-defined problems like math problems and logical problems in which you have a very good representation.
Of what matters.
It's all packaged for you there by the formal system.
Now here, and that would be the spirit of geometry in Pascal.
But the process of formalization of creating a formal system, which uses relevance realization is not itself something that can be done by a formal system.
The process that makes formal systems is not itself something done by a formal system.
It is done by something that is dealing with messy, ill-defined flowing problems that require this very careful trading off between complex dynamics in a flowing dynamic gestalt.
And that's what Pascal means by the spirit of finesse.
And what my work is trying to show is that intelligence isn't primarily a formal system.
It's about the ability to make and then once they're made use formal systems.
And that's not that I'm trying to map everything onto the left and right because that can get very dangerous.
But think about this.
It's like, here's what can't be captured in any kind of formal system.
But nevertheless, it makes possible and is constantly shaping the possibility space for any formal system.
And so the two are deeply interpenetrating.
And I'm trying to say something like that.
See, I'm trying to maybe, sorry, this is audacious because I also respect Pascal the way you do.
But I'm trying to say it's not just, there's two.
There's a deep religio between them.
Finesse actually makes possible and fuels the spirit of geometry.
Yeah.
It makes sense.
And I think resisting our temptation to swing too far back the other way.
Okay.
We've had too much of this bad.
Let's have this different time of attention, this different kind of one.
Again, if we think everything is about connection, if we think everything is about relationship, everything is about interdependence,
then it's leaving those competitive instincts in us, right?
That are like, my way is right.
So your way must be wrong.
Or maybe we need each other.
Maybe we need the spirit of geometry and the spirit of finesse and they are designed to work together.
The imagery in my scriptures is of our body, right?
And the church is not always great at living this UK church right now, struggling with this.
But you know, the head cannot say to the foot, I do not need you.
When we are threatened, when we don't have a stable sense of self, when we do not know ourselves to be beloved,
the Rowan Williams talks about this in relation to God, like there's a relief sitting in the presence of the divine
because it's not constantly negotiating its identity in the way that we are.
And the more I know that which is not constantly negotiating, God's not constantly negotiating God's identity.
And in the presence of the divine, I no longer have to either, just loved, I'm a mess, I'm loved.
Then I can go into the world and encounter other messy people who are loved,
who are presenting a completely different spirit from me, functioning the world completely differently.
Naturally might threaten me because they don't care or they don't understand about the kind of things that we do, what this instincts in us.
But I can kind of have an open heart to that and go, tell me more, you know, that's interesting.
What can we learn from each other?
And that's so work for me.
That's like long, slow, steady muscle building of resisting the temptation to see everything in competition with each other.
Thank you for watching.
This YouTube and podcast series is by the Verveke Foundation, which in addition to supporting my work also offers courses, practices, workshops and other projects dedicated to responding to the meeting crisis.
If you would like to support this work, please consider joining our Patreon.
You can find the link in the show notes.
Okay, that's beautiful.
And that's a connection.
And let me, let me try and make a connection with some of my current work that other people are doing on.
Okay, so again, we think of logical as, and this is Descartes monological, what you do is the individual person running an argument.
And of course, subject predicate logic, and that's where we get our substance property ontology and it's all bound together in this wonderful package.
But the problem is that we're now, we now have increasing evidence growing rapidly that we actually reason better together dialogically than we do individually monologically.
Take standard reasoning tasks and individual does them and the success rates like 10%.
You replace that with four people who they have to dialogue with each other.
So what I call that dialogos, they have to do this shared group agency and mutual correctiveness.
But if they, if they do that, they get that success rate goes up to 82%.
Wow.
I mean, that the finding doesn't surprise me this status.
That's amazing.
It's, it is impressive.
The Sperber and Mercier have done some of the important work on this, but more and more people are showing this.
So, and this, of course, is part of why Plato and this always frustrated people.
Why doesn't Plato just write his arguments because Plato is trying to show because you have to show this, right?
That we reason best dialogically, not monologically, right?
Now think about that.
Think about how there has to be something that makes the dialogos possible.
And what you're talking about, if I understand you correctly, is you have a sensed participation in this presence that allows you to enter into and make possible a dialogical mode with others that actually is ultimately more reasonable.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That we are made in the image of a God who is relationship, right?
Even, even in the heart of the divine, there's no monologue.
It's no monad.
Okay, so that, and we're, so I'm going to invite you right now to come back.
We got to talk a lot more if you want.
Okay, so, so I've been, I'm doing, of course, ultimate reality, God and beyond.
Don't be put off by the title.
I'm trying to explore thinkers who are getting beyond the, the monological substance, subject predicate logic model of God, which I think has become predominant.
And then one of the things that I think is really strangling sort of current theism.
But James Filler's astonishing book, Heidegger Neoplatonism and the History of Being, he makes an argument that Neoplatonists were actually trying to argue that ultimate reality is pure relationality.
Information is purely relational.
Quantum entanglement is purely relational.
Relativity is purely relational.
Intelligibility is purely relational.
You can, you can get things out of relations, but you can't get relations out of things.
That's why we had the collapse of nominalism and all those problems.
It's an astonishingly brilliant book.
And then he makes the argument that Christian Neoplatonism is actually a kind of apogee because Christian Neoplatonism says yes.
And our sacred appreciation, and I'm trying to use that word in all of its meanings, our sacred appreciation of ultimate reality is very well captured in the image.
In an imaginal sense of an image, the image of the Trinity.
Like you said, God is not a monologue.
God is an inherently dialogical.
All, all of the persons are inherently relational in their nature and they're bound together.
And the identity claims of God are relational, logos, love.
And this is, and he's saying, people don't get this.
Although he says, I suppose this is shameless advertising for my friend, Bishop, Bishop Maximus, because Eastern Orthodoxy tries, is very much more awake and alive to these thinkers, the Cappadocian fathers, Dionysus, people like this, Maximus, obviously,
that, right, people don't get this because they're still trying to understand this presence, this pure relationality, this you that isn't bound to a specific thing, but somehow is the you of all youing.
I don't know if that even means anything, but that's how I, that's how I sort of understand it, and that they're trying to grasp that with the subject predicate logic.
And then they're trying to grasp it with substance property ontology.
And therefore they, the only way they misunderstand it is they think, well, it must be a super substance, a super thing that owns and is the author of all things and all properties between them.
And I think, and you may push back against me on this and that's fine, but I think this is an important thing that is happening right now.
I think there's an advent of the sacred going on, both within, I think people are groping towards that anemesis of this understanding that we once had in Christianity, I will put it that way, Neoplatonic Christianity,
and they're finding, not unsurprisingly, that it is deeply resonant with aspects of Zen Buddhism or Taoism, where the same language is being used in powerful ways.
And you very clearly state in the book that you're open to learning from other traditions beyond Christianity.
I understand Christianity is your home and I'm not trying to take you from it.
But I, so I've sort of laid my heart and my thought on the table about, like, and I know you're not doing this, so I'm not attributing to this to you.
I think saying God is love, that ultimate reality is ultimately relational is way, way, way, two more ways, way, way more radical than people realize.
It is a profound challenge to our default way of thinking, of interacting, of determining what's real, of sensing.
Like, it's, sorry, now I fall into a poria.
And I'm wondering if that lands with you.
Yes.
Yes, it does.
Because the word love has been worn out by overuse, right?
Oh, yeah, and trivialization.
Yeah, I, so I talk about sitting in the book quoting Francis Buffard, who forgive me, I'm going to swear for reader distance with sensitive is, but I think it's important.
He calls it the human propensity to fuck things up.
Oh, I think that's excellent.
Brute the brutality of it really helps me.
And when I interviewed him, I said, I need you to do the same thing for love.
And he just take this word, which is everything, and help us hear it again, because we can't hear it.
And it slides past our consciousness and it goes in one ear and out the other.
And to say God is love, reality is love, reality is relational.
All living is meeting.
Everything is relationship.
It's not strong enough.
It's not radical enough.
It's not profound enough to, and this is the key for me to make us change our behavior, to make us change our orientation and our heart posture.
It might make some people go, interesting, interesting ideas, interesting theories.
Oh, isn't that cute?
Lovely, nice.
Honestly, and I'm going to sound more like a like, I'm going to sound more like a Pentecostal preacher than I usually do.
But if it doesn't fundamentally in some way drive you to your knees, drive you into worship of some kind, into a seeking after and encounter with that love, then that's just like head knowledge.
Yeah.
I think that was beautiful.
You're pointing back to Pascal's fire, right?
If it doesn't have that fire, right?
Then the problem is, I mean, and, um, I mean,
I mean, other people have written about this, perhaps better than I, but, um, you know, we've trivialized love to being a feeling of love isn't a feeling.
That's ridiculous.
And then people think, oh, what love is an emotion and love isn't an emotion.
I love my partner profoundly.
And that sometimes makes me happy.
It sometimes makes me sad.
I miss her right now.
Sometimes it makes me angry if somebody is insulting her and I want to, because there is a function of emotion, of the emotion of anger, just to protect those things you genuinely value if they're threatened, right?
And you realize, oh, all of those are expressions of love.
All of those emotions are expressions of love.
So love isn't an emotion.
Love is an existential stance.
It's a, it's a way of being.
It's a way of participating in the identity of something or someone else and allowing them to participate in yours.
It's a religio.
It's a binding that reciprocally opens.
And then if you say, oh, okay, that's good.
And you say, but think maybe reality is a binding that reciprocally opens and maybe that's why our minds evolved to try and focus in on this as a fundamental thing.
Maybe that's the logos of the ontos, the ontology, the ontologos and our psyche logos is actually evolved to be able to track and conform to that.
And that experience, the one where we experience that most is in the experience of love understood in this wise way, not in as a feeling or not as, ooh, not as infatuation, not as desire.
You can like you, you, this is one of the most important tests for the longevity of love.
Do you love someone even when you don't desire them?
That's an important question to ask yourself.
And when you get a clear answer to that is yes, I do.
Then you go, oh, right.
Love isn't right.
Love, love can express itself in desire.
Hopefully so love can express itself in all these, but love is behind them all.
And it's because we have such a shallow notion of love that we find it so hard to believe that we people could say ultimate reality is love.
Well, oh, that's that's a very pleasant metaphor.
No.
Right.
You really open up with that is and then that opens you up to reality in a profound way.
Yeah.
I mean, I think you're right that the sort of conflation of romance with love is non, non erotic loves are as much the really real.
Like deep friendship.
We have devalued it parent child.
Like the though those loves are as much the root to wisdom and growth and fully aliveness as sexual love is.
And we just have devalued them.
But honestly, John, the thing that's making me think of and I'm sort of surprising myself by going here is that in my tradition, the symbol of love is a torture instrument.
Right.
It is that he opened his arms of love upon the cross that the that's another thing that keeps me on my tradition that it resists abstraction.
It resists generalization to the point of no bite through the incarnation and the crucifixion and the resurrection and the no greater love has anyone than this that they would lay down their life for their friends.
And that is what I think is.
Is it the Greek words that you just can no sis self emptying.
Yes.
The love.
Love as opposite of pride.
Love as opposite of withdrawal into ourselves as the toenail turned in ourselves.
But like outward to the point that we might even lay down our lives.
We might even empty ourselves.
And that that has been done for us is is is like gritty, dirty, bloody, painful, not fluffy.
You are not going to draw a Valentine's card about it.
Right.
It's just to do completely different things.
That's a very good point.
That's a very good point.
The cross prevents the Valentine's Hallmark carding of love.
That's a very good argument.
I like that.
I don't know if you're aware of it.
I think it's John Cobb.
The Christian theologian has an anthology.
I haven't read it yet, but I'm looking forward to it called the self emptying God, because
there's this ongoing discussion between Buddhists from the Kyoto school, like Maso Abe.
And there's Jewish theologians and Christian theologians all talking about this, this notion
of the self emptying God and how each one of your traditions says this is something very,
very central that has been lost.
And they find that obviously they don't all agree, because there's no sort of mush religion
that everything will dissolve into or anything ridiculous like that.
But they do all seem to be converging, at least on, we all want to talk about this and
make this more prominent.
Again, this notion, I think of kinosus and the connections between kinosus and theosis,
especially in the Eastern Orthodox, because if you hear theosis divination, right, the
Eastern Orthodox idea,
divination has been coming like God, not as in the lesson in Harry Potter.
Yes, yes, yes, exactly.
But it's all my level of references.
Well, the idea is, yeah, but you become it's not inflationary because the theosis is interwoven
with the most extreme form of kinosus.
Yes, you can be Godlike.
And you know what you have to do?
You have to do the most radical self emptying to participate in God, right?
And I think you're saying...
The first shall be lost.
Yes, yes, yes.
And I do think there's something important about this.
And I mean,
what's coming up for me now is,
Han and his book, Saving Beauty talks about the reduction of beauty.
We've taken the shock out of beauty, right?
And so I'm going to say something that I think an ancient would get, but a modern person would find
repellent.
I think the crucifixion is beautiful.
Not because it's pleasant or pleasing.
Han talks about how we've reduced beauty to the smooth, the easily gratifying, the easily graspable.
But if you read Plato and Platinus or read even Rilke, you know, beauty is an angel that
could kill us, but decides not to.
Like, come on, think of that language, right?
That's again, like, right?
The profound shock of it.
But it's...
But you did that.
You did this thing.
It's a shock that immediately you go, but of course, because if I didn't have that shock, it wouldn't
awaken me to what love really is.
And then that is what I mean by saying this is a kind...
So I'm saying it's not only that we've trivialized love.
We've trivialized beauty and those two things, those trivializations in some sort of...
I have a complicit, right?
Mutually reinforcing fashion that traps us.
And I think the epitome of that is pornography, because pornography is the reduction of love
and the reduction of beauty to the smooth.
And Han has a very good book on the agony of Eros.
You seem to be nodding when I was...
Is that also resonating with you?
I mean, so much of that is resonating with me.
I just can't order my many, many thoughts.
The first one was about beauty as...
Obviously Aquinas talks about goodness, truth and beauty as one way of thinking about God.
And we hear the beauty better like pretty, like nice.
And it...
Kant has a work on aesthetics, which is the only bit of Kant I know, to be clear.
And he...
He's thinking about the sublime and the numinous.
Is that like...
Actually, it's quite scary.
It's the bit...
It's when we encounter something that could kill us and does not.
And the way I think about it is that it sort of makes us feel right-sized.
That part of the agony of being a 21st century of human is that
we are trying to be something we are not.
Like we are trying, like relevance, whatever it was, that there's just so much.
There's so much.
And we're supposed to create ourselves.
We're supposed to decide.
We're supposed to know everything.
We're supposed to be across all these references.
We're supposed to have read everything.
We're supposed to be thin and successful.
And we're supposed to say the word from climate change.
And we're also just like, we are not gods.
We are not...
You've all...
No, Harari is wrong.
We are...
There is...
That is beyond us.
And when we encounter...
I think the real...
The real divine, the real God of love beyond us.
Yes, it's quite scary because we feel our smallness
and we feel our vulnerability and we feel our fragility.
And I think we feel our sin.
We feel our disconnection.
We feel all the ways we have not lived up to the kind of people that our soul longs us to be.
But it is also sort of a relief.
Because then we're rightsized and we know where we are.
The thing about porn is that was the scariest part to write
because I am basically trying to make quite a full-throated defence of the Christian sexual ethic
from a feminist perspective.
And to say, yes, I know...
I know, I know, I know that this church teaching around sin
has been used as a cost to beat people,
gay people and women in particular.
However, it...
At its heart, I think is about a refusal to treat another human being as an object
and a very, very high attunement to power imbalances.
And my argument against porn comes down to the disconnecting formation
of treating another person like an object.
Totally, totally. I think that.
So there's a couple of things that come up for me.
There's all this scientific work going on in awe right now.
I'm involved in it.
We're running an experiment.
Some of the work that's come out of it that seems pretty reliable.
Keltner and Jennifer Steller here at the University of Toronto
is awe does that proper proportion.
Awe is...
And think how it does relate to our word aweful, right?
But awe is...
People reliably report a shrinking of the self.
But one of the interesting things about awe is it's one...
Now, if you push it too far, that becomes horrific
because if the shrinking goes too far, you get horror, right?
But awe is...
It is one of the few experiences where the self shrinks
and people experience it positively.
It's not shame, right?
It's not depression.
It's shrinking, but it's positive.
And you know, this is Murdoch.
Love is the painful recognition that something other than yourself is real.
I propose, this is a hypothesis,
that that unselfing actually makes us realize a possible connection to reality
that we always longed for but didn't know that we were longing for it.
And that's why, although the self shrinks, we get something positive.
Now, for me...
And this is where I'm putting on my Cognitive Scientist hat,
but I'm going to also put on my Plato hat.
The thing about that is, like, you can imagine, right?
You can imagine that there's two sins.
Plato was worried about two things.
Drew Highland's book on finite transcendence,
that Plato was always trying to get us to get that we are always finite,
and that means finitude, fallible, right?
But we are also open to transcendence.
And he says, if we just fall into our finitude, we can fall into despair.
We can fall into horror, right?
We can lose a sense of the proper dignity of a person.
You could just... Right?
Right?
So, we have to also realize that we are responsible to transcendence.
But if we just identify with the transcendent pole,
then we suffer hubris and inflation.
And he says, what you have to do is you have to have a tonus.
You have to get this proper proportioning, proper sizing.
But it's... I'm trying to change it from size to...
When I'm not trying to change it, I'm trying to amplify your sizing
to making it inherently relational.
It's a sizing that puts you in a light relationship,
right position, like the right holding together of right,
your finitude and your transcendence.
And I think one of the problems we have,
and this goes to your polarization chapter,
is we have severed those.
And the left says, we're so finite, and we're so subject to fate,
and we need compassion, and they're right.
But the right says, but when they're both at their best,
because neither one of them is at their best right now.
They're at their worst right now.
But when they're at their best, and the right says,
yes, but we're not just animals.
We're persons called to responsibility.
We have a relationship to the true, the good, and the beautiful.
And then what you need is a dialogical relationship
between them for a healthy society.
And of course, we've abandoned all that.
We've polarized. We've changed that into...
Each side is now at its worst trying to kill the other
and demonizing the other.
I'm trying to bring a lot of what you said into one thing.
So I'm wondering if, because here's the thing,
and I got to be careful here.
So the research that's coming, that we're doing right now
seems to show something.
Sorry, there's a long time, but I'm sort of building an argument.
I love it. Keep going.
Okay.
So I thought, awe is this, right?
Opening up and everything.
So what you should see is if we induce awe experiences
and we have some reliable experimental techniques
using the overview effect and music,
and people can get sort of that awe, right?
Then you should see increased measures of cognitive flexibility
because those indicate that people's minds are opening
and they're exploring possibility.
So we induce awe and we do all these tests
and no measures of cognitive flexibility.
What awe predicts is a confidence
in any insight you might have.
Now, that can be very dangerous, as you can imagine,
but here's the proposal which I've been making
to my fellow researchers.
The point is an awe.
The point is a humble sense of the transcendent.
The point is reverence and reverence is a virtue.
And what the awe does is it gives you some confidence
to start cultivating reverence,
but you don't get the cognitive benefits
from the experience of awe.
You get the cognitive benefits from taking up the encouragement.
I use that word very deeply, right?
To cultivate a proper reverence.
What are you meaning by reverence in that context?
So what I mean by reverence is exactly that tonos,
that creative tension.
Sorry, I'm using a Greek word
because our English word tension is only negative for people now.
We forget Heraclitus, the tension of the bow,
the tension of the liar,
the tension that holds the bridge together.
Muscle.
Yeah, exactly.
And so I think of reverence,
and this is somewhat similar,
but I think also different with,
is it Woodruff's?
Woodward?
The book on reverence is a forgotten virtue.
But I think of reverence as a humble wonder
that we get the profound sense of our finitude.
That's the shrinking.
But we are wondering, not in the sense of curiosity.
Curiosity is trying to get something.
Wonder is calling things into question, including oneself.
We get a humble wondering towards things.
That's what I'm calling reverence.
And that takes time and effort to cultivate
because it's a virtue.
It's not just an experience.
That's what I'm talking about.
Okay, that's making sense to me.
Yes, that does.
So one of the things I reflect on a lot
are these peak experiences,
these ecstatic encounters
that have been really defining in my spiritual life,
but are not sufficient.
Exactly.
It really, it really,
when I talk to,
I'm sorry to bang on about this,
but I've got lots of friends at the moment
who are taking a lot of psychedelics,
and I'm very interested
in what it's doing to our spiritual landscape.
And there are some similarities
between the peak experiences they have
on psychedelics and the peak,
what I would call my experiences of the Holy Spirit.
We don't know because they go beyond language
and we can't actually compare them.
But we at least can see in each other
that something's happened, that it's big,
and it involves our bodies and our emotions,
as well as an idea.
And I was talking to my friend, Jules Evans,
about this recently as a psychedelic journalist.
Yeah, I know Jules.
Yeah, yeah.
And I was saying, I think,
I mean, within Christianity to be clear,
the fact that I'm a charismatic Christian
makes me quite a weirdo.
There are lots of us,
but it is not something that all Christians
have speaking tongues or have these
exotic encounters.
But the bit of, I would say my flesh
or the bit of me that's foolish
just wants it to be about those
because those are some amazing, right?
Super pleasurable.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Really connecting, really nourishing.
But they are,
and I think it was,
who has the pyramid of needs?
Maslow.
Maslow.
Talks about them as-
Actually, by the way,
that's a misattribution.
Maslow doesn't have that pyramid.
That was put in all the psychology textbooks
and attributed to Maslow.
Maslow is much closer to Aristotle
than to that pyramid.
Interesting.
By the way, beyond self-realization,
Maslow had a final thing
that doesn't show up on most pyramids.
He had self-transcendence.
Yeah.
So that's the,
this is making me feel better now
because that's the bit I quote.
Yeah.
So he's talking about the relationship
between religion and these exotic experiences.
And Maslow's fundamental understanding
is that religion is these moments of encounter
and then around it accrue all these dogmas
and these rules and these regulations
that stop looking like real religion,
which these ecstatic experiences.
And I'm like, no, Maslow.
The peak experience is,
I would say my experience with the Holy Spirit,
my moments of encounter with God
should send me back
into the rigorous spiritual path
of trying to grow in faith, hope and love
and love my neighbor.
And if they are just some solipsistic
self-actualization that,
in my tradition, this is sort of worse than useless
because spiritual gifts are for other people.
They are doggedly communal.
We receive these things to make us better
at loving each other.
And so I sort of joke with Jules
about charismatic Christianity is my set and setting.
Like, I need a book to come,
to check it against.
I need a community who are wise
and know me and will be like, no Liz,
that thing that happened to you
in that ecstatic experience
does not sound like it is going to lead you
towards love or fully aliveness.
It sounds like foolishness.
Also, you're getting a bit self-obsessed.
And I need, frankly, to be repeatedly told
that I'm mainly supposed to be feeding the pool,
like not getting out of my head
on divine love much as I need that
and want it and temperamentally,
it's where I would spend all my time.
I think that's right.
I'm teaching a course right now
on the nature and function of the self.
And it's just wrapped up.
And I had a student in there
and the work I was teaching
and the work the student was coming together,
converging on this idea
that these peak experiences,
they are, as you said, they're not sufficient.
They're necessary.
What they do is they,
and this is the term that's now emerging,
they create epistemic vulnerability.
They make you vulnerable to new ways of knowing,
new possibilities of seeing and being.
But if you don't have the setting
and I would add the sapiential framework
and ecology of practices
oriented towards the cultivation of wisdom and virtue,
that epistemic vulnerability can go,
it has the potential to go in multiple directions.
You get the conspirituality, right?
It makes you hugely vulnerable to abuse,
gurus, cults, blah, blah, blah.
That's right.
And so like you, I reject that idea
and Huxley has it to some degree,
that if we could just peel away
all of this, all of these doctrines and structures.
Now I'm very, I have issues around reducing
religio to credo.
We can talk about that when we talk next.
But I do agree with you that you need,
you need a practice and principles
and philosophical in the wisdom,
cultivating sense framework
that's housed, sorry, wrong word,
homed in a community for these peak experiences
to turn into transformative experiences
that are transforming people towards wisdom and virtue.
I think the evidence is mounting for that, by the way.
Yeah.
Great.
This is a good place to end, I think.
This has been truly full of wonder, wonderful in that sense.
I've really enjoyed this
and I hope that you found that you had enough,
that I wasn't talking too much,
that you have found enough time to speak.
I didn't want this to be an interview.
I wanted this to be the logos.
This is much more fun, a conversation.
Yeah, and yes, exactly.
And sparking insight and interest in each other,
asking interested questions rather than interesting questions.
That's a distinction that my friend,
Mr. Firmaster-Pietro, has brought into the dialogical practice.
But I definitely want you to come back
and I hope we can continue and doing,
diving a little bit more.
Maybe we can do a little bit more about the vices
and the virtues and a little bit more, again,
about what we were talking about.
And what is the relationship between religio and credo?
And how do we hold that relationship in the context
of a lot of the things we seem to be resonating
and converging on?
That's what I propose for our next discussion.
Sounds brilliant.
So, Elizabeth, I always give my guests the last word.
You can be cumulative, summative, provocative, elusive,
whatever you want to say.
I'm so tempted to go nitwit, blubber.
What is my last word?
I think holding onto the fact that love is the really real.
If you had to bore wisdom down to that,
you wouldn't go far wrong.
Yeah.
Thank you so much.
I look forward to our next discussion.
Thank you so much for having me.
