Welcome, everybody, to another Voices with Reveke.
I'm very excited about this.
We're back again with Teri Dentry and her ongoing work
and this ongoing video series.
Many of you have been reaching out
about wanting to participate in this work
in one way or another.
And I wanted to, I'll do this again,
but I wanted to thank many of you for your interest in that.
We also have Aspezia Gera George with us,
and she already knows Teri.
I've just, before we turn on the camera,
I've been getting to know her, she's very charming.
And I look forward to us opening this up,
getting back into these deep issues around chronic pain,
the medic crisis, the meeting crisis,
and issues around, you know,
interprofessional practice,
dialogical reasoning.
Many of these topics,
we're weaving them all together in powerful ways.
And Aspezia is going to give us
more of a clinical therapeutic dimension,
but I mentioned she'll also want to talk about
some of these far-reaching dimensions.
So welcome, both ladies.
And I'll turn things over to Teri.
Thank you, John.
That was a great introduction.
And I also welcome Aspezia.
I've got to know Aspezia over the last 12 months.
Again, someone I've met through VoiceCraft.
So a wonderful place to actually meet like-minded people.
And yeah, through our discussions, our earlier discussions,
we were talking about, of course,
my research work in chronic pain.
And Aspezia has a clinical background
and works as a clinical psychologist.
And we've come to understand
that we have some very similar feelings and thoughts
when we do think about chronic pain,
and especially the term socialization of pain,
which is something that John and I have been talking about
to quite some length.
And I'm really excited to talk to Aspezia about that today
and actually how potentially rationality
fits into the way that we actually think
about that socialization of pain.
So I'm going to let Aspezia introduce herself and her work.
Thank you, Teri.
It's a real pleasure to be here with you both.
And John, I did just want to say that
you've formed a very important part of my life.
It's really wonderful to finally meet you.
I think it must have been like six years ago with my baby son.
He had trouble sleeping.
And I used to listen to your lectures
when I was pacing back and forth all night exhausted.
And so to meet you is really special.
So I just wanted to start with that
and to thank you for that.
Thank you.
So yes, I'm a clinical psychologist.
I'm a therapist.
I see people in private practice.
I use a modality called ISTDP.
So it's a psychoanalytically informed modality.
It's very emotion focused.
It's experiential.
So it's all about creating experience in the room with patients.
And it wasn't designed for chronic pain.
It was designed really for depression, anxiety,
personality disorders, that sort of thing.
But it can be used for chronic pain.
So it also relieves chronic pain and somatization
and an array of things.
And we can talk about why.
So I'm, yeah, I'm interested in talking about that in some depth.
I'm interested more broadly in the role of emotions.
I think there's a forgotten landscape.
I think there's an over focus on rationality, cognitions.
And we forget, we forget the emotional landscape
and how to take that into account.
And I think that happens from very early on in life
for reasons we can talk about, but also socially.
I just think it's reinforced socially in the culture.
I don't think there's a strong enough understanding
of what emotions are, how they can be helpful,
how they can be enlivening.
Particular emotions are prioritized over others.
So we can talk about that in a lot of depth.
And also the socialization of pain I'm very interested in.
The idea that, well, what I see all the time
that chronic pain, as well as depression, as well as anxiety,
all of these sufferings, these undue sufferings
actually play a role in relationship.
And this role that they play in relationship reinforces
the symptoms themselves.
And there's a few different ways that I can talk about that.
And probably in some ways that it may be different
to what you've already considered in your conversations.
I think because the model is psychoanalytically informed,
there's a lot of focus on the unconscious
and the role of suppression and repression
and trying to bring the unconscious up into consciousness
as a way to relieve the suffering,
which I think is a really important part of the mix
for a subset of people.
I think more CBT and sort of very general emotional work is enough.
But for many, many people,
there is a lot of unconscious resistance
against experiencing their emotions
and so that they're not aware of.
And so taking time to help them understand
what those defenses against emotional experience are is vital.
And without that, what can often happen
is that symptoms can just move around.
So someone gets some relief to their pain, for example,
but it may be that it manifests somewhere else later on in life
or it now manifests as anxiety in a different context
or depression or sexual problems or all sorts of things.
So so I'm interested, I guess, broadly in emotions,
getting more of a platform,
that is because of the work they do with ISTDP,
which stands for intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy,
the type of therapy developed by Dr. Davenle in the 60s, I believe.
And it's a very, yeah, we can get into the details of it.
But essentially, it looks at
it would look at chronic pain as being a defense
against emotional experience.
And so it's another way that we can avoid
particularly painful emotional experience
that our psyche, for whatever reason,
has decided is too dangerous or threatening to bring into relationship.
So for us to even be aware of internally
and then be to now, how is that going to impact the relationship?
Will this person reject me, punish me, whatever it is for having this feeling?
So all these defensive structures and mechanisms get created.
And ISTDP is really about getting very clear
on what the defensive mechanisms are that are in operation,
bringing that into sort of stark relief for the patient,
highlighting the internal emotional conflict that's going on,
the intracyclic crisis and then helping to push through the resistance
so that some of these feelings can come up and finally be experienced.
And it gets experienced in the room together.
And one more piece I will say is that I have found
that the I think the most confronting part in the resistance
that is greatest is the resistance against the impulse
or the action impulse, the action tendency that comes with an emotional experience.
So it's not just the sensation and the feeling itself in the body
that is resisted against.
In finally letting oneself experience that fully inside,
there is an impulse that comes with it, which is the whole point of an emotion.
And seeing that impulse, recognising that impulse inside ourselves
can be very confronting.
You know, if it's an aggressive impulse to reach out and hurt someone,
that's a very confronting thing to look at.
So there's a lot of resistance around seeing that part of it,
but it's in the seeing that part of it, not the enacting,
but just the noticing inside
that can finally clear up the need for all these defences.
Right. So it just clears up anxiety, clears up depressive symptomology.
It can clear up chronic pain and opens a person up to
also opens a person up to be able to experience their emotions more clearly
and more fully. And that gives them greater potential in their action.
That's what I've found. It gives them more options now.
They have more information to draw from, to integrate with obviously cognitive,
you know, rationale, bringing all that online with the emotions,
working together as opposed to just looking at one part of it
and pushing the emotions down.
And I've said a lot all at once, but that's that's where I'm broadly
interested in how I think it might be relevant.
And I was saying to Terry, too, before this started that
I'm also a researcher and actually I was a researcher before I was a clinician.
So my mind also naturally goes to
how can we like what are the practical implications here?
What is it that we can take from this very complicated model?
You know, that we're not going to be rolling out to everybody.
What can we take from this?
What are the key ingredients that might be useful to OTs, physios, GPs,
you know, nurses, anyone that's coming into contact with someone with chronic pain?
What can they take from it?
So my mind is sort of in all those places at once.
And just more more sort of broadly philosophically as well,
because I've been I've been spending a lot of time at Boyscraft
and those those generative
conversations with that with that core group there.
It's just it's just been wonderful when it's been.
It's really opened me up to all of this in a new way as well.
So those are all my different little lenses that I'm bringing to this.
That was wonderful. Thank you.
So you said it, you said about 20 very interesting things.
So I'm afraid no matter which one I'll pick,
it'll sound like I'm being negligent, but hopefully you'll be you'll be understanding.
So I mean, I.
I frequently say that for ECOGs, I should have two more E's added.
Not only is emotion embodied, embedded, enacted and extended.
It's also emotional and exacted.
And so I and I think there's
I've I've been making an argument for quite a long time
about that that at the core of cognition is something called relevance
realization, but relevance realization is not cold calculation.
It involves caring and involves affect.
It involves arousal, etc.
So I think we're playing in the same ballpark, at least.
So.
In what way.
Does everything you've said connect up with some of the stuff
that Terry has been doing about the degree to which
this is inculturated and socialized.
I would, I, for example, you said you familiar
at least with some of my work, you know, I think being stuck in a Cartesian framework
has particularly exasperated and getting a very getting a very truncated
notion of our rationality means where it goes from a very platonic notion
down to this very logical notion and and their eros is drained out of it.
Deliberately so, by the way, whereas Plato was a great emphasis
on the relationality and the eros.
So in what way does the sort of is the cultural cognitive grammar,
the framework we're in.
Does that I imagine that gets internalized, that that's an impact
or that's an amplifier of the kinds of stuff you're talking about.
Is that is that correct?
How does that land?
What like what comes up when I say that?
Yeah, a lot comes up.
And the answer is yes, that plays a role.
And I see I see it play a role in just so many ways.
First of all, I think I don't think there is there is a grammar for emotions
out there.
Like, I don't think people understand what we mean.
At least as psychologists, when we say an emotion, people automatically go to action.
So if I say to you what what is anger like for you, they go to, oh, it's, you know,
someone lashing out or saying mean things or well, that's an action.
And so the idea that there's even any sensation in the body is a beginning point is often
absent from people's minds.
There's there's an idea, you know, this idea out there that we should be controlling our
emotions, which again, really, I think people are talking about actions, but you can't you
can't control the fact that these are biological hardwired signals that occur within us.
We don't have choice over.
Is absent seems to be absent from the mix.
The idea that we that we generate our emotions, we can sort of curate and create this in a
landscape of of joy and only being positive.
All of that being reinforced by things like social media, but also just in family units.
Like, I mean, it starts young.
It's it's in the family unit.
It's oftentimes in the schooling system.
It's oftentimes in the schooling system.
It's often what happens when you go to see a doctor.
It's it's just in culture at large.
And I think a lot of it is about that the prioritizing feeling good and looking like you're
doing well and overriding overriding even just to divide between sort of positive and negative,
you know, that some feelings are good and some are bad.
And they're all vital signals inside us that can tell us something very important.
They have a wisdom to them and that we don't take them seriously in that manner is a real problem.
When it comes to pain specifically, it's quite often the case that people who I see
who have chronic pain issues, once you can get very clear with them how interesting it is
that they also seem to have an absence of emotional experience,
but they have a lot of physical pain.
That can be quite confronting in and of itself.
Is that is that a general trend?
I'm going to speak in a lot of generalities because there's always, you know, I don't want to act
as though there aren't distinctions here.
But yes, in a general sense, what happens is I guess from from an ISTP perspective,
in some of these cases, you have to do I think one thing to say is you have to meet the individual
in front of you.
Of course, of course.
It's very different.
But in general terms.
Just take it that will give you charity around that.
Okay.
I hope others will as well.
Yeah.
Well, they should.
They should.
Okay.
All right.
I appreciate that.
So in a general sense, yes.
I mean, if we're thinking about from an ISTP perspective, if we're thinking about chronic pain here,
operating as a defensive structure to keep the person from noticing that they're having a particular emotion,
and we can talk about why, then they just notice the pain.
The pain operates to keep them from noticing the emotion.
So rather than notice the rage that I might feel towards my partner, right, for, I don't know,
for deciding to leave their job and now putting me in a greater financial sort of burden,
rather than notice that, all of a sudden I've developed some pain in my back, you know,
and now so it's rather than, rather than notice the guilt that I might experience for doing
something that ruptures my relationship with my child.
I just noticed this sort of crushing pain in my, in my arms, right?
Or I notice, you know, pain in my head or in my neck.
So they notice the pain is replacement as a like a distraction from noticing the emotion that precedes it.
So when you can, when you can draw it out and say, wow, you know, as we talk about this and look at the sort of the timeline of this,
it seems like there were really, there were really difficult things happening in your life, you know,
your mother passed away, you lost your job, like all these things.
And then you develop this pain, but I hear nothing about how you felt about any of those things.
I see.
How did you feel?
And to even just notice that they, that's almost the first time they've considered that question.
And they say, oh, it didn't really bother me that much.
You know, my mother had a great life.
It was her time to go, you know, it's fine.
I get it.
I didn't really feel a lot.
Or, you know, they give you some watery feeling or they're making it into a positive, positive feeling.
You notice that you notice that it lacks the richness of an entire emotional landscape that one might imagine someone would experience if they were going through difficulty.
So the pain, so it's like, it's like the same things we would say about anxiety and depression.
It's sitting as a, as a cover, as a cover to keep this stuff squashed down so that the person themselves doesn't have contact with it,
but also so even if they start to have contact with it, so that would never come out into the relationship.
So that you would never let your partner know that you're very angry at them when they keep interrupting you, you know,
and you've pointed it out to them several times and they continue to do it.
That you feel a great anger inside when they do that, that you believe that that would never bring anything of value to the relationship.
But what happens with these emotions is that we, they have to go somewhere.
They have to do something.
They have their own life.
We can't just cut them off and throw them away.
So they go underground and they fester and they come out in all sorts of other unconscious ways.
And so some ways that we see that in, in ISTDP, especially when it comes to pain,
is that the pain itself can be a rerouting of a rage and impulse to hurt someone else instead they experience it on themselves.
So there's often, very often a link.
Once we do all this work, there's very often a link between the precise location and nature of the pain they're experiencing
and the initial impulse that came with the rage in the first place when they were younger, probably against an attachment figure.
It's the same, it's the same expression, but they're expressed, it's being expressed in their body rather than to be inflicted on the other.
It's a way they protect the other from an impulse to hurt the other.
No.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, it does.
And there's a couple.
Oh, sorry.
Am I interrupting you?
So I just want to make sure.
So part of what I'm hearing, there's three things I'm hearing.
And you can respond to all or none of them or whatever order.
I'm hearing like that there's both sort of a vertical dimension.
You know, emotions are a signal about what's going on, but there's also this horizontal dimension of if I'm connected or not to external reality.
Right.
And either I'm trying to not admit something about the world or I'm trying to hold myself back from interacting with the world in a certain way.
And this goes with sort of the idea of, which I think has got merit to it, that emotions are sort of this nexus between these two axes of connection, embodied connection and embedded connection.
This is why I think the E of emotion should be added to embodied and embedded.
So first of all, what you think about that.
And then there was, I like this, this idea.
I don't, I don't, I don't want to, I don't know quite what the word semiotic or symbolic that where it is, isn't just happenstance.
There's some kind of meaning to it that and confronting the meaning is part of the issue as well.
And then the third is a question.
So those are my two observations.
And please let me know if I'm tracking you well.
And then the other one is, is it given sort of how we got into this with my original question.
When you're doing therapy, is there an element of cultural critique that has to come up that you have to challenge people in terms of these cultural frameworks and give them the tools.
Because like you said, they're going out and you're saying something for an hour in therapy and then they're going out with four hours on social media.
And do you see what I'm saying?
It sounds like it's in some ways the games rigged against you.
And how do you deal with that?
And what do you do?
Do you have to do things, cultural critique?
Do you have to empower them to challenge those cultural imperatives?
So two observations and a question.
I hope that wasn't too much.
Oh, amazing.
I'm going to start with the last one.
Because what happens, John, is that if if when this is when this is done and it goes well from my point of view, it's all it's all about the individual and I in the room.
Right.
And it's it's less so about maybe like a CBT style.
It's psycho education.
Let's talk about the theory.
It's all about trying to give the experience in the room to this person of what we're talking about.
Right.
To show them here and now together.
Right.
If we pay attention right now to your pain, what happens that using the relationship and using the here and now to give to help them see the gaps.
And to see that actually something might be off here and the way I've been approaching this and understanding this everywhere else.
But we keep it very much about the experience in the room.
And I guess it's a corrective emotional experience that is taking place.
And you're right.
It is just one hour and they go back out into the world.
But it is amazing how making it experiential in the room trans starts to translate out into the world anyway.
Without me needing to say now you need to take this out and do that.
Because otherwise the problem is otherwise you get into a game of talking and intellectualizing and an over rational and now you get into that same arena again that is part of the problem for many of these people.
Part of their defensive structure is they like to think and talk about things and go up here a lot and make lots of connections in their brain without actually consulting their body first without going in and noticing what is that what is the truth of the emotion here.
Even if I don't want to see it even if it's going to be disruptive to a relationship I'm in.
And the part that you said at the end of your question about empowering them what generally happens is once we get on the other side of that in the room they are empowered themselves.
I don't have to do anything.
It opens up.
There's this thing called the unconscious therapeutic alliance and it sort of takes over in this person.
The healthy part just sort of takes over and they are opened up and they know what to do now.
They are empowered.
I don't give them any advice.
I don't say to them oh you should probably leave your wife or not leave your wife or it's clear to them on the other side of it.
They don't need me for that.
They don't need another person in their life listing out the pros and cons of what you could do in the situation.
Their problem is a blockage and access to vital signals that might help them to to see more clearly what is going on for them and in relationship and through seeing more clearly and having access to these more vital signals.
They can integrate that into their thinking faculties which most of them have no problem with.
The people I see John are highly intellectual people.
They don't need more help from me about how to think.
They oftentimes put all those pieces together themselves on the other side of it and that is beautiful to see because that actually is part of the healing.
But they can say wow I can just figure that I figured this out now and I have I have agency in the world.
I don't need my therapist to tell me what I should or shouldn't do in this relationship or how I how I should feel about social media.
It's just clear to me now that yeah.
Thank you for watching.
This YouTube and podcast series is by the Verveke Foundation.
Which in addition to supporting my work also offers courses practices workshops and other projects dedicated to responding to the meeting crisis.
If you would like to support this work please consider joining our Patreon.
You can find the link in the show notes.
Yeah one pin in it quickly.
So that last move really was helpful to me just before you address the other two that notion of sort of recovery or restoration of agency.
That seems to be like an important thing.
So that's what I was asking for.
I wasn't necessarily like.
I was like but something has changed such that they can go out and confront a world that is in some ways driven them into your into your office in the first place.
And it sounds like there's a restoration of agency in some and this is a theme that Terry and I have been really trying to explore what that what that is and how that how that how that sort of comes online.
I just wanted to put a pin in that because for me that that really helped me connect your answer to my question.
But you wanted to respond to the other two points about emotion as the nexus and the symbolic aspect.
Yes.
But I'm tempted just to respond to the point you just made now as well.
Do what you wish.
Do what you wish.
I will.
It links really nicely to me with me to a conversation that I had with with Daniel Garner of OG Rose recently.
We were talking about something similar to do with emotions and this distinction about about agency that you're talking about.
So what it seems like to me happens is that in highlighting because really what we're doing in ISTP is we're highlighting the conflictual nature of the internal emotional landscape.
It's about the fact that there are complex mixed feelings in there towards people who we both love and at times might feel intense rage and want to rip their head off.
Right.
How does one right.
How does one have that experience inside without thinking there's something wrong with them or you know self attacking or trying yet.
So what this work does is it really highlights on the other side of it highlights for a person that they have complex mixed feelings inside themselves that they have.
They can have two parts sort of you know together at once and then they get then they can choose how to act.
They don't have to act from the rage part you know.
And so the agency comes and this is sort of more wording that came from from Daniel.
But the agency I think comes from noticing.
Oh there is something inside that is complicated.
Now I get to choose how I act.
So that is the distinguishing point as opposed to trying to edit the internal landscape to precisely match how they're acting.
If that makes sense.
It doesn't.
That there is something inside that I can wrestle with and which to make a choice from that allows me to feel I have an ability to make choice as opposed to the other way around.
And I think the problem with pain is that pain is read as oh this is just a thing in my body.
This isn't an emotional experience.
Because there's nothing yet.
Yeah.
But that's the pivot point I'm trying to get at.
Because like one of the one of the one of the things.
Well I from my side I feel like I'm wrestling with.
I mean theoretically is you know the association of emotion with passion where passion means exactly the loss of agency and being overtaken and pain also.
Yeah.
Right.
We suffer pain.
Right.
And I'm just sort of seeing like is there a connection there that right.
There's there like it's like you have when people when people move out of you know the passivity of pain and they get away and they see that emotions can actually right afford their agency.
And see that's what I'm sort of hearing is sorry.
This is just right.
Right.
Does that make does that make sense.
Because like one of the things I bump up against when I try to teach students about.
You know the cognitive importance of emotion is that notion that of no no but emotions are passions.
They we undergo them and they are losses of agency and they overwhelm us and an emotion is a passion.
It's the opposite of an action.
And it sounds to me like what there's a there is this platonic point right where people oh they realize no no no emotion affords agency.
It's not robbing me of choice and agency.
Am I hearing that well.
Yes.
Yes you are hearing that very well.
Yes.
Yes.
And certainly there are cases where certainly there are cases where the learning around emotion has been one where.
Yeah the impulse the impulse becomes scary because it may overwhelm action and all these sorts of things.
There is that side of this as well.
But but often I think that the move here is that that this damage if we call it that happens so early in life.
It's it's an attachment relationship rupture of some kind which leads to which leads to all these defensive structures coming online which then leads to a lifetime of just having this distance from our emotions.
So the way that we are understanding what an emotional emotional experience might or might not be like is completely removed from the truth of what it could be like because we've already got the defensive structures in place.
And.
And so.
So in terms OK so in terms of pain.
One way of thinking about chronic pain here that relates to this point is that.
Pain the pain that if the pain is being driven if the pain is being driven by an inability for a person to consciously experience the emotion of guilt.
Let's say because a lot of this is just about anger which gets a lot of air time and kind of the space where I am.
But it's about the guilt the child then has about noticing the anger.
That's actually the more the more difficult emotion for a child to bear and for anyone to bear.
It's very difficult emotion very painful painful.
And so rather than learning to experience so rather than having that they experience pain which defends them from the emotional experience of guilt but it also helps to serve the guilt.
It's it's a way of saying I'm a bad person.
I should suffer.
It's actually this is what I mean by the wisdom of emotions once you can get clear with a person that an emotion is not there for no reason.
What's its story.
What's it trying to do.
What's its associated impulse for guilt the impulse is to reach out and repair.
Right.
I want to reach out.
I want and guilt is about a specific action.
It's not the shame.
Right.
Which usually operates as self attack.
It's just another way of turning anger in on oneself.
It's you know it's to reach out and repair.
It's there for a very important biological reason.
It's there to facilitate relationship not to destroy it.
But instead.
Yeah.
So instead for various reasons because people have never had an experience of being able to tolerate internally guilt, anger, grief, emotional pain because it happens so early in life and because it's in the context of an attachment relationship that they are so biologically driven to just hold on to it all costs.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
As evolutionary provenance.
I mean, you don't have an attachment figure.
You're dead.
You're dead.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
So it makes sense at that time.
But what happens is this model then carries forward for the rest of our lives where it no longer makes sense.
It's outdated.
But we're not even aware of the model.
We're not even aware of the frame.
It's all unconscious.
So does this does your does your modality talk to attachment theory like or does it talk to EFT things like that as well?
Yeah, it's it's grounded in attachment theory.
So again, I mean, if it becomes relevant, you might explicitly speak to the patient about it, but it's all experiential.
But yes.
So what happens?
So what happens broadly speaking in ISTDP is through first of all, lots of groundwork.
Starting to notice emotions inside the patient starts to notice emotions inside themselves and we can get clear about what those are.
And if we don't pay attention to the pain and we look underneath, what are you feeling?
And so when they're looking underneath the pain, they get clearer on the emotions.
And then we facilitate them having in a full internal emotional experience, which means that they have a full set of sensations in their body, which are quite reliably consistent.
So for example, anger and rage is usually a heat that sort of starts and the belly radiates upwards.
It can go out the hands, the arms.
People feel it all of a sudden once all these resistances are out of the way, they can feel it and experience it in their body.
And then with that, and what would it want to do?
So we're trying to get to the impulse.
What does it want to do?
What does it want you to do this feeling?
And so it's this imaginal walking through of the impulse.
They can get to a point where they can describe in detail what the anger would want to do to their partner who, I don't know, didn't put away the washing yesterday or whatever it was.
And some of this is getting out of the way of rationality because what happens is they step in then to cut it off and say, but that makes no sense.
I shouldn't have raged towards someone for not putting away washing.
I can't have that feeling.
So we try and put all that to one side and say, maybe the emotion will show us why it's here and why it's so intense.
So they had the full experience.
They talk through the impulse.
Sometimes the impulse is to the point where the person is dead quite often.
And then through then seeing that, then they can often experience the guilt that's trapped underneath that to see this, you know, imaginal sort of dead figure.
All the feelings come up, the waves of grief.
You know, this is done over a standard period of time for some people.
For some people, you can do it sort of in one big go.
They have all of this.
And then often what happens, John, is that through this, they actually see in that, in that imaginal portrait, they see all of a sudden, oh, it's not my husband.
It's my mother.
It's my father.
Like they see the transfer of the like they see the other person who it relates to.
And then they have a memory come to them spontaneously, right?
And this is some event in their childhood that they have forgotten about or they sort of remember, but haven't really remembered.
And now it just comes to them vividly.
So I'll give you an example.
So, you know, a guy that comes in and say he's presenting complainers that he has crushing pain in his wrists.
And, you know, he sort of had issues with pain all his life and he's had this a bit all his life, but it's become really bad recently.
And he doesn't know why doctors can't help them.
It's so bad that he's he's had a child recently.
He's had a daughter and he can't even hold her.
Right.
And so, you know, through this work, we might come to find that the crushing pain in his wrists is a cover for what has happened as he picks as he becomes a father and starts to pick up his infant daughter.
She starts to reach out and touch his face, right?
And everyone says, oh, how lovely.
This is so wonderful.
Look, you know, and at the same time as crushing pain has come online and he can't pick her up anymore.
So what we what we come to find through this extended sort of form of therapy and doing this imaginal walking through of the emotions is that actually when he was younger, his mother would get in his face and hold him by the chest, right?
And scream at him, right?
Like the baby crying, scream at him and be dysregulated in front of him.
And he was terrified, terribly couldn't move.
And this is his mother.
But when we draw down into it, he had an intense rage towards his mother at that moment, which wanted to reach out, grab her wrists and crush them, crush them so that they would let go.
Right.
But he never experienced that.
He could never tell me that before we met and went through therapy.
And so he comes to realize that, oh, this crushing pain that I feel in my wrists has been activated by my baby daughter reaching out and touching my face, which a part of me has intense rage about.
But I would never notice that because it's my baby daughter and I love her more than anything and I'm supposed to protect her.
So he protects her by feeling crushing pain in his wrists, which is both a rerouting of the impulse, but also works.
This is a relational thing.
Also works to make him unable to pick her up.
So now, even if the impulse ever got out, it can't get out because I'm impotent and I don't even pick her up.
So now he protects her in a second way with a second layer by now he's in a situation where he will never be in the situation where she'll be holding his cheeks.
But he knows none of this consciously at the start.
So there's this whole sort of understanding about how this is working in relationship that is really fundamental here.
And I'm aware that I've probably gone wildly off track to your original question.
No, no, that was very helpful.
I mean, we can leave the original question aside if we need to.
I thought what you did was actually more to the point.
I do want to give Terri a chance to get involved now.
She's always very gracious and she lets me sort of do this for a bit and open things up and make connections, which I appreciate because often she's introducing me to people.
But I think it's I think it's a good time now to turn things back to Terri.
Thanks, John. Thanks for seeing.
Now, I just really enjoy especially this time enjoying the conversation.
I can certainly see so much of it in the things that we've talked about before and, you know, especially in relation to our thinking of this socialization of pain and how our narrative bias is driving a lot of this.
So, you know, the narrative bias coming from the early childhood experiences and that providing the bias to what we are thinking and giving us a filter of how we are then relating to these things as we go forward in life.
One of the things I wanted to ask you as the chair is about when you are in these moments with someone in therapy, I know you've spoken about being in the flow state with them before.
And I'm really interested about how you enter into the flow state because to me it sounds like you're cultivating an environment, an emotional environment where you're allowing insight to come forward.
And that's again goes to John's point where you're saying like what happens after you leave the session.
Well, now they've got some wisdom that they've gone away with and they carry that with them going forward.
So what it appears to me is that you're cultivating this ability to have emotional insight in the moment and you are creating that experience between you.
So it must be a very special feeling to be in from both sides as the therapist and as the patient.
But what does that bring up for you?
Yeah, there's a, I think this is the word I've used with you before Terry, there's a sort of an embeddedness that that's what it feels like to me when you when I'm really with a patient.
And what facilitates that I think is just really focusing in on the relationship, the one on one relationship.
And obviously, you know, even for the therapist, that can be very confronting too.
So, you know, there's being aware of all your own stuff as well.
So the way I think about it is there's sort of lots of theory and lots of thinking outside of session and then you come to session and I try to just let all that fall away, which is in itself anxiety provoking,
and feel sometimes like I have no idea what I'm doing or where we're going.
But it's just keeping the relationship front and center and the question in my mind really that guides that is how close can I get to this person how close will they let me get to them and how closely can I connect to them.
How vulnerable can we can we be here emotionally.
So the work of that really the groundwork of that is which can take a very long time is trying to to bring down the defensive structures.
So, so getting clear on what are the defenses that are getting in the way of us emotionally connecting, pointing those out.
And then there is often a real battle inside the patient about what they're going to do about that because they've got two parts in operation at once.
So once the part of them, and this is I think fundamental with ISDDP, the idea that there is always a healthy part, we call it that there is always like an unconscious part inside a person that is striving for this emotional liberation.
And this opening up right that is a fundamental tenant of it.
So we so some of this is about trusting that part to help guide us as the clinician.
But that is the part we're trying to get in contact with and trying to try and we are using sort of metaphor and other forms of language to speak to that part as well.
So once once that part rises up against the part that says no way we never we never let someone get that close to us, especially not another woman.
You know, like last time I did that it was disastrous women never get that close to me.
This part is going to try very once this part can finally break free.
That is when the defenses go down and that is when the person has more ready access to their emotions and they just become spontaneous with it.
There's no more resistance. That is when this flow state I would say is occurring.
It's when you can see it, you get the sense in their eyes almost.
And so but it calls for me to also connect in the same way.
So I need to get to my emotional landscape and that can be fronting too.
But everything else falls away.
Like there are I mean, it's not just me.
I mean other therapists who have been using this model far longer than me.
You know, talk about the ways in which even their perception changes.
They, you know, the way that they see color might change.
They might, you know, there's a there's a change to to the state of mind.
There's just a change in in the moment.
It feels very different and you're just with the person.
And when I when I am like that, which is not, you know, not all the time, probably very infrequent to be honest, but at its best things come to me as well.
Like I find myself sort of, you know, saying things and they just somehow are the right thing to say that it's helping to bring up whatever needs to come up.
So there is a letting go and a trusting of an unconscious component here, which is part of the model.
And that relates directly, though, to the way that the emotion is understood as actually being kind of this.
It walks between the unconscious and conscious, I guess answers your question.
No, no, it's really interesting. So as you know, in the work that I did with the practice, two different practitioners were together.
Many of the practitioners talked about it being transformational for them to actually be part of that environment.
And I think you've spoken a lot to that, even though you're the practitioner on your own in that session, which is probably taking on all the burden, because I know that you're a very holistic practitioner and you're looking at the whole senses of the person in that room at that time.
Can you just a little bit more about the language? You mentioned metaphor and thing that you bring to the table.
But one of the things we've been talking about with John is about how the practitioners also need to have a common language that they can use that we can get to this point with people.
So we can help them to understand what's going on.
Part of the problem is that we don't have a common language between practitioners and people who need the help.
So how are you working with that? I know you sort of said and alluded to the types of people that are coming to you.
I'm assuming they're all coming to you a free choice as well. So that's a thing.
But yeah, obviously you've probably done quite a lot of work on this in the past to actually decide what kind of language you'll use and how that works for you.
That's a really, really important point. I mean, I think even the word unconscious is really off-putting for many people.
So, you know, I think using something like hidden or trapped or can be useful.
So just talking about the idea that, you know, it's quite common when it comes to depression or anxiety or chronic pain of the nature that you're describing,
that it is a signal. It's a signal that our brain is giving us to protect us from something else that's happening under the surface.
And, you know, the idea that, you know, under the surface there may be hidden elements or sort of trapped elements under there.
And usually these are emotional in nature.
So that would be the way that I probably talk about it.
And if we can get to that sort of the engine, if that's the thing that's driving the need for these other symptoms to be here,
because they're firing to try and keep us distant from what's happening under the surface,
then if we can maybe bring this up and out and look at it, you know, you and I together over time very carefully at a rate that you're comfortable with,
you can just see what's there and see if we can put all our assumptions aside and try and make, you know, have a look at what it shows us.
That might help your brain to see that it doesn't need to be doing all this on the top anymore and this actually can fall away.
So the anxiety and the depressive symptoms and the chronic pain that you're experiencing may no longer be needed because you've brought this scary thing,
the thing that your brain has decided is very scary and you should never look at it.
You've brought it up and out into the light and hopefully in doing that we might see that not only is it okay, not so scary,
but also that it might tell you something really important that helps to clear up your vision.
It helps you to understand yourself and how you are in relationships so much more clearly.
And that is usually the link for people, Terri, that's really helpful because people often present with, I don't have confidence, you know,
I'm paralyzed at making a decision, lots of self-doubt, you know, I want to feel confident.
Well, the confidence comes from this agency piece we were talking about that actually access to these things that are trapped under here
might be the thing that gives you more information that allows you to see more clearly and therefore it feels easier for you to make decisions.
It seems clearer to you about your desire and your preference and that you can act in the world with that.
Is that what you meant by language?
Yes, yes, because I've certainly found in all the stories and the people I've spoken to when it comes to persistent pain,
so, you know, pain of different, so emotional and physical pain continuing for a long time,
then quite often it's been a case of there being guilt and shame sitting underneath that.
But that's the last thing people want to talk about.
It's very, very difficult to get to that place of being in that vulnerable position to actually talk, because we just don't have,
we don't have a natural place to start from to talk about things like, like I said, anger is something that we do know how to talk about
because we talk about the actions of anger.
We don't really have a way of talking about guilt and shame in the same way,
but we have an awful lot of narrative bias that are held by guilt and shame,
that, yeah, we just don't find a way to talk about it in the same way.
What are the actions? What are the things? How is it feeling in us when we have these emotions?
Yes.
Could I say something?
I just want to pick up on the language theme if that's okay.
Is that all right?
Because I want to take it a little bit further, because I want to talk about not only language in therapy, but between therapies
and what I mean by that, and because this is also an aspect that I heard in Terry's question.
Maybe that's not what her intent was, but I was.
So for example, let's have somebody who's coming to you because there's good reason to believe that the issues that you describe are taking place in them.
But they also actually literally have like some damage, muscular damage, and they're needing to do physio and things like that.
And what's interesting is some of the language you were using around the imaginal and the, you know, how things are metaphorical and embedded.
I mean, if you take a look at Nick Winkleman's work on the language of coaching, and he talks about you have to give people an active metaphor
so they inhabit their body in different ways.
And they learn through these imaginal practices how to move in a different way, and that feeds back into a different sense of agency.
And part of what I heard in Terry's question, and I'm not attributing anything to Terry, but Terry and I do talk about this is like,
but what kind of language could we use that would help you and the physiotherapists?
It's not instead of talking past each other or politely disliking each other or the kind of thing that might happen because that you come from very different worlds.
You're talking about an inner world and the unconscious, and presumably they're coming from a very physiological, mechanically oriented world.
And if we just use those two languages, you're not going to talk to each other and the patient's going to then, right?
But if we say, well, wait, wait, wait, there's this imaginal, there's an active metaphor, there's the way the body can symbolize things,
and there's a way we can get that to open up and between us, and you use language from, you know, you used one of the four E's, it's embedded, and it's dynamical.
I'm interested in that, I'm interested in, so this is not language you'd be using maybe right in therapy,
although you might use it in front of the patient when you and another therapist are talking together.
And Terry, does that land for you as also a dimension of the language issue?
Yes, yes, definitely. I wondered if maybe we extend that as Bezier, have you had experience working with another practitioner in the room?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That would be really interesting how you reflect on language that you use.
Not with ISTDP. I have worked with other clinicians before, definitely using other forms of therapy, and probably more helpfully.
I mean, I've worked on lots of research projects that look at team practice and look at sort of innovative ways to respond to clinical complexity,
and some of that has exposed me to some of these ideas and thinking about how this might work in practice.
If I had another, so if I had someone like a physio in the room, and we're trying to work together, I think this does relate to how I might talk to a patient anyway, to be fair.
Okay, I didn't want to pin you down though.
No, that's okay.
It's not, it's not choosing one over the other. Both are true. It's really, you know, both are true.
There is a component here that is that working on the physical body is likely to give you some kind of relief.
Yes.
And there is, you know, that working on the emotional, I just call it the emotional landscape.
I don't even use any of this psychological or just working on your emotional landscape will provide some relief.
And wouldn't it be amazing if both things could happen at tandem so you could have maximum relief?
Like if the idea is that this is a cycle and one is informing the other, you know, they are ultimately, you can't separate them.
And so if we can both be, you know, working on one part of it, then hopefully together that provides maximum relief.
I don't see it as a choice between one or the other. Both are true.
Both are just different ways of looking at the same thing.
And I don't think that, I mean, this gets a bit more broad, I guess.
But my thinking is I don't think that there is one ideal way that any human being could address the entirety of something.
I just think we have limited view by nature of who we are.
And so we can work on that and how wonderful to have multiple people working from different viewpoints together.
So I would just talk about it as, you know, let's consider the idea that emotions are having a role here
and they're having a very real impact on the body.
And so I don't know anything about, you know, what might be relieving to the muscles and whatever that you do.
And I might have some role here in being able to speak to why it is that this is even happening in the first place.
You know, that doesn't mean that the physical correlates aren't there and that working on them can have some relief.
But if there's an engine underneath driving that, that's about self-punishment, for example, then fixing this is just going to lead to that engine
manifesting somewhere else in this person's life.
But just to take it further, I mean, you could, given the example you had with the wrist and being held, you could, you know,
the therapist could present the movement that's needed to do the damage and connect it to that metaphor and say,
when you're doing this to, but think about that, think about, like, getting release and being free from that.
Or, you know, to see what it is.
Yeah, yeah.
But by giving them a bridging metaphor that bridges between the two therapies in an important way.
Yes.
Yeah.
See, these are the questions Terry and I are really, I mean, we're interested in everything you're saying.
But I'm also, we're interested in this.
We're interested in what could we do.
I mean, you're coming at this very wholeheartedly and that's very appreciative.
But, you know, some people will come in more hesitantly.
And if we could say, right, you know, well, there's a way in which you, you two could co-create a shared language.
And if we play around like we're doing right here, we might start to uncover some shared language that we could both use.
And we could get the two therapies to work in concert rather than orthogonal to each other.
Yeah, no, I love that.
I like the language.
I like the language of opening up.
So I think as opposed to release, I have among the on the fence about the word release.
I think that actually freaks some people out and that's part of the problem.
They think the impulse is going to be released out of them.
That's why they, that's part of the defense, why the structure is there.
But that would be, that's exactly it.
You could say to the physiotherapist, say, don't use release language.
That's the wrong metaphor.
Try to use opening up language.
Creating more space inside.
And you can still do that.
You do that with your physical body.
Like I think about, you know, I used acceptance and commitment therapy for a long time.
And the way that you would deal with difficult emotions there is to imagine more space inside around the emotion.
Right.
It's an open up, but it's still inside you.
It's not about, I need to throw it out into the world because I can't have it.
Because it's important that it's, you see it in reality as being part of the inner landscape.
It doesn't need to go into relationship or it doesn't, doesn't need to be enacted the impulse.
So, so opening up is nice.
So you could talk about while they're doing the exercises, you know, can you feel how that, how that is opening you up?
Can you feel how that is opening up the emotion?
You know, it might also be opening you up to be able to see and recognize this anger and more and more detail as you do these exercises.
I would talk about opening up as opposed to release.
It's teaching the person that they can, that they have space and room inside to bear an emotion in a sort of graded way.
But also opening up as metaphorical.
Opening up means so many things.
Yeah, exactly. Exactly.
That's it.
That possibility opening up, you know, a relationship of your life, your movement in the world and your action.
So I think opening up is how I talk.
That's how I talk about it.
Yeah.
I just, I just say that release is a very negative thing.
So we release our anger and it's like quite often the thing we're trying to stop and hold back from.
So that if you say you're trying to, you know, you're going to release something.
It's like, maybe I need to hold that back, not do it.
You know, so it's kind of.
Yeah.
If it's an aggressive, yeah.
Yeah.
If you're talking about the aggressive impulse that comes with it.
Yes.
But there is, there is a way to that with this work, you come to see that anger can be really useful, helps people to be assertive.
The people that are passive and never take action.
You can integrate the anger.
And so now anger makes me realize I don't like what this person's doing, but I also love them.
How can I tell them in a loving way?
Really don't like what you're doing.
It's, it's hurting me.
It's impacting the relationship.
Oh, that can help us to connect more and actually make our relationship better.
Anger can help me if I bring it in in the right way to make the relationship better.
So, um, so, but you're right.
This, this idea that I think people can fight anger with aggressive impulse.
And so the idea that you're releasing exactly right, that would people would not want to.
Or it also insinuates that anger is like a poison that should never, you should never have and you need to release it.
That's.
And there's other, there's other potential connections.
You talked a lot about sort of seeing in a new way and even inhabiting your body in a new way.
And a lot of reason why people are like, they have trouble in physio is because of exactly that.
They're not inhabiting their body in the right way.
And if you could get people to say, Oh, like in both these places, I'm not inhabiting my body in the right way.
And you could get those to talk to each other.
You see, this is what, this is what I'm trying to get at this, this kind of right.
And what Terry's got some research showing that if the patient is watching you and the other therapists,
like co-create this language, especially in a way that's accessible to them,
that has extra, that has extra therapeutic benefit to it.
Well, they're watching integration happen.
So that's right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They are witnessing their inter-psychic play out.
That's great.
Yeah, I don't need to say it anymore.
Look, look, others are saying it too.
Yes, yes.
So therapy, John, we are trying to help facilitate them seeing that inside themselves.
So a step two, that might be to see it in front of them.
Oh, and these are also two people who, you know, hopefully know what they're talking about.
So I can't just look away and minimize and rationalize out of this.
And they happen and that, again, you know, even on unconscious level may start to help them to notice it inside themselves
and start to integrate inside themselves.
Modeling goes deeper in the brain than propositions.
Really, it really does.
And this also speaks to group therapy.
Like I've been thinking Terry too about, because I know you're thinking about sort of how are you going to take this and how can it be useful?
You know, there's a lot of these pain protocols that are being used are done in a group setting.
And I think it's a similar thing, you know, that being able to witness other people around you have their own wrestling match of this.
And for some people, helps to see that more clearly within themselves and maybe helps them to then be able to do that more clearly for themselves.
Right, but it's a need to see it externally.
Yes, I think hearing other people's stories is amazingly therapeutic.
It allows you to go see something in it that allows you to then to open up yourself and say, I'm not that unusual.
There is something, I have a connection with someone on something and I can actually say that loud.
And that actually helps you to actually then, you know, consider it yourself.
Absolutely Terry.
And I think for, you know, for people who are open in a particular way, that's true.
I think there are also people who are highly motivated to avoid some part of themselves to any degree and to hear a story that should otherwise do that.
For them, they'll find all sorts of ways to discount that story and dismiss it.
This is part of what happens.
The highly resistant patient is the one that, you know, something like ISTDP is really important for.
Whereas these sort of simpler forms that make up a pain protocol are going to be useful for another subset of people.
The shared language.
Yeah, the opening up the, yes, the inhabiting your body.
So it's true that for many people that intellectualize and isolate emotional experiences being something that's like a word that pops up in my brain.
They have no connection to what it feels like in their body.
And so that is the work.
The work is getting back into the body and they start to notice all these sensations in their body that they've never noticed before.
I taught Tai Chi Chuan for a couple of decades and getting people to inhabit their body is a very difficult thing to do.
And then people will often, if this is a big move for them, they'll often be the release of emotion associated with that, re-enhabiting their body.
That's why they don't want to be in their body because it helps them to avoid the emotions.
Exactly, exactly, exactly.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, I would love to think about that shared language thing in some more depth.
Because that is, yeah, that is the practical takeaway here, isn't it?
That would be useful to what?
Well, at least one.
I mean, there's lots of practical people, but that's one, yeah, I would say.
I think it's just something that we are collectively discussing.
I think even just the action of discussing the need for a shared language is something that's, you know, really helping us go forward because it's a little bit more comes out each time we have these conversations, I think.
And I also think like the process of co-creating it in front of patient is valuable.
So I've been trying to do a thing where instead of like, this is in the scientific domain, but I think there's some analogy.
Instead of just presenting the pristine final project, I've tried to do things where I'm working with other people collaboratively and they're seeing the scientific process.
They're not just seeing the finished product.
And they take a much more participatory role in that because they get involved with the generation of it.
And they're not just pointing at the finished product.
They're actually embodying it, right?
They're almost imitating it.
Sounds like voice craft as well.
That's been actually being part of these sorts of conversations.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, absolutely, absolutely.
I think to, I mean, I don't know if this will be useful or not, but in terms of that, the clinicians sort of talking together and what they're doing and what they're modeling.
If they, I mean, part of this work is getting comfortable with our own emotional landscape and actually being forthcoming about that sometimes at key junctures.
And I just don't know, it might be useful for them to at least be bringing some of that language in when they're talking in front of the patient about how they're feeling, you know, how they're feeling during this process.
Just to normalize it for one, I mean, I'd have to think more on exactly how, you know, that might be utilized.
But it would be strange if they were doing this in front of the patient with the goal of trying to model something and not be reflecting it all on their emotional experience, wouldn't it?
And just be up here.
Well, hopefully, like I say, if they were involved in the process and not into the usual cultural drama of presenting the pristine product, that might make them more open to, like, you know, a participatory relationship to it rather than I am.
Even to say, even to say to one another as they're doing it in front of the patient, you know, wow, as you point that out, I hadn't thought about that before and I feel anxious as a result, you know.
Yeah, for sure, you should on the table.
And, you know, but, you know, this is something we should look at and like to really do the wrestling with something in front of the patient as opposed to avoiding.
Yeah.
I agree.
I mean, that's what I meant by modeling, right?
They're going to be modeling yet, right, to the patient and not just.
And it's about, and it's about, it's also, you know, it models to the patient the idea of participating and trying rather, you know, because what we're often also held back in certain ways.
Because we, we carry around these, these, you know, sort of all or nothing mentalities.
You either succeed or you're a failure.
And that also impedes a lot of this kind of work we're trying to do with people.
At least I find that with some of my students.
They get, they get into this thing where they get very self-defeating, because if they can't give the perfect essay, then there's no point.
And I'm trying to say, the word essay actually means to try, right?
Like you're supposed to be trying here.
Right.
Right.
That probably had very punitive authority figures in their past.
Right.
Very much not.
And I, and ongoing.
It's, it's, yeah, there's very much, there's very much.
Yeah.
If I.
With an authority figure, the idea that you could express to them your anger or just pleasure or something that they're doing doesn't come into the equation.
And so just noticing that you might feel some dislike or anger or irritation towards the person who's asking you to write this essay and asking you to put yourself out on the chopping block for, you know, being marked and evaluated.
Natural to feel some anger towards that person.
But they probably don't even realize that they just noticed their self attack.
It gets turned inwards.
Now I give myself.
And it gets very twisted because that you can also find out indirectly that the parent is helping by trying to manage this problem.
Right.
And coming in and right.
And we can fix this.
And it's like, well, maybe that's not what you should be doing here.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And then you widen that out just to the local community around them and then to the wider experience that they're having with all the other, you know, metacrisis and things that we've got going on.
Then that is just all coming down on them at the same time.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You know,
It's a prime example.
Oh, yeah.
It's already high as fever.
Right.
The bar is already so high.
Most of them have got there through their own perfectionistic tendencies and self punitive tendencies already.
And it's just, it's just, and, you know, what they have to do is continually be assessed.
Yeah.
And they're on Instagram seeing perfect lives that are.
And they know propositionally they're fraudulent, but that doesn't matter to other parts of the brain, right?
No.
No.
And then it has huge, it has huge effects on them.
Mm-hmm.
Anyways.
We'll talk a little about the presentation.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
We're coming to the end of our time and I want to thank you.
I mean, that was just really, really.
Well, I think we modeled to some degree we were talking about it became very collaborative.
And of course, Terry, it's always wonderful to have you here.
I'll give you two ladies a brief minute or two to do any summative or cumulative or provocative final words that you want to leave people with.
Maybe, Terry, you first and then you, Appassia.
Yeah.
Well, I just really appreciate the conversation.
I think we've opened up a lot of avenues that still need a lot of exploration.
So I'm looking forward to those.
I think I'm really interested to talk further about this moment of the action impulse and when that happens because the work we've been doing is really about this one turning point.
And I think that we touched on it and I really want to go.
I think it might even need a whole nother session to go into this.
What happens at this one particular moment?
I'm really keen to continue that discussion.
But thank you both so much for this.
It's been great.
Thank you both.
Thank you both.
That really speaks this point that you're bringing up at the end, Terry, about the things most interested in following on about the impulse really speaks to the unconscious alliance.
I think that's alive here with us because that by chance happens to be the area that I am most most fascinated by right now.
And I'm actually yes, looking at that in all sorts of ways.
I agree with you.
I think that that is a pivotal a pivotal point in all of this and something that ISTDP has brought into the mix for me that I never.
I never had with any other form of therapy that I'm trained and I trained in lots of models.
And that is the part of the part of the ingredient list that is making this form of therapy so much more transformative in the work that I do anyway.
It's giving me access to do things in the room and for people to change in ways that I've never seen before in other forms of therapy that I've used.
And I see some of that I think is being, to me, the action impulse is sort of liminal.
It's like the point between the internal and the external.
It's the bit right before it comes out of us and becomes action.
And I think there's something really important about that.
So yes, this has been this has just been such a pleasure and a delight.
And I feel I feel that I've only really just scratched the surface of so many of the areas that I would love to to dive in.
I hope it's been useful to have a tendency to go in 30 different directions.
No, it was very great.
It's been great.
It's been wonderful.
Thank you.
Thank you so very much.
