Hello, everyone. The video you are about to see was originally recorded at the Utah 2024 conference.
It's a conversation, a panel discussion with Greg Enriquez, Alexander Bart and Benita Roy.
We get into some very deep discussions about transcendent naturalism and some convergences,
contrasts, and criticism. I hope you enjoy the video.
Alrighty, friends. First off, welcome. Good to see so many folks here.
I'm just saying my heart tickled to have an opportunity to have this conversation
with some of my very, very dear friends who have emerged in this space.
And of course, John, who will be joining us in a second, has been really tremendously influential.
It's been tremendously meaningful to connect with him. And I think since 2018,
Bart and I hooked up 2019 in the Intellectual Deep Web. And I got to say there are few people
in this world who are both more entertaining and more deep and more profound than John.
Alexander Bart, his Intellectual Deep Web is inspiring, his way of being in the world,
his vision across the breadth. Tyler Groke asked at the end of the last session,
well, is Utah really encompassed everybody? And I was like, well, not somebody like Bart.
Bart's are asked here on outside Utah, although I think they dance well together.
So Alexander Bart, thank you so much for being here. I really look forward to dialoguing.
And over the last couple of years, another dear friend of mine, Bonnie,
we have explored. I've started to learn, I'm still an amateur, but it's starting to really get a grip
on process ontology, on what true naturalism really means as opposed to the fake person that John
and I are doing. And I'm really looking forward to sharing about the layers of metaphysics
in relation. And so what we have today is then a very exciting exploration and discussion
where we're going to be talking about transcendent naturalism. John and I will be representing that.
Bonnie is going to bring her perspective, at least it sometimes is talked about,
that is fierce naturalism. I'm not sure if that's still the term that she is using. Yes.
And what that means. And then we have transcendent emergentism. And the title of our talk,
and I think me and John and Bonnie are okay with naturalism. We'll explore that. We're going to
get into what Bart feels about naturalism versus emergentism. And so we're going to be exploring
the relationships and excavating the fault lines in relationship to these two sets of perspectives.
And so here we are. If John's around, let me just see. Not sure if he's in yet or not in
relationship to that. I don't know. He's still not quite. Oh, there he is. Hey, John, wonderful.
Can you unmute yourself, friend? Can you unmute? Ask to unmute.
Now I'm on mute. There he is. Okay. Woo-hoo. I think we're all here then.
All right. So John, I just gave an overview introduction. Bonnie, Bart, Johnny and me,
I need to say that once. We're going to explore. So what we thought we'd do today,
in terms of basic order, is that John's going to kick us off talking, give us an outline of
transcendent naturalism. Of course, John and I did a series on that. I thought we had a lot of
excellent guests. We're going to wrap that series up with Lehmann Pascal and Bruce Alderman,
who obviously will bring lovely things to summarize that. So we're going to start with that.
Then Bonnie's going to give her take, explore a metaphysics that I think overlaps some,
but also potentially critiques. And then Bart will bring his perspective. The last thing I'll
say is, coming off of, obviously I mentioned last time, you talk emphasized the enlightenment
gap coming off natural sizes. I look around today, you've got materialism, idealism and dualism,
basically in the West. I think all of us would say, no, none of those are adequate. We need a new
framework, a new philosophical framework for the 21st century and beyond, and it's time to start
laying that down. So here we are. Let's get it rolling. John, if you would, take it away. I
introduced you already, then I already told you what a brother-in-arms you are, this process,
and how much I admire and respect you and your leadership. And that goes really for,
certainly, Agent Bard and Benito, and I should have that already. So welcome, my friend.
Thank you, Greg. And I'm looking forward to talking with you, Benita, and with you, Alexander.
So, Greg asked me to give an overview of the argument. I'll try to keep it as brief as possible
without leaving it with too many major gaps. I won't go over the argument in detail. I will
often just refer to arguments that were made in detail in the previous conference presentation
and on the series, Transcendent Naturalism. So Transcendent Naturalism comes out of two
proposals. It comes out of the proposal of extended naturalism, plus a proposal of a kind
of extended naturalism that supports strong transcendence, where that transcendence is
not just psychological in nature, but has real epistemological and ontological significance.
And there's two main arguments here. Each one is a meta-argument, a convergent argument,
a convergent argument for a properly-leveled ontology, and then a convergence argument for
a conformity theory of knowing. And then the proposal is, if you have a conformity theory of
knowing with a leveled ontology, you can actually afford a strong transcendence. I will add to that
something that I didn't make in the original talk, just a brief note on why that can be properly
understood as sacred. So extended naturalism is the proposal that science, let's take what
naturalism is standardly understood to mean, is that the natural sciences, that is where the
naturalism comes, are those projects that dictate to us our fundamental ontology, our fundamental
structural reality. Now that is usually interpreted without much justification as all of our ontology
has to be derivable from the ontology of the natural sciences. And I argue that that actually
doesn't make sense. You also have to include in naturalism everything that is presupposed
in order to do science. Your ontology needs to include that, or you actually have a blind spot
in your ontology. And that's the new book, by the way, by Evan Thompson, by Adam Frank,
sorry, an astrophysicist, Marcelo Gleiser, a theoretical physicist, and Evan Thompson,
a 4E cognitive scientist, and just some shameless self-promotion. The chapter on the blind spot
within cognition explicitly talks about Vervecchi's theory of relevance realization as the blind spot
within cognition. So yay, John. Okay, so anyways, the idea here is, if you do not include the
standpoint from which you are doing science, then you actually have an incomplete and therefore
incoherent ontology. And what I want to argue is, what does science actually presuppose? Well,
it presupposes scientists doing science. And how do we work that? How do we have to extend our
naturalism in order to include that? I take a look at three convergence arguments. One is from
Blackowitz on what he calls the real difference. He argues that reductionism is based on the premise
that only what is shared between things is ultimately real, that he argues can't be right.
Real differences matter. Real differences are presupposed by real information. If there's no
real information, there's no real intelligibility. And so you need real difference, which means
you have genuine emergence. The next main argument comes from whole. And this is the idea that
communication needs redundancy. Redundancy needs levels of reality to it. And causal signaling
is a form of communication. And therefore you need real emergence. Again, I'm not going to go over
these arguments in a way that is intended to make them persuasively convincing. I have done that in
the previous talk. We did that at the intro to transcendent naturalism. I am just referring to
them. You can go back and I'm going to take it that you're extending me the good faith,
that there are persuasive arguments for each one of these claims.
The third argument comes from the work of Yoraro, that science needs real structure.
And she makes a distinction between bottom up causes that change actuality and top down constraints
that shape possibility into potentiality. And science, of course, needs top down constraints.
These are things like E equals mc squared, which are not events. They are real constraints,
real structuring principles in reality. So so far, we need a leveled reality in order to get real
information, in order to get real causal signaling, in order to get real structure.
And then we have Smith's vertical causation argument, Volcker and Smith, which is the
argument to the effect that the measuring device cannot be at the same ontological level as what
is measured, especially when we come down to quantum entities. And so you need a real leveled
ontology in order for measurement. So notice what science presupposes real information,
real causal signaling, real structural principles. And it presupposes real measurement,
integrating all of those together, all of those presuppose a leveled ontology.
Vervecky makes a similar convergent argument that I made at Ralston at length,
which is in order for us to do science, we have to include the scientist on our ontology.
And that converges with everything I've just said. Why is it not just emergence up? The
problem with just emergence up, and this is not just my idea. Many people have talked about this,
is it gives you the level, the emergent level is epiphenomenal. It has no causal powers in its
own right, or no constraining powers in its own right. The problem with epiphenomenalism,
it's an oxymoronic term. It is a category for which we can find no non controversial members.
And it presuppose, it indicates that something exists, but does not make any difference in
reality and therefore is not knowable. I'm not going to go into that argument at length. I think
if your, if your ontology leads to epiphenomenalism, it is a modus tolens. You have led to a reductio
adipocertum. So you have to have real emanation and real emergence completely interpenetrating
each other. You have a continuum. And when we talk about levels, all we're doing is picking out
things that are particularly explanatorily, causally relevant. Whole has a formal proof
that each level has a distinct set of causal powers to it. And therefore, when we're talking
about levels, we're just picking out something that is most causally relevant to the particular
kind of explanation. But that is not that it is just an epistemic convenience. The levels are
epistemic conveniences that refer to a real emanation, emanation emergence continuum.
Now, what about the meta argument towards a conformity theory? So the opposite to conformity
theory is our current modern theory that knowledge is a matter of representation. I have something
in my head that represents the world. Pickstock in her astonishing book, Aspects of Truth and
New Religious Metaphysics from 2020 reviews all of the distinction arguments that are supposed
to support the proposal of representational knowledge and shows that within analytic philosophy,
itself, they have all been seriously undermined. The analytic synthetic distinction, of course,
has been undermined by Quine, the distinction between a conceptual scheme and its content,
by Davidson, the fact value distinction, and the is-ought distinction by Putnam,
Case Beer, or Verveke has one that relevance is both a cause and a reason. And the theory data
distinction by Quine and Duhem. So all of the distinctions that were supposed to
open up the space between mind and world for which representation with the bridge was the
bridge have been completely undermined. And what that returns you to is a conformity theory
that the mind and reality are co-participating in shared principles of individuation,
identification, intelligibility, and they're often mutually shaping each other
all the way from these construction up to cultural world views.
I also made an argument that cognition is all the cognitive sciences are converging on the idea
that cognition is a dynamic continuum of emergence up and top down, bottom up, top down,
completely into penetrating dynamically, realized processing. And if that was not tracking the
grammar of reality, if that grammar of cognition was not tracking the grammar of reality, we would
be facing a radical skepticism, a radical solipsism, because it would be that the mind in principle
could not know reality, and we'd be into very deep Kantian problems, and I won't reveal all the sort
of tensions and contradictions within the Kantian proposal. So we get a conformity theory.
And then that links up with independent arguments within 4e Cogsai, launched by Gibson about the
importance of affordances for perception and action and knowledge, Heidegger and the
all aesthetic notion of truth that is deeper than the coherence or correspondence notion of truth,
and Vervecchi's proposal that relevance realization is inherently transjective
and binds the subjective to the objective together and is therefore more real. And all of these
converge on a conformity theory of knowing. Now if you have a real leveled ontology and a conformity
theory of knowing by knowing it, I know I'm not only engaging in psychological improvement,
I'm actually knowing levels of reality that are otherwise inaccessible. And I am changing ontologically
to different levels of the self that correspond through participation. Actually, I want to
erase that sentence, levels of the self that participate with levels of reality.
And so that is strong transcendence. It is making a fundamental epistemological and ontological
difference, not just psychological hygiene and improvement. I would add to that the current
work integrating the work of filler, who argues that pure relationality has to be ultimate because
you can't get relations from Aristotelian substances. Of course, our science has pure
relationality at the bottom and at the top and scientists are seeking the relation
between the cosmological and the quantum. Nishita's argument that Aristotle's substance
metaphysics, a substance is not stuff. A substance are independently existing objects, things.
Aristotle's ontology, which we still fundamentally share, is that things are ultimately real and
that relations and processes emerge from it. And that is tracked by a subject predicate logic.
Nishita shows, you get Filler's argument that that doesn't work. Relationality is deeper than
subject and predicate and deeper than substance and its properties. Nishita shows the Aristotelian
metaphysics is inherently contradictory because it depends on predication, which is of universals,
but its ontology claims that individual substances, individual things are most real.
And this is the problem of how can the universals ever know the particular? It bedevils
medieval philosophy until the Aristotelian framework collapses and you get nominalism,
the proposed and what they do, what they decide to do is keep the substance ontology,
individual things ultimately exist, but there are no real relations, no real patterns. They exist
only in the mind. That's nominalism. That of course gives you a dualism because the mind is a
fundamentally different kind of reality than reality. And then dualism gives you all the
disasters of the meaning crisis. These are all arguments for abandoning a substance ontology
and understanding that a no-thingness of pure relationality is what is ultimately real.
Finally, making use of the work of the atheist Canadian philosopher Schellingberg
about what do we mean by the sacred? He talks about the Tripoli transcendent and this lines up
now with transcendent naturalism. The sacred is that which is ontologically ultimate. And of
course, we can conform to and participate in the ultimacy of pure relationality. Neoplatonism and
Zen both talk about this. Sodorological, it can transform you by entering into this relationship.
Of course, you get fundamental transformation of human beings because you're engaging in strong
transcendence. It saves you, it liberates you, it frees you in epistemologically and ontologically
significant ways, not just psychologically. And it's axiological. It gives you a reciprocal
opening relationship as you get the ground of the self is opening up to the ground of reality.
And they are ultimately non logically identical because they are co-realizations,
co-participations in the dynamic realization of pure relationality. And that that reciprocal
opening gives you a capacity to fall in love and to involve the whole of the self without
in any way being self involved. And this is would be a touchstone for all other normative
evaluations. So it would be it would be axiologically transcendent. I can develop all
of those arguments in greater detail if needed. So transcendent naturalism puts us into a
participatory relationship with ontological ultimacy, sodorological ultimacy, axiological
ultimacy. And that means it is also sacred. So transcendent naturalism gives an account
of sacredness and ultimate reality that is nevertheless still consistent with naturalism.
But that naturalism has to be extended naturalism. That's the gist of the arguments and some
recent additions I have made to them. So thank you very much, everyone, for your time and attention.
Wonderful. Thank you so much. And so I think that's a brilliant and crisp summary of the core
tenets. Christian put it in the group and I mentioned that John and I have done the series.
It brings in a number of different thinkers. I'm not going to get into it now because I did a
review of you talk and certainly have raised some questions. But let's just say what John just laid
out is a ball from Roy Bashkar and say there's a philosophical under laboring, a richness,
and of course then extending into modern cognitive science that fits sort of with
you talk and sort of a lock and key. I am not a philosopher by training in relation. I got some
notions, but the ways in which you talk is structured as we've dialogued is fundamentally
consistent and I think affords certain kinds of elaborations on what John was talking about.
But I'm not going to get into that because we're really talking fundamentally about these different
positions. What I want to do now is turn the discussion over to Benita Roy so that she can
share her perspective on naturalism, what John offers, and what she brings to bear in relation.
Benita Roy, can you, you can unmute. There you go.
Woman's worst nightmare.
First I want to thank John and Greg and all their guests because I've watched many,
many hours of their transcendent naturalism series and I really like season two. I think
it was, you know, you designed it so there's a lot of shake ups and different ideas and stuff
coming in and I think you brought in the problem and showed that there's a real critical importance
to this, but also that it's not easy. I don't think any of us think it's easy. So I'm glad that
John ended with Axiology because for me, why does this all matter? I think where the rubber hits
the road is that if we could come up with a system that is transcendent naturalism that really helps
people close the gap between the is and the ought, I think that this would be its biggest
contribution as we struggle with science and the psyche and idealism and reductionism and stuff.
This is kind of like the path toward that, but I really think that the goal,
one of the huge goals would be the axiological goal.
I want to start with a quote and the quote is to remind us, I think we all can agree with this
quote, but we're here on line and we're going to do a lot of talking and use a lot of words,
but I just want to honor the fact that for me and I assume for you that this is a constraint
and that we're after something that's really personal and sacred to us and meaningful to us
personally at a deep level. And so the quotes from Warren Heidi and he writes,
how should one live? Not by painstakingly constructing a linguistic replica of a corner
of the cosmos and then running repeatable experiments and quantifying the results,
but by carefully reflecting on what we are and what living well means for us.
So I think the journey often looks like constructing a linguistic replica of the
corner of the cosmos. I think those are the tools that we use, but I just want to remind
us that I recognize in all of us that that certainly is not our goal.
I don't really have a model or a system or an argument to make. I want to introduce some tools
that I think are useful in this project. And one tool is metaphysics. And my definition of
metaphysics amongst many others is I think that the purpose of metaphysics is to distinguish
the true from the real. Now, we have to define those very precisely and there's many different
ways to define them. But the way I am meaning about that is kind of like what Baskar talked about,
science deals with the actual and not the real. And so for me, the true is what science can get at.
And I define science as the set of protocols that lead to actions, the set of protocols
that lead to outcomes predicted by theory. And so science is in a box, a methodological box,
it has a lot of constraints, and it can create true theories. But this is quite different from the
real. And I'll talk a little bit about more about that later. But I think that and these are words
you hear, you know, John, John is talking about real, the transcendent as dealing in the realm of
the real and not the realm of the actual as Baskar would say, or their or the true. So I think
that's an important tool to look at. I want to talk about stratified reality. And stratified
reality is what we do when we say there's information energy and matter and then mind and then mind to
and life and this and that. There's, you know, you go different cultures and different periods of human
history, and people would not have organized the ontological stack that way. And so I was
thinking this morning about where in our evolutionary history, pre human, did we still, we first
encounter this ability to create ontological stacks. I mean, chimpanzees aren't running around
creating ontological stacks, people are. But because I think I believe in the continuity
of the animal mind with the human mind, I'm thinking this morning, where, where can I find
the earliest template or the feeling sense of this kind of activity. And I thought about how
animals will reduce a complex puzzle into parts. They do this. And, and so these are different
steps of action. So I want you to think about what, you know, this is what John said,
what is the standpoint from which we are doing this? What is the standpoint from which we are
creating stratified reality? And so I want you to feel into this sense that, okay, it starts in our
pre evolutionary history and our animal nature of reducing, reducing is not the right word because
reduces like a bad word or, or separating or distinguishing or discerning a complex puzzle
into parts. As far as I can see, that's the first instant. And then this is what's fascinating.
This carries on with early man into toolmaking. And the fact that we can teach toolmaking through
a series of steps, and there's a series of parts. And then this starts this whole
evolutionary advantage, I think is what we are doing when we're, we're, is where it all started.
And then now I want to reflect on something and that is breaking into parts has always been a
protocol for problem solving and making. But only recently has it become a protocol for getting at
what is real, meaningful, or for moral choice. Now, I don't know what to make of that statement
because that was my insight this morning, driven by, you know, the, the energy of the
participation of this panel. But it's something to, it's something to think about. And maybe that's
a good thing because maybe we are this, we're doing a problem solving thing. But maybe, maybe
there's something that needs to be converted there. Okay. However, given that, I'm going to talk about
what people do when they do stratified reality. And there's something very interesting. There's
there's a tendency to make a mistake. And that is, if we say, let me just give you an example. So
if I say, what is pizza made of? Okay, and you can say, well, pizza is made of dough. And then I
say, what is dough made of? I mean, you say dough is made of wheat. This presents a simplistic and
reductive sense of what is going on. Because the pizza is made of dough, but all but made with
the people who, you know, proof the dough, the cook who's doing it and the oven that's cooking it
and the oven, and blah, blah, blah, all of this, the with the with is lost. The with are all these
verbs that don't survive the analysis. Okay, then we can say, well, what is dough made with dough made
is with made with wheat and the agricultural revolution, which is made with human evolution,
which is made made with the genealogy of the earth. And so one of the things that happens when we
ontological stack along categories is all the with is gone. And all and it's kind of like the
physicists that when they say, well, 97% of matter and energy, we can't get our hands on.
And so there's something about this enterprise of categorization, stratifying reality that loses
all the with. So that's the first thing I want to point out. And I only want to point out really
one other thing. And that is, if you notice, as you go down, here's pizza.
Here's dough. Here's pizza and a whole bunch of cooks and stuff in the and the fact that you
bought the flour. Okay. And then here's dough and dough is made with wheat. As I go down,
the systems that are left out become larger, not smaller. So Sabina Hobson Felder has this
strong critique against physics and so does Eric Weinstein. And it's part of it is this problem.
Because if by the time you get to matter, and then you get to sub atoms, and then you get to
subatomic particles, the Higgs boson is made with the whole scientific enterprise across all of human
history, and the politicians and the money. And she's recent Hassan Felder's recently come out
and said, there's a real problem with the scientific enterprise. And this problematizes
something like the Higgs boson. And so this sense that the lower you go down, the more is actually
has to be included to justify the simple thing you are saying exists in this category of reality.
So I just want to add those. I haven't put it together. And I'm hoping that bar is up for the
challenge. Thank you very much for your time. All right. Thank you so much, Benita. I took some notes.
So what we're going to do, certainly after I'm going to hand it over to Bart, he's going to offer
one thing I will say. I hope for our conversation is naturalism, emergentism,
contrast, maybe Barbara will bring that. I found a lot I resonated with and what Benita said,
some questions that I had. I look forward to jumping in those. But we're going to hand it off
to Alexander Bart and let us have it, Bart. I'm kind of shocked at how much we agree.
But I knew we would probably. But I think there's there's also a lot here in the nuance. And Benita
and I, I'm going to do the sales pitch right away. It's done because it's fucking working.
It's not profit, by the way, it's pros and it came out last year. And I realized I had to do
metaphysics when I wrote this six book of mine. I had to do it. I had to sit down and do metaphysics
because the way we did human history could not be explained unless we had, you know, an understanding
of how we do universal history. So I had to go down to the dirty work of actually going into
metaphysics for the book. Bonita and I had wonderful conversations this fall already. I really
look forward to continue those. So I'm here with Bonita against John and Greg's. You know,
it's Abba again. I'm Swedish. It's like Bjorn and Benny against Anne and Fred Magnetta. But it's like,
but we had wonderful conversations. She gets the book and I really appreciate Bonita. She gets the
book in the sense that I'm the son of Hegel and she's the daughter of Whitehead. You know,
and I've always found Hegel and Whitehead to be scaringly compatible with each other. Hegel being
still not understood in the Anglo-Saxon world, basically, because we were all blinded by the
enormous turn with the amount of account to the content turn it's called in contemporary philosophy.
But what happened was that only a few years later in Germany, there was another shock, at least
on our part with the content turn, which is the Hegelian turn. So I will return to Hegel and bring
that into the conversation because a lot of what John is asking for. And I totally agree.
We have to do this turn and get out of the metal crisis. But actually, the work was done
by Hegel and Nietzsche in the 19th century. It's precisely by reading Hegel and Nietzsche through
each other. I worked on this for 30 years. I think we can see that there was a turn here. There was
a turn away from dualism. The last dualism was, of course, a modern kind onto a modest worldview
where the obsession is with difference. Okay. So everything relates to everything else in the
universe. And I totally agree with John. Epiphenomalism is just the dead end because, obviously,
my thinking relates my physicality to it. It's just all the different things that
exist affect everything else. So what we did in the book, there were two things. One of them is that
we realized that three of the philosophical disciplines that I'm a philosopher, I'm not a
scientist. When I'm a scientist, I'm an economist, which I will totally leave out of this conversation.
The economist Alexander Barj, you don't get seen today. But I'm a philosopher and an artist. So
allow me to be, if possible, maybe we might need to hear even more of the philosopher. And then
Greg and John, who are fantastic scientists, can stay with the size. But my pointer is that we needed
to look at the philosophical disciplines themselves. So being tired of doing ontology, because I'll
actually find ontology to be quite easy. There's ontology and there's ontics. Essentially, that's
what happened after Kant. So then everything starts moving and everything is relational,
and that's Hegel. From Hegel, through Nietzsche, on to White Ted, and on to the last, we have
realized that everything is relational fundamentally. All this very difficult to think
relationalism, it's absolutely necessary. The object out there is a byproduct of the relation.
There are a lot that comes after the relation. So I think we all agree on that. But Hegel did
too. The thing is with Hegel, he stopped in his dialectical method. He just said that no,
there is no fixed point anywhere in the universe ever. There are no, there's no individual. I
am many different people. I was a different person yesterday than I am tomorrow. By the way,
I die all the time and I'm born all the time. Divigiality is the normal state of things for us
to be human. So this was already Hegel because with his dialectical method, there is no fixed
point. You must imagine that you live in the universe where you're not allowed to have fixed
point unless you know you're only having a fixed point to use it to then try to understand something.
So it's like you borrow into that fixed point and that's called negation in Hegel. So what we did
was that we took ontology, epistemology and phenomenology and threw them all into one big
big mess, which is what Hegel actually did. What he said was basically that ontology and
epistemology and phenomenology are in themselves all three, three relational siblings in the world
of philosophy. And he started doing ontology and epistemology at the same time, which is how
we overcame Kant because in Kant, they were separate. And suddenly with Hegel, it's just
like he cracks jokes at Kant all the time. He's just like, no, no, no, Kant. It's not like there's
a phenomenon there and there's a numinal there because actually you are engaged and involved
with the numinal. So we call it phenomenology, just to crack a joke about it. Hegel constructed
phenomenology. So the thing was that by doing this and calling it narratology, I think we
come down to something that we can agree on is basically very human. Because in Hegel,
there's a subject and there's a substance. And it's a sub-relationship to the substance,
which is what philosophy is all about. There's always human subjectivity constantly returning
in Hegel. And whenever you try to come up with anything without you being involved with the
world, Hegel says, no way. That's cheating. Back to you again, because you are involved as philosopher
or as partner of the philosopher or as you believe you are involved in the world and we are humans.
Philosophy is a human endeavor. So narratology enabled us to say that this is the trick with
dialectics. Always have a three. So if you want to spice up your sex life, bring a third person
into the bedroom. I highly recommend it. This is very Hegel. What Hegel does is that no, dialectics
is not the dichotomy in opposition between two points. Like if you are young, you must split
either the young or the young. And Taoists actually do that, Bonito probably agrees, by splitting on
the young side. Always take the masculine side to make the split there because men are so fucking
scared to get away, women are not. So you split on the side and say there's young and the young
within the young. And then the young is opposite the young. This is how Hegel works all the time.
So by using ontology and epistemology and phenomenology as three philosophical discourses
and then saying they're all three interconnected one another. And this is the Hegelian absolute.
The Hegelian absolute is to recognize that and to recognize there is no fixed point
and using vocabulary from the Greeks, we then say that there's a logos and there's a pathos and
there's a mythos. Human beings have three different ways of describing reality or describing the world
that makes sense of the world. They use a logos, use a mythos and use the pathos. And science,
of course, is on the side of logos fundamentally. Pathos is just our emotional lives, our feelings
and blah, blah, blah. There's no such thing in AI, by the way, electricity is not blood.
Put it that way. The pathos is incredibly human, animalistic, whatever, you know,
all the forces inside of you, the force of nature, pathic, pathical narratives,
you know, news, a cast, pornography, anything that's brutally real thrown at you is a pathical
narrative. And then there's mythos and mythos is actually as often Hegel to go between,
meaning that since logos and pathos can never be unified in themselves as logos or pathos,
you have to invent a mythos. And this is the temporary story about ourselves that human beings
have to create all the time to make sense of the world. So Hegel allows us to have a temporary
platform, which we agree, at least now we can agree, we have a paradigm, we have a certain
historical period, we agree on certain values, we create a society together and off we go, right?
So to create that temporary platform, the mythos about ourselves currently in the digital age
with AI arriving and climate change and everything to arrive at a mythos is what we need. The meta
crisis is a lack of a new mythos. It's a nihilistic state where the old mythos is dead.
It's it's not a death of a God, it's a death of a paradigm and a new paradigm has to be
stored and we're in between paradigms for the most. Okay, so this moves us on to metaphysics.
So what kind of what kind of implications does this neurological model have for metaphysics?
What it means that like you guys, the three of you here, I hate reductionism, reductionism,
most silliest thing ever. Bonita just pointed out perfectly so simply by reducing the pizza to
the wheat is idiocy, right? The problem is that I don't know why, but especially the computer
scientists to make all the technology they are all reductionist and they tend to go to either
reduction down to the so sort of simplest monad which where apparently the entire history of
the universe is preprogrammed or something. They go all the way down to reduce everything down to
some kind of atom, which would then explain everything else that happens afterwards because
everything is then deterministic from that point, which I totally disagree with. But they also go
the other way and said, well, I'm conscious and there's consciousness is in some center of the
universe. And I'm a fucking narcissist. And because I'm a computer scientist, just made
billions of dollars. Therefore, everything has to be about me. So everything can be reduced
to a consciousness. All I tell those guys is that here is a rock, go and cuddle with a rock,
have sex with the rock and talk to the rock, not with me apparently because the rock has
consciousness and you can talk to it, right? And off they go. So reductionism is the enemy,
but it's being this difficult to get rid of reductionism. I know all you guys here in the
thread say, oh, relations, yes, of course, relations prior to a lot of our own relations,
you have no idea of difficulties to actually sit down and try to do relationalist philosophy.
This is why two geniuses like Hegel and Nietzsche and White Ted to do it. And it's really,
really hard. But okay, but if you try to do it, you got to remove all those things out there
where you lose track. So what I'm proposing is that I'm sorry, but the word nature is just
the opposite of culture. And I'm defiant here. Nature is not superior to culture.
The just different emerges as nature emerged and culture emerged. And like Greg probably
graced me, they're equal. If you're going to do metaphysics, don't do don't do axiology,
we do metaphysics, leave axiology, you can do that later. It can be its own fourth story,
whatever, leave axiology, just try to be as neutral as you can, try to describe how the
world functions. That's all you try to do here philosophically. That's metaphysics. So you say,
okay, so where do I start them? Well, here's the great thing, Bergson. Bergson said, why is everybody
obsessed with why there's something rather nothing? Because that's just interchangeable,
like you were nothing, then you were born, you were something and then you die, you're nothing
again. There's something and nothing all the time. That wasn't even a philosophical question,
this like betrugation. And then Bergson said, what really strikes me with reality and with
the university is how much difference there is. God, there's so much difference and difference
and difference upon difference and difference between differences and differences and differences
all the time, which is relations. Relationship is obsession with difference. And I'm obsessed with it.
So I start my philosophy right here and now with you guys. And then I said, what philosophy is
concerned with, what metaphysics is concerned with is that shit happens. And then the question is,
what is shit? What kinds of shit are there? And what does it mean that something happens?
Okay, then there's a great word for that, which is emergence. And we can then locate
emergence as we temporarily say, emergence is like the most important happening that ever happened
to us. So we sit here and describe the world of the 21st century. What is the most important thing
that ever happened to us? And this is where Greg got some of the ideas from and Greg and I started
into changing, you know, knowledge with each other a few years ago, is that it makes sense
then to create these different emerges that have happened. Well, apparently, some kind of big
bounce or big bang, whatever happened. And physics came out of that. And we have chemistry and we
have biology. And biology and physics is a hard problem to begin with. You don't need to mind
a matter to have a hard problem. The hard problem is everywhere. Because if one thing is irreducible
to something else, probably the problem is hard just because you're using the wrong language.
If you use the language of biology, try to describe physics, you're going to go dead wrong.
If you use the language of physics, try to describe biology, it won't work. So biology is
just a different emergence vector compared to physics and different emerges vector. I even
allow chemistry one as well. And then we would always say mind. And as Greg says, the mind has
produced culture and culture is radically different from all the natures we had in the past. So we
have a cultural emergence vector. So when we look at the world, we have these different
emergence vectors. And then we could start make sense of each one of them independently by refusing
to reduce any one of them to the other ones. Can you see how flat this becomes? So it's an
emergentism to begin with. So this emergentism. Now here's the problem though. Something could
happen. You know, shit happens. Something could happen that forces us to rethink how we look at
the world. It's happened in the past quite a few times. It seems even like every time a new paradigm
comes right now, the internet came and took over the world. And we had satellites everywhere,
we're all interconnected with each other and AI comes along. And of course we start seeing
networks everywhere. And then we live in a network dynamical world all of a sudden. And then of
course we say, well, everything is religious. Yeah, because to us now here, network dynamical
universe to make sense of this, for me sitting here is waiting talking to you guys like we're
in the same room. Magic. Yesterday's magic is tomorrow's technology. Magic. Okay. So the world
changes. And our world, you have to change with it. And we're only human. That means the emergentism
has to be transcendental. And here's the trick. It is so, so easy by human mind, which is stuck
with reductionism to try to find rules and patterns for emergencies. Say that, well,
an emergency is objectively when this thing's happened that it's an emergency. And then Hegel
and I just said, no way, no way, baby, you can't do that. Because if an emergency occurs, it wasn't
pre-programmed. There was no creator God that dictated beforehand what constitutes an emergency.
It's like Hegel says, it's only in his side that we human beings construct the necessity of the past
and say that because now with what we know now, that was an emergency, but that was not. Okay.
That means the number one rule for transcendental emergentism is that it disqualifies any general
emergency theory. There's no general concept to what an emergency is beforehand. What happens is
that when a certain emergence happens, the entire theory has to be thrown out and reconstructed as
a new transcendental emergent system. And that is the transcendentality. It's allowing us to
completely change everything. Or like I say, when people say they don't believe in God, well,
haven't waited long enough yet, meaning God could come. Looking at AIs, getting scared like God,
and we might need God because we haven't mentored the devil. We did August 6, 1945, we blow up a
bomb over Oshima, the devil very much exists, and we went to the devil. So we have to do theology
again and understand we didn't ment the devil. Where is God to save us from the devil? Right?
Now, if you do that, if you start to think about the word like that, there's incredible freedom
in going for a transcendental emergency perspective. And why I use the word emergency rather than nature
is because it's a purely metaphysical theory. Greg and John are doing science metaphysics
for science. I respect that. But if you do a purely metaphysical theory, it's better to work
with the emergency because it's absolutely neutral. It just says that shit happens.
It says nothing else. It doesn't say nature. It doesn't say culture. And it says that if an
emergency happens, and we in hindsight, we live in the 21st century will agree on that these things
are the most important things that ever happen in history. And then we can start looking at these
are the most important things that ever happen in human history, because in the same last
historical season, these dramatic events to change history forever, and we know how to live
with the consequence of that. Hiroshima being one of them. Okay, that's an emergency. Transcendent
emergentism applied on human history, and then we can start understanding society.
So that's essentially how you do metaphysics. If you're a little philosopher like me, I guess.
All right. Thank you. Each of you. I think we've gotten a very good summary of the various
perspectives. I'll just put a let me let me put a little Utah spin. Then I'll invite John
Benita and Bart to just talk amongst themselves. Certainly if I have there are a lot I want to
say, but I really want the three of you guys to have some dialogue. I want to remind folks,
since we're here in Utah land for the conference, that Utah is situated in a particular kind of
problem. And that is what I mentioned earlier in terms of like Bart is coming from a different place.
It is very important to understand the situation of Utah. And that's crucial to understand both
its power and its limitations. It is structured to solve or it emerges out of a very particular
kind of justificatory problem, which presupposes the natural sciences and the kind of knowledge
they're trying to generate. And how does it then relate to psychology as both the science and the
subject? And the Utah architecture is concerned with that and it emerges as a naturalism as a
function of that. That does not necessarily say that, oh, that is where everyone should be situated
or a philosopher that takes a pure proper metaphysical stance should be situated there.
So I'll just say that in relationship to the Utah stance. So I can hang with Bart and basically be
like, oh, there's a different framing that we should be aware of. And if we have those framings,
I think there's a lot of participatory dance that can be effectively take place.
So I'll offer that. And it's a very similar comment in relationship to Benita. And really,
actually, then there's the synergy with John's view in particular. And I think that is a function
of being psychologists, cognitive science, et cetera. So I'll offer that sort of as a synergistic,
but I also want to get into some disagreements. I have some questions for both Bonnie and Bart,
but I'm going to pause. I'm going to hand it back to John and see where you want to take it,
John. And then we can just go in some dialogue amongst the four of us and then start really
bringing in some questions. Yeah, John, go ahead. I think, yeah. Okay. Yeah, thank you.
First of all, that was really rich and wonderful. I really welcome Alexander's. Everybody seems to
be calling him Bard. Is that what you want? It's okay. Sometimes sub-Bard, but then it will.
It makes me feel in high school. Teenage boys often use last names as opposed to first names,
so at least in Canada. I don't know why we do that. First of all, I'm very happy to get into
a discussion with Hegel. I've been doing, as you probably know, Bart, there's a renaissance about
Hegel going on, and the work of Brandum, the work of Pinkard, the work of Farnath,
Zambroga, all these people. I'm going through all of that literature. I'm going through it very
carefully with Dan Ciappi, especially Hegel's binding of the notion of rationality into
reciprocal recognition between individuals, not only synchronically, but intergenerationally.
I think that maps, by the way, very powerfully into current work on extended cognition,
collective intelligence, things like that. You always need to ask, where's the agent that's
doing the cognition? I think Hegel gives us an alternative agency. He famously talks about
the I that is we that is I, and that's the kind of agency that is doing this more fundamental
ontology. I think in that sense, I'm in fundamental agreement with you, and then trying to work out
how does that agency operate? I won't get into the details about that. I think that is a very
significant problem. It's a problem that is now becoming central to Foricog Psi. Hegel is coming
in in a very big way. I think in that sense, we're in agreement. I'll speak about Whitehead
in a second, and then I'll return to Benita. I do have an issue with Hegel, and I think this
comes out very clearly in Pinkard. Hegel talks a lot about the sociocultural, cultural, historical
processes that make the kind of persons, the kind of agents. We need all of these practices,
as he repeatedly says, that makes us into the kind of cognitive agents that can recognize
the inconsistencies within a particular way of life, a particular form of life. And of course,
the phenomenology tries to trace both that out. The problem I have is I fear that at times Hegel
verges on a performative contradiction. He is using the propositional to try to point to the
non-propositional. He doesn't really give us a theory of practices or an ecology of practice,
and that can't be just propositional. You, of course, have to use language, but you have to
actually engage people non-propositionally. That is the way in which they learn practices.
And I would put to Benita, I think she's right. We don't ultimately get at reality through
truth statements. We get at reality through processes, practices of realization. And that's
where I would bring in what Benita is talking about. I totally agree. We need ecologies of
practices because realization is how we get conformed to reality as distinct from truth.
And then the issue then comes up. Okay, well, what does that look like? And I think this takes us
into some work that's going on now about some of the work I'm doing about the deep at the heart of
the rational. And I think this is already presaged in Hegel. You find ritual. You find rituals of
recognition and forgiveness. And you find the generation of the spirit of trust. Barnett does
that very well. And you have additional arguments for why at the heart of the rational, we find
ritual, we have to use all these imaginal things. Look, simple one example of many. To be rational,
I have to reflect on my own cognition. Oh, well, where do I do? Well, I go into this interior space.
Was that a literal space? No. Is it a merely fictional space? No, it gives you access to your
cognition so you can correct it. It's but it's neither fictional nor literal. Well, what is it?
It's imaginal. And you and you're engaging in ritual because you're seriously playing within
an imaginal rain, rain realm, I should say, in order to bring about the fundamental kinds of
transformation in metacognition that is constitutive of rationality. So at the heart of the rational
is the rich is ritual. But that doesn't mean that ritual is irrational. Ritual has a non
propositional rationality. It's not the rationality of coherence. It's the rationality of does your
is what you're doing in your ritual context. Does it transfer systematically? Does it transfer
broadly and deeply to many domains of your life? And does it transform you profoundly? Does it reach
into many levels of the psyche and transform those that when when you get systematic transfer and
systemic transformation, that's why rituals survive. That is how they survive. That's their
rationality. That is what we that's that's how we judge a good ritual from a bad rich will.
So you find the ritual and the rational rational mutually profoundly interpenetrating
each other. And for me, that's the where the work of the Kyoto school, especially Nishita,
is so important because Nishita develops, you know, he follows the Zen ritual into the experience,
the experience, not to put that in serious quotations of nothingness. And then he does explicitly,
by the way, a neoplatonic investigation into the grounds of intelligibility. And he gets to the
basho. And he shows that the basho and the the Zen experience of nothingness are completely
interdependent and inter reliant. And you get basically Zen, no Platonism.
About Whitehead, I think I was just at the McGillchrist conference at the California Institute
for Integral Studies. And of course, you know, and Ian and I agree on, you know, the right hemisphere
is about the Gestalt and the left hemisphere is about the features. And I can give you all the
features of the bird that doesn't give you a bird. You need the Gestalt. That's where the
intelligibility actually hangs. And that's pure relationality. The right, that's what the right
hemisphere is about. I'll just plug in real fast, John. Matt Siegel wanted to be here. He's actually
at a conference. He sends love. And of course, we've talked to him and talked with him, Bonnie.
And he's an excellent process philosopher. I'll just make that nod as you mentioned.
Yeah. And I just want to finish very quickly. I don't want to monopolize. And then the thing
there, of course, is the left hemisphere works with parts within a formal system and well-defined
problems. Just getting a paper published now showing that you can't computationalize
relevance realization because the process of formalization, the process of translating things
into a formal system is not itself a well-defined problem. And it can't therefore be grasped by
a formal system. Formalization is not a computational function. It is no way of running a formal system.
And so you get that the right hemisphere has priority. And the right hemisphere is about
pure relationality. And Ian and I fundamentally agree on that. The reason I bring that up is
in Fuller in his astonishing book, Heidegger Neoplatonism and the History of Being,
makes the argument. And Matt Siegel and the other people, the Whiteheadians agreed that
Whitehead is basically running an argument that was developed by the later Neoplatonist
about pure relationality, about emergence and emanation. What Whitehead adds that I think
James, I know Fuller personally, what James misses is that process of that, I think both of you are
putting your finger on, which is the radical creativity. And I think that's what Bard wanted
to point out too. Whitehead, the many become one and then one is added. That drawing together
of all the widths isn't just a stagnant interrelationality. It's pregnant. It creates
a newness, a novelty. And what I want to add to that is that that means we have to introduce
into our ontology radical uncertainty. If you have radical emergence in which you can't predict
the emergence, but there is some novelty introduced, you are facing radical uncertainty,
which means by definition, no formal system can ultimately track reality because formal
systems require the exclusion of uncertainty. So if there really is radical creativity,
which is what I think Whitehead adds to the Neoplatonist, and I think what Bard is pointing
to, we face an ontology in which uncertainty is not just an epistemic matter. It's not
equivalent to probabilistic risk that we can calculate. It is radical uncertainty, which then
means we cannot grasp it with a formal system. And I think that's the convergent with what
Bard is was saying. And I think that's also part of picking up on what Benita was, I think, pointing
to. And I'll end my responses there. There's 17,000 more things I want to say. But I was interested
in also, I think sacredness is the bridging notion between the ultimacy of ontology and the
ultimacy of axiology. The sacred is that which is most valuable, but it is also bound to what is
most real. And I was trying to make an argument that if you get to this ultimate reality, you
have the triple transcendent, which gives you sacredness. And I think if you have sacredness
with unformalizability that is captured, realized, I should say, not captured, wrong word,
that is realized in a set of practices, I think you're very much into what religion was doing for
us. And that would be my response. Lovely. Okay, so how about I hand it over to Benita and see
what thoughts she wants to pick up on them? We'll really open it up, folks. You can use a question
and answer chat. I see one in there already. I'll also check the chat box for this. And I know
we'll come in, but I want to give Benita and Bard an opportunity to respond to that. You guys
certainly ask each other questions as well. And I'll be checking the Q&A as well. So Benita, thoughts?
This is so be kind. And so as John said, there's a million things to go through. I want to say
this may be a little bit of plug, but I am on the last panel and we'll have a chance to talk about
my conception of God. So I'm going to leave that part out. Although it would be nice to just
put that here. And I want to talk about what I think. First of all, I have to say this because I
have to kind of tease Alexander Bard. Okay, so Bruno Moutour wrote this book, Speculative Grace.
And it really sounds very much like you creating religion with a flat ontology.
And I just think only a true genius like Bard could use Hegel as an icon for a flat ontology.
Yeah, so that was genius. So brilliant. But I guess what I want to do is kind of
perform what I think Whitehead is doing. And that is everything we said about the difference
between the true and real. So that's the bird chair. And then he says, so then what do I have?
What do I have to experience reality? And basically what he boils it down to is I have
what the Buddhists would call self validating experience of the real. And this is a feeling,
that the most fundamental way I can express what this experience is, is a feeling that things are
real. And so from this, he says, as I interpret him, as in my fantasy of being with Whitehead,
he then says, well, if this is, so instead of having like a metaphysical ground, this is what
I truly believe is the most fundamental thing I can say about myself. And then he makes his leap.
This is the metaphysical leap. Maybe all of reality works on this template. What if all of
reality, maybe it's not just a coincidence that my experience is that this self validating feeling
that something is real. And in this feeling itself validates two things. And this is where the
transcendent comes in. It validates that my experience is real and replete. It is whole and
full. But it also validates that it's not complete. That there's a remainder in the cosmos. And this
creates the sense that there is more reality. So this is extremely important experience. And
I believe this is the kind of experience that sustained Whitehead's work. I've never read
a biography of him, but that it brings true to me. And I just want to combine this with something
that Diana Fascia says. She's a student of Panseps. And she talks about the clinical
experience of transformants, that the psychology, the psychologist and the client are working
toward this, what she calls, she says, it's an evolutionary arc that's deeply wired in humans
for transformants. And that truth in this sense, which is reality, is this trust or comes from
the word trough or trust. It's this inner understanding of clarity that is the marker for
awakening of perception. It emerges from awakened perception as a core truth or trust to trust
to truth is to behold. And so I think that these kinds of languages, these kinds of
confidence in the human experience is a potential point at which we can begin to
investigate and share and sing and celebrate the confidence of the real and share this peculiar
sense that the real is always never complete. And there's always a latency in our experience. So
yeah, that's what I'd like to put in the space. That's awesome. I did not expect Diana Fascia to
pop up. I'm a fan of hers, AEDT, and that's Accelerated Experiential Dynamic Approaches.
And it is absolutely the case that modern, emotion focused elements, gestalt frameworks,
to me, the word that I would definitely want us to hit here is primate mindedness.
The mind, the idea that the mind is a propositional reflector that's going to represent,
and that's what's split off, is one of the deep errors of the Enlightenment. Mindedness is the
embodied contact. And clinically, what we see so much of is a disconnect, a fundamental propositional
disconnect. You can argue, certainly you, McGill, because John, and saying modern society in part
is propositionally personhood disconnected from the primate embodiedness. And so much of what
we do clinically is attempt to connect to that in a relational space that creates a shared,
non-propositional, intersubjected, I'd call it a mind-to-be space, to connect to the real.
And it's so lovely to see that bridge happen in terms of me as a clinician. That's sort of an
unexpected turn, so I just had to prop in there. Let me hand it over to Bard, and then we'll really
start to let's, you know, engage in question and answer from the audience and whatnot.
So, there's two quick responses to Bonita and Greg, because we've been in a lot of conversations,
and we'll be at that. This is whited at his Hegelian vest. And please remember, I use Hegel for
method. Hegel was wrong on many things. John can be short of that. He was wrong on many things,
but he was brilliant when it comes to method, because with Hegelian dialectics, we arrive in
Western philosophy with a complete set of how to think relationalism. And whited just does the
same thing. And that remainder, that's exactly the negation within the subject in Hegel. So,
you have those things there. So, perfect, Bonita. And as for you, Greg, this is why I am as a
psych analyst, I am fighting to get psych analysis out of the ditch of science, because as a science
psych analysis failed miserably in 20th century, but it took off and became a philosophical
discipline. And as a philosophical discipline, the 20th century was, it was anthropology became
philosophy. It was psych analysis became philosophy. And most of all, you know, to do Hegel, I had to
do Marshall McLuhan first, because there's no media theory in Hegel. Hegel thinks ideas develop
over time. No, they don't. What develops is, of course, again, relations between human beings
and different technologies. And because different technologies develop over time,
they change the life world we're in. And we actually take to take, we tend to take to the
technologies and proven our lives run the ones to make our miserable. And because we do that,
we can then expand it to learn how to read, write, count, and we can mass duplicate new kinds of
amazing things we do. And that's exactly why I think Hegel is only method and nothing else.
Leave Hegel for the rest. That's exactly why Marx and Darwin, the other guys who came after
Hegel, all went to the material real world and threw it at Hegel with the dialectical method.
But the method is great. So I, this is why I'm a great fan of Greg and where I'm involved with
the Utah, okay, Utah, is it called Utah? Utah. Utah is great. Utah, because I really believe
psychology needs a reformation. It needs a massive reformation. They get stuck as a service to
governments, basically to fix people to send them back to work over the past 50 to 100 years.
And what I loved about Greg's passion was the fact that he said, I'm a psychologist,
I'm going to take psychology seriously. I'm going to, I'm going to do what Aristotle
meant with psycho and logos and do real psychology. And this is exactly why I totally support the
attempt to do a proper psychology as a science, which of course then connects to John's work
as a cognitive scientist. These are great scientists, scientists, we need more of them.
Okay. So for me to do psych analysis is now to do strictly an art. It's nothing but an art.
It's a philosophical art. For me, psychoanalysis performing through people is basically taking
the entire history of philosophy down to one single human being and then put their
divigiality into philosophical perspective. It's teaching people how to do a philosophy
about themselves. That's a cycle of it. So psychoanalysis, I work today with psychiatry,
and I work today with psychologists. What I do is I arrange teams here at Stockholm
where there's psychologists, there's psychiatrists, and there's a psychoanalyst.
And there are three different perspectives looking at human beings and it's stunning
how quickly we can get to results and solve problems and give people a quality of life
and heal, right? So, so I'm all for this. Again,
narratology, like I told you, when you have a dialectical relation between three things,
it's usually very, very productive. Don't try to unify them into one thing.
Don't try to turn logos, pathos and mythos into one thing. Keep them separate, live with the
dichotomies. This is Hegel, live the dichotomies and it's going to be productive and it's going
to be great. Okay. Now, now I want to respond to John, because I'm just going to write a word
down here in the chat channel. I'm going to put my glasses on and write it down,
because this is the next project I'm involved with and I'm thrilled about. It's probably my
seventh book and everything else I'm doing. Zoophism with a Z. So here's the take. When I
started traveling to Asia in the 1980s and realized the religion and philosophy had to
meet again and Eastern spirituality was amazing. And I was totally with Ken Wilber that it would
be embarrassing for my generation of philosophers to start with the Greeks once over again.
No, it didn't start with the Greeks. The Greeks just wrote a lot. The Arabs saved their texts
and the Arabs saved the texts for us. And then we, inside, we made up the Greek system,
you know, the cradle civilization, whatever, and this sort of mythology about Europe.
Josephine Quinn's new book, How the World Made the West, amazing book, better than sapiens or
whatever. It's the biggest, best history book ever written by a woman from the UK and it just
kills the idea. The Greeks started civilization. So what I did is that was that I started looking
into Asian philosophy and I started into looking into the Indian and the Chinese and Japanese and
the Persian traditions. And then I discovered that the Persian tradition is the original Greek
philosophy. The word philosophy is from about 600 before Christ. It was used already by
Indian Iranians 1,100 years earlier as Maas Dal Yassna in Avestan Persian, which means the
love of wisdom. Basically, the Greeks just bought it and he had the keys Heraclitus. So
for all these things about Neoplatonism and Zen, if you look at the Silk Road and you look at the
Silk Road Triad, as I call it, which is the traditions of Buddhism with Shiaism as well
in India. And then you got Zoroastrianism and Zoroastrianism in Persia. And then you got
Daoism in China. Then you got all these different spiritual schools that would never really be
fought with each other. No recorded conflicts whatsoever. Basically, just one from one way
to the next along the Silk Road and you found slightly different variations of the same spiritual
themes. Trade routes, great. Whatever spirituality we go into next historically is human beings.
We should definitely look at the trade routes for inspiration because these religions are
non-digmatic. They're spiritual schools, they're follow practices, they're follow rituals, and
they basically fix our lives every day. So we get rid of the destructive bullshit and our mindset,
drop it somewhere and stay with the constructive mindset and build on that.
And so when I started Zoroastrianism, the original texts, the Gathas and the Saint of Vesta,
translated by Germans in the 19th century, I discovered, wait, this is exactly Heraclitus.
Heraclitus said the Greeks should not be Greeks. Heraclitus said we were Persians. We're part of
the Persian Empire. It was wrong we've been Persian, right? Heraclitus maybe even was Persian,
but the thing with Heraclitus is that by comparing Heraclitus fragments with Zoroastrian Gathas,
which I did 30 years ago, I discovered this is going to be the gold mine I'm going to work from.
And what I'm now doing, what we're probably doing now is basically the Zed in Zufism is,
of course, Zufism, be taking back Zufism from its origin. Zufism, taking it away from Islam.
Sorry guys, but you didn't invent this, you know, you always hated it and you always badmouthed it
because it was modest and all those things that we love. So basically Zufism is a modest
reinterpretation of Zufism as older than Islam. And we then discovered that this is exactly
what Zoroastrianism and Buddhism met. And Zoroastrianism and Buddhism met in contemporary
Central Asia. And of course, out of that, we got Bodhidharma, who was not a prince from India,
was a trader from Sogna. We got Babasavana, who is not an Indian Prince. He was another trader.
He came from Tajikistan today and he came to Tibet. So Varayana and Zen are just to be drenched,
drenched in Persian philosophy as much as their Chinese were Indian. And these are the richest
traditions I can find in the world today. See, if I'm going to do religion and philosophy and go back
5,000 years and go to find the gold mines and do whatever we can do today to understand ourselves
and our history as humans, this is the gold mine I'm totally obsessed with. I can't do Peru and
Mexico too. Other guys have to do that. But I'm totally obsessed with duration and with heritage
and I think where John and I are both heading, maybe this is the future where we can go into
conversation future, I think we're heading is that if I pursue Zufism, I mean, when John just
mentioned the Kyoto school, chairs came out of my eyes right away. These are my months I've spent
in Zen temples in Korea and Japan. This is exactly what I love the most about this conversation.
So I'm just dropping towards Zufism for the first time here because my team here in Scandinavia
agreed. We call each other Zufis now. You can call it Zen Zufis if you like, but we are practicing
now living a Zufism and we're obviously finding other Zufis out there around the world who also
managed to live with this sort of monist spiritual tradition with daily practices.
So just want to put that out there and then say that Neoplatonism, maybe then John can dig deeper
to whatever. I don't get too stuck with the Neoplatonist. I love Hellenism. I think Hellenism
was the most fantastic thing ever. But for me, it's actually deeper. I think before Plato, we go
before Plato with the priests of critics, we discovered they did philosophy flux. They did
Relationalism. Relationalism is the oldest philosophy. It's rather later when, you know,
the Greeks start thinking and mathematics comes into the picture, Pythagoras over there,
and there's so fatigued with mathematics, they think, well, there could be perfect forms out there.
Well, that's an interesting idea, but it's not actually how the world operates.
Today, it's the computer scientists with zeros and ones. And if they have billions of dollars,
think they're philosophers when they're really dangerous. So we have to respond to that whole
sort of computer science attempt to turn the world into zeros and ones and nothing but zeros and ones
and create this sort of deterministic nightmare that comes out of it and respond to that with what
John perfectly calls the radical uncertainty. The radical uncertainty is Hegel's. We are terrified
of our freedom because the future is completely contingent. It is the past which is a necessity
because the past is locked up. History in Hegel is like a zigzag. So everything the zigzag is
the past. Don't change that. Amofati, Nietzsche said, just accept that whatever happened happened.
That's factual truth. But the future is completely scaringly contingent and open and we are active
agents engaged in the future. And for me, that's being a Sufi. So I'll leave it at that.
Well, lovely. John, you want to respond to that? And then I'll take some questions from the audience.
Yeah. Bart, you may be pleased to know that the next big series I'm working on and it's going to
be Titanically Bigger than my previous two. I'm going to go on like on location. It's going to be at
different levels of media presentation. A macro, a mezzo and a micro is called the Philosophical
Silk Road in which I actually pick up the proposal. Now, I talk about Xanthoplatonism,
but we can quibble about things like that. I think Neil Platonism plays a role in Sufism too.
But I don't want to get mired in a historical argumentation here. I think the orientation
is very much aligned. And true to my criticism of Hegel, I'm not going to merely talk about this.
This has become a personal pilgrimage for me. I'm going through a purgation process right now
that I have not called for, but has called me in which I'm fundamentally preparing to actually go
to these places and be transformed by looking at the past, by also drenching myself in what I call
the geo-philosophy, the culture and the history. And so making myself a vehicle that's too pretentious,
at least put myself in service of the advent of the sacred that is happening right now
in response to the meeting crisis. But it seems like what you are talking about and what
I'm talking about, though not identical or deeply convergent. So I just wanted to reply to that.
That's the next big project, right? So that's really lovely. And actually,
there's a question from Victor. So I'm going to go to some Q&A. I'll see if I can pick it up
in the chat if there are other kinds of elements. If Victor wants to unmute, he can read this or
I will read it for him. I think it's a fascinating question. Wait a second. I'm not sure. Why don't
I go ahead and read it, Victor, if you're around and you can unmute and then you can dialogue.
And so here's the question. Our being in an emergence pervades our collective awareness,
gestured at as a time between worlds. How can a philosophy of transcendental emergentism
inform science such that the preferable emerges? Where do we want to go? What do we cultivate?
What's the relationship, I think, between facts and values? Is there a direction where we're
cultivating preferable? I hope I don't put too many words in Victor's mouth. But I'll throw that
out there and see if somebody wants to pick up. What are we oriented toward? What are we trying
to do in form of science? I would also wonder also about practices, et cetera.
I would, first of all, say that one of the things that comes out of this, and Pickstock does a lot
of work on this and so does filler, but other people have, I've mentioned case beer, putnam,
some of my own work. The fact value distinction, the is-ot distinction, is breaking down.
It doesn't mean there aren't differences, but there are differences like the difference between
two colors, right? They're on a continuum of degree and they're not differences in kind.
You can't actually ever state a fact that is not simultaneously a value judgment.
You can't make any value judgment that is not simultaneously a statement of fact.
They are non-logically identical, but they are inseparably interpenetratingly bound to one
another. And I think as long as we still frame this as we have to solve the is-ot problem,
no. I don't often invoke Wittgenstein, but here's where I think Wittgenstein is
appropriate. We don't solve the is-ot problem. We are in a place now where we dissolve it,
and then we get back to an ontology that allows us for profound connectedness to reality.
And I think for me, any way forward that doesn't prioritize that connectedness
to the religio in a way that is rationally self-confident, sending, rationally self-correcting,
all that sort of stuff, all the stuff we've been talking about here, and that's part of
what Hegel was on about. It is rationally self-correcting. It's just not strictly
syllogistic logic, right? Because the process is to be self-correcting or you can't distinguish
foolishness from wisdom. But I think for me, what comes out of this, and I can make a deeper
argument, but wise love, agopic love, like what is guiding you to loving more wisely,
and what is allowing you to love wisdom in an interpenetrating manner. I think
if people are looking for a practical normativity to guide them in practice, that's important.
And then one other thing I would say is give up the monological standpoint.
The evidence is now overwhelming. We reason better collectively than we do individually.
Experimental evidence is merging. And this is what I would say, not pushback on Bard. I think this is
amplification. The dialectic has to be accompanied with a diologos, which is
dialogical practice, because that gives you the cognitive agent that is actually capable of doing
this new kind of realization of a new kind of ontology, in which fact and value are no longer
separate, in which theory and data are no longer separate, in which analytic and synthetic are
no longer separate, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Bard is right. This is hard, but it is already
happening. And I think we should orient to the places. Here is one of them, and there are many
others where it's happening. And we should do our best to culturally try to bind all these places
and practices together. That would be my recommendation. I agree totally with John here.
It's just called Nartological Dialectics in my dingo, but it's exactly the same thing. So it's
a very humbling kind of standard dialectics works, and you can't arrive at a fixed point anytime.
I think the really scary thing right now out there is that the people who were
diabetic have gone fundamentalist and gone hysterical, as we're seeing in the Middle East
right now. That's terrifying, especially if these guys have access to atomic bombs and can blow us
all up. That's a very, very real threat. And the reason why it goes hysterical is because
fundamentalism is like the end state of something that's already dead. It's like imagine an ideology
which is zombie-like. It is almost dead. So the last thing you do is that if God does not intervene
in the world as he should do according to your dogma, you have to act on God's behalf.
The scary thing right now with Islam and Christianity is they might get the armageddon
they prophesied about, but it's all self-made. This is terrifying. This is very, very real.
My recommendation then is to say the revolution is currently completely on the technological side,
and that's scary because the revolution is going hay-walk right now and needs to be contained.
For me as a human, that means I react exactly the opposite way. I retract. The most radical thing to
do as a human today is to retract, like John so wisely says, like we all do here, retract, step
back, go into retreat, observe the world from the outside. And yeah, it's about love. It's about love.
It's about finding that spot where that love is and feeling, be human. This is why we can't do
for loss without spirituality any longer. It's just another data. But what I'm saying is that
what Hegel did is that he basically said his absolute is on the meta-level precisely because
he doesn't allow any absolute on the formal level. That's exactly why Hegel is great in the sense
that he says that the only absolute I have is that there is no absolute in the sense that
there is only movement and flux all the time, and all we can do then we try to think those fluxes
are dialectical processing and dialectical thinking. And that's what we can do to not arrive at any
fixed point, only temporary solutions to temporary problems. And that's what we do all the time.
That means it's incredibly anti-dogmatic. That's the whole point. And the anti-dogmatism is exactly
what we need more of the world today. Whenever you can, if you're going to be a missionary about
anything today, you're going to be a missionary about anti-dogmatic, go anti-dogmatic and dissolve
these dogmas out there because they're the ones that are really affecting us.
Bonnie, did you yet want me to respond to that?
Yeah, I wanted to ping on what was where John and Barb were talking about philosophy is
dialogic. And then I saw a question pop up in the chat, could Bonnie give us examples of fierce
naturalism? So I can kind of answer, build on the dialogic by answering with what I would call
fierce naturalism. Okay, so on the one hand, there's on one level, I completely agree that
philosophy is dialogical. But I think we there's so the fierce naturalism would say yes,
but not dialogic at the level of words and thinking with thoughts. And this is where
if you think of the concept of a stack, I think that so for example,
if you can imagine atoms, atoms are dialogical, they're resonance with each other, there's either
constructive or deconstructive interference. And this is a kind of feeling between the
resonance. And then we get to sentience. And sentience is a dialogue through touch,
you know, so the worm oscillating in an ordered environment is touching the environment.
So that's I touch, and then we have cognizance, where these are gestures, these are physical,
in emotional aphid laden gestures at the animal mind level, let's say, and that's
dialogic gestures are dialogic gesture is touch at a distance. And then we get into the Hellenistic
and the lyrical philosophies, pre Socratic philosophies, where people are saying or singing.
So this is a calm response, the Psalms and the lyrical Hellenistic philosophy. So you just feel
what this is, this I touch, I gesture, I say, I sing, then you get into the great epic of Gilgamesh
and the narratives of the Iliad and the Odyssey. And now we're right at the heels of the Socratic
time. And this is when we're starting to tell. So instead of like lyrical and saying with that
with, you know, saying in a calm response, you have someone telling the whole history of the
people, the whole history of, you know, Troy, and the whole history and these become so there's a
reduction in the dialogical nature at this point in history. And then with the Socratics,
I would argue that becomes I name. So instead of telling a story of a man who was courageous,
but also an asshole to his wife, and all these kinds of very complex ways in which humans in
nature show up in the as in the allegories, we start to say, Well, that's too confusing, we never
see a real courageous man, because sometimes he's not courageous. So let's extract and isolate these
virtues, these variables from reality, and name them. And this is, I think, where we're the next
phase is now we name, then we're going to compute. Okay. So I see this progression that the telling
and then the naming is a bottleneck. And so we go from sentience, cognizance, consciousness,
to reflexive awareness. And this is where we get to I tell, I name, I compute. So it's the
progressive simulation of the self. And then we start dialoguing with the self. And I think this
is a bottleneck. So what we're doing in we call it lyric culture is now we want to move from
reflexive awareness to receptive awareness. So there's an opening as john describes very well,
I see I see with the eye of the soul. This is kind of a Gnostic insight. And then you go from
receptive awareness to open awareness. So receptive awareness, you still have the sense that
you're receiving perceptions and open awareness is more like I'm feeling. And so we're back to
Whitehead's insight that there's a resounding resonance of feeling that I am embedded it,
I'm not I'm not just receiving it. And then we I mean, this is this is all, you know,
a methodology. And then from there, you become you get the sense of the I am. And this is the
transcendent sense of the radiant being of reality or the radiance being the radiance of God,
or the radiance of the divine. And you find that within yourself. And the naming the telling
and the naming and the computing are in the wrong direction. We have to dial that back and move to
our receptive awareness, open awareness, and the sense of original radiance, which you might say
is how the universe started. So that's kind of like a fierce naturalism take on this conversation.
And I thank you for the opportunity to put it on the table. It's not completely resonant with
what else we've been talking about. Okay. What I'd like to do now is I've got another question.
Second one that came up, this is from Spencer. I'll read it, Spencer, certainly feel free to
pop in. But I'll read this is actually directed at Alexander Bard. How do you feel about the idea
that Hegel needs to be read together with Schelling and later ficta 1804 plus to be fully
relationally understood, for instance, to fully read Hegel with whitehead and delused?
That's where the question ends if Spencer wants to. So where does Hegel fit?
Yeah, okay. But that's been done. That's been done a lot. Hegel is put together with the German
idealists, and he's not an idealist. He's really a dialectician. The way I do Hegel is I do Hegel's
method. And then I provocatively call myself a pan dialecticist. I think fundamentally,
everything in the universe, the only thing I can say about all the different mergers vectors,
if they all seem to have some kind of dialectical quality to them. So I just call myself a pan
dialecticist. Then I learned the lesson from Hegel. No, what wasn't done is the weird artificial
opposition between Hegel and Nietzsche. When I started reading the guys my teenage years,
he was like, they're compatible. They're perfectly compatible. I mean, Nietzsche's armor fought
which is his, you know, axiology. It's just where his values start from. It's exactly like Hegel's
the necessity of the past and scared of the contingency of the future and the freedom. It's
exactly affirmation in Nietzsche. They're perfectly compatible. And I'm glad the whole new generation
today, at least in Europe, they're all reading Hegel and Nietzsche through each other, which is
incredibly productive to get all the best uses bits out of these amazing 90s century thinkers.
Then when you start looking at the 20th century, I found Whited, who I loved to bits,
and he also does relationalism. And it's almost like Whited. Deleuze, of course, later in France,
in the late 20th century, Deleuze does the same thing with Guattari in France,
and they're amazing thinkers. I love Deleuze and Foucault. These are the guys I grew up with.
But Deleuze's attempt at trying to do Hegel as if Hegel did not exist is exactly what Whited
actually did. Whited did Hegel as if Hegel did not exist, and then applied on the natural sciences
and mathematics and tons of stuff that Hegel was not aware of, which is why I think Whited is fantastic.
So I prefer to use the Hegelian method and read it through the 20th century thinkers and then try
to read it through us and try to read it through 20th century philosophy, what the Hegelian method
can mean today. But as method, it is amazing. And I'm so glad that John, who's so fantastic,
is now going to put his head on to Hegel because the day for Varkey goes on Hegel.
That's got to be enormous. Okay. I've got a question here from Kevin Katwas.
And this question is, how does an ontology of pure relationality relate to the emerging digital
network decentralized institutions of the future? How does an ontology of pure relationality relate
to an emerging digital network and decentralized institutions of the future?
I guess that's kind of my question again anyway. It's the paradigm we're in right now is the network
dynamical paradigm. Some call it digital, some call it the internet, some call it AI, whatever.
What happened is the technology now is going global. We get satellites everywhere. Everything is
interconnected. The threat there is to arrive in a surveillance police state. We don't want that. So
I'm totally with decentralization and try to think how can we still have a network dynamical
society with all its benefits but still lived in a decentralized way? That's a fairly difficult
question to solve. Is it typical axiological question today? So we are networked up because we
I've got a question here from Cody Palmer. Does a neoplatonic framework create an ontological
structure? Greg, can you hear us? I think you couldn't hear you, Alexander. I think that's a
problem. All right. Greg, are you still there? He looks frozen. Yeah, that's Alexander just
hanging on a sec. I think that's what happened there. I don't think he was being rude. I think
he thought you'd stopped. Yeah.
I could just finish the answer as soon as he can get where to back because the rest of you are all
here, right? It was just Greg's problem, right? Yeah. He'll be back. So I'm just going to finish
the question. The thing is that I'm with Marsha McLuhan, an amazing philosopher, by the way,
in that media we use. I'm going to show you this because the last time you said him,
did you have you read his Remedian book? Oh, yeah, yeah. Oh, okay. Oh, yeah. I mean,
if anybody's going to save the pope, it's going to be Marsha McLuhan, the best Catholic in the
world, right? But the thing is that the media we use will also affect how we think. And that's why
this sort of minoritarian thinking that Hegel and White did practice at the time is not
becoming majoritarian. We're all starting to think like they think because living in a world
drenched in network relations and we try to figure out how relations must work. And it's fantastic
to live in a relations universe. So why not? But that's why that's why relations become a big
topic because it actually reflects the technological environments we are in right now.
I'd like to answer to that too, then, while we wait for Greg to come back.
And I think this is actually convergent with what Bart is saying. What you still have,
and this goes to what we're now in what's called the fourth rationality debate. We've had a whole
bunch. What is rationality? You still have people claiming that this can ultimately be grasped in
an a priori axiomatic system, all of this. And that that is kind of the epistemological version
of the zombie fundamentalism that Bart was pointing to, but within a scientific, scientific
framework. And part of what we try to argue in two papers, one is
relevance, rationality and relevance realization. The other one is naturalizing
relevance realization. Is that project is actually doomed? You can't do it that way.
It's not that there aren't top down aspects, but you can't step out. This is Hegel. You can't
step out and give an a priori top down, right? Optimization that will work algorithmically
across all possible contexts. This is the last ditch attempt that is being made in order to
wrestle with the network reality and the dynamic system reality we're realizing here. And I think
that is a kind of scientific fundamentalism that is strongly analogous to a lot of religious
fundamentalisms that we have. But because they typically don't blow up buildings or what not
they don't get the deserved attention. But if you don't think these people are going to cause
terrific suffering, if they succeed, I think you're being foolish. So I would want to point out that
there is an attempt to recapture all of what Bart was pointing to, right, about network dynamics
in a top down, a priori axionomic formal systemization. And I think this is the last ditch
attempt. And so I think that has to be properly challenged and resisted. I've been trying to do
so, by the way. And I think other people are. I totally agree with John. That's why I said
Surveillance Police State. Yes. And this book Processing Event is a manifesto against that
happening. The scientist fundamentalists are going to go for the surveillance police state and they're
going to do good in the world. It's like vulgar Platonism. They're going to go for the good in
the world by controlling absolutely everything. Well, that's already happening, because T and
Ping is trying to do it in China with vulgar Confucianism, because vulgar Confucianism is
exactly vulgar Platonism. And these are the two heritages we got in Eastern and Western thinking
we need to get rid of once and for all. We call them the pillar saint ideologies. The pillar
saint ideologies that Confucianism and Platonism at his worst is the little 11 year old boy who
threw his wonderful little idea that if everybody did everything the way I think they should do
the world will be wonderful and everything be a sunny day forever. And they're there. I mean,
most computer scientists I meet when they start to think about philosophy, their mind gets stuck
there. I think it's great that you mentioned that here, John. Scientific fundamentalism is
exactly, scientific fundamentalism is the right term for that. And it's just as scary as any
of the other fundamentalists, especially these guys have so much power and influence today.
We've got to avoid the surveillance police state precisely because we need an open society
without an open society, all freedom is gone. All right. Hey, folks, I'm back.
It looks like we have Scott. It's got a question. I'm noting the time here. Why don't we ask Scott
a question, respond to that, and then we'll congeal, give some final thoughts, and then we'll end
the session that way. Scott. Thank you very much. I appreciate having the opportunity to open my mic.
I tried to type the question and it blew up. Alexander, I very much appreciate your rich,
bold understanding of Hegel. And if we're going to talk about Hegel and Whitehead
and be serious about process ontology, then stability becomes a scale relative phenomenon.
In other words, the things, one of the things I've confirmed your speaking language.
Hold on. Okay. Hold on. There you go. Okay. Sorry. I got a zoom thing I had to answer.
A question I have. This is in my work. I look at where you, the things you described,
where we weren't wrong with thingism. Why would it's difficult to think relationally?
One of the artifacts of the way dynamical systems work is that dynamic stable states emerge
relatively in a dynamic space. So they're transient. Yet we've confused the stability with
the fixedness. Our thoughts come to be as temporally stable states that come and go in a
hyper complex nervous dynamic. Our words are the same. So I think I just want to get your reaction
to the idea that we've confused the stable states that our brains necessarily create to have things
we call thoughts. We've confused those abilities with the way the world is, not seeing the actual
multi-scale dynamic work that makes the emergence of temporarily stable states possible. I know
there was a lot, but I had to ask that of you given your talk. Totally agree. That's why the book is
called process and event. In a very, very, very fundamental rudimentary addressing all the
problem of the East and the West, where East and West can learn is that the East got stuck with
process and I've never met Chinese or an Indian intellectual who didn't agree with me. They got
stuck with the process. The problem was that in Western culture, especially through Islamic
Christianity, we got so obsessed with the event and we forgot about the process. What then happened
is that the event itself becomes endlessly repeated. Christ on the cross all the time,
Mohammed storming Mecca all the time, every year again and again, say we're from the back.
The problem is that reality is process and event, meaning human is process and event,
East and West, man and woman, dynamic relations all the way down. I'm just basically advocating,
if you can think that the event is the stability and it's temporary, remember it's temporary,
so you can use it and build from, but then things will move on and the new process will start.
Then what happens is you realize that processes are repeated, but the process is never identical
to the previous lap of the process. That tiny little difference enables you to create an event
and change history forever in a new constructive direction. I think that's a wonderful thought
that any engineer I've ever met is thrilled about hearing because they try to find that little spot
where they can improve on the world every day when they work. So process and event,
that's what the books call that. That's the unity of the two.
All righty, that's lovely. Let me offer a few thoughts first off. First off, thank you all
for really stimulating our 45 minutes. My heart is filled with joy to stay at the primate level
and the exchange of ideas, the feeling in the room was really good. One thing,
a couple things I want to mention. One is let's make sure we're clear about where we're locating
how we're entering into this. Certainly, Utah's location is explicit. I appreciated our exchange
being clear where John's coming from. I think where Bernice is coming from. Understanding
where we're entering and then to see the convergence through those various elements,
to me, is really inspiring and fascinating. Another area of convergence I want to mention
with Bard is that narratology with its logos, pathos, and mythos has lots of parallels with
Utah's epistemological pillars of the Tree of Knowledge, the Iquocoin, and the Garden. That's
really a logos, pathos, mythos, frame of reference. I also want to speak to some of what obviously I
share with John and our hope for transcendent naturalism, at least in relationship to a
strong transcendence of a collective emergence, a collective intelligence that transforms the
onto epistemological relation. I think that's desperately needed. The last thing I'll say
in relationship to Bonnie is the embodiment of being. Contact with the cutting through
metaphysics down into the experience of being, to me, is absolutely central and we've lost that
in many ways. To regain that is aspects of the core of the task as I see us moving forward.
All of these things, to me, are connecting in particular ways. They're inspiring. They're
spurring lots of thoughts. I'll go to John and then Bonnie and Bard can have the last word and
then we can wrap up. John, any final thoughts you want to share as we bring this to a close?
I found this tremendously fecund. I'm always impressed when there's considerable convergence
and its convergence. There's enough difference. We're not just echo-chambering. Convergence
requires that there's real difference, although they come to shared conclusions,
maybe resolutions is a better word, because that raises the plausibility of the overall framework
dramatically. If Bonita working, I'm not claiming we're completely independent of each other,
that's ridiculous, but she's working independently. Bard is working independently.
There's significant enough differences between what we're saying that we're not just echoing
each other. As we unwrap, unfold our particular argumentative paths, we come to very similar
kinds of realizations. I think that raises the overall plausibility. I would say that if you
listen to the geist between the three of us, you actually get the best possible argument
for what is needed right now.
Lovely. Bonnie?
Yeah, I just want to end by pointing out a kind of confusion. My work, as you kind of situated
my work, always emphasizes the animal level. But what I hope you can understand from my work
is that I'm not just, you see, the problem is when you work from the kind of stratified
reality that you have, you're saying my work is down there in the animal realm. This is the problem
with the stocks, because my work is saying, okay, this reflexive awareness, we're telling,
we're naming, we're going to compute. Just because this is more on the scene recently,
it could be a mistake. There could be an alternative. It could be the wrong way.
I'm saying that these other moves come out of our animal nature, but they're beyond the human
condition so far. This is why it's tricky to have always work from that stock, because I'm not a
pagan. You're going like this, you know, I know you know. I just want to end with that. I too found
the conversation lovely and very complex and probably challenging for many people who
stayed stuck with us, because there's so many different worlds popping up. And so yeah,
and thank you all so much for being a part of this. Lovely. I'll just say amen.
Barb? Yeah, I just want to say that this was like the most wonderful check-in with you guys.
I'm sitting here on the other side of the Atlantic and you're some of my best friends in
North America and it's just wonderful to collaborate with you. And I will dig into your work even more
than ever, all three of you. And certainly I'm very inspired. I'm working on a term myself at the
moment, which was not part of this conversation, but just to point out how inspiring this is.
And it's called emotional intelligence. And this is the ridiculous thing.
Intelligence is currently the most important word in our language and it's not being defined by
anybody. That in itself is terrible. That's a really dangerous position that we're actually
using the word intelligence as if we knew we're talking about it. There are so many Italian
gents to begin with. And AI is just one of them and a minor one, to be honest about it. So I'm
working with the concept of emotional intelligence, which I think it ties in very nicely with White
Ted and very nicely with Bonita's work, just the example of how inspiring this conversation is.
But that's another conversation altogether. All right, well, maybe we'll have future
conversations then. All right, folks, thank you so much, each of you, for bringing your wisdom.
It's been a real joy. It's lovely to host this in the context of the Utah Consilience Conference
and to think about the kinds of philosophies, metaphysic, empirical experiences of being
oriented toward wisdom in the 21st century. And I love the dance and I appreciate the connection.
Thanks to everybody. Thanks for all the questions. Super engaging. So what we're doing now is
basically you got an hour. I think there's plenty to digest here and go for a walk,
get a cup of coffee. We'll be back at one o'clock where you have three options
for three wonderful symposia. And then again, at three o'clock, three options. I'm really
looking forward to the afternoon. I feel like conference off to a great start and go get some
nourishment, share some love, hang out, meditate, etc. We'll see everybody soon. Okay, take care.
