Welcome, everyone. I've been really looking forward to this particular voices with Reveke.
You're no doubt looking at somebody who you've heard, many of you have heard me mention multiple
times. Cytus' work and his influence are repeatedly a huge impact on me and somebody I've gotten to
know on a somewhat more personal level. We were colleagues. I taught his son at one point,
well, multiple points, I think. He's just a fantastic and, I think, important thinker in
the field of cognitive science. I think he's probably one of the most premier, if not the
premier person, representing what's called for ecogsci. That, I think, is very pertinent
to questions that we're wrestling with around the nature of meaning, etc. I'm going to just
turn things over to my friend Evan Thompson and ask him to give us a little bit more of the
background that he thinks might be relevant. Then we'll move to the issue at hand.
Yeah. I am first and foremost a philosopher. That's my academic training. I work in the
areas of philosophy of mind and cognitive science, both theoretical cognitive science and collaborating
with experimental scientists. I also have a strong interest in Asian philosophy. My undergraduate
training was in Asian studies, Chinese language and history. I got drawn into philosophy really
through studying Chinese philosophy. I went the reverse path from the path that sometimes
people take from east to west in my case academically. I have a continuing interest in
the conversation between Asian philosophical traditions and Western philosophy.
I also have a strong interest in phenomenology, the tradition coming from Edmund Husserl.
That plays a strong role. The phenomenological tradition plays a strong role in the most recent
book, The Blind Spot. Which is what we're going to turn to. Evan just referred to it. This is it.
I want to strongly recommend this book, especially for people who are interested in
the meaning crisis. It is the central topic of this book. It is called The Crisis in Meaning,
the Meaning Crisis, The Blind Spot. The Blind Spot is a particular account and explanation of
the meaning crisis. This book is written with Adam Frank, Marcello Glycer, or Gleaser, is it
Glycer? Glycer, Marcello Glycer, yeah. And Evan Thompson is the third author. When I got this
book, I opened it and I was like, whoa, things that are near and dear to my heart and to my work
and my besetting obsessions, the meaning crisis was there. And then there's this notion of the
blind spot, which we'll unpack in a minute. And I turned to chapter nine on cognition as I often do
in any book, because that's my shtick. And the blind spot in cognition was explicitly named as
relevance realization, something else near and dear to my heart. And so as soon as I saw that,
I hadn't read any more of the book, I just read about 10 pages here and looked at the chapter
and I went, oh, wow. And I showed my partner the book and I was like so excited about it. So I
reached out to Evan right away and I said, you got to come on, we got to talk about this. Your
work and my work really talk to each other really deeply at this point. The book, just some basic
things, the book is wonderful. I'm talking now sort of rhetorically, it's clearly written,
it's accessible. I wouldn't say it's like a beach read, like you're just going to sit there and
write. You have to put thought into it. It demands, it provokes and demands reflection
and consideration. But it is also not pitched to the academic hoi paloi or anything like that.
It is really written as I think it should be given the topic to a general educated audience
of people who are concerned with the meaning crisis and how we get here and what it is and
what is this meaning we're talking about and how can we ameliorate it. So first of all,
book is really wonderfully written, very clear. Now the thing I want to ask you very quickly
about and unpack this a little bit before we get into the meat of it, this book has a very
single voice to it. Sometimes you know when you're reading books by multiple authors, you hear this,
you get the sense of a carcophony and it's, you know, and you use we throughout and everything,
you're reminding the reader constantly as you should. But the voice has, I find the clear
integrated voice, like how did that come about and how did you make that happen?
Well, I'm glad that it reads that way. Obviously that was, you know, that was a challenge in
writing a book with three authors. And I would say that the responsibility for really doing the
overall smoothing as we called it and kind of unifying of tone and narrative that that was
really part of my role as the writer. Each chapter was written in a first draft initially
by one of the three of us. So Adam Frank, you know, took the lead on the Quantum Mechanics chapter,
Marcelo Gleister took the lead on the Cosmology chapter, I took the lead on, you know, the
Cognition Consciousness and the Introduction chapters. But then we each, you know, wrote over
each other's drafts. And then when we felt that we all were sort of on the same page with regard
to what we were saying, then it was really my job to smooth it out and just give it a unified voice
and tone. Which I'm happy to hear you say you think it works because, you know, when you're
doing something like that, you don't want to remove the particular, you know, the special
things that each author has in the way they articulate something, the way they write something,
you don't want to just remove that and flatten things. But on the other hand, you can't have really
very different styles in the same chapter, let alone the same book. So that definitely took
some work. But I enjoyed that work actually, I found it very satisfying and it enabled me to
really deeply think through each chapter with materials that, you know, I'm not an expert on,
you know, quantum mechanics, cosmology, the physics of time. I mean, these are not my areas
of expertise. I have an interest in them from a philosophy of science angle, but that's not,
you know, to be a scientist in those areas. So I learned a lot from doing that.
Well, that's interesting. And I won't open this up as rabbit hole, although maybe we'll return
to it. I mean, I've been doing a lot of work right now on dialogical reason as opposed to
monological reason and a lot of the emerging evidence about how it has a lot of capacities
to overcome bias and to be more clear and complex at the same time that you get with
monological. So I welcome that, the fact that this was sort of dialogically produced.
So in order to flesh that out a little bit more, can you tell me a little bit more about Adam and
Marcello? Yeah, so Adam Frank is an astronomer and astrophysicist at the University of Rochester.
He works on a number of different things in science and he's written a number of more general
audience books. Marcelo Gleiser is a theoretical physicist and he's also, you know, done a number
of different things in the scientific domains as well as having written a number of popular books.
So the way that we wound up writing this book is that Marcello
directed for I think about five or six years at Dartmouth College where he's based an institute
for cross disciplinary engagement, ICE. And he invited, you know, fellows each year to come and
be there for a couple of weeks and give some talks and just interact with the community there.
And he invited Adam and me, I think it would have been 2016 or 2017, I don't remember,
so we were both there together. And we just started talking and at one point in our conversations
about, you know, science and experience, this term, the blind spot sort of popped into our
conversation and then we just kept sort of working on it, the three of us, and eventually
it became clear that, you know, we had something that we wanted to write. So it really came out
of conversations, our collaboration as a result of Marcello's having this kind of special
intellectual setting where he was inviting scientists and philosophers and historians and
religious teachers, spiritual teachers as well, also to the center. And so their background is
really coming out of physics and history of science and then the conversation between us
was what launched the book. That's excellent. So there's a good representation both from the
history and the philosophy of science going into this book. So I want you to unpack the
core argument. No, and people do this to me all the time. Can you summarize Awakening Tim from
the meeting crisis? Right. Yeah. So we'll give you time and space, but when you do that, though,
can you talk a little bit about how at least these figures show up in the introduction? They
show up sort of throughout, but you know, Nishita and Whitehead and then Cartwright,
three philosophers at least, that's maybe the best category they all belong to,
are playing a pivotal role. Cartwright I'm unfamiliar with. I've just purchased a couple
of her books because of the blind spot, so thank you for that. Now, Whitehead and Nishita,
I'm doing a lot of work on and I've been doing this on and off for several years, but
I mean, they have a notion about this idea that in some way, I'll use Whitehead's idea here.
We've gotten into kind of a performative contradictions where we're making statements
about reality, and then I'll use Nishita from a standpoint that isn't consistent with those
statements. So, and many people on watching my channel, I've made this argument about scientists
making pronouncements about everything above the level of the quantum being an illusion,
and then it's like, but then you're basing those statements on all these illusory machines and
gauges and illusory conferences and like, what? How are you drawing deep conclusions about the
ultimate nature of reality from all this illusory material and that there's a performative contradiction?
I don't know if this is the actual source, but I credit Whitehead was sort of the first person
to really put his finger on that performative contradiction, although I've seen Nishita doing
something very similar, especially when he gets to Basho, when he's talking about Basho. So,
what is the argument and why the term the blind spot, which I found really helpful
as an enacted metaphor for this? Right. So, maybe we'll start with the metaphor of the blind spot.
So, the blind spot in the way that we're using the term is a metaphor from the blind spot in
the individual field that we have that all mammals have, actually. And it's the area of the retina
where the optic nerve leaves and projects inward into the brain. And because there are no
light sensitive receptor cells, where that bundle of nerve fibers enters into the brain,
we don't see anything in the blind spot. There's no possibility of visual sensitivity
to what's in the blind spot. But we also don't see that we have a blind spot because
the situation is the eyes are constantly darting about and the blind spots of the two eyes are
different. And so, as it is said, we sort of fill in across the blind spot. So,
we have a blind spot, an area within the visual field in which we don't see and we don't see
that we don't see. So, this is a metaphor for the idea that in our scientific world view,
there is something that makes science possible, that is the, you could say, the source of science.
But we don't see it and we don't see that we don't see it. And what it is, and now we could
use different words for this. What it is, is lived experience, direct experience, immediate
intuition, pure awareness, these terms that thinkers like William James and Kitara Nishida,
and also figures in literature in the 19th turn of the 20th century are interested in
stream of consciousness. All of these thinkers as modern science is becoming this tremendously
powerful epistemic accomplishment. All of these thinkers are Whitehead, Husserl, the phenomenologists,
they're all grappling with this recognition that there is an experiential source to our knowledge
that we systematically occlude when we think about the nature of that knowledge. And the way that we
do that, it takes different forms, but the way that we do that in how we think about science
is that we step back, we look for invariance across perspectives, we look for things that we can
objectify and quantify across a community of observers, forgetting that those things actually
depend on and arise out of a background of lived experience. And then we objectify them in a way
where we take them to be more fundamental than the experience that underpins them.
And that's the sort of crucial move in what we call the blind spot, is this treatment of what
comes about through a certain method, let's call it a method of objectification, which is a very
powerful and very useful method. We're not arguing against the method as such, but when you forget
that it's a method and you take it for the being of what you're studying in a way that makes that
being more fundamental than the experience that's animating the method, then what you've done is,
and here we really rely on Husserl in the crisis of European science, you substitute a method for
being, which is like a category error, and Husserl calls this the surreptitious substitution.
You substitute a method that you've arrived at, Husserl identifies it as arising really most
powerfully in Galileo, where Galileo imagines the world with no sentient creatures. He then
treats nature in terms of mathematical properties, where the mathematical properties,
the method for him is geometry, the mathematical properties are then taken to be the actual
being and reality of the universe from a god's eye point of view that sees the language in which
nature is written. That move of substituting a method for being, that's the surreptitious
substitution that's built into the blind spot. The connection to whitehead is that whitehead,
there's two concepts in whitehead that are important for us. For whiteheadians out there,
I would say that we're really working here from what is sometimes called whitehead's middle period,
so the concept of nature is a really important book for us, and also science in the modern world,
which is a little bit later. Whitehead says there's, in the epistemology that gets attached
to modern science, or to natural philosophy, you could say there's a bifurcation of nature,
where we say, as Galileo did, what's objective and fundamentally real are the
mathematical properties, and the qualities, the lived experience, that's subjective.
In a way, it gets kicked outside of nature. That's the bifurcation. It gets kicked outside,
because if nature is that which is mathematical, and those qualities have to be removed in order
to mathematicalize nature, then what are you going to do with those qualities that are residing,
as it were in the mind? Well, the mind then gets excised from nature. Whitehead is insistent on
saying, even from the standpoint of natural philosophy, you cannot do that, because the
lived, sensuous qualities belong to nature. The task is to create a system of relations
that treats them on the same level playing field and integrates them. To think that
the abstractions, the mathematical abstractions, are what nature really is. Whitehead calls that
the fallacy of misplaced concreteness, because you've got an abstraction that you concretize,
and no, what's concrete is, in Whitehead's terms, it's the sensuous experience or the sense
awareness in which nature is given to us in terms of passage and duration and flow out of which we
abstract things like space, time, continuum, and so on. That's what we set up in the beginning
of the book, where the blind spot, just to maybe succinctly summarize it, the blind spot is
the inability to see or to recognize or to acknowledge that lived experience is the source of
science. If you undercut the source of science by occluding lived experience, this is central to
our argument, you're actually damaging science, because you're removing the epistemic footing
that it needs to be the powerful investigative method it is. What happens is you get this
symptomatic of the meaning crisis in our culture, you get this oscillation between the extreme of
science triumphalism, which is science is the greatest method ever, and the world is what
science tells us it is, on the one hand, and then you get science denial, on the other hand,
because a very natural reaction to science triumphalism is to say, well, that's not how I
experience the world, regardless of what you say, and in a world of rapid transmission of
information and misinformation and willful misleading of people, that oscillation between
science triumphalism and science denial becomes particularly problematic and pernicious.
That's sort of the setup of the book at the very beginning.
That was great. That oscillation is, I mean, it also comes to the fore in some ways in
it. I don't know if it's the same, but it resonates with the oscillation. We have an
instability in our sense of realness. We have these two, right? We have the mathematical sense
of realness and Descartes played with both to no resolution, or we have this, you know, the core
of where consciousness is present to itself as what is most real, and we also vacillate between
those. I don't know if they are identical, but at least they seem to be tracking also between
science triumphalism and science denialism. I thought that was beautiful. It sounds like you're,
and this is a bit of Nishita in it, you're picking up on that the blind spot, we're not only
unaware of it, but it is also simultaneously the source of our ability to see.
You're right, right? Because the optic, right? And Nishitani builds on this. It's the not the
thing that makes it accessible to us and that sort of thing. So that move is really interesting to
me. This idea of grounding, and you use that term a couple of times in source, you use that term a lot.
So what would you say to somebody who says, well, what do you mean? I mean,
isn't there a difference between the epistemological order of how I come to
knowledge and the ontological order of what that knowledge discloses? Yeah, I have to start in sense
experience and etc, etc. But that doesn't mean that that ordering of my epistemological endeavor is
the same as the order of reality or how it unfolds. I know that you're ready for this, but I want to
hear what you have to say about it. Sure, sure. Well, this depends on what ordering means. So
I mean, at one level, it certainly is something that needs to be recognized that the
procedure by which we disclose something is one thing, and that which is disclosed is another thing.
The ordering, though, if it's a hierarchical ordering in terms of
fundamentals goes beyond just that recognition, because it says what's ontologically fundamental
is, let's say, the, you know, the, the, the, the, the, the, the properties as
mathematical. And the experience is derivative. The problem with that ordering is that
the mathematical properties exist at a different level of intelligibility
from the concrete phenomena. And they are, if you will, the map and the territory is the
concrete phenomena. And if you, if you assume that the territory just is the particular map
in the way that you're able to render it using, you know, the tools of, of objectification and
mathematics, that's, that's actually to not see that. So let me give a concrete illustration,
because this is a very abstract way of putting it. So, so one of the things we talk about is time.
And so we have the idea that, you know, from a, from the standpoint of physics clock, you know,
time is what clocks measure. That's fine as a method. But if you then say, well, what time is
is what a clock measures, you've forgotten that there needs to be clock readers, and they exist
in some window of duration, that's, that's a continuous flow that disappears if you, if you
try to reconstruct it in terms of, you know, point-like instance and clock readings. So
So I want to make sure I'm tracking. You're saying something like there's a kind of time
in clock reading that is presupposed in measuring time with a clock.
Exactly. Okay. Yeah. So, yeah. So, so there was just a review of the blind spot in
LA review of books by Robert Crease, who's a philosopher of physics, also writes, you know,
general books about, about science. And he had a wonderful statement that I, that I wish we had
actually thought of. And let me see if I can, if I can, if I can get it exactly. So he, he says,
describing our view, no one pulls out a clock to know what time is, they pull out a clock to
know what time it is. So that's basically the idea, right? You already have to have some
experience of time. And you might say sort of to use a, use a phenomenological term, a kind of,
you know, pre-understanding of time in order to be able to recognize a clock as at all relevant
to, you know, to the, to the subject phenomenon that you're immersed in. So the ordering, so the
just to go back to the ordering point. So the ordering is, is, is what we object to is the
sort of hierarchical ordering in terms of fundamentality, where we say experience is not
fundamental, or what's disclosed to us of the world in how we experience it is derivative,
not fundamental. And what's fundamental is what we, what we're able to reveal through,
through say, mathematical models.
Thank you for watching. This YouTube and podcast series is by the Verveke Foundation,
which in addition to supporting my work also offers courses, practices, workshops, and other
projects dedicated to responding to the meeting crisis. If you would like to support this work,
please consider joining our Patreon. You can find the link in the show notes.
Okay, so there's two moves here, and I like both of them, because I've advocated for both of them.
So I hope, I hope this isn't just two members of the choir performing in front of the minister
or something like that. That's okay too. Because I've talked about, you know, even a naturalist
should be committed not only to what is derivable from your science, but what is presupposed by
the practice of your science. And that's exactly what you seem to be saying. You're right. Greg
Enriquez and I talk about that as extended naturalism. Right. And then the next one is,
and then this one may be, may be more controversial, but it sort of follows from the
first, there's an implicit judgment of realness. And I think, well, I hope you agree,
I take real as a comparative adjective, right. You know, Marla, people from Plato to Marla
Pondida Whitehead have said, you only judge one thing as an illusion by judging something
else as real. It's always comparative and vice versa. And so what I was hearing something like
fundamental, implying something like more real, and the idea is, I'm not happy with this term,
and we'll play with them a little bit later, but the concrete is more real than the abstract.
Because of something like, and you say this multiple times too, there's a richness, there's an
inexhaustible-ness to that. And this is the point about the map territory kind of,
the territory is way richer, has an inexhaustible, it overflows any particular map, even a globe,
even a Earth-Science globe, et cetera, et cetera. Is that, that's very, so for me,
just as we're sort of putting cards on the table, that's the influence of Polania on me. He was
proposing that as the mark of what he calls contact with reality. And Esther, like Kat Mead,
has talked about that in her book of the same title. This inexhaustible-ness, but it's not
carcophonist inexhaustible, and we'll play with that a little bit. It's kind of like an inexhaustible
fountain of intelligibility, right? And so is that, is that, is that what I think of it?
Yeah, so that's very much it. I mean, another way that I think of it is that our being always
is more than or overflows our knowing, because knowing happens through certain means,
through certain methods, through certain sensory systems, through certain forms of
intelligibility, and our being is always larger than that. It always overflows that, yeah.
So that would, that's wonderful, Evan. I've got to slow down. I'm very enthusiastic.
So that, that means that, well, let me form it as a question. Is it possible that one,
because I've made an argument that one of the contributors to the meaning crisis is we've reduced
many kinds of knowing that have many different kinds of memory attached to them, procedural,
episodic, autonometric, have different criteria of realness to them, skill is power,
you know, perspectival knowing is sort of like noticing, getting that sense of,
you know, getting deeper into things, more present to them. And then the participatory
knowing is the sense of sort of belonging, fittedness to your environment. And what I mean by that
is part of, I hear you saying this, but I want to frame it, like our practice, we've reduced what
knowing is, and we forgot, when we do that, we've forgot the ultimate responsibility of
knowing to being, like particularly our being, but also being in general, like we forgot that
there are ways of knowing that are more, or are closer metaphor to our being in the world than
these mathematical abstractions. Is that also tracking? Oh, definitely. Yeah, no, definitely. I think
there are different kinds of knowing, there are different modes of knowing, I suppose you might
say, different ways of delineating those, of course, too. And it's, because science is so
transformatively powerful, in its outward, you know, obvious manifestations, we have defaulted
to thinking, and I mean, you see this explicitly in Descartes, right? We have defaulted to thinking
that knowing is a matter of having a method. And that's true for some methods of knowing.
But even the application of a method presupposes something that you can't, you know,
state in terms of a method, right? I mean, this is a familiar kind of thing for philosophers.
Yeah. So, yeah, no, that's right. There's a kind of acquaintance, you could say,
that we have with our being, that is not a matter of having a method. That acquaintance is not
unproblematic, of course. I mean, all sorts of questions arise in relation to that, you know,
normative questions, existential questions, philosophical questions, ethical, political, of
course. But it's the background for the application of any method, exactly.
Well, I was smiling because, and I know you're aware of this, because you treated about it,
you know, with Johannes Yeager and Anna Riedel and Aldrich Bedwick and Dennis Walsh.
We're trying to get a paper published on how you can't ultimately, you can't capture relevance
realization in computation for exactly that reason, that the process of formalization of
translating things into a formal system is always an ill-defined problem that requires
relevance realization. And that sort of, I mean, there's a lot more to that paper, but that's the
core kind of thing. Yeah, yeah, no, I love that paper and I completely agree and sympathize with
the argument. Yeah. Now, what's interesting, excellent answer to that question. So, I'm going
to throw out these, like, devil's advocate things and then you do this wonderful thing and we get
into some nice discussion. Well, somebody will say, bifurcation, come on, we've always bifurcated,
because we have to and we do, even in our lived experience, readily and reliably make
distinguishing distinctions between appearance and reality, fraud and reality, illusion and
reality, delusion and reality, hallucination and reality, right? And yeah, maybe we cut it up as
a subjective and objective, but the ancient world cut it up into the problem of the one in the mini.
We're always building these worldviews, trying to somehow give us a normative guide for how we
discern, you know, reality from appearance. And so, isn't a bifurcation an inevitable thing,
therefore? Yeah, so, of course, we always live in a world where we have to make distinctions
between, you know, the appearance of something and, as we say, how it really is. But if we think
about how that works, the test, the criterion, the standard for how something really is, is
disclosed in and through another experience. So, it's not that we step outside of experience and
we have some absolute standard or metric by which we can say, this is real and that isn't real. It's
rather that we continually open up new vistas, new horizons in experience where the relationship
between appearance and reality shifts within the sphere of experience itself. So, that's not really
bifurcation in Whitehead sense. That's a sort of progressive changing of appearances, perspectives,
you know, profiles, aspects of things where what we take to be true or real is something
disclosed, again, through experience where Whitehead, when he uses the term bifurcation
of nature, really means you kick experience out of the framework of scientific, the framework
of the scientific representation of nature. And then, and we know this very well today in terms
of the hard problem of consciousness, then you face a very, very fundamentally difficult problem
of how to recover consciousness, awareness, the mind. And the hard problem is that problem.
It's a problem that that derives in a way from the bifurcation of nature in the way that we state
the problem today, which is, you know, how is consciousness possible in a purely physical
world where we conceive the purely physical in terms of this bifurcation of, you know, a
mathematical, quantitative nature, that then somehow we have to find a room for the qualia,
the qualitative properties, the phenomenality, the appearances. And then we either, we do that by
either trying to, you know, be reductionist and say, well, it just really is physicality
in the face of the obvious sort of problem of conceptual intelligibility there.
Or we say, well, it actually is an illusion itself. We sort of go the illusionist route.
And then we strain at the intelligibility of the concept of an illusion. Or we, you know,
or we go panpsychist and we say, well, there's a sense in which consciousness and some minimal,
phenomenal sense is sort of an ingredient everywhere at all levels. So we sort of like
having sucked the consciousness out, we then sort of like spray it back into the universe
as it were everywhere. And that doesn't really work either. So that's the bifurcation. So,
so yes, of course, we have to make distinctions between appearance and reality, genuine counterfeit.
But we always do that within a framework of the test of experience.
So that's the key move. And I liked that. That was a great answer. And there was a moment in the
book. Sorry, I don't mean to indicate it was the only moment in the book. There was one moment
in the book, one among many, where I was, I was looking at this and I said, oh, I never put those
two together. I, you know, I talk, obviously, about, you know, the relationship to God and
the two worlds mythology. But you did this, you made this move where you said, you know, the thing
about the idea of this, I don't know what to call it, you know, the monarchical God or something
like that God, even when that God disappeared, we preserved the placeholder function of the
view from nowhere, right? And in there. And so what I hear you critiquing is that view from
nowhere possibility. It's like, yes, yes, there's reality, illusion, reality distinctions, but you
never are in the place from nowhere, no when to make that distinction. Is that, is that a fair way?
That's right. Exactly. I mean, if you read, if you read Newton or Galileo, you have this
this conception, a particular kind of conception of God as, as able to, you know, behold everything
at all times from all possible perspectives. You know, Newton says that, you know, space is God's
sensorium. So there's a sense of God can, can contemplate, you know, every, every possible
perspective of a thing in space. You, you have a, you have a conception of, of the outside view
and science, you know, is, it may never achieve that, but that's it's, it's ideal in a way.
And so that is very much what we're, what we're criticizing is no, that that's,
that's not how science works. And it's not how knowledge works. It's not how experience works.
So, so that's really good. And I want to, I want to, I want to shift back into Nishita just for a
sec. I forget where it's in Nishita, but Carter talks about it in his beautiful book, The Nothingness
Beyond God. He talks about Nishita's distinction between the transcendent, transcendent and the
imminent transcendent. Right. Right. Right. Because you, well, you qualified something,
and I think it was good that you did because some of my people listening to this,
you're, you're not the village atheist or something like that. That's not what's being
argued for here. And so, and I hear you're saying, well, that conception, the transcendent,
transcendent, that, that is probably given this argument, a performative contradiction of some
kind. Like it's, it's ultimately not conceivable to us, not just because we're limited or finite,
but because it is inherently, it severs itself from the very sources of meaning and understanding.
Is that, is that, that is, yeah. Whereas there's something like the notion of the imminent
transcendence, which you get, of course, in, in Whitehead, right? You have the, the emergence,
right? You, you have, and we can talk about whether or not you still like this language,
but you know, you have the eternal and the emergent and they're constantly resonating with
each other, but they're always bound together. Whitehead says, you know, God transcends the
world to the same degree that the world transcends God and God is imminent in the world to the same
degree the world is imminent in God. And I think that's very aligned with what Nashid is trying to
get at. Now, so you aren't responsible to every possible audience. I get that. But a lot of people
come to this and I think this is a fair point around the meaning crisis and they come to this
around the issue of sacredness because they say, yes, you're talking about reality and you're talking
about things can be more real. I can be closer. I can be more in conformity to it. I can live a,
perhaps a fuller life, a more responsible life. And there's a sense that that could even be sacred.
It could afford transforming me, making me a better person. And, you know, both Whitehead has,
has a God and Nashida talks a lot about God and he certainly has a sacred in it. So I know you're
not a theologian and I'm not, I'm not trying to bend you into something, but I think this is a fair
question. Because these questions around the meaning crisis bring up issues around, you know,
about sacredness and ultimacy. And what would you say about that? Would you say that?
Yeah, because there's a parallel. This is all final proposal for before I shut up and let you
answer the question. There's a parallel with religious denial and religious triumphalism,
I think, in a certain way. And, and maybe, you know, and you're, you're trying to get out of the one.
And I, I, I agree with you on that, the science and you're trying, and I've been trying to get
out of the other. And I'm wondering if you see relationship between them, particularly because
we're, and I want to get into this with you at some point. I think this meaning, what psychologists
call meaning in life, not semantic meaning, but this sense of connectedness to reality is what's
behind, you know, our judgments of what is, you know, most real and most sacred, most important
for us, etc. Do you think those two problems talk to each other? I know you don't, I haven't
like a whole book, maybe you talk about it in other places in the book, but do you think about it?
Yeah, no, those are really interesting thoughts and questions. That definitely goes beyond what
we talk about in the book. So we don't, I mean, I'm happy to talk about it here, but just, just
to be clear about the book, it's not, we don't really enter into issues about,
you might say larger issues about meaning that connect to, to religion or to the sacred or to
spirituality. You know, we may be allude to the certain aspects of them here and there,
but they're not, they're not a really dominant theme in the book that, you know, the book is
really circumscribed by the, by the effort to, you know, help us get clear about what science is
and how science works. But that, of course, immediately raises the question from, you know,
a larger perspective of how to think about science in relationship to philosophy or religion or to
issues about, about the sacred. This is difficult, you know, in a way to know exactly how to enter,
because, you know, the word, the word sacred can mean different things. The word, you know,
the word God can mean different things like whitehead has a very idiosyncratic
conception of God. I mean, it's been generative for process theology, but, but it's, it's, it's,
it's an outlying conception, even within the realm of theology.
So I would do how I'm using it and maybe and see if that's good enough. And I'm deeply influenced
here by a fellow Canadian, Schellenberg, and his idea of the triple transcendent. The sacred is
that which is, in some sense, ultimately real for us. It is ultimately transformative for us. It
has a sodorological function. It's not just an intellectual ascent. And then it has an
axiological, it serves as kind of an ultimate normative guide for us in some way and making
our ethical and aesthetic, even epistemological judgments. And, and, and, and other people
like Bracken and the Divine Matrix seem to be arguing that I'm not, I'm not saying this
is going to satisfy everybody, but maybe it's enough of a core so that we got something to work
with in answering the question I'm posing to you. Yeah. I guess the way that I have been
thinking about that recently, so that this isn't really worked out for me in a thorough way, but,
but, but I have thought about these things, you know, more in actually in relation to the
writings that I've done about Buddhism and religion and science in my, in my earlier book,
Why I'm Not a Buddhist. So there's an issue I would say about,
You're going to come on my show and talk to me about that book when I get to that book. I've had
that book on my shelf for a while and I apologize for that. But yeah, no worries. Yeah. Yeah. No,
that would be fun. So we might, we might use Tillick's idea of, you know, faith as ultimate
concern, like not to say that it has to stop there, but we can take that idea as an entry point.
I like Tillick a lot as you know, he's big. Yeah. So ultimate concern,
or, you know, we could, we could use the word sacred to mean ultimate concern as well. So,
so, you know, faith, sacred, ultimate concern. For me, one issue really has to do with a juxtaposition
between what Martin Hoagland calls secular faith. So this is the idea of faith in our, in our being
as faith in our finitude, faith in the life we share together as finite beings, you know,
under the, under the horizon of death or within the, you know, the limit of the horizon of death,
the kind of existential secular conception of ultimate concern, where ultimate concern
really has to be grounded in, in this life and, and this world that we, that we share with each
other. Good, good. Whereas the notion of transcendence can be used in a way that would, that would,
that would be juxtaposed to that where transcendence would mean something like
a state either of liberation or freedom or release that takes us beyond or outside this life.
Transcendence doesn't have to be used that way because you could have a transcendence in
imminence again within this, you know, within this life. But when used that way, which I think is,
is one fundamental sense of transcendence we see running through lots of different religious traditions,
then I don't see,
it's not that I want to deny that because I think for many people that's important and meaningful
but it wouldn't be how I would articulate the sacred or ultimate concern.
Right. And so there's a diss, I mean, and I've realized I've made an error sometimes in making
this a hard and fast distinction, it's more of a continuum, but there is a distinction to be made
between something being indispensable to somebody and somebody claiming it's sort of metaphysically
necessary in some fashion. The example I use is I'm, I'm monolingual, so English is indispensable
to my cognitive agency. That doesn't mean it's metaphysically necessary. And so I think,
I think that's how I sort of parse what you're doing. And I agree with you, the sacred does not
obligate us to any kind of escapism because behind the escapism is a two worlds mythology
and then we have the problem of the bifurcation and then we're getting into back to the very place
we're trying to get from. And I agree with that. That's a mistake. But here's like, so for example,
the meaning in life literature, you want to ask people if they have meaning in life, you can
ask them these three questions. And like, and like, what do you want to exist even if you don't?
Sorry, say that question again. What do you want to exist even if you don't?
Great. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. How real is it? And sometimes you put in the qualifier,
how really real is it? Because what do you mean, right? And then, and then how much of a difference
do you make to it right now? If you got, if you got something, it doesn't have to be an object,
obviously, if you have something that, you know, this is Susan Wolf's, this is trying to, you know,
break out into a questionnaire Susan Wolf's idea of being connected to something larger than yourself.
Right. What that metaphor means is, well, people want this thing,
like they want it to be in the universe, even if they're not, it's not, it's not in any way
bound to their egocentric preferences. Right. Right. And then the next one is, right. It can't
be fraudulent. It can't be mere appearance. It can't be superficial. It has to have significance
in depth. And then, and then the next is, but we have to be connected to it. We have to make a
difference to it. And so, so remember, I agree with everything you said, and I sort of ran through
that, the argument with you about it. But how do you, I'm going to express sympathy. I can express,
and let me buttress this. Okay. So you're, you're in the Axial Revolution. You've got Bella's second
order thinking your, your metacognition has been massively improved by numeracy with what the Greeks
are doing with alphabetic literacy. You've got incipient democracy. So debate is everywhere,
hyper justification, and you've got a shared culture, but many different polices. So you have all
the six social experimentation, and this is really blowing your metacognitive abilities up. Right.
And so you're getting just a tremendous awareness of your capacities for self deception. And then
you're liable to think, oh, you know, and you can see this in Plato, you can, you can even see it
outside of Greece. You can see it like in the Dhammapada, but, you know, the right and things
like this, that, you know, this realization about how much of our suffering and violence is due to
this self deceptive proclivity of the mind. And then you could start to conceive of a world that,
how the world would be if you weren't looking at it through that torture of self deception and
self destruction. And then you could plug into this, this other thing we said, you've got that's,
it's being connected to that is deeply meaningful to you. And you somehow have a sense of it being
beyond your life, right, and beyond your egocentric concerns. And so I'm not justifying, I'm trying
to play with an explanation with you. It's very tempting to give into a two rules mythology,
that is just such a wonderful way of explaining all of that and drawing it together.
Yeah, no, that's right. And I think, you know, they're, they're different cultural forms
that, that that takes. So, you know, say in India, where in the, you know, the Vedas, we don't really
see the, the idea of rebirth or, or, you know, reincarnation, as we sometimes say, we, we have
a cosmology in which, you know, there may be, you know, higher, more divine kind of transformative
states or possibilities after death that have to do with, with divinities and, and, you know,
the sort of sacred order of the cosmos. And then we have this idea that we have this sort of
ethicization of action, where the idea is, you know, if you act, you know, in a good way, then,
you know, the possibility of a more refined transformative after death state is open to
you. If you act in a bad way, then it's going to go worse for you after death. And, and so we,
we have this sort of, you could say kind of two world, if we, if we slice it in terms of, you
know, life here and what happens after, you know, after death. And then we have the idea that
of karma that we see really first in the Upanishads, where it's, you know, because of desire,
you're actually thrown back from that other world into this world. And then it goes round and round
and that becomes an existential problem that has to be, you know, has to be solved. And then we get,
you know, the different solutions to it on the part of, you know, Buddhism and, and,
you know, the Buddhist teachings or, or what later come to be called Hindu teachings.
So that's all part of this axial, this axial transformation in our, in our consciousness,
in our metacognition, in our cosmology, in our ethics, definitely. And
well, let me phrase the question. Since we've landed on sort of a, I like the way you broadened
it, because I want the cross, cross contextual, cross historical, right? Given that something
like that, let's like, like that, how do we preserve the recognizable gains? There's a
change in the notion of wisdom to, to, like you said, this, this kind of liberation, maybe escape,
but transformation from, you know, maybe a bronze age, you know, Taylor talks about,
you know, the continuous cosmos and you're trying to fit in and harmonize, right? It's a,
it's a very, it's a very different notion of wisdom. How do we preserve what was gained
by us? And you know, I'm going to obviously ask the same thing when we come to the scientific
revolution. How do we, how do we preserve what was gained by the axial revolution? Well, can we,
can we preserve that? Let's say we, we agree we want to preserve it. I'm presuming here,
but let's say we want to preserve a lot of what was gained by that, all the metacognitive
enhancements, all the sense of individual responsibility, right? Etc. The realization
of self deception, the possibility of self correction. How do we, how do we maintain all
of that? Or can we, I'll phrase it a question, better question, can we maintain all of that? And
I don't know, tear it free. And I'm trying to use a somewhat violent metaphor from
the two worlds of mythology. I mean, it's, it's almost, and, and, and, you know, part of this
also plugs into even our, you know, our conceptual metaphors and our embodiment, real is more up,
less real is down. And like, I'm peeling up today and you're looking down at all this kind of language
and we abstract and the abstract is above and the concrete is like, like it's, it's, it's so woven
culturally and even like into, you know, plugs into our embodiment in a powerful way.
I think we can, but I want to hear what you, do you perceive the difficulty of the problem?
Oh, certainly. I mean, that is, that is a huge question. You might say a part of the big historical
question for our, for our times and the, and the, you know, the crisis of meaning that we
face as, as you've talked about it. And, and I see it, you know, it's hard not to sort of go
Hegelian here, but, but I'm going to give in to the temptation. I see it, I see it in a way as,
you know, that was a, that was a hugely transformative
revolution, let's call it, you know, the Axial Revolution. And we might also think that things
were lost in that. So we might think that a certain relationship to the natural world
was lost. And we're now especially conscious of the need to restore some viable,
I'll even say sustainable, though it's become a buzzword, some viable, sustainable relationship
between the human and the, and the rest of the biosphere that requires, I think, an affirmation
of the, the, the specialness of our earth environment. You know, yes, there are in, so
Marcelo Gleiser's book, The Dawn of a Mindful Universe is about this. It's, you know, yes,
there are, you know, inordinately many planets out there that might be able to support life,
but a critical examination also suggests that there might actually be very, very few that have
life. And if life is a special thing that's happened here, at least in the way that it's
happened here, then, you know, the sacred and ultimate concern has to involve our being in
relationship to the, to the biosphere. And we have to do it in a way that involves all of the
ethical cognitive gains that we made as a were of, from the Axial Revolution, you know, telescoping,
you know, huge historical time here. But we also have to do it in a way that recovers a kind of
sensibility to the, and relationship to the natural world that there would have been
pre-agricultural, at least according to some historical narratives. We need, we don't, we
can't go back to that, of course, that's absurd, but we need to recover something of that in a new,
so the way this is Hegelian is it's like a higher turn of the spiral. This would be how my dad would
have put it, actually, is that, you know, you have this course, a recourse of history, and you never
repeat the same thing, but there are patterns where at a certain turning of the spiral, you
actually can look down and see, you know, the axial turn, you know, the, the, the, the turn that
would have been or the curve that would have been before the axial. And from that perspective, you
need to, you need to recover things that were lost because there's always something lost as well
when you, when you have a, when you have a gain. And that, you know, the amazing thing about science,
just to bring it back to the book for a moment, is that, you know, with, with things like the
Gaia theory and earth system science, we've opened up a whole new appreciation of, you know, that we
don't live on the planet, we live in the planet that were embedded at so many levels in the very
fabric of life on the planet. And that is it, is it, you know, to really, to really be with that in a,
in a, in an ethical way requires a kind of profound, I think, change in our, in our sensibility,
that, that science gives us some of the tools for not all of them, but some of them. And the other
things are going to need to come from, you know, larger perspectives of ethics and the sacred,
you know, religion and spirituality, art. I mean, the world is a lot bigger than science,
right, the human cultural world. Yeah. Well, that brings up two things. One is, of course,
I assume you're making a similar argument about the scientific revolution that there was a lot
lost. I mean, that's what the book is saying. That's right. That's right. And, but you're not
proposing nostalgia. I get that. Definitely not. And so the thing you said about that, that, that met,
that, so it's not only a looking back through the eyes of history, it's also looking around
through eyes other than the eyes of science, art, ritual, all different ways of knowing,
different ways of being together, of being in the world, looking, you know, looking from within,
not looking at, but looking from within nature, Ursula Goodnuff's notion of transcendence into
nature, things like that. And so Whitehead had this idea that we need to recover, almost in Tolkien's
sense of recover, we need to recover art and ritual and all of this and somehow bring it back
into having a proper role within our epistemological and ontological endeavors. That's clearly
sort of a thing that Whitehead is arguing. Does that land for you too? Oh, definitely. Yeah.
Okay. Okay. And here's where we're maybe trespassing on Matt's work, Matt Seagal,
especially his most recent book. But you know, and this where I'm influenced somewhat by
Habermas, right? You know, Kant basically severs the true and the good and the beautiful from each
other in really powerful ways with the three critiques and the autonomy arguments for each one
of those. And you know, Kant is sort of looming in places in the book here and there. Because
you're rejecting both the kind of old Platonism and simple Kantianism about things like math.
We'll probably get into that in the next conversation. I don't know if we'll get to it now.
But I'm trying to get at what would, at least in a preliminary fashion, and I'm not trying
to pin you here. You know, I'm your friend. I want to talk to you about this. How would you
address? I mean, that's a hard problem. It's a hard problem. I mean, Habermas has been wrestling with
it. He wrestled with it, sorry, right? To, you know, overcoming those arguments that give us the
autonomy of the true, the good and beautiful. We have a sense, you know, and David Schindler has
been arguing about how they're actually convertible and all that sort of stuff. But how would you,
where would you, where would you go to, like, I'm trying to make, I'm trying to make Kant the
impediment that you have to address right now. But that's not all of his work, but just this move
about, right, the, you know, the separation and making autonomous, including making the
individual autonomous with each one of the, within each one of these autonomies of, you know, because
of the three critiques. That seems to me like a really powerful thing to be trying to wrestle with
philosophically. And the book has a philosophical edge to it. You represent that.
Yeah, that's an interesting question. I hadn't quite thought of it in those
Kantian terms. I suppose my, you know, my philosophical sensibility is so informed by
phenomenology in the sort of, you know, sense coming from, from, from this role. And
it doesn't, there's, there's a way of talking about truth, where it's very easy to think of
truth as different from the beautiful say. And that's because we think of truth in terms of the
correctness of propositions. And we have, we have an idea of correctness really, or of, or of
correspondence. But from a phenomenological perspective, that actually is a secondary sense
of truth. And the primary sense of truth is, is disclosure, or presence, or the, to be, you
know, technical in the way that Husserl uses the terminology, the, you know, the evidencing
of something. So evidencing is the, you know, we use evidence as a noun in English. We think
here's a piece of evidence, but, but in other languages, evidencing has this verbal sense,
where you, you disclose something, you, you uncover it, you reveal it, it comes to presence,
you know, Heidegger tries to talk about this in terms of his, his sort of etymological
reconstruction of the, you know, the Greek sense of unconcealment of Aletheia, you know,
Lethe is the concealment, the alpha privative Aletheia is the unconcealment. So there's this
opening, this, the space of unconcealment and openness. And it's within that space that you
can then say, in terms of a proposition you might assert that you put in quotation marks,
oh, that proposition that you just said, it's correct. That happens against this other sense of
truth, which is, you know, unconcealment, presence, openness, evidence, disclosure, you know, however
you want to, however you want to put it. So within that context, it's very difficult to make a
separation between the, the, the, the, the, the sense of truth as unconcealment and say,
the beautiful or other aesthetic, aesthetic properties for that matter, or the just. And
so if we think of it that way, we are in a sense going back before Kant, you might say, well,
that's going back before the critical philosophy of Kant and, and thinking in, you know, a more
Greek way. That's fine. As long as we do it, having taken, you know, the knowledge and the
message, if we want to simplify things of Kant on board, you know, it's like, we're not going back
in some nostalgic way in the way that Heidegger often writes, in a way that I find actually
very distasteful, this kind of nostalgic, artificial German, German romantic sort of
projection back into the ancient world. No, we're not doing that. We're, we're taking what
we've learned from Kant, but we're moving forward in the way that, say, phenomenologists have taught
us to, taught us to do, where again, the, the, the, let's say, the horizon of experience as,
as, as presence is the, is the, is the context within which we're, we're going to be talking,
where those distinctions don't, can't, can't be made hard and fast in the way that they might
have been done, right, in, for, for the Kantian purposes. I want to play with that a little bit.
I like that, because I've done similar play, you know, Rikur talks about the hermeneutics of
suspicion and that, and I've made the argument the hermeneutics of suspicion is parasitic
on what I call the hermeneutics of beauty. The hermeneutics of suspicion is
appearances are distorting, misleading, they, they conceal deception, blah, blah. But the
hermeneutics of beauty, at least, some people are talking about beauty is, well, no, but there
have to be situations in which appearances disclose reality, that appearances is not a veil, right,
the way, that's an enlightenment ideal, but, and that beauty is when we're getting a sense,
and this, and, and Skari does this in her book on beauty, that it's what we're getting a sense of,
oh, oh, it's, and it's, it's bound up with almost like that insight moment where you realize, oh,
I haven't been seeing this as, as, as, as it is. And then, so that's beauty, but then that you're
already also in like the truth, but you're also getting into this other thing, this sort of,
and you get this research from people who have, look at the Griffith lab and others, I know you're
familiar with this research, and they have the experience, the noetic experience of the really
real, and it seems to have a kind of normativity to them, right, right, that, and it's just, it's
just in the fact that it's real, that it's normatively binding on them, like, and they,
they transform their lives and their relationships, and they're not guided by at least a Kantian sense
of being more moral, and they're not, right, but they're guided, but nevertheless, by this sense
of a goodness, I call it, onto normativity, just to give a name to it, somehow there's a goodness
to reality, that, and, and you're nodding, you might be just being polite, but is that
sort of the kind of thing you're talking about, where you start to unpack these kind of things,
and you start to say, well, no, you know, there's a sense of beauty as appearance is disclosing
something underneath them, which relates to truth as disclosure, and then there's a sense of goodness
as, you know, this contact with the really real as something that's sort of an ur normativity for
us. Is that? Yeah, very much so. I mean, I think, you know, in addition to beauty, I would, I would
invoke awe and wonder. Sure, of course. Yeah, yeah. I think that it's impossible to separate those
things phenomenologically in, in those kinds of experiences and situations that, that people
have, including, including science, right? Yeah, I mean, you read what, you know, you read Einstein,
you know, writing about, about the, the, the, the worldview that he has as a scientist and the,
and, and some of his own, you know, experiences in thinking about his scientific work. You read
historical, you know, scientific figures throughout, throughout history, and, and they all, you know,
express or many of them express this, this sense of, you know, awe and, and, and wonder and amazement
and, and, you know, a feeling of the good transformative insight. And I think there's a deep
connection. So I'm really going to lay my cards on the table because I know I can do that with you.
But I mean, for me, I, I, I'm very much
drawn to mysticism in, as a mode of understanding what's happening there. I think of, you know,
science and mysticism as, as deeply linked throughout history in, in, in, in philosophical,
cultural and, and, you know, personality ways in terms of individual scientists where,
you know, mysticism is this, I think of mysticism almost as a kind of epistemic
humility. It's that, you know, the world is, is vast. It's unfathomable. And that there are modes of
knowing is not even the right word. There are modes of being in which there is a felt
oneness or unity that can be expressed in enumably different ways in, you know, in, in science,
in art, in philosophy, and, and mysticism, you know, so, so going back to the sacred,
I think of it as a kind of, you know, the need for kind of imminent mysticism, a mysticism of,
you know, here and now in this planet, you know, with, with, with the needs that, that face us as
a species and as a, as a civilization, as a scientific civilization. So I see the mystic as
really almost the, the, you know, the guardian, the reminder, the reminderer, the, the sort of
watch person for that sensibility. Yeah.
Well, I think you know that I agree with that quite deeply. A lot of my work is about trying
to get these two to speak together. And in your own book, The Blind Spot, I was noting the many
places where you explained why this was chosen by the scientists, especially in the history
chapter, because it was elegant, because it was beautiful, because it was simple. I mean, there's
a problem with the notion of simple. We act as if it's a cleanly, cleanly determinable thing,
but it's not right. And stuff like that. But there, yeah, there was this tremendous sense of how
much that is how that is, you know, driving, motivating and justifying the moves that these
scientists are making historically. Yeah. And even, you know, as people have written about,
just, you know, just to balance things that that can sometimes lead us astray, you know, we can get
caught up in the beauty of the mathematical constructions in a way where we lose, we lose
contact with how the world actually is talking back to us. And we, you know, we depart from
any real possibility of experiential grounding or confirmation or support. I mean, this happens.
You know, so I'm, you know, Marcelo and Adam could talk much more articulately about this,
but you know, this happens in, in areas of physics, you know, in string theory or, you know,
the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics and how people just are willing to
run with its metaphysical implications in this sort of profligated indiscriminate way. So that's
sort of the flip side is you can get, you can get fascinated by constructions that have a kind of
beauty, but that are, but that are misleading in certain ways. For sure. For sure. And
it's interesting that maybe we'll leave to when they're present to talk about this more in depth,
but you can see sort of both of these impulses, right? You, yeah, you can get the rabbit holding
that goes on with strings theory and multiple worlds. And it's just one electron moving all
through time and space, encountering itself and like, what, how could you possibly determine that
or given empirical content of that claim? And then, but the other, like there, there is something,
and I hear that the, the, maybe I'll call, I'll be poetic, the whisper of the mystic in the,
in this drive to unify the very, very bottom with the very, very top, the cosmos,
relativity with quantum. And it's like, you know, if there was ever a falsification of
popper, there's a falsification. We've had the best minds and the best technique, and they keep
making this hypothesis and it keeps getting reliably disconfirmed and they, that doesn't matter.
They just keep going and they just keep going. And I think that's powerful. Yeah. I wouldn't
want to. I, I'm very, I, I try to make a distinction between the wisdom that mysticism
can give us and any particular ontological or epistemological knowledge claims that are made.
And the first, I think, I take very seriously the second, I, I agree with quite a bit of
suspicion. Right. And, and, and I think that's important. Well, I just want to, I want to wrap
up for today. And we're, we're, I think this was great. We're really unpacking things really nicely,
very dialogically, the way I like, I want to talk to you next time, just to forewarn.
I want to talk to you around, about these issues, about abstraction. And you mean,
you make a wonderful correction, or at least amendment cameras at the end of chapter one
or chapter two, you talk about, well, you say, actually, we mean more or less abstract or more
or less concrete, because the terms are actually relative and comparative, right? You know,
the dog is more abstract than the cocker spaniel, but the mammals more abstract than the dog and,
right, and all that sort of thing. And I want to unpack that a little bit more.
And how does that plug into this notion of more, more real, as you're more closer to the
inexhaustible fount of intelligibility. And then there's this other one about,
you know, direct experience, immediate pure experience. And, you know, and then you're
familiar with this, no doubt. These are criticisms made by others against people like Nishida and
the Kyoto schools, you know, and hey, Gillians would make this argument. What? What do you mean?
There's no, there's all experience is mediated. That's the gain from the Kantian Revolution.
That's the thing you're doing where you're trying to go back before it can't, you're giving up the
realization that everything is mediated in some fashion. And there's no such thing as immediate
experience or direct experience. Right. Does that sound like a fecundary to go into it?
Yeah, definitely. I mean, immediate, immediate is like abstract concrete. It's, you know,
there's, yeah, yeah, exactly. There's a contextual issue there as to what,
what immediate versus immediate means just as there is for abstract concrete. But yeah,
no, those are all important things to talk about. Definitely. Yeah, yeah. Excellent. Excellent.
Well, Evan, first of all, I'm going to thank you. This has been just fantastic. Thanks.
I had great expectations and it exceeded them. I really enjoyed myself a lot. I hope you did.
Yeah, definitely. Lots of fun. And I definitely want you back. Let's have the next one just be you
and I again. Okay. And then maybe we, you could reach out to your co-authors and we could set up
maybe a third and fourth with all of us together. Yeah. We might need a little bit more time for
those episodes just to give more space for more people to be able to chime in. But I always like
to give my, you know this from when you were on the philosophy of meditation, we'd like to give
the people here the last word. It can be provocative. It can be summative. It can be
mysteriously evocative. Whatever you want it to be. I don't know if I have a, if I have a last word
of that, of that nature, other than just to say it's always lots of fun to talk with you. And,
and yeah, you know, I've really enjoyed the conversation. Yeah.
All right. So then I'll give the last word. I'm going to plug the book again. Okay. Really.
This book, if you are interested in the meeting crisis, if you're interested in, well,
relevance realization, that's in the book too. If you're interested in all of these issues,
we'll be talking about the sacred, about, you know, the fact that somehow we need to be put back
into the scientific worldview, but that means changing what we mean by a scientific worldview.
And you should be interested if you're watching this video, because I've been talking about those
things for five years, at least in this space, and I don't know, 20 years at the university. So
you should definitely buy the book. Again, very clearly written, accessible without being a dumbing
down. It's a nice stepping down without being a dumbing down. I highly recommend the book.
Go out and get it. It's not expensive. It's a great read. And thank you very much again, Evan.
Just great pleasure. Thank you.
