John Varvakey and Sean Coyne have together authored a new book,
Mentoring the Machines. It's a book about artificial intelligence and the path forward
that further develops the arguments of how to align artificial intelligence to human flourishing,
and it sets those arguments into beautiful and accessible writing. It's an incredibly
timely book. In fact, it will be released August 1st, 2023, as a four-part series that will culminate
into a final volume. You can pre-order today a special edition copy that will include a
signed hardback edition. Pre-order in the link in the description below.
Welcome, everybody, to another Voices with Varvakey. I'm very excited here to be talking with Joe
Alto. We are going to be doing an interesting thing. I'll let Joe talk about it a little bit more.
Although he's on Voices with Varvakey, we want you to consider that this is, I'm also on Joe's
channel. We're sort of going to be interviewing each other and talking for both audiences in
integrated fashion. Welcome, Joe. Thank you so much for having me, John. Just a quick introduction,
I guess, about myself. As John just mentioned, I have my own YouTube channel called the Gist
with Joe. That channel is really dedicated to talking to what I consider great minds in the
fields of psychology and philosophy, theology, really just culture in general. I essentially
ask my guests, what's the gist of their intellectual, their artistic, their spiritual
project? We know that distilling what your project is to the gist is a good practice. I like doing
this with my guests, and it usually blossoms into a really beautiful and meaningful conversation
afterwards. That's going to be one part of our conversation today. As John said, I'll be on Voices
with Varvakey. John will be on the gist with Joe. Obviously, my channel is much more teeny tiny than
John's. I guess even further introduce myself. I'm currently studying clinical mental health
counseling. I am the campus minister at a public university in Cleveland, Ohio, and just very
interested in pursuing what my, as a Catholic man with the church fathers or what other great
thinkers in philosophy in general would consider the good, the true, the beautiful. I'm on that
search myself. It's a hard, long search, but having conversations with great thinkers is
something that helps me with that endeavor. I'm just really honored to be on today. Thank you so much,
Jen. Thank you, Joe. Let me go first. I'll happily answer your gist question. On my side,
I guess what I'm really interested in hearing from you and talking about it a bit is how does
my work intersect with your pursuit, your quest as a Catholic man to track the true, the good, and
the beautiful? How does my work, like, does it help? Does it afford? Does it challenge? Is it a
problem? Well, it definitely does a lot. It definitely does a lot. Challenge is one really
good thing. Help is another. It helps a lot. And so, you know, as a Catholic, I will explain,
so, you know, I'm a Catholic campus minister, but I'm also studying intensively right now.
I'll be able to practice next April. I actually start my clinical internship in a couple weeks,
so I actually start seeing fiction soon. So I'm on this journey right now as I stated in clinical
mental health. And, you know, I don't have any plans of ever advertising myself, per se, as a
Catholic counselor. I actually think, and you know what, anyone who does religious specific
counseling, that's very needed. And I laud, you know, anyone who's watching who does, like I said,
religious specific counseling. However, given just my charisms, my personality, just what my
goal in this profession is, I don't necessarily plan on ever advertising myself as a Catholic
counselor. However, I do believe that in my, it's in my opinion that counseling, you know, psychotherapy
is, one can consider a spiritual or religious endeavor. There's many Christian, there's many
Buddhists, there's many Islamic, there's many Jewish, there's really all, every major, you know,
world religion and the ethos of that religion, you can see elements of that in the counseling
profession, right? And so, it's not going to ever be explicit, but you know, it's more so in the
implicit of my counseling, that I want to, well, that I will express or exude my Christian faith
that ever, without ever, possibly ever stating, hey, I'm a Christian man. And so, John, what is
your work coming in for this? So, although I've only had a couple encounters, right, with people
coming to counseling, but in my, in my time in classes, in my work reading the great thinkers of
both, you know, just the psychological field and just even the counseling field, I do know that,
and although I don't have any stats to prove it, this is more operating the anecdote right here,
I do know that many people go to counseling, not for, well, what we would consider, what the DSM
would consider, you know, a particular disorder, right? So, not everyone, so people who are depressed
don't always have a major depressive episode or major depressive disorder, right? People who are
anxious don't always have a specific phobia or generalized anxiety disorder, and that's actually
one of the downfalls of the current field of counseling, in my opinion, is, you know, the
overdiagnoses of these diseases. Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah. You said it, and again, I don't know the,
I'm going to misfire on the exact quote, but you once said that in all of his time counseling,
around something like 60% of the patients he ever saw were never dealing with an actual
psychological disorder, but they were dealing with, and John, this is where you come in, a crisis of
meaning. Yes, yes, yes. And, you know, your work has been so influential in what I want to do when I
hopefully knock on wood, right? Either I work with a group or I open up my own practice one day,
I want to create really this psychotherapeutic model that invites the individual to think more
deeply about virtue, and that's one thing that I really think plagues so many people. It's like,
if you could just realize, right, how virtues can be, virtue cultivation, how virtue cultivation
be so profound and have such a reformational, such a reformational influence on your life,
if you pursue these virtues, I believe that a lot of what people are coming in for, if those
individuals are not suffering from a particular disorder that you could diagnose via the DSM,
I do believe that something like virtue cultivation could be a serious modality to really help, you
know what, I'm trying to think what's the word that Aristotle uses in eudaimonia, to get to this
eudaimonic state, right? And that's really the goal of all mental health counseling is you want
the individual to reach this eudaimonic state, you want the individual to be happy, right?
And I won't get into like the happiness that is more, well, it's the more profound, it's more
joyful than it is happy, right? Eudaimonic, you want people to be joyful, and yeah, I do believe
that one way that we can reach joy is by the cultivation of virtues, and so yes, your work,
I think in a lot of what you've been doing with the Beaning Crisis and what you've been doing
with After Sacrities and what you're doing in general is really in alignment with what I'm doing
and I would hope to use your work and to pick your brain a lot, you know, now and in the future
to help me with this effort. Wow, that's a very well-explicated and thoughtful answer.
There's a lot in there. So I'm going to ask a question and it might sound like a challenge,
but I honestly, it's not. So one thing that's happened in response to, and I agree with all the
stats you were laying out, you know, the particulars might be move around a bit. I think the general
point I think is well stated. So one of the ways in which there's been a response, and I know people
that do this like Rick, Rick Rapetti, they've taken up philosophical counseling as a way of trying to
address the people that are coming in not because, I mean the slogan is they're not pathological,
they're confused and they're not sick. They're finding that they're being too foolish in their life
and those are not the same thing. And of course, there's nothing that prevents them from both
being comorbid either. Often you can have both and they're making each other worse
in really obnoxious fashion for the person. So are you planning on getting any training
in and incorporating the philosophical counseling into what you're doing because it sounds like
it would also be helpful for you? Yeah, no, I've most definitely looked into it
and I think it would be helpful. And I've already been tapped on the shoulder by a few to pursue
things like, you know, become maybe like a union analyst or to, like you said, maybe journey down
that avenue of what we would consider philosophical counseling. And I'm sure many people who are
watching don't even realize that there might be like this very specific type of counseling. Yes,
it is. Usually the individual who is the counselor usually has a higher degree in philosophy.
Yes. And it's almost like this, you know, I always think, I tell people, many people this
before, you know, I think the greatest counseling relationship that we've ever seen in human history
has been the counseling relationship between Virgil and John today. I really can't believe that
that is quite frankly the most beautiful vision of what a counselor should be. It's like, hey,
I'm going to help you get here. Realize, though, that I can't go with you to that. I can't get to
that same place that we need you to get. But I know that you need to get there. And I have to leave
you behind. And it's going to be sad, right? When we terminate, that's like the counselor,
counselor, when we terminate our relationship, it will be sad. And we have learned a lot from
each other, and we may not ever see each other again. But, you know, realize that again,
this relationship has been reformational, that it's like this beautiful, like,
vocation that we have journeyed on together. But to answer your question more directly,
yes, I have thought about pursuing it. But here's my only issue with that. I want Mike,
I was talking, so it's actually funny, because I was actually approaching this question with my
wife, literally last week, and I was like, hey, because, you know, it's all about the
particularities. It's like, okay, well, there's some very practical things that we have to do,
right? So like, I'm going to open up my own business. So you got to take out a small business
loan and yada, yada, yada. So it actually does, you know, this is, it's not just a me decision,
it's a family decision. And how is this going to affect my wife and my kid and all these things
that we were talking. And my vision has always been working with very high insight in individuals
with high insight, right? So individuals who possess high insight. And when you do philosophical
counseling, you're usually working with individuals with high insight, because who is going to a
philosophical counselor, other than that, other than the individual who has probably is somewhat
learned in, you know, Western, more than likely, Western continental philosophy, right?
And so I was telling her this. And, you know, she said, you know, very wise, she said, well,
you're really just missing the mark then, at that point. I was like, what does that mean?
She said, Joe, you know, you virtue cultivation is not just for the intelligentsia. It's not
just for those in an academic side, right? Virtue cultivation sometimes is needed more
by the individual who don't, who doesn't realize that you cultivate virtues. I mean,
people don't even know if we were to go out on the, our respective cities sidewalks,
we say, what's virtue? Who the hell would be able to, I mean, really, I have a hard time
myself answering that without the help of great thinkers, right? Like,
so, I mean, so it's not even like my, so I even sometimes have a difficult time buying the correct
language that I have to rely on great thinkers of the past. So given that, I mean, stemming from
that, who realizes that we have to cultivate it? People just think, Oh, this is, people have a
very odd relationship with virtue, because they just, they just don't understand that it's a
vocational call, right? That virtue, I believe that virtue truly operates in the beautiful. It's
like, the beautiful is the car and virtue are the parts of the car. So they're very connected,
but you can also make the distinction, right? So I'm not going to say my steering wheel is my car,
but I will say, like, yeah, beauty is the car. And I do believe that virtue is the steering wheel,
because they function similarly, right? Because the beauty and things that are beautiful,
allow the individual, it's like one of the only things in our life that allows us
to not be content with how things are, right? So it's like, we are not content with our lives,
and, you know, philosophically, but even like, put that on like a lower rung of the scale,
maybe I look at my bedroom and it's a mess and I'm like, why? So beauty really orients us
towards the good, right? But it also allows us not to be content. And it calls us, right? Beauty
calls us to achieve or go up a rung of understanding and seeing reality more vividly. And that's what
virtue does too. So this is why I really do believe that- Yeah, I agree. That's a very platonic argument
you just made. Very platonic. That's a very platonic argument you just made. Yeah. Right, exactly.
And, you know, I do believe that, you know, Henri de Lubach, Ray, talks about a saturated
phenomena. And I do believe that, I believe that virtue is also operating as a saturated phenomena.
Again, I do believe that virtue, again, being connected with beauty operates in the erotic,
because it's something that calls, it's something that pulls you. It's something that is insightful.
And, you know, I once read this great book, I don't know if, I mean, knowing that you have
spent much time studying Buddhist philosophy, I read this great book in college once upon a time,
because I also, I was a religious studies major, but most of my time was never actually spending,
well, I was never taking Christian classes, I was taking Buddhist classes. And I read this book
called Alone with Others by Stephen Batchelor. Yeah, yeah, I teach that book. Oh, do you? Okay,
yeah. I taught that book for years. I've met Stephen and had dinner with him. Yeah.
It's a great book. And I also, and again, it's not nothing, it's nothing about the book, by the
way, is about, you know, it's mostly on, you know, Buddhist, a particular Buddhist philosopher,
a Buddhist philosopher's connection with Martin Heidegger. But the book is called Alone with Others.
And that's another way I think that virtue is that virtue functions is that it's an individual
pursuit, but you aren't going to realize it unless it's practiced with others, right? So.
So let me make sure I'm not losing the thread here. So you're, you took a look at philosophical
counseling, and there was an appeal there, but your wife said something very insightful about
what, you know, maybe the what you're called to is to bring virtue to people who are not
awakened to the quest for virtue. And you want to learn how to awaken them. And one of the functions
of beauty is to awaken them to the quest. And then, and, and, and, and this, yeah, and beauty is
one of virtue is one of these alone with others. We, you know, it's a virtue if you have Gaiji's
ring and you're alone, but it's because you're responsible to other people. I get all that
connection. And that was very eloquent. So how does this beautification, how would the beautification
and the awakening to virtue come into sort of the psychotherapeutic practice? Now, first of all,
I give you the caveat. Like if somebody, if somebody's coming in disordered pathological,
that, that has to be, that's exigent. That has to be addressed and dealt with. We're talking about
this other group, the people that are coming in existentially confused, meaning crisis. So
tell me what, how you're like, how you're, this is where a lot of my thoughts are,
I'm ruminating on most of these. So if my answer isn't as developed, please, you know, show me some
compassion, but I'll, I'll, I'll, of course, of course, of course. I was in my own. So I see, you
know, part of my program is that, and I think every good counselor, every good psychotherapist
should see their own psychotherapy. Oh, totally. Totally. I, I, I'm very critical of people who
practice, who have never gone through therapy. Right. It's odd. Um, it's like being a priest,
but never going to mass. Yeah. And it's funny. I mean, I don't, I don't really mean to
make this very direct joke, but as a Catholic, right? Sorry. One thing I struggle with, I think
I would struggle with this without, without being Catholic or not, but I have a lot of guilt,
right? That's one thing that I have in me. And I don't, and I work, get into my,
getting into my, my particular sessions, I'm trying to figure out, I'm on my own quest right now,
of figuring out if this guilt is a personality trait, where this guilt comes from, why do I have
this guilt? And it's also yesterday, I had a great, I had a great realization, but it was also very
embarrassing realization that, you know, a lot of my identity, a lot of, a lot of my identity that I
exude is still the identity that I had, you know, when I was in middle school. And that's very
embarrassing, right? But it's like, it's like, it's like these characteristics, these personal,
personality characteristics that I obviously just haven't processed correctly. Right. And they, and
they're not bad, and they don't necessarily get in the way, but they make me for a lot of reasons
without getting into my psychology, right? They, I have a lot of guilt, like I said, so I feel guilty
for, why am I telling you this? Well, I'm telling you this because I think with people of high insight
who would come in for this particular type of counseling, maybe something that they would
also feel ashamed or guilt. And so usually high insightful people will do something, something
very menial, right? Could be menial. Like I lied to my spouse about, I don't know. I mean, maybe
I lied about how many beers I had at the party, or I don't know, maybe, maybe I, maybe I watched
pornography and I feel really bad about that. Maybe I bullied a friend, I jibbed a friend a
little too hard, you know, when we were, you know, in our, in our group text message, or, and you
could think of whatever, you know, I feel guilt. Okay. And then, you know, unfortunately, nowadays,
I mean, how everyone who feels guilt, like four times in a week, or am I a narcissist? Am I this?
Am I, no, no, no, let's, let's, let's take deep breath and let's, let's take this. What if it's
not guilt? What if it's not shame that you're experiencing? What if, again, because like virtue
is a call, right? It's something that calls you. So what if virtue was a call? And what if the fact
that you were able to admit to me that you lied to your wife, or you did something dishonest,
you did something that wasn't courageous, you did something, you know, you did, you did something
again, you just didn't enjoy the fact that you're able to sit here in a counseling session and tell
me that you have guilt and that you didn't enjoy it. Maybe that's not guilt at all. And maybe
that's your conscious telling you, or maybe that's virtue, right, trying to signal to you
that you should pursue this further. The fact that you were able to feel that the fact that you
knew that it was wrong to lie, the fact that it was the fact that, you know, you were being
deceptive, that you were being surreptitious. That insight right there might allow you to
realize that, no, no, I don't need to feel guilty, but the fact that I was cognizant of my fault,
maybe that's actually virtue communicating with me and inviting me to indulge in a deeper
relationship with virtue. Well, I see. I see. So you're reframing it. It's very
high agarient, which Stephen would love, Stephen Bachelor. Yeah. You know, the conscience is,
there's an existential version of conscience. There's a psychological version of conscience,
which is basically your internalization of certain norms. And you punish yourself as a way of
redirecting your behavior, guilt and shame. They're not the same thing, but they're sort of working.
But then there's an existential sense where conscience is the call to authenticity. You're
saying conscience could be understood as the call to virtue. So where does the beauty come in? Is
that trying to see the beauty of the life that you could be called to? Is that the idea? Yeah,
that's precisely it. And even trying to, you know, again, like, I think if you pursue and
try to cultivate and therefore try to live a virtuous life, I do think, yeah, in that process,
I mean, life automatically becomes more beautiful, right? So what's a more beautiful vision of life
that I'll complete as hard as it could be a complete honest relationship with your wife or
dishonest relationship with your wife? And what's more beautiful, right? What's a higher form of
that? Right. So yeah. So yes, what you said precisely. Oh, that's very interesting.
So like, yeah, I could see how a lot of the work that I do would be relevant to that project.
And so how does, you know, the truth, the truth of the beautiful David Chindler,
who I get to talk to, you know, these are the transcendentals. They're the transcendentals
because they apply universally across domains. But the idea is their ultimate unity is in
is in the one or God, your Catholic, so I'll say God for your benefit. How does that sense of the
transcendence, you know, Plato, the symposium, the cult of the love of virtue is not the final love,
we move beyond that to the love of the source of intelligibility or the possibility of virtue,
the ground of being, the ground of life, the ground of wisdom, that sort of
vision that's articulated in Aquinas or Maximus. How does, so now given all of that sort of
explication, how does God show up in this for you? Yeah, I mean,
you're Catholic, so it's fair to re-ask that question, I think. 100% it's fair. So again, like,
this is why I bring up, this is why I say that Dante and Virgil is such a good model.
It's, you know, in a counseling session, I don't know if I would, I mean,
unless the individual is comfortable with bringing it up, you know, then I would talk about God, but
yeah, well, you, I mean, you almost, I think and challenge me and push me further, but I really
almost think that, you know, you gave the answer in your question though. And when it's, you know,
all these things are in submission to the one, right? Virtue and beauty and the true and the good.
And I don't, you know what, I'm having a hard time trying to order three transcendentals in my own
life. I would love to get your take on that. It's like, you know, what's, it's like, what's, you
know, everyone tries to say, oh, you pursue the good and that opens up the beautiful and that
gives you truth. I don't necessarily think that it matters how you orient the three transcendentals
for me personally. I believe, like I said, that beauty is the most approachable because, yeah,
that's what Plato thought, because beauty is the one that reaches so readily and obviously into the
sensual aspect of our being in the way that truth and goodness don't. We can see and touch beauty
in a way in which we can see and not, we cannot see and cannot touch truth and goodness. So I think
David Gendo talks about it as, what is it? I might get it wrong, but something like the primacy
of beauty, it comes first, but the centrality of truth and then I think the ultimacy of goodness,
or it could be those two the other way around, but they each have a superlative, but in different
ways. I think, I think speaking temporally, I think beauty comes first. I saw, but what we have to
remember is to not, and human beings have a proclivity to this, this error. We have, we shouldn't
confuse, that's what David's trying to address. We shouldn't confuse temporal priority with
ontological priority. Just because beauty comes first doesn't mean it's the first of the transcendentals,
right? They're all first in different ways. Beauty is temporally first. I think the true is
central in some way, but they have different priorities. And I, like I say, kind of remember
which way David does it. It's really good. His work on that on, on the primacy of beauty,
and then he talks about primacy, centrality, and ultimacy. And so I think truth is the ultimate
actually, and goodness is the, is the central, but I could, I could have a look around. But that's
because I have a slightly different notion of goodness is perhaps making me confused. So I'm
just admitting I'm confused. But the point, the point that I'm not confused about that I think
is well taken is to not, is to recognize that each transcendental is ultimate, but in a different
way. Each, right? So there's, there's firstness and there's centrality and there's ultimacy.
These are all superlatives, but in fundamental different ways. And just don't, so learn to
differentiate the different ways in which they're ultimate, but also learn to not confuse them
and give each one its proper due. It's profound. Yeah. And I, you know, just because of my background,
you know, I, my, my undergraduate degree is in art history and religious studies. My master's work
is working with my favorite Catholic theologian, Von Balthasar. So obviously,
yeah, you've got to read some Schindler. He is the person that has made Balthasar
like accessible and I think clearer. And also he's developed. David's just done amazing work
developing beyond Von. And I mean that in the way a good student goes beyond their teacher,
but he's gone beyond Balthasar in just profound ways. Of course. Oh, this is great. Okay. This
is great. I need, oh man. Okay. Yeah. Well, now I have something to do. I do want to say one thing
though, back to your question about, you know, where is the one and where does God come in an
office? Yes, please. This makes me a bad Catholic. I'm sure. And I'm, I'm worried about, sometimes
like, yeah, I always have a hard time. I always have a hard time trying to know, or I have a hard
time knowing where I fit in in these circles. I watched that video that you and Paul Bander Clay
and Jonathan Peugeot, and forgive me, I don't remember the woman's name. I had, that was the
first time I interacted with her virtually. What was her, what's her name? Who's on? You did,
I'm sorry, let me give you the title first. On a Spiritual Home, it was on. Oh, that's Catherine.
Sure. Yeah. And there was John Van Dink was there as well. Yes. Wonderful. Well, it's kind of funny
because, you know, as someone, I mean, obviously as someone who's Catholic, I still somewhat don't
feel that I have a spiritual home. And the reason why I preface this is this. In my counseling,
like, you know, my goal is never to make in life. In life, this is very hard to admit. I'm not
necessarily concerned with converting people to Catholicism. I don't think you should be when
you're in therapy. I think that's just, I think that's just. Even personally, I'm not necessarily,
you know, and I, and that's for my own personal reasons. And that's because, you know, I'm basically
not, I mean, I'm a cradle Catholic, but I'm also a revert. And I had, you know, a long bout with
atheism. And I, as I just expressed to you, I mostly studied Buddhist philosophy and undergrad,
and deep, deep compassion for anyone who has that proclivity. And so it's not my goal to make
any one Catholic, but it is my goal to, and I'm not a relativist, I want to make that very, very,
very. It is my goal, though, to unite the individual with the one God, right. And I won't
necessarily get into the, yeah, I don't understand what I just said was loaded, because then you
can, again, you can, oh, what is he saying that, you know, what he's, what he's saying is that
like a relative, relativist thought, and I don't necessarily want to get into my, my spirituality,
or, you know, things that I subscribe to, I really enjoy the more mystical teachings of Catholicism.
But yeah, it's never my goal to make anyone anything. My goal is the only, the only goal I
have is, like I stated before, is to help the individual pursue the path to eudaimonia, right.
And that's what I want to do. So I think that's a good clarification and specification. So let me
make my question more precise than my question is, well, I first of all, proposal, I propose that
getting people into right orientation towards the one towards ultimacy is how you can best help them
explicate, articulate, and respond to their, and here I'm being till it, their ultimate concerns,
and that part of what is underneath their confusion is very often they are confused about
what they ultimately care about. That's one part of the confusion. The other can be what is ultimate
such that I should care about it as ultimate is another thing that people are often confused
about. We often pursue evil, not because we're pursuing evil, but because we pursue a lesser
good at the expense of a greater good. Oh, amen. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So what I, what I meant was,
you know, how, yes, I get it, you're not proselytizing, you're not trying to surreptitiously convert
people. That would be duplicitous. I think it would be vicious in fact. But there's a sense in
which if what we're talking about, again, not, not the pathological people, but the deeply confused
people, we're trying to bring them clarity, then I think the orientation towards, you know, what's
real, what's most real, and how well connected am I to it is a fundamental question about meaning
in life. Of course. And that's where you're, I mean, and that's exactly where your specific
project comes in. And it's like, okay, but now how do I make this a psychological modality?
Right. I don't sit them down. Hey, in today's session, we're going to watch episode four of
the meeting. Of course. That would be utterly ridiculous. That sounds like a weird sitcom to
that could be done or something. Yeah. Right. Um, but it's again, it's like, yeah, how do I
distill? And again, I'm not, and you know this, you are not the only individual who has written
or thought about this extensively, right? So it's not just you. It's, it's, it's you in
accompaniment with other great thinkers. It's you in accompaniment with spiritual teachers. It's
you in accompaniment with simply just like already like empirically proven psychotherapeutic
practices, right? So it's like, and it's also in company with my, with my own, uh, with, with,
with who I am as a person, right? Yeah. So it's like, how do I put it? How do I, how do I get all,
all of us to converge? How do I, how do I create this tapestry of all these voices?
And that's what's difficult because it can't just be, right? So this is the thing. I mean,
counseling is not what we are seeing on YouTube, right? This is not, I mean, this is, this, this,
in a way, this is nice. Um, and I've had many counseling sessions where it has just been a
dialogue. Um, but how do we transform the dialogue? Right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And so that's the question
that I'm, I'm, I'm struggling with quite frankly. I mean, so again, there's more skin in the game
because this is not just a theoretical, I'm not just like having this conversation with you,
just a, you know, kill an hour. It's like, no, this is quite frankly, like a livelihood that I
might have. Right. This is, this is also, this has economic implications, right? Yeah. I get it.
So it's like, well, what's the model that, what, what's the model? And so yeah, this is the thing
that I'm, I'm, I'm tirelessly thinking about every day. And it's like, yeah, I'm breathing a lot,
and I'm thinking a lot, and I'm reflecting a lot, and I'm watching a lot.
I want to know this when, when, like, I, I'm not demanding it now. I get it. It's a
work in progress. So, so, but, so don't mistake my, but like, I want, I like, I want to, I,
I want notes from the front or something. I want to know, like, how this is work,
how you are doing that, how you're translating that into, this is very important. I mean,
I mean, part of what the Verveki Foundation is trying to do is collect,
you know, relevant psychotherapists and counselors and philosophical counselors who can deal with
people who are wrestling with not just sort of the pedagogical struggles of taking on
an ecology practices, but, you know, a therapeutic slash existential dimension. So, you know,
let me interrupt you right there, even. So, I mean, part of it is also just not trying to reinvent
the wheel. Right. Yeah. We have, I mean, who the hell am I? Not, not that much, right? Who the hell
am I to say I'm going to create this new psychotherapeutic model, right? No. How am I going to have,
how am I, how am I going to personally put my ego aside for a second? And I'm going to submit
myself to the great thinkers, to visionaries of the past. And I, again, I, I interact with them,
and I transcend time and space, and they come into that session. So it's like, yeah, it's like,
how do we, okay, so part of it is I'm wrestling with kind of this hybrid CBT existential model,
because there is, because there, there, you do need to involve some type of cognitive behavioral
therapy. And of course, people reframing abilities, you have to. Exactly. Because you can give everyone
the existential jargon, and someone's going to say, you know, you, you can talk about, you know,
like I said, use I, you just throw out, like it's like a word box, like, oh yeah, I the relationship,
or yeah, whatever, like, you can't do that unless you have to first get the individual to a
place of insight, they weren't there. It wasn't there before, right? And the only way you can get
there is through the, you know, and we should be, we should be in, we should have much gratitude
towards the individuals who really developed the CBT model. And I do believe, you know, one thing,
it's funny, I talked about never knowing where my footing is, it's like, I, yeah, I tend to,
in the psychological circles, I tend to hang out with the more existential psychologists,
right? There's a lot of like good existential psychology happening right now. Even from,
you know, my institution where I'm at, Clay Rutledge over at Dakota, he's doing a lot of great work in
terror management and nostalgia and just more existential things that you could actually trickle
down to using that as like a therapeutic modality. But, so what I'm getting at is that you have the
existentialists on one side and just being like, sometimes it's weird how we just like groupthink,
they're like, no, this, you know, the people who subscribe to CBT, that's just a bunch of bullshit.
It's like, no, it's not just a bunch, I mean, it can't be a bunch of bullshit. It's not just that,
it's not that simplistic. And the evidence is the effectiveness of CBT is going down,
because as it's been abstracted and extracted from therapists who had a much broader philosophical
base and could bring in and address existential issues and sapiential having to do with wisdom
and virtue issues. Yeah, when you take it out, you abstract it, you just have it as a separate
method. Like it looks like it's effectiveness as an evidence-based therapy is actually going down.
There's a lot of reasons for that. And just like the, yeah, like, it's unfortunate how much
your basic, sorry, your average clinician who is working in the modality of CBT
might not actually have a keen of an eye. And they might not understand CBT. So what ends up
happening is you just, you go back to third grade vocab class and you just get a work.
I have a stronger critique. I think, yeah, yeah, it's, I think the way to address this
is that CBT and other people have said this, Robinson and others, CBT needs to be resituated
into, inside stoicism, which it was derived, because what needs to be offered is not a technique,
but the cultivation of virtue within the aspiration to a good life. And that's what's
missing from CBT as a framework right now. So I think CBT was more effective. You know, the people
who invented it were deeply educated with stoicism, right? And then that has fallen away
because of psychology's proclivity to forget its philosophical past.
Oh, amen. And that's why I said, that's why, you know, to get to the point or to get to the
genesis of this subconversation. Yeah, you have to bring in the existential psychotherapeutic
techniques are the most approachable of, you know, that side of the coin. So you do need to have this
blend of, you know, cog and existentialism. And you need to blend these two together. And I think
I personally think if this, if this enmeshing happens, then this is, then we can borrow that
and use that for this vision of counseling that I've been discussing.
Interesting, interesting. So I mean, virtues often have to do with two other things, emotions. So
I mean, I've done training also in EFT, Emotional Public Policy, and also inter-conflict and
inter-parts work by GIFS and other things are really good for learning how to also internalize
the dialogue inside the psyche and not always make it. So I'm wondering, do you think those
other two, I mean, I don't want to send you on an education. By the way, Joe, just, you know,
get educated on this for the next 20 years and then, but it seems to me, I guess I'm making an
argument. I agree totally with the proposal of integrating CBT and existentialism and therefore
getting something back to something like stoicism. But we also know, you know, stoicism and should
be put into dialogue with Buddhism because all kinds of evidence that combining CBT and
mindfulness together is synergistically helpful. Right. So I'm just wondering, like, is it, you
know, and then you want the inner dialogue work to overcome inner conflict and how to internalize
dialogue and IFS is good for that. And then dealing with emotions is a very, very important
part of call to virtue. I mean, Aristotle said, you know, it's not about being angry or not,
it's being angry at the right time for the right reasons to the right degree for the right person.
Yeah. And this is where, you know, a lot, you know, I'm even thinking about now and forgive
me if I don't directly answer your question, but now I'm just, you know, brainstorming and just,
again, they're not, they're not, again, please have compassion for me because they're not the
most, they're not developed thoughts yet because I'm spending a lot of my time thinking about this.
And so it's been like, you know, how, to what effect will, to what effect does psycho education
even have, like this type of therapy? It's like, you know, you said, I forget exactly,
I know you talked about mindfulness, but even just like the differentiation between teaching
someone what's the difference, the difference between mindfulness and contemplation meditation.
Meditation, yes, yes, yes. Yeah. So it's like, how often do we conflate these and we conflate
these and then we think that, and it's just confused. So if we don't understand the meaning
of words that we use, well, then we have, we don't understand our very selves because like,
the person is like a word. I mean, we are like letters. I mean, it's all these things are connected,
right? My friend Spencer Clayton, he writes about this in his newest book. And he talks about how
one thing that's been lost is the meaning of the meaning of words, right? I mean,
structuralists. So, you know, we think that words can mean whatever the hell they want,
but it's like, no, like these, these things, these symbols engender something, right? And,
and once we believe that they don't, well, then we get in a weird, really weird place. And, okay,
so how are we like letters then? Or how are we like words? Like, well, our forms engender something.
And if we believe that they don't engender something real or true, or how about this,
that we all engender possibly the same thing, getting back to the notion of the one to God.
But when we stop believing this, we get into really weird places. And it's so funny that you
brought up stoicism because I was thinking about how, you know, the Stoics naturally, and again,
even with the Buddhists, right? So the Stoics, what's, you know, you take a Stoic and you can
naturally start ushering them into the Christian ethic, right? It's so, it's, it's, it's a, it's
not easy, but you know, you do it via Neil Platonism. That's how you do it. Right. And so,
yeah, I mean, so, because, because in stoicism, it's obviously, I mean, people nowadays,
especially individuals who might be going to counseling, who aren't necessarily religious,
right? Taking those more Stoic practice, people are going to, people are going to automatically
feel more comfortable. Yes, very much. Yeah. Rather than if they begin to sniff that,
oh, what you're saying, I remember kind of hearing a very watered down version of that sometime in,
like, in Christian school, or that's mildly religious. Right. So, yeah, I, it's, yes, it's,
it's trying to be as approachable as possible. But no, you, when you were talking about, you know,
the regulations of emotions and trying to figure out, I mean, yes, that, I think that that very
much so is going to be a big part of this. Again, it's just like, and I, and part of this conversation,
which I didn't necessarily expect it to be, but I'm really happy it isn't, it's trying, it's trying
to talk with, you know, individuals. I mean, so I'm also talking next Thursday on a busy schedule.
Her name is Nancy Snow. I don't know if you're familiar with her work. Nancy Snow? No, sorry.
No, it's fine. And so I wasn't that familiar with her work either until just due my own
perspective. So Nancy Snow is now at the University of Kansas, but she previously was at the University
of Oklahoma. And so from 2000, from 2015 to 2018, Nancy in collaboration with
other academics in the psychological field, they held experience, experiments just on, like,
on this topic of virtue cultivation, how to, yeah, how to, and I'm so sorry, I don't have the exact
name, but you should look her up after this is Nancy, Nancy Snow. And what their goal was in
this three-year project was to discuss how you can use virtue cultivation. Can we make this,
can we give this like some empirical backing, right? Because no one in the psychological field
is going to care if you don't have empirical backing. Yeah. So yeah, part of it is having
conversations like with you next week, Professor Snow. And hopefully what I end up doing is
I, I take all these voices and I, like I said, I put everyone into accompaniment.
And, you know, maybe we'll talk in the future. I don't know. But I'd like to, I'd like to know when,
when you find your voice from all of these voices, I'd like to know what that was like,
and what, how you did it, and what is properly idiosyncratic to you and what is properly
charitable with other people. Yeah, it's very much like to know that.
Yeah. So we're, we're on the journey together, I guess, you know, we're, and that's, and that's
the really beautiful thing. So yeah, you know, and, you know, I did it. I, this, I'm kind of like,
you know, going off the path a little bit. I didn't want to ask you a question though that I've
been thinking about. I was just going to say, I think we should turn things over to you now asking
me questions. Okay, let's do that. Okay. So how about this? We'll probably stay on this path.
Well, I have a couple of questions I'm going to ask you about virtue and about play and about
male and female virtue. And I'm going to incorporate Jung in that. I'm going to incorporate play in that.
So I'll ask you some questions. But we're still going to be on the same. Yeah, if that's okay.
With all that being said, real quick, just to, just to answer the question,
what would you say is the gist of your intellectual project? Because you do so much.
What are you trying to, what are you really trying to,
what are you trying to achieve? What do you want people to take away?
I want people to recover, how to cultivate meaning in life and wisdom. So they have wise meaning
and meaningful wisdom, such that they can fall in love with beauty, truth and goodness, and
ultimately fall in love with being again, and continue to do so for the rest of their lives.
Real quick endeavor, right? I appreciate that. Thank you. And I will say, I mean, so
you're getting bigger and bigger. This is, I just thought of this question now, but you know,
and your pursuit is truly the most noble of pursuits. And your voice is being heard by many
and you're helping out a lot of people. Has that hit you yet? Is that hitting you now that you are
getting, that you, you're, you're gaining some type of what we would probably consider celebrity
status, right? You're, you're probably getting more into the public intellectual sphere, probably
that you ever thought you were ever going to get into, I'm guessing. Very, very mixed.
One part of me is deeply grateful and I take great pains to demonstrate and to
point out that there's, this is not me alone. This is very much a lot of people that I'm
collaborating with and in community with. So I'm very grateful for the recognition. I'm very grateful
for the, the collaboration. Very grateful for both of those. I'm very concerned, very concerned about
undertaking whatever, the exercise of whatever influence I garner to do it with as much
virtue and virtuosity as I can. So that's why I've set up and I've got, there's the, the
Viveki Foundation, which is a not-for-profit and there's Ryan Barton, who's the executive director
and Eric Foster from Upfire, the director of operations and there's people on the board
and so, right? And so there's, I have an arms length relationship. So the money and the recognition
is not right here. It's over there and it's, there's a lot of people who I selected very carefully,
who are very committed to a virtuous vision. And so, and I'm constantly looking for
feedback on how not to become a guru in the pejorative sense of the word.
Yeah. So that, that's hitting me.
Because unfortunately people will do that.
Oh, they will and I don't want to.
Yeah. And I really, really, really, really don't want to. I really don't want, I want,
I really am, I deeply aspire to being Socrates and I really, that is the most profound thing I want.
And I don't want anything to come at the expense of my aspiration to being as authentically
Socratic as I can. And, and in connection with that, although it doesn't sound like they're the
same thing, but they're connected, you know, all the, all the fundamental relationships that,
that I value for their own sake. So I don't want that. There's, I'm not, I'm socially phobic
by nature. This is a, this is a decade long persona that I have crafted that you're interacting
with, not inauthentically, by the way. I'm sure it aspirationally. But so I was talking to Ryan
last night about, I recently released a video on AI and the scientific and philosophical and
spiritual import of what's happening in AI right now. And it's, it's doing very well.
And, and so I get a sense of exposure that is quite unpleasant for me around that.
But, but if I hadn't done it, like I did that, I worked really, really hard,
like almost obsessively so for about three or three or four weeks before I released the video,
I say, because I felt a tremendous sense of responsibility. So it's not like I can't do
these things because of the exposure, because then I'm beset by a tremendous sense of responsibility
to the level of obligation, you know, about trying to do something, try to do whatever I can to steer
this towards the good for the sake of my family and my kids, my friends and for the world.
Yeah, right. But, but on the other hand, yeah, like, it's like, it's like, it's, it's like,
it's, it's, it's a negative affect of exposure that I also confront around it.
So techniques that you do to control your id from seeping into all of this. What do you, what do
you do to? Well, I have my, I mean, I do my daily ecology of practices, and which are do a lot about,
you know, that there's dialogical practices, imaginable mindfulness practices, you know,
body movement movement, the whole ecology, trying to design it, all the stuff I'm talking about,
designing a proper well, I enter into, you know, a dialectic into the logos, philosophical fellowship,
I do practices, I like my patrons are becoming like, we do, we do practices together, which is,
and I mean this, I mean this with respect, it's kind of like going to church together.
Yeah. And then, like I said, I know that we, we can't rely on self interpretation and self
direction, we have to engage it, but we can't rely on that for getting us to the good, we have to
make sure that there are people other than us, we nevertheless have our best interest at park,
who we have empowered, or also make it personal, who I've empowered to challenge me, to speak on me,
to keep me away from, so I don't, like for example, all the money doesn't come to me,
it goes to the Raveki Foundation, and then I will take out expenses for projects, and I also take out,
you know, a relatively small honorarium, because, you know, I should, this is a lot of my time,
and I like, I'm not generating income elsewhere that I could be doing, so it compensates for that,
but it's very much about putting in place also the external safeguards where there is specific
people who have been specifically empowered with specific duties to help keep me on track.
All of that can still screw up, but the more and more of this, I can make self organizing and
independent from my, you know, personal, my personal cognitive and emotional biases,
the better I think I can meet the demands which, and meeting the demands I do find very meaningful,
meeting the demands of doing this virtually, and with doing it virtuously and with virtuosity,
yeah, that's what I'm trying to do. That's beautiful, it's hard sometimes, you know, and
I am obviously nowhere near you, but as I, you know, I, this little podcast has allowed me to,
it's opened up doors, of course, it's allowed me to write for, you know, a publication,
it's allowed for me to have great conversations with you and other people, it's, I have, I mean,
I have my one, only one video and I don't ever want it to, because that was, I was very anxious
when I saw how many people were watching it, but one video was 40,000 views and I remember,
I was like, I remember like working out and I was at the gym and I was just clicking to see
how many people were watching it, and I was both flattered and both, I was getting egotistical
about it, but I was also extremely, I was growing extremely, you know, anxious over it,
and so it's like, in all this, you kind of, you get this false sense of gravitas, and so sometimes,
I know in my life, the people, you made that very clear and you made that beautiful point, it's like,
you know, you have the individuals, the friends, or the loved ones, the lovers, right, that, that
ground you, and it's like, well, oftentimes, now that I've been doing more, you know, sometimes that
gets, that gets into the way, that gets into the way, you know, sometimes with my relationship,
with my wife, maybe I'm working on something and, you know, my wife says, oh, look at the baby,
or, hey, you want to hang out, and it's like, well, I'm writing, or I'm collaborating, and so
that's on a teeny tiny scale, so I, you know, I can't imagine, you know, the,
how conscious you have to be, basically, on a moment-to-moment basis, which is good,
but it's also very hard in order to not deteriorate these relationships, and we don't have to get
into it by any means, I don't, I'm not asking you to- Well, I do want to say something about it,
I mean, I was, because I was talking to, I was talking to my life partner, I was talking to her
last night, and it's really interesting, I was saying how she actually becomes more and more real.
I said something to the effectist, as some of my, you know, dreams come true, I more and more find
the woman of my dreams to be more real, that's what's actually happening for me,
because the ephemerality of this, and again, please, I want to, I'm very grateful for the
recognition, I really am, and I'm not, I'm not being dismissive or insulting of it, but
sometimes, there's an old Greek proverb, that God sometimes punish us by giving us what we want,
right, and so a lot of these things that I, you know, I wanted more recognition,
I wanted my work to get out there, I wanted to make a difference, and you know, and to be really
honest, there's an egocentric, egotistical aspect to that, which- Always does. Yeah, well, I mean,
because, you know, if you totally get rid of the self-preservation strategy, you'll, you'll die,
and so, but, you know, getting a lot of the success, as you said, I didn't really expect
the gas, although I'd always wanted it, you know, that weird sort of semi-fantasy thing that we all
were, getting that fulfilled has, and I don't want to come off as being saintly, because that is not
what I am or claim it to be, but it's, it's kind of, it's, it's salience diminishes in some important
way with respect to the things that are really mattering in your life, that's what I found,
I mean, I'm not saying this is universal, but, but for me, that's been helpful, it's like, wait,
you know, all of this is really cool and everything, but what's really happening phenomenologically is
that's sort of now more background for me, and my relationship with Sara, and like, and my kids,
and like, my friends, that's not really- I really do, I mean, I've only been a dad now for
a year and a half, but this, his birth and his life has coincided with this project of mine,
and kind of my, you know, this is my second career, I was a high school teacher, and then I had my own
meeting process for a while, and I kind of, this allowed me to, it jolted me back on this path,
and part of that jolt was my son being born, and the encouragement of my wife, and, but getting into,
and connecting what you were saying, yeah, I understand that he's actually more real now
than I ever have before, and I hope that as I grow and I develop in my pursuits, that actually allows
my boy to be more vivid to me, and my wife to be more vivid to me day by day, and it's beautiful
when these things mesh, and when our, you know, intellectual pursuit allows for our personal
pursuit to become more vivid. I hope so, I mean, I, at the end of my practices, I frequently pray
a prayer that Socrates pray, he prays it initially to, it goes something along the lines, a beloved
pan and all God to dwell in this place, give me the inward beauty, inward beauty, and let the
outward man and the inward man be as one, and I probably messed that up a bit.
Right, and, and, and, like, if, like, I hope, and I try, I put effort into cultivating the discernment,
I could see how people could be tempted for the reverse, the salience of the fame and other
things could actually cause that to be foregrounded, and the real things to be backgrounded, that's
obviously happened to be, yeah, tons of rock stars, and, right, no, exactly, right, the rock star
phenomenon, there's that. And I've also, I've also seen, I've also seen
that there's a temptation, right, right, I don't want to totally use that in religious sense,
but I don't want to ignore the religious sense either, so that's why I'm hesitating, but there's
a temptation, I can feel it, wait, this fame and this, you know, this fame and this wealth,
it's not as satisfying as I thought it would be, so the answer is I should get more,
I've felt that impulse come up to me, and it comes up from this Darwinian depth, right, wait,
the answer is go higher on the hierarchy, that's surely the answer, right, and it's like, whoa,
and I've noticed that too. So I'm trying to keep, right, I'm trying to, you know, be properly,
like mindful of them, not suppress it, but also not, not obsess about it, like get that golden
mean about it, so that I can hopefully not fall prey to that temptation. I would like to be,
if I could get what I wanted, I would like to be, you know, have a large enough audience
where people have to take me seriously, but not so large that people would start to idolize me,
that's where I would like to sit. That's the sweet spot. Yeah, that's the sweet spot for me.
I really do hope you get there, I think you are going to get there, because again, you
walk through this so precisely, and you can see it, like, you, I mean, in my opinion,
you don't, you never come off as disingenuous, you know, and even like with your conversations,
I mean, how, I mean, how I and how I'm sure many people approached you at first was through your
conversations with Jordan Peterson, and you never came off as disingenuine, you came off as real,
you came off as authentic, and I think that's why people ended up, you know, following you, and I
think there's, I don't know, I've never really, I mean, this is not a developed thought whatsoever,
and I think Jordan Peterson is on the same path, but there's obviously a difference between you
and Jordan Peterson, and I'm not just talking about philosophically, you know, I think Jordan
probably has a little more proclivity towards the pomp and pageantry of it all, and I don't think
that's not a shot, and I think that's actually, that's sometimes a very good thing, and you need
people like that, right, because you need people who also are going to talk to the, I mean, you said
you want to find that sweet spot, and people have different sweet spots, and there are some
individuals who just need to talk to the culture at large, right, and you need that, and sometimes
that actually makes you, or that is, it's then taken on the pomp and pageantry of that is actually
a necessity, though, because it's part of the game, so, but anyway, I mean, I think that's why,
I think that's why a lot of individuals have really linked up with your work, though, is because
it's, and I don't know the word to describe it, I'll be honest, I'll just say authentic again,
but, and so I think that's really telling that you admitted yourself that you want to find that
sweet spot, where you want to get big, but you don't want to get big, right, and I just think
that's really cool, to put it really cool, I know that's like, that's not the most profound, I just
think it's really cool, though. No, but thank you, thank you. Yeah, Jordan and I are different,
yeah, I mean, we have an interesting relationship, and of course it predates him becoming like a
superstar that he is, right, we aspire differently, I think Jordan aspires to being,
this is half the joke, and I think I've said this to his face and he laughed, so I don't think it's,
I don't think it's an appropriate, but he aspires to being Moses, I aspire to being Socrates,
and those are very different aspirations, because they're very different aspirations.
Right, and, and I agree with you, there are times when we need a Moses figure of a prophet
that will lead people to the prophet land, lead them out of bondage to the prophet land,
out of promised land, I think Jordan is, you know, I think both his virtues and his vices,
and I will admit that I have virtues and vices, so I'm not trying to, but I think both his virtues
and his vices orbit around that vision, right, whereas mine are around Socrates, and that's a
different vision. Oh, everyone has a mediator, right, I mean, everyone has a mediator, everyone has
that object of desire, and the sweet spot in life, right, just really quite, you know,
what Gerard would say is that everyone is going to have mediator, it's picking the right mediators,
that's what that's, that's exactly it, that's about, and that's the, that's the Socratic
prayer, I want that outward and inward to be resonant, and resonant, such that I, I, my life
is as virtuous as possible. I mean, try to manage these three things, virtue, virtuosity, and the
virtual is sort of what I'm wrestling with a lot, because they intersect and really interesting,
and on, and ways that haven't been very well articulated by previous people, because they
didn't have the virtual as the third in those three, which in it alters things, like you and I
would not be speaking like this without the virtual, what, how does virtuosity and virtue
show up here, and how does the, how does the, and the reverse, how does what we do in virtual space
translate back into the real space of virtue and virtuosity, these are important questions we
were wrestling with, right. No, I meant, and sometimes you got to, they're hard questions,
and I think precisely, and so they're so difficult that we're trying to actually
have these conversations function in the, in brick and mortar spaces, and so it's like,
I know that you are doing, you've been doing conferences, and that there's another conference
coming up, and me and my, me and my good friend, Marcus, who runs the channel more Christ, we have
an event coming up in DC with Michael Martin, and Paul Vander Clay, and, and, you know, we hope
our, our goal actually, one of our goals is that we plan our vision, Marcus don't get mad at me that
I'm talking about our vision, but our vision is, you know, we plan on having conferences, hopefully
multiple times a year, now Marcus is in Ireland, I mean, I'm in Cleveland, so it's obviously far away,
but if we could do like a European thing, and maybe an American conference, another thing that
we're thinking of is, you know, doing conferences, it's a conference camp, where a group of 15,
16, 20 people is actually a camping trip, right, and that, that, that projects you into a different
headspace, and conversation is, oh yeah, living with people is, is just important,
we, yeah, Ryan and Eric and I need to talk more about this, we're first doing lots of events,
and trying to get regular events going, and regular communities of practice, but we, yeah,
we need, we also need, we, we need to have retreats where people live together for a bit,
when I went on, we turned to the source last July, with Ray Kelly, living with these people,
and pushing yourself to the horizon of horror every day, for spiritual transformation,
as an impact on you. Joe, I've got a ghost on it, we've sort of shifted to you being
the host, is there any final thing you'd like to ask me before I leave?
There is, but I don't know how far we would get into it, but I'll pop it in there, maybe this
will leave us for a conversation in the future, really quick, why aren't you putting on this?
Physical beauty, is it beauty, are people's physical selves beautiful, or just not ugly?
That's to ask the question, if I were to answer it from like a platonic framework is,
yeah, came physical bodies, them and shine with beauty, yes. Beautiful, that was a question that
was on my mind, and I thought that was going to get me a one sentence answer, so you gave it to me,
I appreciate that. One of the most sensitive things in my relationship with my current partner is,
by objective measures, she's a physically attractive woman, but so I want that understood,
but I was really attracted first, and this had not happened to me before,
I was really attracted first, and I'll speak a little bit poetically, because it's appropriate,
I was first really first attracted to the beauty of her soul, and then I noticed in conjunction,
and as a function of that, I noticed how physically beautiful she is, and that has been really important
for me. That was like a, that was a wake up moment for me, and I think we have to be open to very
often, and you know, many people argue this played out famously, that we start with physical beauty,
and then we move to other, but it's happened that the reverse has been the case for me,
really importantly, and I just wanted to note that, I just wanted to note that, I think the
question of beauty is very much, it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not unidirectional, is what
I'm saying, you can both be drawn through the physical to what is beyond, and what is beyond
the physical can reach to you first, and then draw you in attraction to the physical.
Yeah, all right, that's so true, it's, that like gave me goosebumps when you said that,
my wife is absolutely gorgeous, I would say she's absolutely gorgeous, and I would say by
side of me, she's absolutely gorgeous, but you know, there's always those times where every woman
and every man will get insecure, and you know, my wife sometimes asks me, you know, why, why me,
I tell her, because you really have the most beautiful soul that I've ever encountered in
my whole life, and you admitted the same thing, so I just think that's really, it's wonderful,
it's absolutely wonderful. Yeah, it is, it is, and yeah, I think that's a great, and I think that's
a beautiful place to end. Yeah, it is a good place to end, it is a good place to end, thank you,
Joe, this has been really wonderful. Yeah, thank you for having me. Oh, thank you for having me,
and I will send you a copy of this for your channel, and we'll talk again soon. Thank you so much, Jen.
