Thank you for watching. This YouTube and podcast series is by the Verveki Foundation,
which in addition to supporting my work also offers courses, practices, workshops, and other
projects dedicated to responding to the meeting crisis. If you would like to support this work,
please consider joining our Patreon. You can find the link in the show notes.
Thank you, Catherine. That was probably the best introduction I've ever received.
I assure you, I'm very happy to be here and I'm very engaged with the material I'll be
presenting to you. Okay, so let's start. Why is, why beauty is deeply implicit in stoicism,
especially in its commitment to rationality and virtue? So, Han, in his book, Saving Beauty,
laments that we have reduced the beautiful to the smooth. This is what he calls it.
This is the pleasantly, easily accessible and useful. So, the way my phone is smooth. The way
many things are now smooth. And this is convergent with his work in another book, Agony, the Agony
of Eros, about how intimacy with mystery, which used to be in our erotic relationship,
and this intimacy with mystery, which demands transformation and commitment from us,
has been replaced by pornography that gives priority to easy access and use for pleasure.
So, this is the idea of the reduction of the beautiful as something that was initially
very transformative and very demanding upon us to something that in fact puts very little demand
on us whatsoever. Now, he's no doubt correct how this reflects a consumerist greed in our culture
and a culture oriented to quick and easy gratification, to bottom line mentality, etc.
And his argument, of course, is convergent with the argument of other people, just one among
many examples, arguments from current musicologists about the loss of complex melody in popular music
in favor of super salient, please remember that notion, super salient beat and repetition. So,
again, we have easy access and of course, easy access makes sense when we are doing mass marketing
within a mass society. I think all of this is completely coherent argument. However, I believe
that there is something more going on in this reduction of beauty to ease of access to pleasure
and use. I think something else is going on. I propose that there is a deep suspicion about
appearance in our culture. There is a suspicion that appearances are misleading, distorting,
distracting, untrustworthy, and often being used for manipulation nefarious manipulation.
In my work with Christopher Massupietro and Philip Misovic in 2019 in a book entitled Zombies
in Western Culture, A 21st Century Crisis, in which we explained the emergence of the zombie
mythology as a way of articulating the meaning crisis, we noted the upsurge in the increasing
prevalence and power of bullshit. People are convinced there's more and more bullshit,
and it is more and more powerful in our society. Now, the notion of bullshit I'm using, I'm not
trying to be vulgar. I'm making explicit use of Frankfurt's technical arguments about bullshit in
his seminal essay on bullshit. So, Frankfurt distinguishes the liar from the bullshit artist.
The liar tries to manipulate your behavior by depending on your concern for the truth
and getting you to believe something to be true that is not true. That is the liar. The liar is
depending on your caring commitment to the truth. The bullshit artist, on the other hand, is trying
to get you indifferent to whether or not some claim is true and rather to be caught up in the salience
of the claim. So, prototypical examples of this, of course, are an advertising in which,
you know, you see the commercial and there's a beautiful person
in a bar and they're surrounded by other beautiful people. And notice my invocation of that. We'll
come back to that. And there's an alcohol present and they're all very happy and very healthy.
And you know this isn't true. You know that this is not what you're going to see if you go into a
bar. This isn't what you know this is not going to happen to you when you start drinking the alcohol.
And they know that you know that none of this is true. And this is the important point. It doesn't
matter because it puts you into a state where you don't care whether or not it's true and you just
find the stimulus of the alcohol super salient. And therefore, you are much more likely to buy
the alcohol, which of course is why so much money is poured into advertising. So, advertising is
prototypical bullshit. It works by getting you to not care about the truth at least some of the time
and who instead be caught up in the salience of what is being presented to you. Now, what's
interesting about this is the deep connection between bullshitting and self deception and how
they mutually reinforce each other. You see, although we use the metaphor, you cannot really
lie to yourself. You cannot say to yourself, I believe X, but I want to believe Y because
belief is not a direct voluntary action. Belief is not something you do. Pick a belief you'd like
to have that everybody loves you. Okay, do it. Believe it. Go. There's nothing to be done. You
can imagine it. You can hope for it. You can desire it. You can't believe it. That's not how
belief works, but you can bullshit yourself because salience is actually affected by your
attention. If I say your left big toe, it is now a salient to you. And of course, when things are
salient, now they will tend to attract your attention in the future. And so by paying attention to
things, you make them more salient, which is more likely to grab your attention. And so you get a
self reinforcing cycle until you are drawn into particular patterns of behavior. So self deception
drives, sorry, bullshit drives self deception. But of course, the more self deceived we are,
the more easy it is to bullshit us because the more easy it is to get us to be unconcerned
with the truth, because that of course is one of the deleterious functions of falling prey to
self deception, we get disconnected from a proper pursuit of the truth. So we got this culture and
with self deception and bullshit are reinforcing each other and becoming more prevalent. Now,
Paul record has argued or talked about what he calls a hermetic of suspicion. And this was given to
us by Freud and Nietzsche and Marx as prototypical thinkers of this ilk. And for all of these
thinkers, we are they give us arguments to the effect that appearances mask self deception,
they mask a hidden motive, a secret agenda, or a deceptive covert manipulation.
That's why it's a hermetic suspicion, we're suspicious of how things are appearing to us.
However, I would argue that it goes back to the combination of the Copernican revolution
and the Protestant Reformation. So before the Copernican revolution, we have the Aristotelian
notion of realness. And it's basically tested through three, through rule through three rules,
right? And it's is my organ functioning properly? Is the medium clear? Do other people after
reflective discussion agree with me? Now, we still live by this, by the way, we still use this to
determine if what we're seeing is real. Now, this is at the hallmark core of the Aristotelian framework,
but notice what happens with Copernicus, we all have well functioning eyesight. It's a clear day.
We see the sun rise in the east, pass overhead, and set in the west. We all talk, we all agree
that that's what we saw. And we're all wrong. We have to remember how terrifying that is.
We've gotten so used to it, we, and that it has, it is so inseminated itself into us at an almost
unconscious level. But it expresses itself in a deep suspicion. Because if that's, if that,
if that can fail the test, what else is failing the test? What else is passing all of our intuitive
judgments about what is real? And nevertheless, turn out to be illusions. The Protestant Reformation,
of course, taught us that we cannot trust traditional institutions. We cannot trust their
sense of right and wrong. We are thrown back upon, ultimately, individual conscience. Now,
that may not have been Luther's original intent, but that's not relevant to my argument right now.
What we end up with is we get the isolated individual trapped behind
sense experience, where that sense experience is understood as the veil of appearance. I was taught
this repeatedly in my undergrad in philosophy as a central issue with which we had to contend,
the veil of appearance, and an ongoing anxiety about skepticism and solipsism at the heart of
what we were trying to do. And of course, the scientific revolution and the Protestant Reformation
and this concern with skepticism and solipsism come to a particular fruition in Kant and the
tremendous impact, and he called it his Copernican Revolution, he had on the intellectual
and spiritual development of what we now call, probably inaccurately, the West.
In all of this, appearances became unmoored from reality and from social structure.
But of course, they are still, nevertheless, salient and compelling.
That is part of our inevitable embodied experience. So notice what we have here,
we have appearances that are unmoored from reality and social structure. We are deeply
suspicious of them, yet we find them still salient and compelling. This is super bullshit.
The culture as a whole is in a place where the appearances are disconnected from realness,
yet they are still compelling and driving our behavior.
Now in order to protect ourselves, I propose or I'm arguing, from this we seek to tame and control
appearances and make ourselves invulnerable to them being used to manipulate us. This is
the great question, of course, it has been put on methamphetamines by the advent of social media.
How would we tame appearances, make them easily accessible back to the smooth
and and make it so they do not claim or intend to claim or pretend to claim to
pretend a deeper reality. They are superficial and they glory in being superficial, the smooth.
How do we seek to control them? Instead of being controlled by these appearances,
they will be completely manipulated by us. They will be completely in control of us.
They are solely for our use, back to the smooth. Of course, and this was what reflection and research
show, this is ultimate bullshit in our attempt to not fall prey to bullshit.
We actually fall deeper in it because this strategy of the smooth, the smoothing of appearances
distracts us from the fact that the reduction of beauty to the smooth is precisely in service
of mass marketing manipulation, as we all wear our logos that look the same,
saying how individual and unique we really are. So we have super bullshit being responded to
by ultimate bullshit. This, of course, is a very difficult and problematic situation.
What this argument is intended to show is that the reduction of beauty carries with it
considerable epistemological and ethical loss and risk.
But we're not trapped in the hermeneutics of suspicion. This is a point developed by Marlowe
Ponty extensively through his writings, but it ultimately goes back to a deep discussion
by Plato that appears in many of his dialogues. But I'll use Marlowe Ponty's presentation of
it because it is clear and accessible. Illusion is a comparative concept. It's like tall or small.
It's dependent on the experience, the realization of reality. I can only say this is an illusion
if I can say because it is not this which is real. It is a contrastive comparison. In fact,
technically it makes no sense to say all is illusion. That's like saying everything is tall.
It doesn't make any sense. Typically what people mean is all of sense experience is
illusion in comparison to some X that is taken to be the reality. But there's always a comparison.
So illusion is when appearances mislead us away from reality and they are dependent.
Illusions are dependent upon when appearances lead to reality within acts of realization.
And I want you to hear both meanings of that word coming into an intelligible understanding
and awareness and becoming real, disclosed as real.
Now this is one of Plato's central proposals given this realization.
Beauty is when appearances disclose reality. That is beauty proper. We can realize in both
senses of the word, the world through beauty. Because beauty is when appearances lead to
reality and lead us to reality. And they have to be primary. They have to be more real than illusions.
Now note here, this requires us giving up a lot of the subjectivist and smooth notion of beauty
that we have been given in a post-continent mass marketing world. Beauty does not have to be pleasant.
It can be striking or haunting. Platinus repeatedly makes reference to this possibility.
Rilke in some of his great poetry talks about how beauty is terror that could kill us, but deans not to.
But it is always a moment of insight, seeing in to things, seeing through illusion and in
to reality. And this of course is part of what Platinus conveys in his argument is about beauty
and intellectual beauty, the two ineod's. There is a moment when you realize that what appeared
as relevantly real, the moment of insight, you thought something was relevantly real
and then you go, aha! What was salient to me was actually misleading.
It was wrong and notice the normativity in here. I thought I was apprehending her as
angry, but she's actually, notice the language, she's actually afraid and therefore I should
adjust how I'm apprehending her and interacting with her.
Notice this realization has a normativity in it, a call to responsibility and action.
The aha moment carries with it a flash of salience as one sees into reality. There's a
lot of cognitive science around this and I won't go into it. You can look at my published work
and my work in my on my published videos.
Somehow one is more right. In fact, we find insights so compelling in this way. We tend to be
biased. We tend to judge reality in terms of whether or not they were produced in our judgments,
were produced in an insightful manner. When sees into reality, one is more right in both
an epistemological and an ethical sense about reality. One is correct and in right relationship.
We need to be very careful here. Beauty is in the act of realization. What may be disclosed
could be great evil. One of my favorite paintings, and I don't use slides so I'm not going to put
up a slide. I hope you've seen it. If you haven't, you could look at it later, is Picasso's Guernica,
which is a painting of the bombing by the fascists of a town in Spain during the Spanish Civil
War, I believe in 1937. It is in many ways a horrifying painting.
Now Picasso's Guernica is trying to cut through all the proper and bullshit
around war and bring us into a full presence of the full presence of the event.
Collingwood would talk about this in the work of art, how it takes us out of a categorical way
of thinking. This is one battle among, no, the actual suchness of this event coming to full presence
of its full presencing. There's a reciprocal opening. The whole of the self is involved in
opening up to a deeper and deeper apprehension of the reality. And there's a reciprocal opening,
which of course is an instance of Platonic anegarge.
What I'm saying is it is a beautiful disclosure of evil. But this should not be confused with saying
it portrays evil as beautiful. It portrays evil as evil beautifully.
We love the painting. We love the painting. We treat it. We don't destroy. Look,
it's evil before us. Destroy it. It's evil. We don't destroy the painting. We honor it. We
hold it sacred. I believe it's now being hung in the United Nations. It's a sacred object.
We love the painting. And in that, therefore, in some important way, it is beautiful. The act of
viewing it is beautiful. Not pleasing, but beautiful. Plato's second great proposal about beauty is that
beauty can not must connect us to reality in a way that helps educate us in wisdom and virtue.
Beauty affords self-transcendence, anegarge, as I mentioned earlier. This is echoed in the work
of my friend D.C. Schindler, especially in the Catholicity of Reason and Love in the Postmodern
Predicament, where he talks about the three transcendentals. And remember, they're all
convertible. They're not identical, but they all interdefine and interpenetrate each other.
The primacy of beauty, the centrality of goodness, and the ultimacy of truth.
The primacy of beauty. Beauty is how the otherwise abstract reality of the Eidos, which is often
translated as the form, the forms in Plato, first reaches into sense experience. But how? Well,
Eidos actually means the look or aspect of something. Remember that. Now, think about when I ask you,
what is a bird? Well, it's feathers. It has wings, beak, and it flies. So I'll pile a bunch of feathers
here, put a beak, some wings, and I'll toss them in the air. They're flying. That's a bird, right?
No, it's a horrific mess. Because what's missing is the structural functional organization
that makes it into a bird. It's Logos, a notion that Plotinus will use that he properly gets
from the Stoics, as Kevin Corrigan has argued, the Logos, this Eidos. But notice it's a way of
looking at it, but the seeing isn't visual seeing, at least primarily.
Because you have to understand that this structural functional organization is not
just the synchronic structural functional organization, it is diachronic. Look, you actually
don't ever fully see an object. You can't fully see it. And all of these different aspects,
all of these different looks are held together by something that is not any aspect at all,
but a through line, a through line that is one with, but not conceptually identical to,
that structural functional organization. That's what the Eidos of something is. And beauty is
when the Eidos is being disclosed in our awareness of something. Now, Roussin, in his
really important book, Bearing Witness to Epiphany, is trying to integrate phenomenology
and Plato back together. And he talks about the musicality of intelligibility. He talks
about the fact that when we're making sense of things, there's a rhythm that we need to pick up on.
There's a rhythm, right? There's a rhythm going through this. And there's a melody. All of the
different instances are like notes. They're not identical, but they all belong together.
And there's a harmony. There's an organizing, unifying principle to it. This is the musicality
of intelligibility. And intelligibility is our primary way of determining what realness is. So
realness and intelligibility and musicality are bound up together.
When we have an insight into the form, we're leaping into a Gestalt. Not just the
synchronic Gestalt that's in our mind, but the diachronic Gestalt through the musicality
of intelligibility, of our experience of a thing. This leaping into the Gestalt is what
Zewicki talks about in the experience of meaning. So notice what we're saying here. Stoic notions
of beauty are often, and I don't know her name, and I wasn't here for her earlier talk because,
as I said, I'm not feeling well. I don't know if it's Salkite or Kalkite. I apologize for any
pronunciation. Makes a good case for Stoic beauty as Sumitria. Not exactly the same as our notion,
current notions of symmetry, better understood as proper proportioning.
Another notion is Ratio, which is at the heart of our word rationality, because rationality is
the putting of things into proper proportion, properly proportioning our attention and care.
And by doing this, we cut through illusion and into reality when we properly proportion our
attention and care so that we can track the through line, follow the Eidos, then we cut through
any possible illusion and appearances in the musicality of intelligibility,
beautifully disclose an underlying reality. This is why Crecipius can say only the beautiful is good.
Connecting to the real rational order of reality. This is onto normativity, a term I've coined for
the fact that people find the really real, inherently good and they will transform their
lives, their relationships, even their identity to be in closer communion and conformity to that
really real. And of course, this lines up with the Stoic proposal that the universe itself
has a logos and that logos is sacred and divine. And we are to come into an ongoing,
dare I say it, musical, joyful flowing with that logos. Marcus Aurelius, of course, is aware of
appearances disclosing reality and their relation to beauty. He says, we should remark the grace
and fascination that there is even in the incidentals of nature's process when a loaf of bread,
for instance, is in the oven. I know there's been another talk on this crack appear in it here
and there and these flaws, though not intended in the baking, have a rightness of their own
and sharpen the appetite. The cracks, flaws, breaking in a simple notion of symmetry,
and their unintended breaks in the surface structure, have a rightness about them.
Notice that language, the rightness, I've been talking about this all the way through,
a rightness that sharpens the appetite. Isn't that of course what beauty does?
The appearance of the cracks literally opens up the surface of the bread to the depths.
And this enhances our desire to come into contact with the bread.
Part two, sorry, quote two. An angry look on the face is wholly against nature.
If it be assumed frequently, beauty begins to perish and in the end is quenched beyond
rekindling. Why is an angry face against nature? Because it is a face that discloses passion
and not the logos that is essential to our humanity. A face too often angry can lose its beauty.
It no longer rightly discloses the core reality of human nature.
But let's examine more closely this realization through beauty that I have been arguing for.
Scarry, in an important book, an amazing book, I would put it on beauty and being just,
talks about how the experience of beauty prepares us for seeking truth and justice.
She gives an example of seeing a beautiful tree and she goes through the phenomenology very carefully
and she says, the inside is something like, I didn't realize trees could be like that.
Now, I'm going to do something, if you'll allow me to use a self-referential adjective,
verbakian about this. I'm going to put this into cognitive terms of sense making.
So, I didn't realize trees could be that. So, we have all of our previous experiences of trees,
all the different instances, all the categories and they're converging on this new entity.
And it somehow is disclosing the Eidos, the underlying reality of what trees really are.
I didn't realize trees could be like it's realized. And what that does is that opens up
possibilities for us, new ways of seeing and relating to trees in the future. So,
notice these movements. You've got a convergence to a realization of form of Eidos that is,
right, can be used in many different, it can find and formulate and reformulate problems
as we encounter trees in the future. Now, if you take a look at the work on
making sense and explanation, there's a couple things that come and the work on plausibility,
a couple things come out. This notion of convergence, we like convergence of independent things.
Or why? Well, if my realization comes through just one, let's do sense experience,
comes through just one sense channel, I see something, but I can't touch it or hear it
or feel it. It might not be real, it might just be a subjective illusion.
But if I can see it, touch it, hear it. In fact, the more senses I can get,
the more I'm convinced it's real. Why? Now, this is not an algorithm, it can go wrong,
but why? Because the more convergence I have, the less likely it is, the less probable it is
that my realization has been produced by subjective illusion or bias. So,
convergence gives us what Rescher, in his 1976 book, plausible reasoning, calls
trustworthiness. The opposite of bullshit gives us trustworthiness.
Of course, we know why we want IDOS, we've already talked about that.
What is it when a realization can suddenly be applied to what were previously many disparate
domains? This is making use of the philosopher of science, Kicher, some of his work on stringency,
but I will argue, in fact, I'll just have to claim I've got arguments elsewhere. This is what we
mean when we say a scientific claim is elegant. I've had an insight that can go to many otherwise
diverse. Four sequels mass times acceleration can be used to talk about planets, balloons,
blue whales, accelerating cars. Wow, that's elegant. Ben Milgram in his astonishing book on
practical induction, how we acquire new desires, not new beliefs, but new desires, argues for a
balance between our backward and forward commitments. What does that mean? If I'm going to promise a lot
of elegant problem solving going forward, I need to have a lot of convergence to my realization
or claim. If I have a lot of promise without much convergence, I get the conspiracy theory,
the far-fetched claim. If you only believe that the British royalty are lizard people,
look at everything that I can explain. What's the opposite? We have lots of trustworthy
convergence, but no elegance, no power. That's triviality. Trivialities are not false.
They are not worthy of your attention. So notice what we have in plausibility,
in good sense-making. Notice all the aesthetic terms, terms deeply associated with beauty.
We have convergence, a coming into oneness. We have the emergence or the emanation of
idos or form. We have elegance and we have balance between them.
Plausibility is the beauty of good sense-making, and we are deeply attracted and moved by it.
Now plausibility isn't probability and it isn't certainty. Plausibility is what you should take
seriously. What is a good proposal, where you should look for the truth?
Turning it around, beauty is sensory motor, plausibility that can be taken up into cognitive
plausible, therefore beautiful sense-making.
So, plausibility, what you should take seriously, what you should care about,
the reasonable promise that salience is tracking reality, the opposite of bullshit. And of course,
Socrates famously argued for a rationality of care. He knew ta erotica. He knew what to care
about. He knew what he didn't need. He knew what mattered. The unexamined life is not worth living.
And of course, this lines up with other more recent work by Frankfurt,
the importance of what we care about and reasons for love. And my extensive, sorry,
I don't mean to be self-promotional. I just want to indicate trustworthiness, work on relevance
realization. You are different from computers because computers don't care about the information
they process. You care about some information rather than other information and therefore you
take care of it because this is all part of you taking care of yourself and other people.
Lipton makes a very strong case in his book on inference to the best explanation for
the primacy, the primacy of plausibility. What do I mean by that? Well, think about an experiment.
I have to come up with a hypothesis. Do I generate all possible, logically possible
hypotheses? No, that is combinatorially vast. I pick ones that are plausible.
When I'm designing my experiment, I have to worry about confounds, possible alternative
explanations. All the logically possible alternative explanations? No, that is uncountably large,
only plausible alternative explanations. What implications do I draw from my data?
All logically possible implications? No, those that are plausible. Plausibility is primary.
It is before, during, and after all scientific investigation and labor.
Rationality depends on the orienting beauty of plausibility. Plausibility is good sense making,
grasping the significance of information well, grasping the, the significant of information
well, caring about the information in the right way. And that's what we actually mean by understanding.
Look, knowledge is about evidence. Understanding is about the relevance and significance about what
you know. Plausibility and understanding are mutually defining. Here's the connection. Good
sense making is the beauty of plausibility. That produces understanding. That gives us the
musicality of intelligibility, which of course affords good sense making. That is the cycle
that we are constantly running through. It's all a cycle of beauty.
Marcus Aurelius, dwell on the beauty of life. Watch the stars and see yourself running with them.
Dwell. This language is not the language of just belief. It is to be with
and to run with. This is participating in the beauty in the very way in which you are
contemplating the highest or deepest realities. Beauty is primary because it reaches into our
sense life and our sense making and prepares us for truth and affords us seeking it.
In this way, beauty, and I've already alluded to this, beauty is anti-bullshit.
Beauty helps us discern through bullshit and tutor us how to care well.
What to take seriously? What matters?
McGee and Barber in 1999, this ability to see through illusion into what's real is the hallmark
of wisdom. This was taken up in the consensus paper that I was a co-author on with many other
people led by Igor Grossman in 2020. The science of wisdom in a polarized world, no one's an
unknown. This ability to see through illusion into reality is central to wisdom.
I propose to you that virtue requires discernment knowing what to take seriously and what to care
about with insight and deep understanding. And when we have that, we have wisdom.
In the symposium, Plato proposes that virtue is a higher order of beauty. We first notice the
beauty of the beautiful person, then we moved to beautiful institutions, then to the beauty of
virtue. How is virtue beautiful? Each virtue is a way to be wise in a particular situation.
There are multiple competing interpretations of the Socratic
proposal of the unity of the virtues, but I take this one to be the most plausible.
Each virtue is a way to be wise in a particular situation.
It is like to be wise in this situation is to be courageous, to be wise in this situation is to
be compassionate. The virtue is a proper proportioning, a ratio of attention and care,
the rationality of attention and care, so that one homes in on what is most
relevantly real in that situation. Think about the stoic emphasis on posage and prochiron.
It's all about tailoring us so we can do this, tutoring us and tailoring us.
Each virtue is how wisdom proportionally and properly therefore appears in a particular
context. Virtue is the beautiful appearance of wisdom. Virtue is how wisdom proportionally
appears in a particular context to best disclose the most relevant truth in that situation
and how action is appropriate to it. Virtue is the beauty of wisdom.
Virtue is the beauty of wisdom.
Think about all of the stoic practices, premeditatio, what Hado calls objective seeing,
the view from above. What are they all designed to do? They're all designed to get you to pay
attention to how the alteration of how you're finding things salient can be
more properly attuned to the underlying reality and that often we are confused
because we fuse inappropriate caring with the underlying reality.
But we can learn to have what we find salient, what we take seriously, properly tutored
so that salience tracks us into what is real, not just in our thoughts but in our whole
sensibility, our whole sense making, our whole comportment, our whole existential orientation
and stance towards reality. This of course is the cultivation of virtue and wisdom.
All of these practices, they may disclose things that are very unpleasant, the premeditatio,
doesn't disclose something, oh death, the fatality of all things. I could lose my loved one tonight.
It's not a pleasant experience. But what does it do? Well, some research on this shows is that
when you do something like this, it releases people from mortality salience. If you just trigger
people about their mortality, they will get very close-minded, very rigid, very defensive
of their worldview. But if you move it into a reflective practice in which you imagine that
you're dying and all the people are around you and then you ask yourself what really matters here
in this most real of real moments and people don't say their possessions or their power,
they say their relationship and because the people they care about are there,
they become open and flexible and loving. This is a beautiful practice even though what is
disclosed is not something that we like or prefer or find smooth. In fact, we are doing our damndest
in our culture to try and smooth over the reality of fatality, the fact that at any moment reality
can smash in to your most narratively cherished projects and our ultimate mortality. We try
our best bullshit around this. But the historic practices can open us up.
They can be beautiful practices that lead us into a deeper ability to be connected to reality.
What would that be? A connection to reality that has rational apprehension, plausible sense-making,
and by the way, you see here that rationality does not reduce to Cartesian logic. I'm talking
more about overcoming self-deception appropriately, proportioning your attention and care to the world.
What would that be? That sense of connectedness to reality that is fundamentally good,
that is not pleasant or pleasurable. That, I put it to you, and I think LaVine is right about this,
or LaVine, that is joy, something the Stoics actually talk very frequently about. And of
course, we've reduced it. Think about what we've done even to the word enjoyment. We've reduced it
to a synonym for experiencing pleasure. But moments of great joy can be very unpleasant.
They can be beyond pleasure. They can be other than pleasure.
One way in which we can get a notion of joy is some of the current work I do, which is the flow
experience that has been talked about by Chick-Sent-Mahai. The flow experience is when you're
doing jazz or martial arts or rock climbing, you get this tremendous narrative nanny,
super ego thing in your head. How am I doing? What do people think of me? How's my hair?
Was my shirt okay? How am I doing? What's my status now? Am I safe? Is there anything interesting
for me? What am I getting out of it? All of that falls silent because you are so deeply connected,
and there's a there's a reciprocal opening, an anagogy. The world is super salient to you,
and you are committing more and more of yourself to it, but you're not being bullshit,
exactly the opposite. You're being led into an intimate causal efficacy and connectedness to
the world because error really matters in the flow state. You're at one. Although you may be
exerting tremendous metabolic energy, you feel graceful. It feels magical. People seek out this
experience. They will reliably tell you it is not. It is not pleasure. Think about rock climbing. It
is absurd. You climb up this rock surface. You're hurting yourself. You're putting yourself at risk
of injury. You're exhausting yourself only once you get to the top to come back down. It sounds
like a Greek mythological torture in Hades. People do it because it gets them into the flow
state. They have, I've argued with Leo Ferraro and Anna Herrabenet that what's happening is an ongoing
insight cascade. Like you're constantly getting more and more insight into what's going on,
and it's calling deeper and deeper into you. You're getting this anagogic at one minute. It's a
deep state of joy. It is not pleasure, and it can be very painful in a lot of ways what you're
doing in that state. Sparring is painful. Rock climbing is painful. And yet people do this.
It is an optimal experience. It is the best experiences. Many people say it's the best
experience they have, and it is where they are at their best. And it is a universal. You find it
across cultures, linguistic groups, socioeconomic status, gender identification, continental
dwelling, etc. People describe this experience in similarity at the level of detail. This is a
universal. It discloses something essential about our functionality. We are made for joy, which is
not pleasure. We are made for this deep one minute, and it is a profound experience for us
because it gives us an intimate, deep connection to our reality that is disclosing itself as
overwhelmingly beautiful. There's an ongoing sense of super salience, but not deception,
a super salience that is making us love what is happening, falling in love with us. There's
ongoing disclosure and discovery, and we're tapping into the inexhaustible intelligibility
of reality. Seneca, even when painted into a corner, it is possible to leap into the sky.
The disciplining of attention and caring, cutting through self-deception in rational
virtuous realization, potentially putting us into a profound flow with nature, another stoic theme,
is a deep enactment of beauty. That is how beauty is implicit in all of stoicism.
Thank you very much for your time and attention.
Ah, John, thank you so much. Everyone, a round of applause in the chat for John Rovegi.
John's going to linger with us for a while, but I'm also aware, John, that you're not feeling
your best, so we'll maybe take a couple of questions and see how we go. Are you okay with that?
Yeah, let's say 15-20 minutes. I think I've got enough cortisol in adrenaline
and enough flow that I can hang on for a bit longer.
I want to say, wow, John, that was elegant. You mentioned that, wow, elegance. That
exclamation of, wow, is that an exclamation of awe and is awe the experience that might be a sign
of beauty, plausibility, et cetera? How do we feel that? How do we recognize that?
So, awe is tricky. I think wonder and wonder flow are definitely experiences of plausibility
and intelligibility. Awe's a little bit different. We thought it would just be
that sort of just more, but we're running some experiments to show
if awe was just that, like what's happening in the flow state, you would expect people to
demonstrate very increased measures of cognitive flexibility after you induce the awe state in
them, and we're not finding that. Now, one of two things might be the case. Awe is really ephemeral,
and that's a real possibility, so take that seriously. Secondly, even if the awe state is
persisting long enough that it should be impacting cognition, and this second proposal is my
favorite because for the completely biased reason that it lines up with my argument,
there's probably an intervening thing that is needed. What awe does is it's one of the few
positive experiences of the shrinking of the self, and if that launches you into the training of
epistemic humility of reverence, then that would probably predict many of the traditional predictions
of how awe improves people. So, this is very much an experimental work and a theoretical
debate work in progress, so that's the best answer I could give you right now.
I think, did you say with the Marcus Aurelius quote, it's not to dwell on or dwell with beauty,
the stars? Dwell on the beauty of that. That's the translation I have. So, is that an intellectual
relationship? Is there an embodied relationship? I think the Stoics, and I mean, I'm going to
speak anachronistically, I'm going to use some of my language for them. I think the Stoics are
very concerned with perspectival and participatory knowing. They are not just concerned with
propositional knowing, and this comes out, of course, in their continual refrain that
philosophical discourse is not the same thing as the proper love of wisdom, because love involves
what you care about, what you find salient, how you're noticing and oriented in the world,
and how you are committing and binding your identity to something. And I think the welling
therefore should be understood as pointing towards that perspectival and participatory knowing.
Okay, I have one more quick question from me, and I'm going to jump into the chat because we've
got some questions. Could you just clarify how to recognize triviality versus plausibility?
Sure. So, plausibility is when you have a balance between the convergence. Many different things
give converge to this realization and the elegance. There's lots of convergence to lots of elegance
and lots of instantiation of an Eidos, right? But there has to be a balance between them.
When you have a lot of convergence, but not much elegance,
then you have a triviality. Can I give an example? Buses stop at stoplights. Okay.
Yeah, you know, you've got a lot of converging evidence for that. You've probably seen it happen
multiple times. Many people will agree with you. Lots of independent collaboration. You don't take
that as a great scientific insight. Buses stop at stoplights. Yeah, and notice what you want to
say here. And what follows from that? What comes from that? Where's the elegance? Well,
there is no elegance, and that's what makes it trivial. That's why the person who spouts triviality
is a bore. They're not lying, but they don't say anything that has consequence for us.
Hmm. Okay. Well, thank you. That was really clear. All right, I'm going to jump into the chat.
Something that Dave Murray said, it's not a question, but it's just an experience. And
yeah, I'm going to start with that. So he said, met a guy just like this at a biker. This is at
the beginning when you were talking about Harry Frankfurt and Bullshit. Met a guy just like this
at a biker bar a couple of weeks back, slung all kinds of bullshit, wanted me to believe him.
He got very upset when I would not agree, haven't been able to stop thinking of that encounter since
not sure I handled it well, felt like I should have clapped along, but not to agree in felt I
should have clapped along, but not to agree internally. All right, so any comments for Dave
on that interaction? Thanks, Dave, for that. Yeah, Dave, that's, I mean, that's a really tricky
situation, especially if it's a stranger. And so you don't have much sense about what you can expect
from the person, you know, is there actually, you know, an implicit possibility of an escalation
potentially into violence or harm. And so I understand, you know, there's care to be taken
here. And there's a there's a cost benefit analysis, like, is it going to cost you much to
challenge this person? If, if please hear the if, if it does come to be the case that there might
be a good reason to challenge. This is where I think learning Socratic practice is really important.
This is what I do in a lot of work I do around dialectic and to the logos. Socrates was very
good at drawing people into the depths of their bullshit, only to have it fall apart in their
hands, so that they would experience a poria. Now that in itself is a dangerous thing to do. And
of course, we all know what they did to Socrates. But the thing is, because a poria gives you a
choice point, you can either retrench even more deeply. And that, right, that is a real possibility.
Or you can do the following, you can open up, you can experience wonder, which is to open oneself
up to call one's world and oneself into question in a beautiful way, in a wonderful way. And so
I would again, please hear all the caveats I put before it. But there are times when people are
bullshitting. Perhaps a relationship is at risk. And somebody is bullshitting. This can often happen
in couples therapy. The therapist often needs to use techniques, largely Socratic in nature,
to try and get the person into a place where they are willing to
disidentify from being a bullshit artist in an important way. See, the problem, as I said,
with bullshitting, and we all know this, the problem if you bullshit a lot is you start to
believe your own bullshit, you don't really believe your bullshit, you fall prey to it.
And so getting people to break out of that cycle, it can be very challenging. But that might be an
instance where doing, posing a Socratic challenge to bullshit might be really necessary, or at least
highly indispensable and needful at the time. Don, you said we can't believe our bullshit.
But we repeat, we say bullshit enough that it just becomes more salient and therefore.
Right. And then we engage in action, which causes us to have certain beliefs. So technically,
we don't believe our bullshit. Our bullshit leads us into being locked into what we find
salient. And then our actions are what cause our bullshit. We can't, sorry, cause our beliefs. We
don't, we can't act a belief. But our actions actually cause our beliefs. And so in that way,
bullshit channels our actions, and then those cause our beliefs. And Pascal, and I don't mean
to say he was promising bullshit, but Pascal was aware of this. When he gave Pascal's wager,
he didn't want, he said very clearly, I don't think it will convince you of God's existence.
What I noticed how this is a really sneaky plausibility argument, what it should do is
take, make you take seriously going into church and lighting a candle, because he knew if he
started to do these things, then things would become salient to you. And then the beliefs would
start to accrue, even though he could not give you any argument for them. Yeah. Yeah. And, and
that's what Marcus Aurelius is doing quite a bit. He's kind of always piecing through things that,
that veil of appearance when you said that I'm thinking of that piecing through
that veil to get to the reality of the food on our plate, the wine in the bottle, etc.
Let me move on to another question.
Mark, Mark Trumbull says, what is the relationship between beauty and confirmation bias?
So that's a very tricky one. And there's a sense in which some more empirical research is needed
at a couple of lynch points. I think confirmation bias is a kind of pornography. And in fact,
I think you can even talk about confirmation porn. And in that sense, it's given my argument
in my use of Han, it is antithetical to beauty, which should startle us and wake us up and make
us ask questions and prepare us for truth that we do not yet have. And so in that sense, beauty,
as I've argued for it here, which of course is not our everyday notion of beauty, I've taken great
care to do it, I did distinguish that, right? Beauty in the sense I've been arguing here would be
the opposite of confirmation bias, which is a kind of cognitive pornography. Yeah. Now,
you have to be careful about this because you can't, this is what I cannot tell you.
Don't ever engage in confirmation bias, because that would mean I would rob you of heuristics
that you need, because what these heuristics, when they're adaptive, what they do is they help you in
situations, ignore a lot of irrelevant information, focus in on the relevant information. The problem
is for every instant, and this is a formal proof that no free lunch to the theorem,
for every instance where that heuristic helps you, there's another instance where it equally harms
you. And so you have to get good at ameliorating this and seeing the bias or seeing the heuristic
in context. Thanks, John. I'm just noting the questions in the chat, and I see one from Stacy.
Stacy says, would you say the smoothing, and that's in quotations, the smoothing of reality
has created a society that generally has a disdain for or denial of the necessarily complex,
or do we have a yearning at an individual level that can supersede the superficiality created,
the superficially created smoothing? So I think the answer to the first question is yes,
and I think that's Hahn's argument, so it's more his argument than mine, that the smoothing
locks us into a superficial simplicity instead of a challenging elegance.
About the second point, I think, of course, no one swings free of cultural influence,
but we know there are individual differences, and we know that one of the things in which
there are individual differences is need for cognition. This is how much do you need to go out
and find problems rather than just waiting to react to problems that are given to you by
circumstance or other people? Do you seek out problems and challenges that have not been given
to you by reality or by circumstance? And by the way, need for cognition is predictive of
rationality. Your intelligence is only weakly predictive of rationality, and if you want to
see about that, go look at a whole bunch of other work that I've done and worked by Stanovic
and a whole bunch of other people. So many individuals have a kind of constitutional resistance
to the demification, the stupification that is happening, and what they do is they seek
to complexify their cognition because they have a high need for cognition. Now, that is probably,
in some sense, perennially true, but it is also more pertinently true right now because,
as I've indicated, we have the technological and social acceleration of the strategies of smoothing.
Yeah, thanks, Joan. People that have high need for cognition
and seek rationality need to seek each other out and find community and mutual support.
So, obvious reference to the group here. Yeah, that's what we're trying to do here.
I'm going to take two more questions from the chat, everyone, and one question from my co-host,
and hopefully that's going to be good, John. Leonard says, what to do in cases in which authentic
natural salient beauty is indeed misleading? Do you recommend specific contemplative practices
to recover from self-deception stemming from being blinded by beauty?
So, you have to be, I understand the question, and I'm not being dismissive of it.
Typically, what we mean is, let's say, for example, a woman is naturally very beautiful to
a heterosexual man, just as a prototypical example from literature. I'm not giving it any
moral priority at all. And we say, but that beauty was actually deceptive because she was evil,
or manipulative, or a liar, and all the horrible tropes, and I know there's sexism bound up with
this, but that has been a prototypical instance of it. Now, you have to be very careful because
what the natural sexual beauty discloses is actually something like, there's good reason to
believe symmetry in the modern sense of the person's appearance and healthiness of their appearance.
And those are both indicators of, sorry, I don't mean to sound crude, but this is sexual attraction
we're talking about. Those are both indicators of good capacity for sexual reproduction. And so,
in that sense, there was no deception. Now, what we can do is we can fall prey to the halo effect,
which is conclude that because the person is naturally attractive, that they are also morally
virtuous. Now, that thing, the halo effect, you should definitely engage in contemplative
practices to get to more reliably challenge. The halo effect is very, very dangerous. Now,
you can see why it evolved because halo effects, people that are attractive will largely
marshal social influence. And if they marshal social influence, you better think well of them
because social power, et cetera. So, we can understand why it's an evolutionary adaptation.
But nevertheless, if we could all learn to more successfully challenge the halo effect
and retailer our salience radar, it would do us all very well. And by the way, it helps the people
who live by the halo effect because eventually it goes away. And I know people like this.
And then they're really bereft. They're really bereft. I had, I noticed I was, like many of us,
I had been unsuccessful in the people that I had entered into a romantic relationship with.
So, this next time I decided to do something pretty stoic, I think, not to praise myself,
but I decided I'm going to challenge my default automatic attractiveness radar, what grabs my
attention in women, the type that I like, and I'm going to go off type. And so, I met somebody
who I'm now with, one of the best people I've met in my life. And I fell in love with her soul
first because of that. And then I've only come to realize, not only through my own eyes,
but the eyes of others, that she's actually a physically very attractive woman. And this has
been the best for me that it could possibly be. So, if we are being really careful about what
we're pressing on here, something like the halo effect, yes, yes. I think it's good to challenge
the halo effect. I don't think that's a particular problem with beauty. I think it's a
particular problem with our judgments about how we are leaping from, and this is inappropriate
leaping, right? There's good leaping and bad leaping, leaping from the disclosure of some
underlying reality, a kind of capacity for sexual reproduction to making conclusions about
people's moral character. That's where we need to pause and to challenge.
hugely helpful answer, John, and thank you for your question. Okay, one more question from the
chat, and then one more question after that, and we're done. So, Geon has a good little question
for you, John. Could you share methods to question myself if I am bullshitting or not?
So, the first thing to do is to adopt a practice of active open-mindedness.
Learn about various cognitive biases, and then first, and you'll find this very easy and pleasurable,
identify cognitive biases in other people in newspaper articles or videos or in other people,
and you'll be really good at it, and I want you to remember this. You'll be really good at it. We
are really good at detecting cognitive bias in other people, and then try and apply that to yourself,
and you'll find that's really hard and you're not very good at it. That's because the Cartesian
monological model of how reason works is dramatically wrong. Reason works socratically,
it works dialogically. I'm good at identifying your bias, you're good at identifying mine,
and so what we need to do is regularly engage in socratic dialogue, dialogue with each other,
and so we get more and more capable of doing that, and then eventually, you will start to more and
more internalize that into an internal dialogue. Remember what Antistony said, he learned to
converse with himself from Socrates, and eventually, you will internalize that ability
to take other people's perspective on your own perspective, and then you will start on your own
to be able to do active open-mindedness. Oh, that's brilliant, John. Again, I just want to
bring up Marcus Rades here. I notice that sometimes he does this little dialogic thing,
he asks a question and then answers it. It's thoughts to himself, right? The meditation is
a dialogical exercise, a dialogical exercise to go through. Yeah, yeah, thanks. That's a great
question, Geon. Thank you. All right, I'm going to invite my co-host, Phil Yanov, to the stage to
ask the final question, John. Over to you, Phil. All right, John, thank you for being here today.
Thank you for hanging out with us and sharing your thinking with us and letting us ask you
questions. It's just been a real gift. I'm going to tell you, I can't wait to go watch this again.
I'm glad we're recording this so I can come back and revisit this. And I'm sorry that you're feeling
poorly, but I'll make one last question, one last question. I look forward to your question,
Phil. I really enjoyed our conversation earlier. So thank you. And I did too. And so I'm going to,
you know, we've been talking about beauty and stoicism and it's, I feel it's a romantic notion
and you've got lots of thinking and we got to put all those pieces together. But I would love
to hear you reflect a little more upon a statement I heard you make in another interview where you
said that, you know, stoicism was kind of a gray area. And what you were saying was,
maybe it was a religion. And I was trying to get to the thought of what is your thinking in
was stoicism a philosophy? I mean, they see themselves as the heirs to Aristotle, right?
Or is it a religion or was it somewhere in the middle or were they bullshitting themselves
about what they were really doing? This is wonderful. So I mean, this is a question other
people have wrestled with I've looked at I haven't read it thoroughly. So I don't want to claim
competence in it. You know, entire PhD thesis around this question. And it goes around what's
called the demarcation problem in the social sciences about religion. We don't know what we're
we have by the way before we go see religion, we have the same problem with science, the demarcation
problem also exists for science. That's it's very hard to say that's a science and that's not.
So the demarcation problem for religion is well, what's a religion is going to a sports stadium
where you go on a specific time with a whole bunch of other people and you cheer and you yell
and you eat together and you chant and you're rooting for these people that are doing
something that in no way changes the real world. Is that a religious action?
Yes, and that's the right answer. The right answer is me. Is Buddhism a religion? Well,
it could be a philosophy, but it's not right. It's not a philosophy in modern academic sense
of philosophy, but it's it's a love of wisdom. Right. And so I think stoicism is I often use
the the phrase, the hyphenated phrase, it's a religious philosophy or a philosophical religion.
Because I think trying to come down hard on a demarcation, it has practices, it has rituals,
it has community, it has a sacred dimension that you are supposed to come into a participatory
relationship with that transforms you profoundly. I think this is a reason why stoicism was taken
up and becomes a proper part of Neoplatonism, which has found a home in many religious traditions.
Right. Of course, there's Neoplatonism within Christianity, within Islam, within Judaism.
And of course, there is there's really weird historical inter integrations between something
like Neoplatonism and Vedanta and Buddhism. And so this amazing capacity to enter into
reciprocal reconstruction with other religions and religious philosophies, it tends to
to make the religions more philosophically deep and tends to make the philosophies more
religiously transformative. And so I think, you know, I think, I think you have Aristotelian
science and Neoplatonism, I think you have platonic spirituality that spends that sense of
an agage that I talked about. And there's the mystical. And then stoicism, I think,
it gives you a lot of practices that I think are crucial. I'd be more happy saying that, you know,
Platonism is a religion, but I also think it is more properly described as a philosophical religion
or a religious philosophy. What's interesting, I wasn't looking for a definitive answer from you.
I wanted to hear your thinking on this, because I think it is exactly that demarcation problem
and part of it is too. And I've heard you comment on some other things is that, you know,
there is a hunger for some binding of ourselves to some other philosophical tradition,
which is the thing that you talk about a lot. And I think that's kind of what we're seeing here.
Yes, there is. And I think this whole, if it's not presumptuous, but I think you're at least
affording this, Phil, I think this whole conference is around the sense of religio to be deeply
connected to something that is profoundly and transformatively and beautifully real
that helps us find the centrality of goodness and the ultimacy of truth from the primacy of beauty
to use DC Schindler. Now, the one thing that I think is interesting, and the problem is the
history gets a little bit hard here, is, is there a place, was there a place for the mystical
experience that is clearly explicitly present in Neoplatonism? You see it in Plotinus without
question. And of course, it's controversial around whether or not the mystical that sense of, you
know, a profound at one mint with reality is actually something that Stoics report on. I don't
know. I think that part of the history is perhaps lost to us. Maybe it gets submerged under the
emerging Christianity, maybe gets submerged when it's taken into Neoplatonism. I don't know. I don't
know. I do think that flow with nature, especially if it has connections to what I talk about as flow,
I think it's on a continuum with more proper transformative and mystical experiences.
So do you, and I apologize, but I'm going to get one more question, one more answer out of you.
That's fine. Do you think those, you know, the, the Zeno's flow and, and I can't say the guy's name
Mahila. Chicks have my eyes. Yeah, check. I, you, every time you say it, I think I should record
that. So I can say it, but, but those two uses of flow, do you think those are similar enough
to have that conversation? Yeah, I do actually, because I mean, the, the, we tend to over focus
on prototypical instances of flow that come out in athletic performance or martial arts or rock
climbing, but it also comes out in jazz and it also comes out when you're doing dialectic into
the logos and practice. And we're following the logos the way Socrates says you follow the wind.
That, to my mind, is an ongoing practice of insight, improvisation, re-questioning, reopening up
an ongoing sense of discovery and wonder. And that seems to me to be very much a flow state.
Error matters. Socrates will catch you out. You have to be very clear. There's immediate feedback.
These are all the conditions that create flow. I think being in Socrates presence,
if it was taken up correctly, which is always the existential choice in the face of Socrates,
could induce a flow state in people. Don is following the wind, the same of sort of stream
of consciousness, thinking, journaling, writing, following the logos, following the wind.
What do you mean by following the wind? Oh, I just thought I thought, I thought you said
following the wind. No, following the logos, like, like, like, like, like a wind, right? Like a wind.
Yeah. It blows and it comes from another direction that we have to reorient. So
Socrates talks about following the logos as if we're following a wind. Yeah. And of course,
I just thought it just reminded me of kind of a stream of consciousness type following of our
thoughts in that way. No, I don't think see flow is typically different from associational,
like, like that associational thing, because it requires it flow really cares a lot. And there's
a lot more I could have put in my talk. We flow really cares and is afforded by a concern for
intelligibility. If things start to be not make make not make sense for you, you immediately
fall out of flow. If you start to make a lot of mistakes, you're immediately out of flow.
That's the thing that will snap you out of flow like nothing else. Yeah. All right. I think we
also have a t-shirt. Well, you're feeling well. I want to bring you back for more questions about
this particular set of things. But thank you so much for your time today. This has been
thanks, John. I think we have a t-shirt phrase. Beauty is anti bullshit. John Varvage.
