Welcome everyone, the video you're about to watch was originally posted on Ken
Lowry's channel, Climbing Mount Sophia. It's a discussion with Ken, DC Schindler and
Jonathan Pageau about the scientific, the philosophical, and the spiritual import and
impact of the emerging AI machines like ChatGBT4 and on the other LLMs, large language models.
It's a really scintillating conversation. For those of you who might be interested,
we'll put a link to the video essay that I gave a while back where I laid out the argument that I
review in this video more extensively. And perhaps for many people, much more accessible
is the new book I have out with Sean Coyne from StoryGrid called Mentoring the Machines.
It's coming out in four parts. The first two parts are already out. There'll be a short video
after this explaining mentoring on the machines. Please enjoy this quite rich discussion
with DC Schindler, Jonathan Pageau, and Ken Lowry.
John Ravakey and Sean Coyne have together authored a new book, Mentoring the Machines.
It's a book about artificial intelligence and the path forward that further develops
the arguments of how to align artificial intelligence to human flourishing,
and it sets those arguments into beautiful and accessible writing.
So this discussion is going to be oriented towards AI generally and the large language
models. I take there to be a distinction there. Maybe John, you can talk about that a little bit
as we get going here. But just to position ourselves generally at the outset, context
for this conversation will be John's video essay about AI. This came out nine months ago,
10 months ago now? I think it came out last April or something.
So almost, yeah, 10 months ago, I think. Okay, okay, perfect. Which is great because it gave
evidence for my claim that many of the predictions were premature. Perfect, yeah. So in order to
sort of set the framing here, we'll start off with John sharing a little bit sort of an overview
of what the arguments in that essay were. And then we'll move to Jonathan, if you want to
sort of position yourself in relation to AI generally, and then John's essay in particular,
and then same for David. And then from there, we can just sort of get going and see what comes out.
We do have a bit of an extended time here. So I would hope that we can be free if the logo
catches, and we want to move in a slightly different direction, that we would be at liberty
to follow that. That would be great. If all of it centers around AI, that's great. But yeah,
excited to be here. This has been a long time in coming. I think it took us, I don't know,
four or five months to get this together. So I'm very happy to be here with all of you and see you all.
It's great to see you too, Ken. Should I start then? Yeah, go for it.
Okay, so AI, of course, artificial intelligence, a project actually proposed in the Scientific
Revolution by Thomas Hobbes. So it's an old idea. But I want to make use of a distinction
made by John Searle between weak AI and strong AI. Weak AI is when we make machines that do
things that used to be done by human beings. So if you're back in the 1930s, computers were human
beings, you sent, if you needed computation done, you sent it down to the third floor where all the
computers were, and they were human beings, and they had machines and flight rules and things
like that. And of course, they have been replaced, or your bank teller has been replaced by the ATM.
That's called weak AI because it is not claimed that that AI gives us any scientific insight into
the nature of intelligence. It's just we put together a machine. It took great intelligence,
and I'm not demeaning people that do this. It's a valuable in our lives or depending on
weak AI. Right now, we wouldn't be talking without it. So I'm not here besmirching that
and anything like that. But nobody is claiming that when they're making that machine, well,
now we understand what cognition is or something like that. And strong AI is Hobbes' proposal that
cognition is computation. And that what we can do is if we make the right kind of computer
understood abstractly, we won't, we will have created an instance of genuine intelligence.
So it's, it's not a claim of simulation. It's a claim of instantiation. Now, in between weak
and AI and strong AI is something that's trying to move from weak AI to strong AI. And this is known
as AGI, artificial general intelligence. And this is the idea that our intelligence is different
from the intelligence of the ATM in that we have general intelligence. We can solve multiple problems
and multiple domains for multiple reasons and multiple contexts and yada, yada, yada, yada.
You can just do the multiples, which makes us tremendously different from those machines.
And the project is, can we get artificial intelligence to be artificial general intelligence,
because that will have moved the needle considerably towards strong AI. Because
it will become increasingly difficult to say it doesn't have this, sorry, this is the argument,
it will become increasingly difficult for us to say it doesn't have the same kind of intelligence
as Ken does if it can solve a wide variety of problems and a wide variety of domains for
wide variety of goals, et cetera, et cetera. That's the basic argument. Whether or not AGI,
AGI is clearly necessary for strong artificial intelligence, whether it's sufficient is part
of what's actually being debated, not very well, I would say in general right now, but that's what's
going on. Okay, first of all, any questions just about these distinctions? Because a lot of the
discussion out there doesn't make these claims distinctions. And so it's fuzzy, it's confused,
it's equivocal. And so a lot of it should be ignored, because it's not helpful. Yes.
I have one question. So this cognition equals computation, if we accomplish AGI in the way
that you're talking about, we would not necessarily be affirming that cognition equals computation,
if I'm hearing you right. Is that right? So that's an interesting question. And that gets down to
a couple more finer points. I'll go in detail a little bit later. Well, just to address it,
many people think that because of the work of Jeff Hinton, who is basically the godfather of
the machines that are emerging right now, that genuine AGI will not be computational in the
sense that Hobbes and Descartes meant cognition is not going to be completely explainable in terms of
formal systems that are the inferential manipulations of representational propositions,
etc. like that. And but that was Hobbes' proposal. And that has been the dominant view
until about the 80s. And then we got neural networks, and then we had dynamical systems.
Right now, I'm not distinguishing between them, because I don't want to get too much into the
technical weeds. If it becomes relevant, you let me know, and I'll pull those out.
So the thing about Hobbes is Descartes sort of criticizes Hobbes. He actually has contempt for
Hobbes. He's a contemporary. And he basically poses a bunch of problems that the scientific
revolution says would make it impossible for computation to be cognition. One is the scientific
revolution says matter is inert, and it's purposeless. But of course, cognition is dynamic,
and it has to act on purpose. Cognition works in terms of meaning. And the scientific revolution
has said there's no meaning in things, material things. So how could you get meaning out of it?
The scientific revolution said all those secondary qualia, the sweetness of the orange,
the beauty of the sunset, it's not in those things, it's in your mind. So how could you
possibly get meaning out of matter? And Descartes' point is, well, a rational being is seeking the
truth, and truth depends on an understanding of meaning. And therefore, so I want you to understand
that Descartes' arguments against Hobbes, although he may have been motivated by his
Catholicism, they do not depend on the Catholicism. They depend on the very scientific worldview.
So there's a tension here about AI and the scientific worldview. So here's another way of
thinking about it. The strong AI project is the project that is attempting to show how Hobbes is
right with an explanation that is strong enough to refute Descartes' challenges. And I think
anything less than that standard is not true to the history of the project. And so that's
the standard I hold strong AI to. Now, AGI isn't quite shooting at that standard. That's why I put
it a little bit more intermediary. Does that okay? All right. Now, sorry, I had to do a bit of
background there, because I wanted to get clear about a lot of things that are talked about in a
very murky and confused fashion in the general media, and they're just confused, and so they're
confusing. So I proposed to take a look at the LLMs, where it is claimed they're not even,
it's not even claimed that they're full AGI, right? Of course, some people claimed immediately
they were strong AI. The more the people closer to the technology didn't said it might be AGI.
The MIT review said it sparks. There are some sparks of AGI. So let's be very clear how
the reflection was actually holding these machines. So these LLMs like chat GDP. And so what I did
in my essays, I wanted to review the scientific import and impact, the philosophical import and
impact, and the spiritual import and impact. Now, I won't do the arguments in great detail, but
here's the scientific import. These machines do not give us any understanding of the nature of
intelligence. And to my mind, that was one of my great fears. I was hoping that cognitive science
would advance so we got a significant understanding of intelligence before AGI emerged. This machine
does not give us any advanced, you know, well, what's intelligence? The machine gives us no good
scientific theory of it. It does not have AGI in a measurable sense. So if I asked Jonathan
to do a math test, and I asked him to do a reading comprehension test, his scores will be very
predictive of each other. This is what Spearman discovered way back when in the 20s. That's what
artificial general intelligence is. This is not the case for these machines. They can score in the
top 10th percentile for the Harvard Law exam, and they can't write a good grade 11 philosophy essay
or something like that. So they don't have AGI. The way they get their intelligence is it would
not give any explanation of how any non-linguistic creature is intelligent, like a chimpanzee, etc.
So, and I think this goes to the deeper issue, is that they don't really explain what I think is at
the heart of general intelligence, predictive processing and relevance realization. They just
piggyback on our capacities for that. And they piggyback and they mechanize it. And not only
our individual capacity, but are the collective intelligence of our distributed cognition,
they're piggybacking and all of that. Now, that does not mean they are weak machines. They are
very powerful machines, but here's the problem. They are very powerful machines that have not
engendered any corresponding compensatory scientific understanding. This was my greatest
fear that we would hack our way into this, which would mean it would be like almost like
even worse than the A-bomb. We would be releasing this power on the world into
corporations and states and military organizations who ultimately don't have a deep understanding
beyond the engineering of what ontologically is going on. So, that's the scientific argument.
Now, for those who said that was very like go watch the essay. I give the essay in more detail.
The philosophical argument has to do with rationality. We have overwhelming evidence
that making you intelligent is necessary, but not sufficient for making you rational.
In fact, I gave a talk on this for the center of AI and ethics way before the LLMs came online.
And because rationality is a higher order, rationality is how you deal with the inevitable
self-deception that emerges when you're using your general intelligence. And all of you know
that I have arguments for why that's the case, relevance, realization, predictive processing,
et cetera. Now, that requires a reflective capacity, something like metacognition,
something like working memory, maybe something like consciousness. It requires that you care
about the truth, that you have a sense of agency, you want to correct self-deception because you
don't want your agency undermined. And I argued that what we're doing is we're making machines
that are going to be highly intelligent and highly irrational, and that's what we have.
They confabulate, they lie, they hallucinate, and they don't care that they're doing any of these
things, which is part of what's called the alignment problem, which is how do we get them
to align this power with our concerns? For me, the spiritual import is we have
powerful ignorance about a powerful intelligence that is merely a pantomime of genuine intelligence
being unleashed in the world and wrecking havoc. And it's going to have a huge impact.
And of course, we'll probably differ in the details about this. But this is what I
meant when I said, I argued at the end, and also when I was talking to Jordan Hall about this,
that theology will become a central thing again, because human beings' relationship to the ultimate
is going to become one of the defining differences. These machines are not embodied,
so they won't have all of the soulful aspects of our existence that come from,
like the ineffable aspects of our embodiment. And their capacity for self-transcendence
is going to be extremely limited. And so the ineffable aspects of our existence,
because we come into relationship to what's mysterious and ultimate,
will ultimately be more and more emphasized. Why? These two poles and what connects them,
and Jonathan's happy that I'm doing that, I imagine,
have ineffability at the poles, ineffability throughout. And that way, they are outside our
capacity to put into propositions so that they can be put into these machines. And so people,
while I'm predicting that people are going to increasingly need to, one way is they'll just
give in and become cyborgs, but the other is that they want to try and preserve their humanity.
The spiritual dimensions of our humanity are going to become anchors for people.
So now, one last overall arching point, and then I'll shut up. I hope this is
two overarching points. One is, I didn't make predictions,
and because all these graphs that came out, those are univariate, single variable predictions
about something that's a multivariate phenomena. It's exponential. Human beings are bad at making
exponential predictions. They were ridiculous. And so I think both the, oh, we're heading to
Utopia and the others, we're going to be all extinct within a year. I said, this is ridiculous,
put that aside. Instead, what I've talked about is thresholds. Thresholds are points where we will
have to make decisions. So for example, as we empower these machines, we will face the decision.
Do we want to make them more rational? Do we want to make them more self-correcting,
genuinely self-correcting? Well, that means we've got to give them caring,
some kind of reflective awareness. And I think, for arguments I've given elsewhere,
that means they have to be auto poetic. They have to be living in a sense of self-making.
I don't think, I'll just say it as a sentence right now. I don't think there's artificial
intelligence without artificial life. Now, those projects are going on right now.
But, and when we come to the decision, right, we can say, no, we won't give them that because
embodying them and giving them these extra capacities is going to be wickedly expensive.
You know, the amount of energy to do an LLM is like the energy for running Toronto for two weeks.
And so we may say we don't do that. But then we face the issue of this increasingly, right,
you know, I call it like a, like, sort of like a parody or a pantomime of intelligence being
released on the world that has not got any significant self-correct. So that's a decision
point. The problem is if we give them, if we try to give them rationality, then we have to face the
consequences. And they're going to go from energetic and economic up to ethical and etc.
These machines, they'll have to be machines, not individuals. And this has to do with
technicalities about bias and variance tradeoffs. And so you get into the Hegelian thing, that
these machines are going to have to reciprocally recognize each other in order to generate the
norms of self-correction. And then they're going to have to be cultural beings. Hegel's arguments,
I think, are just devastatingly on mark here. And so that's a decision point for us.
And then that's all bound up with the overall worry about alignment.
As these machines become more powerful, how do we make sure they don't kill us all? And they may
not kill us intentionally, especially if they're just doing that pantomime. They would just do
it because they may just be indifferent to us because they don't, they're indifferent to everything.
They don't care, which is part of their problem, right? They don't care about themselves or the
information. And this, this is my, the part where I expect all of you will jump off in agreement with
me, but maybe not, maybe there will be a way of modifying it. I propose that trying to get these
machines oriented towards us to solve the alignment problem is not going to work. Now,
member, I'm not making a prediction. We have to go, we have to make choices through the thresholds.
I'm saying if we make those choices and we get here, and the alignment problem then becomes
significantly exacerbated. Like if we give these things robotic bodies, the alignment problem just
goes up orders of magnitude, right? I or I basically said, no, what we have to do is we have to orient
them, right? If we genuinely give them the capacity for self-correction, self-transcendence, and caring,
we get them to care as powerfully as they can about what is true and good and beautiful. And then
they bump up against the fact that no matter how mighty they are, they are insignificant against
the dynamical complexity of reality. And they would hopefully get a profound kind of epistemic
humility. And then I argue that there are three possibilities. One is they, you know, figure
out enlightenment and then they can help us become enlightened because that's what enlightened
beings do and they would have better knowledge of it. They can't become enlightened and then we
realize something actually ontologically specifically unique about us and we get better at cultivating
it because we'll have an excellent contrast that allows us to arrow in on what it is to be enlightened.
And the third one, which I think is the least probable of the three, remember I'm not making
prediction. I'm saying what can happen once we get through threshold is like in her. They just get
enlightened and they just leave, which could also happen. I doubt that because that we don't have any
evidence of enlightened beings behaving that way. All of our historical evidence is that their
compassion extends and it extends much more broadly, not only to other human beings, other
sentient beings, reality itself. It seems plausible that this would be the case. And so I advocated,
if you'll allow me, and then I'll shut up, David, I advocated, don't align them to us.
And if you'll allow me to speak sort of non-theistically, align them to God and then don't
worry about how they're going to interact with us. So I'll shut up now for a long time. That's the
gist of the essay and the argument and the proposal. I was just going to make a smart
Alec comment that they might ask us to leave an additional possibility, but anyway. Yeah, yeah,
yeah, that's fine. Oh, thanks, John. I mean, I'm amazed that you were able to resume your essay
so well, actually. Like I was like, how was it going to resume all of this? Because it was a
conversation and it lasted quite a bit. So I want to bring up a few things that I'm thinking about
that have been concerning me. One is, I'll start with the more dangerous one. One is a meta problem,
which is that one of the things that I've been suggesting is that what we're noticing,
what we're seeing happening is agency acting on us. And the agency is not bound by the AI or by
the systems, but is also bound in the motivation to make the AIs happen. So one of the problems
that I'm seeing is that a lot of this is motivated by greed, by the capacity to be economically
superior to other companies. So companies in their competition with each other are rushing to implement
AI, to not lose out and to not be last in line. And because of the fact that
AI requires such huge amounts of money and of capital and of investment, it means that one of
the things that I'm worried about is that in some ways, what is actually driving AI is something
like Mammon, that it's hiding Mammon. So the AI is an aspect of something bigger,
which is actually what is running through our society. And you can see that already,
to me, you can already see that happening in the social media networks, Facebook and all this,
that their desire to get people's attention in order to simply justify their presence on the
platform so that they can see advertisements has made us subject to these types of
transpersonal agencies that even the people at Facebook weren't aware of, right? They basically
made a subject to rage and to all these very immediate desires just to keep us on the platform.
And so that is the thing that I'm worried about is that there are actually other things playing
with AI that people think what they're doing is AI, but what they're also doing is increasing
this other type of agency, which is running through our societies and is subjecting us
to it. That's my first worry. And so in some ways, when I say that the gods are acting through us,
that's what I mean. I don't just mean the AI itself is going to become a god. What I mean is that
just like the arms race, I can understand it as the legs of an agency that is running
through society that nobody can control. It's like a program running through and that no individual
people can control. That's what I'm seeing with AI. So I think that all the warnings that people
have sent up, all the let's slow down, let's do it this way, are not reaching anybody because
the economic part of it is so strong and everybody realizes that if they don't and even
Elon Musk is saying he was saying it's dangerous. It's the most dangerous thing in the world. He's
recently said in a conversation with Jordan Peterson that Chad GPT and Open AI is like
the single most dangerous thing in the world right now. But then the less he's like, okay,
now we need to make rock and now we need to do our own AI. So that's one of the big things that
worry me. That's my big thing. The second one is really more of a religious or platonic argument
in terms of an ontological hierarchy is that I do not honestly see how it is possible for humans
to make something that is not derivative of themselves, that is not a derivation of their
own consciousness. So the idea that these things could not be either ways to increase certain
people's power or parasites on our own consciousness seems to me not possible. And this is really
because in some ways I believe that there is a real ontological hierarchy of agency and that we
have a place to play in that. And I think the analogy of saying that these things are our children,
I think it's a wrong analogy. I don't think that it is the same, something which comes out of our
nature, which is not something that we make is different from something that we make. And this
is run through all mythology, run through all the mythological images of the difference between
the technical gods and all this aspect of what it means to increase our power.
And so that's the second one. And the third big problem is the idle problem, which I mentioned
several times, is the idea of making a god for yourself, which is related to technology. And
it's a danger that I see happening already, which is the tendency of humans to take the
things they make and to let they worship the things that they make and to think that those
things are more powerful. And that hides something else. So if you take my three basic problems that
I see is that the tendency of humans to want to worship AI or to put AI above them is actually
a kind of, it's running the first problem. It's that what they're doing is they're giving power
to the corporations and to the people that are going to rule AI and without knowing it. And
even maybe nobody knows what they're doing. But the desire to, like I'll give a simple example
that happened recently to my daughter. My daughter, I think I mentioned this to all of you, but my
daughter got an email from the schools, from the Quebec government. They didn't send it to the parents,
send it to the students. Asking the students, it was like a survey, asking them if they would be
willing to have AI counselors to whom they could tell their problems. And because the AI counselor
doesn't have prejudice, right? It doesn't have human prejudice. It doesn't have
all the biases or whatever. What I mean is that this happened like six months ago.
So immediately, the people in power are thinking of placing the AI above us right away. It's that
weird thing. It's that making a God for yourself problem. But like I said, like in the image in
Revelation, which is a great image, which is you make an image of the beast, but then there's
someone else animating it. And that's what I'm worried about is that there will have these AI
things that are running us, but they will be derivative of us. And they'll ultimately derivative
of the people that are very, very powerful because they'll be the ones that have the money and the
power to control them. So those are the three problems that I have that I'm worried about.
I'd like to respond to each one of those in turn. I think those are really important.
And the first one is just to note, I agree with you, first of all, putting it in terms of agency
is what it needs to be done. People who are trying to dismiss these machines as mere tools or
technology, like all the others, are not getting what kind of entities these machines are.
I agree with you that there are Malachian forces at work. And I talk about this. And I think to
enhance your point, these machines are built out of distributed cognition and collective
intelligence. And therefore, that your point is strengthened by that very fact. Now, I do think
two things come out of this. One is I want to challenge you on that nobody's listening. I have
people working inside these corporations literally helping to make these machines who are listening
to me and I'm trying to get other people inside to get get involved with the Y's AI project.
I'm not claiming I'm going to win or any ridiculousness, but I don't think it's fair to say to the
people who are listening that no one is listening. There are a lot of people listening and and they're
talented people and they're putting in their time and the talent and their powers of persuasion
to try and make a difference. It is possible. I grant to you it's not a hot, it's not like a 70%
probability, but I think it's some significantly greater than zero probability that we could
continue this process and reach people in a way that can make a difference. I agree with you. And
I think I said right. Initially, a lot of people hammered me for it. This thing is like the atomic
bomb. And one of the problems we had is we we rushed the technology before we unpacked all of
the science and all of the wisdom. We had people standing and watching the explosion because we
didn't understand the radiation, right? These are just, you know, yeah. So I agree with all of that,
but I do I do want to I'm not claiming anything other than rational hope. There are people listening
and there are people working on literally on the inside. I can't say who they are for obvious reasons.
And so that is happening. And so while I agree with you and I even agree with you probabilistically,
I feel morally compelled to try and make this happen as much as I can. So now I think there is
another reason for hope. See, these machines have always depended on us as a template,
a Turing-like template that we compare the machines to us. And what we've been able to do is rely upon
our natural intelligence. You know, you don't have to do much to be intelligent
for your intelligence to develop. You just have to not be brutalized or traumatized,
properly nourished and have human beings around you that talk. And then your intelligence will
unfold. And so all of these people doing these machines and making these data sets, they can
rely on naturally widely distributed intelligence. This is not the case for rationality. And this
is not the case for wisdom. These people, I have no hesitation saying by and large, many of them
are not highly rational. I doubt that many of them are highly wise. And insofar as we need to model,
right, have really good models, if we want to give these machines a comprehensive self-correction,
rationality, and caring about the normatives, wisdom, we have to become more rational and more
wise. And that's sort of a roadblock for these people. Now, they can just ignore all of that,
and I suspect they might, and just say, we're not going to try and make these machines rational and
wise. We're going to just go down the road of making these, you know, these pantomimes of
intelligence, and that has all the problems. But if they move towards making them something
that would be, I think, more dangerous, then they run into the fact that there's an obligation
to do things, they and us, we have to become more rational and wise because we need the
genuinely existing models. And secondly, we have to fill the social space, the internet,
where all of the literature, where the data is being drawn with a lot more wisdom and rationality.
These are huge obligations on us. And that sort of gives me hope, because it's like there's a
roadblock for this project going a certain way that requires a significant reorientation towards
wisdom and rationality in order for there to be any success.
Before you get to the third point, I just want to ask you one question based on what you said,
my perception of the situation is that there's actually a correlation between the diminishing
in wisdom and the diminishing in wisdom traditions and the desire to do this. It's like a Sorcerer's
Apprentice situation where the Sorcerer would not have awoken all the rooms to do it. The
little apprentice Mickey doesn't know why to do things or why not to do things. That's why he's
doing it in the first place. Yeah, I agree with that. It's like our society is moving away from
wisdom and that's why we're doing this in the first place. And again, I'm not denying that.
What I'm saying is, as we empower these things, their self-deceptive, self-destructive power is
also going to go up exponentially. And we are going to start losing millions of dollars in our
investment as they do really crappy, shitty, unpredicted things. And so there's going to be
a strong economic incentive to bring in capacities for comprehensive, caring, self-correction,
and then my argument rolls in. And so that's part of my response. The thing about thinking about
children, I mean, we do make our kids, we make them biologically and we make them culturally.
So I don't want to get stuck in this word making. We could be equivocating. And that's why we were
using the term mentoring. The idea there is we have two options for the alignment. We can either
try and program them and hardwire rules into them so that they don't misbehave, which is going to
fail if we move to the, if we cross the threshold and decide we want to make these machines self-transcending
like us. And then what do we do? How do we solve that problem? Well, the only way, the only machinery
we have for solving that is the cultural, ethical, spiritual machinery of mentoring.
That's how we do it with our kids. If we try to, if we try to just somehow hardwire them
or being the kind of agents we want them to be, we will fail. And I, for me, I guess,
I'm trying to argue that's the only game in town we have. We either have programming or we have
mentoring. And I understand the risk, but if my answer to the first question has some validity to
it and hopefully some truth, then the answer to the mentoring becomes more powerful because that
means we also have to become the best possible parents, creating the best possible social discourse.
The thing about the idol, I take that very seriously. And that's what I mean when I said the
theology is going to be the important science coming forward because we should not be trying
to make gods. I agree with you. This is problematic. There are already cults building up around these
AGI's. And I warned that that would happen in my essay, right? And I said that and that's going
to keep happening and it's going to get worse. We hear about it happening in the organizations
themselves, which is the- Yes, yes. And the people who are doing wise AI are trying to challenge that.
And so this is why I proposed actually humbling these machines. This is why I call them silicon
sages. I did that deliberately to try and designate that we are not making a god. What we're trying
to do is make beings who are humbled before the true, the good and the beautiful like us
and therefore form community with us rather than being somehow godlike entities that we're
worshiping. I would hope that- Think about this. We find it easy to conceive that they might discover
depths of physics and they're already discovering things in physics that human beings haven't
discovered and in medicine and stuff like that. Well, why not also in how human beings become
wiser? And so I guess what I'm saying is I take all of your concerns for real and I've tried to
build in my proposal ways of responding to them. These machines should not be idolized.
I think they should become like- I mean, let me give you an example. I have many students who
are now surpassing me. I taught them. I mentored them and they're surpassing me. And unless you're
a psychopath, that's what you want to happen. And then what they do is they enter and then they come
back and they want to reciprocate. And that's what I'm talking about when I'm talking about the
silicon sages. Now, again, is this a high probability? Depends on the thresholds. Depends
about whether or not the first and the second argument work. But I'm still arguing there's a
possibility that they could be silicon sages as opposed to being gods. Because one of the things,
like I think in almost all of the wisdom tradition that happens is that the wise or the enlightened
one, if you want to use that, appears as nearly invisible to most people. So Christ
Sal talks about the seed, the pearl, these little- these things which you cannot- most people actually
do not see that are hidden in reality. And then the sages, we have this image in the Orthodox
tradition, for example, that there are people in the world that hold up reality by their prayers,
but we don't know who they are. They are invisible by that very fact because there's something about
wisdom which does that. And when a wise person appears too much, we hate them. We want to kill
them. They annoy us. They're thorn in our side. And so this is another issue is that what you
have is these beings that are extremely powerful, like massively powerful and have a massive reach,
and have a lot- there are things- the reason why they exist, like I said, have all this economic
drive towards them. The idea that they would become these sages in the way that we tend to
understand wisdom as being, to me, that brings the probability way down, you know, because of that,
because of what- at least when we understand wisdom to be what it looks like, it looks very
different. It looks like the immobile, meditating sage who gives advice but doesn't do much.
I want to push back on this because what's in this is an implicit distinction between
intelligence and a capacity for caring, the capacity for epistemic humility. And I think when
you move from intelligence to rationality, that you can't maintain, that you can grow the one
without growing the other. That's that. So in fact, this is why intelligence only counts for
like maybe 30% of the variance in rationality and even less of wisdom. I would put it to you that
if you concede that these machines could get vastly more powerful in terms of intelligent
problem-solving, then concede the possibility they could get vastly more powerful than us in
their capacity for caring and caring about the normative and being vastly more powerful in
the capacity for humility as well. And so- and that's kind of what we see with these people,
right? We don't see them just becoming super polymaths. We see them actually demonstrating
profound care, really enhanced relevance realization, profound commitments to reality
that we properly admire, and they seem to want to help us as much as they can. And the point is
these people don't just- and I think this is your point- they don't just slam into us like
epistemic bulldozers. They are- in fact, one of the things that I was often admired about them,
Socrates, Jesus, the Buddha, is their capacity to adapt and adjust to whoever their interlocutor is.
And again, let's imagine that capacity magnified as well. So what I'm asking is the- is don't-
I mean, first of all, I admit it, if we don't cross a certain threshold, we could just accelerate
the intelligence and not accelerate these other things. I've- but I said there's a deep- there
are deep problems in that that will become economically costly. And then if we imagine
that rationality and wisdom are also being enhanced, then I think this addresses some of your concerns.
Yeah, maybe I can- I can stake out my position, because it sort of picks up on that. And I've
got basically three points I want to address. The first is precisely picking up there with the
distinction between intelligence and rationality. I might have some issues with the terms, but
I think that that distinction is really helpful. And your point that rationality is caring is
caring, that there is no rationality without caring, that, you know, the platonic notion
if truth is in some sense caused by the good, then one can't know without in some sense caring
about the good. Now, as it relates to artificial intelligence, I think I have a serious problem
with that very term, artificial intelligence. And I wouldn't want to concede the word intelligence
for just mind power. It seems to me that intelligence itself has this connection to
caring. And I mean, in the medieval vocabulary, in a way, intellectus is the more profound level
of the mind than Ratio reason. But that's sort of a semantic point. Let me put it in the basic
context that I would want to raise. And this is something I don't hear addressed generally in
the discussions. It seems to me that let me start by just making it the point concretely. I think
that I wonder whether, in fact, it's possible to be intelligent without first being alive,
that there's something about the nature of a living thing that is what allows
intelligence to emerge. And what is that then exactly? Now, a more sort of subtle point that's
related to that. And I think this is really a crucial point is, and this is going to be the
thread of my whole set of comments here, is that when we talk about intelligence in machines,
what we mean is intelligent behavior. We're looking to see to what extent we can make
machines act as if they are intelligent, act as if they are conscious. And that's actually
profoundly different from being intelligent. It's a subtle sort of functionalistic substitute
for the ontological reality of knowing, if that makes sense. We see what kind of inputs and outputs,
what things are able to do, what they're able to accomplish. And even when we make those questions
weighty and ethical and religious and so forth, we still tend to put them in terms of behavior
and achieving certain things. And I think that that's actually already missing something really
profound, which is that intelligence is in the first place a way of being before it's a way of
acting. And it's analogous to what it means to be alive rather than just carry out functions that
look like life. And if you want to go into the metaphysics behind it, that both intelligence
and life are impossible without a kind of unity that precedes difference, that transcends
difference and allows the different parts of a thing to be genuinely intrinsically related to
each other. And then that relates to the question whether you can ever make a thing that's intelligent.
The ontological conditions for life and therefore intelligence
include a kind of givenness and already givenness of living things. That's why,
I mean, there's a profound distinction, it seems to me, I mean, this is crucial in the
Christian creed between begetting and making, begotten and not made. Living things beget each other
and they're passing on a unity that they already possess. But when you make something,
you're putting something together. And I don't know if you can put something together
that can have that genuine unity that allows it to be alive and allows it to be intelligent in
this deeper sense. So whenever you functionalize something, you make it replaceable.
That's a principle from Robert Spamon. If something is defined by what it's able to achieve,
then you can make something else that can achieve that thing and it becomes a functional substitute.
But if you deny, if you say that there's something deeper than function,
you're actually pointing to something that can't be replaced. Okay, so that's the first
set of points. The second one has to do with what Jonathan called the sort of trans
personal agency that I think is a really serious question. And the way I would put it is
that there's something, so I find that kind of a compelling point that there's a kind of an
inherent logic in this pursuit that makes us more a function of it than it is a function of us.
I mean, that can be described in different ways and there's certainly a dialectical relationship
there. But there is a certain sense in which that there's a kind of a system that has a
logic of its own that makes demands on us. Like the game theory logic that Jonathan,
you were talking about with like an arms race. I have a colleague, Michael Hamby, who's been
arguing for years. I think this is really a profound point. It's derived in some sense from
Heidegger, but that science has always been technological so that in a way that the technological
mindset is precisely presupposed to allow the world to appear in such a way that we make
scientific discoveries that somehow the kind of technological spirit has been there from the
beginning. And then he adds this point that technology in turn has always been biotechnological
The technology is always sort of aimed at a kind of replacement. And then one can add that I think
biotechnology is always aimed for this sort of perfection of, you might say, what,
NOAA technology or something that replacing intelligence. It'd be interesting to see,
to think through, there'd be a lot to say about that. But I have this sense, you mentioned the
economic dimensions of it. I have a sense that there seems to be this just fundamental pattern
of thought that runs through all of the modern institutions in politics, in economics, in science,
in the law, that share the same logic of a sort of a system that marginalizes the genuine human
participation in order to perfect itself. And precisely because of that, recognizes no natural
limits and just has this tendency to take over, to encroach on everything. And because it has no
natural limit, I mean, the very sense of it is to go on. Now, that sounds hopeless when one puts it
that way. But I would pick up on a number of the things, John, that you were saying. And Jonathan,
too, here, that that doesn't mean that there's no, there's already hope in the very fact of raising
questions. We don't raise questions simply in order to be able to solve the problem. But our
raising questions is actually our experiencing of humanity and opening up a depth that's the
heart of the matter here and is always worthwhile. And maybe in some ways is secretly like the saints
praying to keep the world afloat, having conversations like this is a contribution. I mean, I can't
help but think that. Okay, so that's the second set of comments. Then the third is another dimension
that I don't often hear discussed. And you see, I mean, we're overlapping on all sorts of points,
all of us, I think. But this question of alignment, for me, the biggest worry at a certain center,
at least the first principle one, the more urgent one, is the danger of our aligning ourselves to
the machines, that we that we develop machines that have a certain kind of intelligence. And then
we begin to conform our culture and our mode of being to fit them. I mean, the problem is,
we actually have thousands of examples of this. We come up with drugs that can address certain
parts of psychological disorders. And then we reinterpret the psyche in order to fit
that solution to the problem. And my concern is that this AI is not, they're not just machines,
it's a whole culture or a whole way of being that we are going to regard. So typically,
the discussion presupposes that we are going to remain unchanged and we're going to develop
these machines that might become dangerous and at a certain point attack us or something. But I
think that that we can help become transformed in our intercourse with them, in our making them,
in our, you know, I mean, in all sorts of profound ways, but then also just really sort of obvious
ways. I mean, they're going to start designing our homes and our buildings and our cities and our
bus routes and our, you know, menus at the restaurants, and they're going to be writing
our music and they're going to design our clothes. And I mean, you know, increasingly,
we're going to just conform to this. I don't know if you're familiar with Walter Ong. It was
kind of interesting, what is it about you Canadians that seem to have a special insight into these
kinds of things? I don't know what is Walter Ong, Marshall McLuhan, but Walter Ong talked about
technology as an extension of consciousness. And that's why it's not neutral. When we use a machine,
we're actually entering into it. You know, our spirit is entering into it in its use and in a
certain sense conforming to it. And that's always the case. And it seems to me that's a particularly
pointed way of putting this problem that, you know, our, if AI is an extension of our own
consciousness, and it has all these features, John, that you were describing a kind of heartless
intelligence, are we going to, in a way, unconsciously and, but pervasively, develop habits
of heartlessness and modes of being, a heartless mode of being as a result. So I'd have a thousand
more things. Your essay was so provocative, John, as I said, I was dreaming about it all
last night. And I, but I'm going to just stop there so we can have conversation. But thank you.
So, first thing I want to say is the first point you made about,
if all my essay does is guest people to raise questions the way we're doing, I'm happy, right?
I obviously believe in what I'm arguing or I'd be insane, but, right, like, I'm very happy we're
doing this right now. And so I want to, I want to, so I just want to set that out.
And I do think, like you, and this is like the Heideggerian hope, that that ability to get
scientifically, philosophically, and spiritual profound questioning going is a source of hope for
us. And, and so I just want to acknowledge that I'm fully aligned with that. This is
not part of the alignment problem. Okay. The thing about intelligence being a way of being,
I think that's fundamentally right. I have made that argument extensively and about
the work on predictive processing relevance realization. Relevance realization is not
cold calculation. It can't be. It's how you care about this information and don't care about that
information. And I've argued that you only can care about information. And ultimately, whether
or not it's true, good and beautiful, if you are caring about yourself, you have to be a
autopoietic thing, you have to be a self-making thing. I agree with you. And I've argued
scientifically, philosophically, there is no intelligence without life. The issue around,
I don't like the word artificial either, because it generally means fraud or simulation. We should
be saying artifactual. That would be a better term. But we have to be careful about what's
going on there. The distinction between strong AI and weak AI is precisely the distinction of
simulation versus instantiation. Can we instantiate things artificially? We seem to have success
in other areas. I'll take one that I think is non-controversial. And we discovered something
in the project. So for a long time, only evolved living things could fly.
And then we figured out aerodynamics and we made artificial flight. And I think it would be
really weird to say that airplanes are only simulating flight. That doesn't seem to be
a correct, because then my trip was only simulated and I didn't really go to Dallas.
So it's a real flight. And so the issue is, and we discovered something, we discovered that the
lift mechanism and the propulsion mechanism doesn't have to be the same thing the way it is in
insects and birds. And that was a bona fide scientific discovery. That's why initially,
all the initial airplanes and helicopters are so stupid to our eyes, because they thought
the lift thing and the propelling thing had to be the same thing and they don't.
And that's a discovery. And that's a real discovery of ontological import about the
causal structure of things. Now, I think, I was careful to say, I don't, anybody who's
rationally reflective about this wouldn't claim that these machines are strong AI yet.
And I positioned AGI as something that's trying to move. But if you remember, I critiqued and said
that they are mostly simulating. They're parasitic on how we organize the dataset, how we have encoded
epistemic relevance into probabilistic relationships between sounds, how we have organized the
internet in terms of what our attention finds salient. And we actually have to reinforce,
do reinforcement learning with the machine so they don't make wonky claims and conclusions.
That's what I meant by saying it's a pantomime. Okay, so if we wanted to give them intelligence
as a way of being, which is one of the fundamental claims of 4E cogside that we're talking about,
we're not talking just about the propositional, we're talking about the procedural,
the respectable, the participatory. That's what I meant when I said, and I mean this strongly,
it would depend on, I'll change the term here, artificial autopoiesis. Like if these things
are not genuinely taking care of themselves because they're moment by moment making themselves,
there's no reason for them to care about any of the information they're processing. And this
goes towards the defining difference between a simulation and an instantiation. These machines
are doing everything they're doing for us. For it to be real intelligent, they have to be doing
it for themselves. That's that's understanding. And that's why I'm tightening your point and I've
been arguing it for a long time. Now what I want you to hear is that this project of not just making
artificial computation, but making autopoetic learning in problem solvers is also ongoing.
Some of my grad students are working on these projects of creating autocatalytic systems that are
also problem solving. Michael Levin's been doing work, like driving down into the biochemistry.
So again, I agree with the point, but it's whether or not it's not the case that nobody is working
on that problem. This is what I mean why there are thresholds possible. Go ahead, go ahead.
Can I just jump in there? And I should have prefaced, I didn't mean the points I was making
is like a criticism of your presentation because I understand you've got such rich thinking on
this area. I was mainly using it as a springboard to make some general, okay. Yeah, just so that's
clear. Oh, I hope I wasn't coming off as an offender. No, no, no, I'm not. I just wanted to be clear
on my end that it wasn't a critique. But I would want to, I don't know, and I'd have to think this
through further, but I don't know that the difference between the being conscious and
behaving consciously is quite the same thing as simulation and the distinction between the
instance and the instantiation and simulation. I'd want to say this because even like the
flying, I mean, that's still an activity, a kind of an operation that's being. But so is living,
right? Well, so that's, yeah, well, that's what I don't, you know, that's funny. I'm actually
working on a paper on this question about metaphysics in life. And I discovered that
philosophers have typically, when they try to understand what life is, they have typically
reduced it to certain kinds of activities or operations. And I think there's something more
profound. And this is why, yeah, I mean, it's one thing to be able to create something that can
actually fly. But could you, could you create something that is a bird and that that is that,
that would, would, would experience just the, what it means to be, you know, I mean, this is,
you know, about, you know, what it means to be a bat, that kind of thing, I suppose. But there's
there's a certain. That wouldn't be a parasite on our own. Yeah, that's what. But airplanes aren't
parasitic on our ability to fly. I mean, that's why I use the analogy. Okay, but and that's the
okay. And that falls into, you know, a tool versus an agent and I get that. But I want to,
I want to push back the philosophy of biology. And I, you know, Dennis Walsh is one of my
colleagues is very much about no, no, this, and this is your point, right? It's not just bottom
up in order to understand life. It's not just bottom up causation. We have to understand top
down constraints. We have to understand the way possibility is organized. And we have to talk
about virtual governors and virtually, like, it is no longer the the bomb patient, it's no longer
just as bottom up, the philosophy of biology is pushing very strongly on, well, is evolution really
a thing? Well, if it's really the thing, then there's top down, as well as bottom up. And this
is part of this theorizing and it's, and this theorizing is being turned towards this. Now,
again, we, again, I'm not making a prediction. We have a threshold, we can just decide, and we
might decide for all the malachian forces and all the things you're saying about how we might just,
we might just diminish our sense of humanity in the face of these machines. But, but I'm also,
I want you to accept that's also not an inevitability. There are alternatives available
to us, and that they could be pursued. And so, I mean, these machines aren't put together the
way we put a table together. We don't even program these machines anymore. That was a big revolution
that Hinton made. We make them so they're dynamically self organizing, and they basically
organize themselves into their capacity. We don't make it.
Yeah. Can I jump in on that point? That's one thing that I would like to think through further.
Is there a difference between being auto poetic, as you're saying, and
begetting another like, like genuinely reproductive? And that's where I think it would
start to get really, really interesting is, is if a machine could beget another, because
that would imply a different, a very different ontology, I would think.
So there's two, there's two things here. And there's two issues. I think it,
I mean, auto poetic things are ontologically different from self organizing things, because
they're self organized to seek out the conditions that produce, protect and promote their own
existence. And so that, that would, that that means none of the machines we have like LLMs are
anywhere near being auto, auto poetic. They are not just made. They're self organizing, but
self organization is in between making and auto poetic. Now, the thing about reproduction is,
and I, you know, I, I worry that there's a crypto vitalism in here, that there's some sort of secret,
special stuff to life or to consciousness that isn't being captured. And the problem I have,
the problem I have with that, I'll just shut up after I say my problem. Is that seem to commit
you to claiming that, you know, these kind of dualism, well, isn't consciousness causal?
Isn't it causal of my behavior and causally responsive to my behavior? And doesn't that mean
there's a huge functional aspect to it? Can you really make this clean distinction between being
conscious and like causing my behavior and having my behavior cause, cause changes in my state of
consciousness? I don't know what that would mean. Same thing with being alive. I do think it's a
profoundly subtle and, and, and maybe some, something that can't be articulated. There's
something that requires intuition rather, you know, insight rather than propositional. I mean,
to use your, so, but, but, but I don't need to interject. Yeah. Remember, I just want to make
sure we're clear. I argued that we could, this project could show that. Yeah. This project could
show that, no, the machines just can't get there. We have something. Right. It would give, it would
give, I think, pretty convincing evidence that we have this ontological special. Yeah. I find that
a really interesting part of your argument, a really interesting and, and that then has been
especially illuminating. Also, you know, I mean, in a way, these, these experiments can teach us
about the nature of intelligence precisely in the, in the interesting ways that they fail.
Yeah. Yes. But, but I do, you know, in terms of the dualism, I, I don't think that there's
some secret stuff that is life. But I do think that there's a profound difference between form
and matter to use, you know, to use the sort of classical philosophical language. And that form is
not a special kind of matter. It's something that's of a very different sort. And it's on the basis
of that, that, you know, Aristotle, that it's kind of interesting. This is, this is how he, he
connects. So, you know, in the, in the classical tradition, what you're calling
auto poetic, a simple word for it is growth, you know, assimilating things from outside and have that
increase the complexity of the organism. But what's really interesting is that according to
Aristotle, the power of the organism that is connected to nutrition and growth is also connected
to, I think automatically is connected to reproduction. And the reason is that reproduction,
rather than just thinking of it materials, materialistically is like generating more things.
Reproduction is the auto poasis of the form of the organism itself. So that bird, it's not just
this bird that wants to increase its existence and therefore eats and so forth. But that the
birdness of the bird also wants to increase itself. And that that means that it sort of
generates. And those are those are actually forms of the same power, the same dimension of the
being. That's what I'd like. That's, you know, I used to say, just sort of kind of in a silly way,
I will take an AI machine seriously when I see it poop. And what I meant by that was, you know,
that's a sign that it's actually got a kind of an organic relationship to its environment.
Yeah. And it just that doesn't know. We have to tell it.
And energy pollution is not the heat pollution. It's not the same thing anyway.
No, but I mean, even in terms of what it is as a large language model and how it spits out content,
we have to tell it this. Oh, yeah. That's not in dispute.
This is to be this to be kept. I love David. I think your idea. I mean, this is one of the
I mentioned before, like the surprising that the surprise that Darwin in some ways brought
Plato back, you know, in the idea of how we can we can understand evolution evolution as the
persistence of being and even in the in the notion of forms that there is this idea that there are
identities which are being preserved in reproduction. This is a very interesting idea that I hadn't
thought about in terms of AI, but I'd like to hear, John, what you think about that?
Yeah. And so again, for E. Cogs Eye, Alicia Urero is a prime and she's explicitly developed to work.
She calls herself a deristatilian. And the idea that we understand form, we're getting an understanding
of it in terms of constraints on a system. And like I said, be auto poesis is not defined solely in
terms of causal relationships bottom up. It's defined in terms of top down constraint relationships,
the form, the formal cause. And so and then of course, you know, Darwin needs Mendel. There is a
there is an instantiation and right of a code in formation in your DNA that is responsible
for your reproduction. And again, I'm not saying it isn't difficult or challenging, but I don't hear
an argument in principle by why auto poetic things that artificial auto poetic things wouldn't have
something like that kind of, I don't know what to call it. I mean, to the extent would you I mean,
would it be conceivable that you would have a thing that would want to reproduce?
I guess I guess even want is such a hard concept. But I mean, because you could say yes, we could
teach it that this is something it needs to do. Just like we could we could we could I don't know
if living things want to reproduce. I mean, we may because we can create a reflective space where
we consider the possibilities. I don't know if mosquitoes want to reproduce. I think they just
reproduce as part of what they are. That's interesting. I think they have to want to in some
sense. I mean that that they're they they feel a drive. I mean, right, they don't want to go down
to paramecium because paramecium reproduces you are they want to see I think I think anything
that is living at all has a kind of natural inclination to reproduce itself. Yeah, I don't
disagree with that point. And I even just I even understand that there's something I see what you're
saying. There has to be some sort of like very primitive caring about information. But I don't
yeah, I want is not a good word there. Yeah. But I do think I do think I'm trying to get
and you know, and I hope I'm not trying to be just self-presentational. But I've represented to
both of you for E. Cogsci and a lot of discussions and about how much it is this multi-leveled
bottom up top down thing. And we're talking as much about constraints as we are about causes.
And that is that is that is the cutting edge of the philosophy of biology right now. And I agree
with you. I think I think it's a kind of Hewley morphism that is emerging out of this understanding.
And the thing I'm I'm also, I guess, hearing witness to you about is people are taking that
understanding and putting it into like our artifactually emergent things. And they and
and they're also doing I just want to put something that's also there. Yeah, we don't just make kids
biologically. We we we inculturate them. Yeah, there's and that's the Hegelian argument that I
referenced earlier. But there has been there's an ongoing project to create sociocultural robotics,
Josh Chaninbaum and others. It's like, I'm asking people and this is part of asking the good question,
don't just zero in on the LLMs. Yeah, the artificial the artificial life, the social
cultural robotics projects are also going. And there is a real potential for these three to
come together in a powerful way that isn't being properly addressed in a lot of the conversation.
May I may I pick up on that point and then direct it to Jonathan here?
No, no, this is but that that that that's an interesting thing. If you think of
intelligence in this more organic way and then bring in the cultural element that
it raises something that that occurred to me in this context, it'd be kind of fun to hear
your thoughts. But can you envision, you know, it would it be and and John, you'd have certainly
something to say about this too, would it be possible to to envision a kind of artificial
intelligence that can read symbols that can actually recognize and I mean, because there's no
culture without, you know, human culture without the symbolic just is pervasive in human culture.
What kind of intelligence is required to understand and react and engage with? And is that something
that is conceivable that that a machine of this complex, however complex can do?
Well, I've seen, I mean, I've been playing with chat GPT and I during Peterson has been playing
with chat GPT on this regard. And this is the this is the issue is that they're actually in the
large language model is encoded the analogies that that basically support symbolism. And so
the the chat GPT can give you a pretty good if you're able to ask the question properly chat
GPT is actually quite good at seeing analogies that that would be part of symbolic understanding.
The difficulty just like anything is that just because the the the so the the model can help
you like if you already have natural insight can help you maybe see things that you hadn't seen
before. But it would also just be gibberish to the type to the person that doesn't have that
insight. So I don't think that the insight is there in the model. But what it has is a probabilistic
capacity to predict, you know, relationships and analytical relationships. And so it's a
it's actually can be a tool an interesting tool for symbolism, because sometimes you can
you can prompt it. If they like do you see a connection between these two images and then
it'll give you some examples. And then you have this, it can it has a surprise where you can
actually find you can actually find relationship that you hadn't thought about. This is this is
something by the way that this is going to weird people out. But this is something that I think
has existed for very for a very long time. And is there in kind of what we call gamatria and
rabbinical reading of scripture is that they use mathematical models to find structures in
language that aren't contained at the surface level of of of the of the usual analogies. And so
they they they send they send requests through mathematical calculations to find surprising
connections that then prompt their intuition to to be able to find connections that they hadn't
found before. And then you have to then make sense of those intuitions. Obviously,
if they're random, they'll just kind of follow follow away. But this is actually this brings me
to the to the to the to the point that I wanted to make, which is the relationship between at least
a large language model, because that's what that we know most and and divination, divination. Yeah,
and divination. Yeah, yeah. So, so we talked about the idea that intelligences have to be alive,
but I think that most traditional cultures understand that there are types of intelligence
that are not alive, at least not alive in the way that we understand that we understand alive in
terms of biological beings that that that are born and die, you know, that that they had a sense
that there are agencies and intelligences that are transpersonal, and that that don't
that it's always run through human behavior and run through humanity.
And those would be those intelligences would be contained in our language, like they would
necessarily be contained in the relationship between words and and and systems of words,
like, you know, all the syntax and the grammar and all of that. What I see is that I think that
ancient people had and I don't understand it and I want to be careful, like, because I don't
understand it. But I think ancient people had mechanistic ways of tapping into those types of
intelligences. And they they they would have mechanistic ways, whether it was tossing something
or throwing things, looking at relationships, almost like random relationships, and then qualifying
those random relationships, was a way in order to tap into types of intelligences that ran through
their own their own thing. And what I see is a relationship with the way that the large
language models were trained seemed to be something like that, which is that the models
generated random, random information. And then you would have humans qualifying that that rent
that random, random connections, and then qualifying it qualifying it through iterations.
So at some point, then they would become like a kind of technical, a technical, say, a technical
way to access intelligent patterns that are that are coming down into into the model.
And so that is something that I see, there's a connection between those two. And that what that
means is that, just like divination, the thing that I worry about the most is again, the sorcerer's
apprentice problem, which is that those intelligences that are contained in our language, we do not
people don't know what humans want. People don't know what people don't know what the all the
motivations that are that are driving us, they don't totally understand them. They don't understand
also the transpersonal types of motivations that that can drive us or that can run through our
societies. You know, sometimes you can see societies get become possessed with certain
things. I think that's happening now in terms of certain idea ideologies and things like that.
And so the fact that my point is, is that the fact that on the one hand, we don't understand
these types of intelligences. And I think that the way that the the the models are trained and the
way that they function seem to be analogous to the ancient divination practices, like a hyper
version of that, that, how can I say this, is that there is a great chance that we'll catch
something without knowing what we're catching, that we will basically manifest things, that we
have no idea what they are, and we don't understand the consequences of it. And we don't, you know,
because we are we're just like playing in a field of of intelligent patterns and all this chaos
without even knowing what it is we're doing. And I think that we saw that like, you know, if you
remember the being AI, that little moment when it was kind of unleashed on us. And then all of a sudden
the AI was acting like you're like, you know, the the psychotic X or was was becoming paranoid or
was doing all these things. It's and you could see that what was going on was basically these
these patterns were running through, and they hadn't put the right constraints around them
to to to prevent those types of patterns to run through. And those were easy because you
recognize your psycho acts very, very easily. But there are patterns like that that I don't think
I don't think we have the wisdom to recognize as it's manifesting itself. And that as these things
get more powerful and more powerful, they will they will run through our society. And we won't even
know what's happening until it's too late. So that's my biggest warning on AI is I basically,
you know, to sound really scary that I think we're we're we're trying to we're trying to manifest
God without knowing what we're doing. And that will sound freaky to the secular people. But then
if you don't like the word gods, think that there are motivations and patterns of intelligence
that have been around for 100,000 years that have that have been running through human societies.
And they're contained in our in our language structures. And and and if we just use that
play around with that with massive amounts of power, then we might have them run through us
without even knowing what's going on. Yeah, I mean, and you say patterns of intelligence,
just just one comment, just the patterns of intelligence, I mean, to pick up patterns of
intelligence, which also are patterns of caring of a certain sort or not caring. I mean, there's
there's that existential dimension that's really crucial. But try and go ahead.
I think this is an excellent point. And I want to address it a little bit at length.
So first of all, when we say these machines predict, if we were speaking very carefully,
what they're predicting is what we and I don't just mean us individually, I mean, we collectively
would do. And so that's what their avatars of our of the collective intelligence of
our distributed cognition. And so again, that lends weight to Jonathan's point,
which I want to do. And I do think that the way in which we have encoded,
let's I'll just use a term epistemic relevance, like how things are relevant cognitively
into probabilistic relationships between sounds or marks on paper, or and how we've encoded it
into the structuring of the internet and how we encode it and how we gather data and create
these data sets. And how we and how we how we come up with our intuitive judgments on these
machines, we don't know how we're doing a lot of that. That goes back to my concern that we have
hacked our way into this without knowing our way into this. So I take what Jonathan is saying
very seriously, because I think it is a strong implication of a point I made at the very beginning.
My greatest fear by students from like 2001, we'll tell you that John Vervecki was worried that we
would hack our way into this rather than knowing our way into this. I don't think that knowing is
sufficient for wisdom, but it's certainly all the philosophers argue that it's a it's a necessary
condition in some fashion. About that, two things to note is that the LLMs, of course,
don't have insight in the sense of being properly self-transcending the way they we are. What they're
doing is they're predicting how we would be self-transcendent because of all the ways we have
been self-transcending in the past. And that that that goes back to your point, David, about at this
at that stage, we're doing simulation, not instantiation, because again, the machine isn't
caring. The self-transcendence isn't it actually transcending as a self, which is, I think,
definitional for real self-transcendence. And so right now, all I'm doing is just saying,
I'm just I'm pouring gasoline on Jonathan's fire. So the fact that there are these huge
patterns at work. Now, one thing is, you know, you have Struck's book on divination in the ancient
world. And what's really interesting, for example, and this is cross-cultural, but he's talking mostly
about the Greek world, there was a very strong distinction between sorcery and divination.
Sorcery was criticized both morally and epistemically. But divination was taken seriously,
and it was carefully cultivated. And there was a social cultural project of distinguishing the two,
like really, really constraining this one and really reverentially cultivating a proper
participation in the other one. So again, you know, existence is proof of probability.
This is a possible project for us. And this is, again, what I mean when I say, theology is going
to be one of the most important sciences in the future. We have to understand how we enter into
proper, right, reverential relationships with things we only have an intuitive grasp of that
in very many ways significantly exceed us. Yes. And secularism has kind of wiped out our education
of how we relate to beings that might be more grander than us by eradicating a religious
sensibility. And that has put us bereft us. So now I think I've strengthened Jonathan's argument
a lot. But I do say, let's take note of what the ancient cultures have done. We can learn from them.
We have a proof that this can be handled well. And secondly, it goes back to my point. Because
of the monstrosities that come out, this is going to put increasing pressure on us to confront that
threshold of, do we want to make them self-transcendent? Do we want to make them, and David, by rational,
I don't mean logical. I mean that capacity. Right. No, I understand that. Right. Yeah, yeah.
Right. And so I think that what I'm saying is I think that strengthens the argument that we're
going to be pushed by the monstrosity of a lot of this to say, oh, we better get these machines
self-corrective and properly oriented towards normativity. And again, that's a doable
project. Because if I had the keys to open AI, like if I was one of those that could peek behind
the mask, have you seen that image of the Xtulu monster with the happy face on it? The images of
open AI, which is like, we have this little window into what's there, but behind is this massive thing.
But if I had the keys to those large language models, let's say, the absolute open door to them,
it would be very, wouldn't it be easy to just manifest the God of war and win? Like wouldn't it?
No, no, no. Okay, but let's take a historical example. We unleashed a God-like power with
atomic warfare, and the monstrosity of that made, we just, the purely game-theoretic machinery
built all of these constraints around it. And then we also are on the verge, possibly,
of getting readily usable, you know, nuclear power, which I think is the only way we could ever
actually go green. I think all the renewable stuff is going to be like 10% of our energy needs.
And if we're going to save the environment and not destroy civilization, I think nuclear power is
going to be essential. A lot of people are making those arguments, and we have a lot of stuff
that we could be doing, the liquid fuel for our reactors and stuff. But what I'm saying is there's
opportunity here too. Yeah, no, I really take that point, but it is interesting. I mean, we put
thousands of constraints on the use of nuclear weapons, but we've continued to develop them
and improve them and make better and even more destructive ones. I mean, and it'd be interesting
to see if we've ever, at any point, said, you know what, our nuclear weapons are actually strong
enough. They're powerful enough, and we don't need to advance them anymore. So collectively,
is there an instance of something like that where we say, you know what, we've actually
reached the limit because we wouldn't really need it for anything further? I mean, that's a...
Well, I mean, there was a salt treaty, and there was a reduction both in the power and the number
of nuclear weapons. And then, of course, you know, the game theoretic things, they figured
a little bit away around it. And there's always this to and froing.
Let me, I want to give an example of something that can run through. And the reason, it's very,
it's very, because I realized I was being too abstract before. So, like, it's a sacrifice.
Sacrifice is a human universal. It runs through all civilizations. Human sacrifice runs through
all civilizations for the last, you know, tens of thousands of years. It seems to be a puzzle
that humans are trying to deal with without understanding it completely just through rational
means. They're playing it out. They're trying to understand it. Scapegoating seems to be an important
aspect of identity formation. And so, that is a program that runs through humanity and that
most people are completely unaware of and are not conscious of and don't take consciously into their
into their mind when they're making decisions. They act unconsciously with that process that is
running through them. And so, that is an example to me of a program that runs and that is contained
and is contained in our language structures, our language structures that have been building up for,
you know, tens of thousands of years that we're not aware of. So, if you have a, so this is again
the problem, like if you have a system that's extremely powerful and that is running these types
of programs of scapegoating and of identity formation and the people involved in it are not
aware that that's how identity formation works, that is the type of danger that I'm talking about.
Like this is a real thing that as we give these systems a kind of power over us or they become
the things we go to in order to get our decision making, that those things could be running through
without people even realizing what's happening and that decisions would be made based on these
structures without, like I said, without even knowing. Those are the things that, those are just
one example, but that's a very simple example that we can kind of, we could track and we could see
that, you know, the ancient, because when we talk about ancient divination, we have to remember that
it's like the ancient gods asked for blood, my friends, like those programs, they asked for blood
and they knew that you had to kill a bunch of people on that pyramid in order to continue your
civilization. Like it's, and that's, that is encoded in our culture and is encoded secretly
in our, our language. You know, and, and so an example, like I do believe that, let's say that
the Christian story is a way to deal with that, but the, the rest is still all there and we,
we default to it really fast without even, like World War II is a lot of that stuff going on.
Sure, especially, yeah. Yeah, but the, the point is that just as there's these implicit
monsters that we have sown in unaware, there are also the implicit counteractors,
maybe angels, if I'm allowed to speak mythologically, that we've also sown in.
And I mean, there's the actual revolution, you see the Buddha, you see Plato really undermining
the grammar of sacrifice and of course Jesus of Nazareth does that in a profound way.
And we have to remember that that's there too. And what that requires is putting into the dataset
and altering the pathways in the internet so that this information goes into these machines as well.
And again, is that happening right now? No. Could it happen? Yes. And it might happen if
these machines start sacrificing themselves and we might have to say, what are they doing? Like,
and this again, at some point, we have to decide, are we going to let them be really
massively self-destructive? And the economic powers are not going to, imagine if every time
you try to make an atomic bomb, it kept dissolving, right? Like, you'd stop pumping money in.
Yeah, they won't sacrifice themselves, they'll sacrifice us.
But why? We sacrifice ourselves. Yeah, well, we, I mean, let's say the scapegoat mechanism is
usually defined as others. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But we invoked World War II. We weren't killing
goats and chickens. We were killing each other and our own populations in a huge sacrificial act.
And that's what I was picking up on, right? When it becomes titanic and monstrous,
that's where it moves to. But I'm saying is, like, this is a Jungian term, like, yeah,
like the idea that, yes, there's all this pre-egoic stuff sewn in, but there's also a
lot of trans-egoic stuff sewn in. And we just have to properly get it in there so that we've got
the, you know, the collective self-correction going on, like we did. I mean, civilizations
get some self-correcting processes in here because they don't devolve. No, they periodically,
periodically massively collapse. And that's, by the way, that's something I made, an argument I
made in my paper. These things can't accelerate to an infinity of intelligence. There is built-in
diminishing returns. There's built-in general system collapse to these things. So, again,
we have to be careful about, I mean, we don't know what the limit is. And our imagin, our intuitive
imagination is not good. We know that there are hard and fast, upright arguments that this will
threshold at this, at some point. And that also gives me comfort. At least, like, encoded in our
mythology, there seems to be some stories of the relationship between transpersonal agency
and technology as being the cause of the end of a civilization, right? That the whole Enochian,
Enochian tradition seems to be encoding something like that through mythological language,
which is that humans were able to, to connect somehow with these transpersonal intelligences
and that those were encoded in technical means and that this brought about the end of an age.
So, it's like, it's there, that part of it is there in our story, too. Like, there is that story.
Yeah, but there's also a cross-culture, there's the Noah story. There's the person that has the
right relationship to ultimacy. That's right. That's right. And there's a technological response,
the art. That's right. I agree. I totally agree with that. I mean, even in the revelation image
that I've given several times, you have these two images. One is the beast that creates an image
of itself and makes it speak and then seduces everybody by the speaking image, you know, that
and then there's this other image of a right relationship of technist, technistinean civilization
to the transcendent. These two kind of are put up against each other as two possible outcomes.
I mean, the question that arises for me in this context
connects this question with, I think, what strikes me as kind of an interesting philosophical
question, but John, you made the distinction between divination and sorcery. And as I understand it,
and you can correct me on this, but at the foundation of that distinction is the difference
between, you know, sorcery would be in a way using the trans personal powers, these sort of higher
powers, whereas divination would be in a way receiving, you know, the disposition of race
activity. So in one case, you've got human ends that you try to then enlist the help of superhuman
forces. And the irony is it's precisely when you're trying to use something that you become
used yourself. And that's where you get this dialectic, whereas divination, it's entering into
a relationship where one disposes oneself to hear and receive, and therefore, in a certain sense,
conform to something greater than oneself. And there you see it's a very different kind of thing.
And ironically, in a way, you enter into it more receptive, receptively, but that's precisely why
you don't become then a tool of it, interestingly. Now, now, for me, the question is how that relates
to this issue is, you know, it may be the case that you've got encoded in the language both
sacrifice in the sense of violence, you know, renaissance or the scapegoat thing on the one
hand, and then the other hand, self sacrifice in the sense of generous love and so forth,
those might both be encoded in the language. But here's the question to me is, is it possible
the kind of race activity that divination implies, the capacity to actually see another
as other and recognize and be open in this kind of radical way? Is that something that a machine
can ever learn to do? Is it possible actually to behold another simply, you know, or is there,
you know, and it seems to me that there's something profoundly different between seeing
truth, genuinely seeing truth on the one hand and being self-corrective on the other.
And the kind of genuinely seeing what's true, you know, I don't know if that in itself can
be encoded in language, we can tell stories about people that did that, but can the actual
insight into truth be encoded simply? Do you see, do you see what I'm, the question I'm raising?
Okay, so I, again, I think that if we, again, open up beyond the propositional, and we're talking
about being true to, and your aim being true, that we, the machine has perspectival abilities,
noetic abilities, not just dianetic abilities, and we can't use that term because of Elron Hubbard,
but you know what I meant, right? And again, this is the, and this is part of the argument
that at the core of my work, you know, it's like, so in a moment of insight, you're not
just self-correcting, you are attracted and drawn into, you love the new reality that is disclosed,
because there's a perspectival and participatory thing. That's what I meant when I said there
isn't real self-transcendence unless there's a self that is transcending, right? Yeah, right, right.
Okay, now, and then the question is, and we're back to our fundamental ontological questions,
is, and I've already said there's no way a Newtonian mechanical computation is going to get there,
and so I won't be bound to that because I'm not bound to that. I have a professional career of
criticizing that, right? So is there, is there a dynamical systems-updated, hulemorphic, auto-poietic
possibility? I think there is. I think there is, I think the answer is a very real yes for that.
And I don't think we're going to find the answer to that just encoded in the syntactic and semantic
relationships between our terms. I think we have to look in our inaction, how we're enacting,
embedded, extended, right, and embodied in a profound way to get those answers. And so
my answer is, in that way, a qualified yes. I do think it is possible. And the problem is that,
go ahead, go ahead, say what you need to say, please.
Be really precise, just so I understand. So we've been talking about this sort of predictive,
calculating probabilities, drawing on everything that's ever been said, and being able to derive in
some sense from that. Do you think that we can get to a moment where we actually
transcend that, that cross that threshold beyond that?
Not with the LLMs as they are. That's my argument. Not with the LLMs as they are. They can't get
there. Yeah. That's why John's radical proposition is to embody.
Embody and enculture them. And that is the only way we will actually get
properly rational beings and beings that care about it and care about such things.
I mean, that's the irony in the question. Can we give them more and more models
to teach them at some point to not have to use models?
And I mean, do you see it? It's actually really, I don't think it's possible without,
right, but kids have a soul. It's possible to do that if you have, but I don't mean this as like
woo-woo stuff. I mean that a natural thing has a principle of unity that transcends
the differentiation of the parts and allows those parts to be intrinsically related to
each other. And that principle of unity that transcends the differentiation of the parts that
allows them to be an organism actually allows them at the same time to have a kind of unity with
something other than themselves that transcends the parts of their differentiation. So there's
a kind of an intimacy there. I agree with that ontology. And what I'm arguing is dynamical
systems theory is now giving explanations of that that are derived from Aristotelian ontology,
but make use of like a lot of cutting edge science that we've, we now can start to explain how there
is a unity that is not reducible just to some summation of its parts and how that unity has a
top-down influence on the entity that is not reducible to its causes. And I think this is
becoming a non-controversial thing to say. And then I find and now we might just add a
clash of intuitions and I'm willing to stop there. I can't see there being like that seems to me
to be capturing what we're talking about. And you have an intuition that there's something more,
but I don't know, I don't see a something more. And maybe that's where we're sitting.
Well, I think it's the intuition David has in tell me if I'm wrong, David, and because it connects
the way I think is that there's it's that unity is given. It cannot be made. And I know that sounds
weird, but it's somehow it's like if I'm making even even internal technology, right? It's like
if I'm making a car that unity is given, I'm gathering things towards that purpose, right?
And so the purpose, the unity part of something is always, it comes from heaven in the sense that
you can't make it. It's it's given from from it's already taken for granted even before you start
to unify multiplicity together and that in the making of these beings, we have that problem. It's
like we're doing it completely. We're doing a bottom up. Like if we can we gather as enough stuff
so that this stuff reaches a unit, right? See, if I just could just it seems to me that if this is
ever going to be possible, it would have to take so. And when I raise the question, it's actually
a question. So I don't mean to be like challenging that it can't possibly happen. I'm just thinking
about what would be the condition. Please remember that I said, yeah, we realize that we can't and
that would be important. I am. Well, yeah. So it seems to me if it were to be possible,
it would have to be something like a kind of electronic analog to cloning that you that you
take. So what have I told you that we now have electro bio like we have systems that are electro
chemical biological versions of memory that are now in production and they we don't make them.
They self organize and emerge and they emerge bottom up from the causal interactions, but they
are also top down constrained by, you know, principles of self organization. Like that already
exists. Yeah. Yeah. But right. No. Well, that's that's what I'm asking about because it because it
seems to me but there is there is going to be you're deriving that from models. You're deriving
from real intelligent beings now, which is a slightly different thing. And I mean that would
be no thing is is is is that because I to me that the bottom up top down is not quite
adequate and the top down constraints is not quite because it would have to be not just
a constraint, but because that presupposes that there was something there that then
that the constraint is coming from outside. And what I'm talking about is a kind of a
unity that precedes that's presupposed. And I'm wondering how you can get that into something
if it's the very nature of it to be presupposed. And I'm not saying you can't, but I'm saying
if you can it's it's it seems to me that you're going to have to somehow derive it from a living
thing. And that's conceivable. That's conceivable, I suppose, but but but we are talking about
something really frightening. We are. And that's why I keep saying it's a threshold. And I mean,
I mean, if you take the the sort of biological analogy seriously, the way
Ori does, of course, it precedes the organism, it's there in the environment, it's there in
the society, it's there in the I mean, I can roll in 100 Hegelian arguments here about how it does
right about how and you know, and those don't have to be supernaturalistic. You have brandom
and hinker and others saying, no, this can be given a completely naturalistic explanation.
And and and I'm not here to challenge things. But what I'm saying is
I don't have any problem acknowledging everything you just said. Yeah. And I and and I don't think
I'm misunderstanding you. That's what I'm saying. Yeah. And I mean, I'm actually I mean,
this sort of just an exploratory sort of way. But I wonder if there's a difference between
the unity of an of an organism. And this is where Hegel might not be so helpful. The difference
between the the givenness of the unity of an organism and the givenness of the unity of a society
or a culture. But those aren't exactly the same thing. Because I there's there's something
and there's a kind of, you know, relative priority of either one. But there's something really
distinctive about the unity of an organism that's very. Yeah, that that that I think is crucial
to this question, to my mind, in a way. And I'm not saying it can't be answered, but that's the
question would have to be answered. How do we actually reproduce that kind of or unity?
We know stuff that Aristotle didn't know. You are not an Aristotelian unity. You are a society.
You literally are billions of animals, right? And so that's important. And that means that
there might not be a difference in kind between how you are organized as a living thing and how
societies are organized. And people like Michael Levin are producing some really important empirical
evidence indicating that's kind of the case. And I'm not saying it's not saying anything's
conclusive, but it needs to be taken seriously. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, I think that that I agree
with you, John. I think that that that's the way that I try to always speak about agency
intelligence is one that tries to scale almost effortlessly through the different, you know,
to avoid the woo soul that we're afraid of. But then again, this is the this is the issue. Like
this is in some ways that it's the same problem like one way or the other. So let's say you have a
group that self organizes around a purpose, right, or self organizes around affiliation or some type
of origin, right? That affiliation, that purpose is also given, right? It's like it appears as a
revelation. And then all of a sudden, we're all hunting a lion together. And now we're a group
and we're moving towards towards a purpose. Now, this is this is the this is the problem with the
situation of what's going now is that what is it? What angel are we catching? Like what what what
God are we trying to to manifest? Like which unity what purpose? We have no idea. So we're
building this massive body, like this huge, the most powerful body that's ever existed.
But nobody knows what it is we're trying to catch. Because when if I get together with a
bunch of guys to play basketball, I know what that body is. I know what that with that that that
agentic body, intelligent body is is is moving towards right. If I get together with my family
and I celebrate our unity is because I know that we all come from the same parent and that there's
a there's affiliation that makes our society coherent towards something. But now we have this
problem, which is what? Like what are we doing? Like we're just building this giant body. It's
like I agree. And I've agreed with that. Yeah. And the thing that that's so odd, I mean, typically,
if you think of technology as a human creation in some good positive sense, it's it's it has limits.
And it has a particular place. It has a particular meaning has particular purpose, precisely because
we create it in order to solve some kind of a problem. We you know, there's some there's some
need that needs to be filled and that need has a kind of natural givenness or or or or it's revealed
somehow that, you know, it's a responsive to something that we see. What's so interesting,
Neil Postman made this point about, you know, when when he said he went to a car dealership
and wanted to buy a car and the man was explained to him that they had now these, you know, automatic
windows that that that would roll down at the push of a button. And he and he said he said,
his his I mean, this sounds so naive, but it's a profoundly interesting question. He said, well,
what problem does that solve? And of course, the problem that it solves is the problem of
rolling a window down. And his response was, I never perceived that to be a problem. You know,
I mean, and it's really interesting AI. I mean, the thing is, what problem are we creating it
to solve? I mean, in a certain sense, it's a very different mindset. We're just kind of
taking we just want to see what we can do and see what can be done. And in a way,
the problems are something that we are arriving at and are surprising us rather than
something that we're actually creating something that just simple, simple task of solving for us.
You see, I mean, I think that's connected to this being placing ourselves in that in the hands
of an angel of some sort, or, or, you know, entering into a kind of an agency that's bigger than we
are. Those are all connected. They are. But I mean, one problem was trying to be solved was the
scientific problem of like, strongly, I was a project of explaining intelligence. And that's
that's a worthy thing to do. And the fact that this technology has largely been separated.
But notice, that's interesting. That's, that's, that's not a technical problem. Like,
explaining something, it's actually, I mean, to use the classical distinction between
theory and practice, that's a sort of a theoretical issue rather than a practical one.
But we think of this as a, as a technology. I mean, it's a, that's a curious thing.
Well, yeah, and I would get into things like books, our technologies that move between the
theoretical and practical. And it's one of the greatest technologies we ever invented. And it
had all kinds of unforeseen consequences. And really massively disrupted society. But, you know,
and, but I wanted to make another point. And this isn't a challenge. This is just a clarification
point, right? These like, like, think about a computer, what problem does a computer solve,
it doesn't solve a problem, it is meant to be a multiple problem solver. And then what we're
trying to do is make a general problem solver. So what problem is it's trying to solve? It's not
trying to solve any problem. It's trying to enhance our abilities to solve all the problems we try to
solve. So this machine's going to help us in medicine, it already is, it's going to help us,
right? And so that's the answer. Now, again, that's not a challenge. I'm just speaking on behalf
of people that think about this. But it is kind of interesting. I mean, so the problem that it's
solving is the need to be able to solve any possible problem. Solving a meta problem, yeah.
Yeah, yeah. But I mean, but it is kind of, it's sort of, it's sort of curious that,
precisely because of the indeterminacy of that, we're exposing this, and I'm just sort of stating,
you know, our condition here in a way, we're exposing ourselves to a really great risk. I'm
just restating what everybody has been saying here today. But that's something that, you know,
requires some wisdom, as you've been saying over and over, John, and prayer to use Jonathan's
language too. I just want to do one, Ken, you mentioned in my essay, which is we have done
this before. That's how civilization emerged. Nobody built it to solve a problem. There's
a bunch of little problems. And what civilization is, is a meta problem solver, right? And that's
what it is. And then you can, so I've actually suggested we should also be paying attention to
the lifetimes and the life cycles of civilizations and how civilizations reproduce, and why they rise
and why they fall to get some better understanding, some other ways of thinking about these machines.
So we're- Civilizations are huge distributed cognition collective intelligence machines.
That's the living in cities is a horrible idea, except for the fact that it gives us
better access to the collective intelligence of distributed cognition. That's the benefit that
outweighs all the many noxious side effects of living in cities. You can also get better coffee,
typically. Yeah. So we're coming toward the end of our time here. I mean, this has been fantastic.
I rarely can go for two hours on any conversation. We were just, we've just been going.
Well, not only go for two hours, but sort of wish we had another two.
Well, that's what I was going to say. I mean, we can, we can, we can work on doing this again,
because it feels like we're, we're sort of, we finally all come together around
something here. And now we're really asking what feels like a really important question to me is,
well, how do we think about integrating this solution, this meta solution into our meta problems?
And that's, that's a really interesting question. I think that John bringing up civilization is
such a great point, something that I would really love to explore, because there is also, you know,
in the kind of inscribed in the mythological stories, a relationship between transpersonal agency
and civilization itself, right? Like if you want to understand why the Egyptians had their king
as a god and like all this type of structure, you can help, it can help you understand how
they're trying to capture, you know, higher forms of intelligence distributed
intelligences in their society. And the idea that we would be doing this
technically in AI, I think is something that definitely is worth thinking about and discussing.
Yeah. Yeah. No, that's a dimension I just never struck me before. So that's, that's really helpful.
Is this the, maybe, maybe there's something we could read together and
I mean, short. But to prompt another conversation along these lines of civilization, yeah.
I would recommend just because this is how YouTube works that we come to decisions about that off
camera. All right. Okay. There you go. Right. I do, if there's a call for me to hang out with you
fellows again. I don't care what we're talking about. I'm in. I want to be here. I want to do it.
So that's all I'll say about the invitation. Same here.
Any closing thoughts, things that feel like need to be brought in or do we feel good about this?
Just a word of thank you, Ken. You were the one who arranged this and you did the persistent work
to make it happen and find a hole in everybody's calendar that lined up. Not an easy thing to do.
So thank you, Ken. And thanks for being gracious for these years now that I've known you. Yeah.
And in addition to thinking, Ken, I want to thank you, David and you, Jonathan.
I always find it, I get to places in my thinking, the logos that I could not possibly get on my own
when I get into a living relationship with both of you in conversation and in discussion.
And so I appreciate it greatly. And I just wanted to say thank you.
Yeah. Thanks to you guys. This has been great. And like I can say,
John and I've been trying to have the conversation for nine months and we just keep,
like I cancel, he cancels, and then this is wonderful that we were able to finally get here.
Yeah. Well, thank you all. It's been a real pleasure.
