Last time, we discussed orbital mechanics, how Newtonian gravitation shapes the orbital
motion of two bodies, a planet orbiting around the sun, a moon or a satellite orbiting a
planet.
We saw that the simple orbital paths are conic sections, circles, ellipses, parabolas, hyperbolas,
and the shape of the orbit and the motion along the orbit is determined by the energy
and angular momentum of the orbiting body.
But this time, we're going to see how gravity explains a quite different phenomenon, a phenomenon
that is mysterious but also familiar.
In fact, it's a daily occurrence on the Earth, but it's a phenomenon that's also significant
in the far reaches of space and over vast eons of time.
The phenomenon I'm talking about is the phenomenon of the tides.
If you live near the seashore, you've seen the tides.
The overall level of the ocean varies over time.
There's a high tide and there's a low tide.
And the usual pattern is that high tides are a bit more than 12 hours apart.
Now some places, the effect is small.
Out in the middle of the ocean, the whole range of the tides is only about 60 centimeters,
about two feet.
And in enclosed lakes and inland seas, the effect is almost nil.
But some places, the effect is very large.
There's a famous location in the Bay of Fundy in Newfoundland, where the difference between
high tide and low tide is more than 10 meters.
Tides are obviously important for navigation, especially near the shore.
But they are also proverbial as an inexorable and inscrutable force like fate.
So King Canute, the king of Denmark in the 11th century, shamed his flatterers by ordering
the tide to recede.
The tide, of course, did not obey the king, which proved that not everything obeyed the
king.
Jeffrey Chaucer in the 14th century wrote, time and tide wait for no man.
And Shakespeare, about 1600, said, there is a tide in the affairs of men which taken at
the flood leads on to fortune.
But none of these really knew what ocean tides were or what caused them.
And two contemporaries of Shakespeare, Galileo and Kepler, had their own ideas about the
tides.
So Kepler thinks that tides are somehow caused by the moon.
Why would he think this?
Well, essentially because of timing.
Remember the daily pattern of the tides, about 12 and a half hours between high tides.
And if you work it out, this means that tides happen at the same time of day when the moon's
phase is the same.
Also, you might notice that tides are stronger at the time of the new moon or a full moon.
Galileo, on the other hand, does not think much of Kepler's theory.
Let me tell you something he wrote, among all famous men who have philosophized about
the tides, I wonder more at Kepler than any of the rest.
Though he is a free and acute genius, he has lent his assent to the moon's dominance
over the oceans and to other occult happenings and such trifles.
Basically, Galileo does not believe in mysterious forces that act across vast distances of empty
space.
He has his own theory of the tides.
He thinks the tides are caused by a combination of the earth's own motions, its orbit around
the sun and its rotation on its axis.
But in this case, Galileo is wrong and Kepler is right.
Isaac Newton's great book, The Principia, contains the right explanation for the tides.
It's a beautiful and brilliant application of the idea of universal gravitation.
So consider the fall, not of one apple, but a whole bushel of apples, a spherical cloud
of apples.
All of the apples fall at the same rate, almost.
Remember, the apples are all accelerating toward the center of the earth.
So the apples on the right and the left are accelerating in slightly different directions.
So they very slightly draw together.
The apples on the top and the bottom are at slightly different distances from the center
of the earth.
So they accelerate at slightly different accelerations.
They draw apart.
So the net effect, which is very small, is that the cloud of apples will change shape
as it falls.
The essential physics is that the gravitational force is slightly different in different places.
And this fact shows up as a mysterious force that squeezes in from the side of our cloud
of apples and stretches out along the up and down direction.
Basically the tidal effect is that relative accelerations occur due to small differences
in gravity.
Now, if gravity were perfectly uniform, there would be no tidal effect.
So let's do a little math.
Let's recall that at a radius r from a body of mass m, there's an acceleration of gravity,
little g, which equals big g, Newton's constant, times m, divided by r squared.
And near the earth's surface, little g, is about 10 meters per second squared.
And this varies in magnitude and direction, depending on your location.
So let's consider two apples.
There are two apples that are near to each other and are falling one at a distance h
above the other.
The tidal effect says that the apples are drawing apart as they fall.
As they fall, they actually get farther apart.
There's a relative acceleration, which we can call a.
And that relative acceleration turns out to equal g times big m, the mass of the earth,
divided by r squared times 2h over r.
And there's a sideways squeezing, but it's just half as big.
And this relative acceleration is generally a lot smaller than the acceleration of gravity.
So if we have two objects near the earth and they're separated by one meter, h is equal
to one meter, r is 6.37 million meters, the radius of the earth.
And so the tidal acceleration is less than a millionth of little g, the acceleration
of gravity.
Certain factors would make the effect larger.
If you had a larger m, you'd have a bigger tidal effect from a larger mass than the earth.
And if you had a smaller r, that would also increase the tidal effect because of the tidal
effect is proportional to 1 over r cubed.
And if you have a larger h, the tidal effect is stronger for a bigger separation between
the two bodies.
OK, but how does this idea explain the rise and fall of the oceans?
Well, the moon orbits the earth, but really earth and moon orbit each other.
As we saw, the moon in its orbit is falling toward the earth, the path is continually
bending toward the earth, that acceleration is due to gravity, but also the earth is falling
toward the moon.
Why?
The gravitational pull of the moon.
The moon attracts all parts of the earth.
But different parts of the earth are attracted differently.
So here's a simplified picture.
We have a planet and a moon, and on the planet there's a uniform ocean with no land masses.
And as the planet and the moon orbit each other, the planet accelerates toward the moon
very slightly.
And different parts of the planet are pulled a little differently.
Water is free to move around on the surface, so it responds more strongly.
The ocean therefore is slightly deformed.
It stretches out along the line between the planet and the moon.
There are two tidal bulges, one toward the moon, one away from the moon.
The near bulge is because the ocean is pulled more strongly there than the center of the
planet.
The far bulge is because the ocean is pulled less strongly than the center of the planet.
So if the planet is rotating, we on the planet will pass through two bulges each day, or
almost two, because the moon is also moving in its orbit, which stretches out that time
between successive high tides a bit.
So what Newton is saying is that tides are due to differences in the moon's gravitational
pull on different parts of the ocean.
Now there are complications.
There are tides in the atmosphere.
There are crustal tides.
Even solid planets are deformed by tidal effects.
Now they're lower in magnitude.
The crustal tides are less than half a meter for the earth.
And the presence of land masses complicate the ocean tides, complicate their timing and
their amplitudes.
And there are tides due to the sun.
They're less than half as strong as the lunar tides, because although the sun is much more
massive than the moon, it's also much further away.
And so with the moon and the sun, the total tidal effect will be strongest when the earth,
moon, and sun are roughly aligned.
And this happens during a full moon when you have the sun and then the earth and then the
moon, and a new moon when you have the sun and then the moon and then the earth.
So tides affect all kinds of things.
They affect the earth's rotation, for example.
The earth is not a perfect sphere.
It's oblate.
It's wider at the equator than it is through the poles.
And so the tidal effect of the sun and moon is to cause the axis of the earth's rotation
to process like the axis of a top.
And that procession takes about 26,000 years for the axis to go around once.
But the gravitational tidal effect also slows the earth's rotation.
It slows it down very gradually.
So why?
As the earth rotates, water flows around to make the tides.
But there is friction in the flow, and that friction leads to a loss of energy.
What happens is that the tidal bulges produced by the moon lag behind the tidal forces.
They can't quite keep up with the earth's rotation.
So for a simplified picture, the tidal bulges in the ocean are at an angle to the line between
the earth and the moon.
And for the earth and moon system, that's about 30 degrees.
So what's that skewed tidal bulge doing?
Well, it's producing small off-center gravitational forces.
And those gravitational forces have action and reaction.
They slow the earth's rotation, and they transfer energy and angular momentum to the
moon's orbit so that the moon gradually recedes from the earth.
This process was first understood in the 19th century by Sir George Darwin, an English astronomer
and the descendant of Charles Darwin.
And it's happening right now.
If you study the earth's rotation with atomic clocks, you'll find out that the earth day
is getting longer.
It's getting longer by about 1.5 milliseconds, 1.5 thousandths of a second per century.
And so astronomers sometimes add a leap second every few years to take care of the accumulated
changes in the rotation rate of the earth.
And also, there are laser reflectors on the surface of the moon left by the Apollo astronauts.
And by bouncing laser beams from the laser reflectors, we see that the moon is receding
from the earth by about 3.8 centimeters per year.
So what about history?
Well, if you study the fossil record, you find that some organisms such as corals create
hard structures in layers.
There's a layer every day.
And there are recognizable bands for the months because of tidal effects, and there are recognizable
bands for years because of seasonal effects.
And also, there are some tidal sediments which record the same kind of information, even
if you don't have any corals around.
So if you study ancient fossils and sediment layers, you can determine the length of the
day.
That is to say, the number of days per year, the year, stays roughly a constant length.
And you can also determine the length of the month and thus the size of the moon's orbit.
So today, there are about 365 days per year and 24 hours per day and about 29 and a half
days per lunar month.
But what was it like in the Devonian period 400 million years ago?
Well then, there were about 400 days per year, only about 22 hours per day, and only about
28 days per lunar month.
The Earth was rotating faster, the moon was closer.
And about a billion years ago, before the fossil corals, the Earth Day was about 17
hours long, and the moon was only 90% of its present distance.
So longer ago, we had a shorter day and a nearer moon.
Now, the Earth moon system is about four and a half billion years old.
And we now believe that about four and a half billion years ago, the moon was formed by
a gigantic collision between the young Earth and another protoplanet in the early days
of the solar system.
This collision completely destroyed the other protoplanet, and it knocked a huge amount
of material from the Earth out into space.
And some of this material coalesced into the moon.
Now, after the collision, the Earth was rotating once every six hours.
And when the moon first formed, it was only about 25,000 kilometers away, only one-fifteenth
of its present distance.
At that distance, the tides on the Earth were more than a thousand times greater than today.
And so the process of tidal friction that slowed the Earth and moved the moon's orbit
was initially very rapid.
And in fact, throughout history, this slowdown and recession rate has varied a lot.
And why is that?
Well, it's because of continental drift.
The placement of the confidence varies the amount of friction in the ocean tides.
So right now, with the arrangement of the confidence as they are today, there's fairly
strong friction, and the rates are fairly high.
But in other eras, there has been less friction, and the slowdown rates have been less.
Tides on the Earth, due to the moon, have had a big effect over time.
But what about tides on the moon, due to the Earth?
Well, the moon has no ocean or atmosphere, but body tides should be much stronger after
all the Earth's mass is 80 times the moon's mass.
Do we see any effects?
We do.
Tidal forces, plus internal friction, have slowed the moon's rotation.
The moon is now locked.
Its rotation period is equal to its orbital period.
The moon keeps exactly the same face to the Earth all the time.
And this means the tidal bulges stay in the same place.
And that's a stable situation, because there are no more frictional effects.
When we look up in the sky, we always see the same face of the moon.
Now long ago, the moon may have had a different rotation, but over vast stretches of time,
tidal effects of the Earth's gravity slowed it down, locked it, so that only one hemisphere
can be seen from the Earth.
And this is common in the solar system.
Moons of other planets, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and beyond, mostly show the same tidal locking,
keeping one face to their planet all the time.
It's the same process as our own moon.
There are a few exceptions, relatively distant outer moons, where the tidal effects are
very weak, because remember, the tidal effect decreases as one over our cubed decreases
very strongly with distance.
So what about the far future?
Well the rotation of the Earth will slow, and the moon will recede until both the Earth
and the moon are locked, like a pair of dancers in a waltz, always facing each other as they
go around.
And indeed, we see exactly this situation in Pluto and Charon in the outer solar system.
So let's recap a little.
Suppose a moon orbits a planet, because gravity varies from place to place, the moon experiences
a slight distortion.
It's stretched in one direction, and it's squeezed in others.
This is called the tidal effect, and the planet also experiences a tidal effect due to the
moon.
And combined with a little friction, this affects orbital and rotational motion.
Tidal effects are much stronger when you get closer to the planet, it goes as one over
our cubed.
Two times closer means four times stronger gravity, but eight times stronger tidal effect.
So if you get close enough, tidal forces can even pull the moon apart.
How close is close enough?
Well in the 19th century, the French astronomer Edouard Roche analyzed this very question.
He said, he analyzed the parts of the moon nearest and furthest from the planet.
Now the moon's own gravity holds these parts together, and the tidal effect of the planet
pulls these parts apart.
So at what point is the tidal effect greater?
This is called the Roche limit.
In the simplest case, where the density of the planet and the satellite are about the
same, the Roche limit is about 2.4 times the radius of the planet.
So if you have a satellite that is held together by its own gravity, and comes closer than
2.4 times the planet's radius, then it will be pulled apart by tidal effects.
But wait, what about satellites around the Earth?
The International Space Station, for example, orbits at about 1.05 times the radius of the
Earth.
But the International Space Station is not held together by its own gravity.
It is made of solid pieces that are welded and latched together.
It's held together by inter-atomic forces and chemical bonds.
Imagine that the modules of the International Space Station were separate pieces.
What I'm saying is that their mutual gravitation would not be enough to hold them together.
The assembly would gradually drift apart.
The most beautiful illustration of the Roche limit is Saturn's rings.
The planet's Saturn is surrounded by thin rings in the plane of the equator.
Galileo observed them, but he did not understand what he saw.
The Dutch astronomer Christian Huygens, with a better telescope, first recognized that
the planet was surrounded by rings.
The rings can easily be seen in a small telescope.
In a large telescope, though, they are breathtaking.
We now know, from telescopic studies and space probes to Saturn, that they're made of ice.
Millions upon millions of small pieces of ice.
How small?
Typical size is about one meter across.
So they're ice boulders.
Also lots of snowballs and smaller bits.
All of these are pursuing independent, nearly circular orbits around Saturn.
The large outer planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, all have rings of some sort.
But Saturns are by far the most glorious.
So there are lots of interesting structures in Saturn's rings.
There are gaps, thin rings, sharp boundaries, and all of these are shaped by gravity, as
we'll see in lecture 10.
But for now, we want to ask, why are there rings at all?
So we can superimpose Saturn's Roche limit on an image of the rings.
And we notice that the main rings all lie within this limit.
Outside the rings, Saturn has many large moons, many of them also made of ice.
So one of two things has happened.
Either Saturn's rings are the fractured remains of an icy moon that strayed too close, an ancient
moon broken up by tidal forces, or Saturn's rings are small fragments that never collected
together to form a large moon in the first place.
Tidal forces prevented them from clumping together by gravity.
We do not know for sure which of these is right, but either way, Saturn's rings illustrate
the power of tidal effects.
But Saturn's rings are not the most dramatic example of tidal effects in our own solar
system.
That honor is reserved for another truly astonishing phenomenon.
So let's consider Jupiter, the largest of the planets, 300 times more massive than the
Earth.
Jupiter has four large moons discovered by Galileo, and the innermost Galilean satellite
is called Io.
Io is about the size and mass of our own moon, and it's also about the same distance from
Jupiter as our own moon.
Its orbital speed, of course, is much faster because Jupiter's gravity is much greater.
Io orbits in only 1.77 days.
One in three-quarters days is an Io month.
And the rotation of Io is locked to the orbit.
It always keeps one face toward Jupiter.
But because of Jupiter's enormous mass, tidal effects are much stronger for Io.
They're as strong for Io as the tidal effects on Earth in the earliest days of the Earth
moon system.
So there's a lot of tidal stretch, not enough to pull the moon apart.
The moon is well outside of the Roche limit, but it's important.
So our first close look at Io was from the space probe Voyager 1 in 1979.
And during the approach of that space probe, scientists speculated what we might see on
Jupiter's moon.
And so stand and peel an American planetary scientist at the University of California
at Santa Barbara made the following analysis.
He said, Io's orbit is almost, but not quite, circular.
It's got an eccentricity of about 0.004.
So that means that as Io orbits around, its distance to Jupiter varies a little bit, less
than 1%.
And that means that the strength of the tidal effect varies.
Io is therefore stretched and relaxed, stretched and relaxed every couple of days.
And other large satellites of Jupiter also contribute.
They have smaller tidal forces on Io, but they are more variable.
And so whatever the interior of Io is made of, there must be some internal friction.
So this repeated stretching, stand and peel says, will generate heat inside Io.
So Peel estimates how much internal heating there would be, and he finds it's a lot.
So what might that mean?
Well on Earth, internal heating, due to the decay of radioactive elements, is the energy
source for lots of geological activity, including volcanoes.
One week before Voyager arrives at Jupiter, stand and peel predicts there will be volcanoes
on Io.
So what does Voyager find?
Peel's prediction is spectacularly confirmed.
Io is the most volcanically active body in the whole solar system.
They not only photograph volcanoes, but giant eruptions.
At any given time there are several gigantic eruptions like geysers, plumes of sulfur rich
material shot hundreds of kilometers into space.
The entire surface of the moon is covered by thick volcanic deposits.
And it's colored by sulfur compounds, orange, white, black.
It's like no other world we know.
Now there are a few other examples of tidally driven volcanism in the solar system.
These are mostly low temperature volcanism involving water or liquid nitrogen instead
of molten rock.
In the interior of Jupiter's moon Europa, Saturn's moon Enceladus, Neptune's moon
Triton, but Io is unique.
Looking at the awe inspiring volcanoes of Io, it is wonderful to remember how they got there.
Internal heat was generated by friction, friction from the repeated flexing due to the tidal
effect.
The volcanoes of Io are all driven by gravity.
It all begins with Newton's idea of universal gravitation.
Every part of an object attracts every other part of any other object.
A planet attracts its moon.
The moon attracts the planets, but not all parts are pulled in exactly the same way.
Gravity is a little different at different points in space.
That's the tidal effect.
From this simple fact, we find astounding consequences.
We find the rise and fall of the ocean, of the Earth's crust, the gradual slowing of
the Earth's rotation, the slow recession of the moon's orbit.
The fact that the moon, like most other planetary satellites, keeps one face toward its planet
all the time.
The possibility that tidal stresses can shatter a satellite into fragments inside the Roche
limit or heat up its interior and drive huge volcanic eruptions as on Io.
Tidal effects, in fact, are not just an entertaining side issue.
And Einstein said that the tidal effect is the key that relates gravity to the curvature
of space and time.
We're going to talk much more about that in the second half of our course, especially
in lecture 17.
But meanwhile, we have other effects of Newtonian gravity to explore.
We have looked at two bodies interacting via gravity, the orbital motion of one about
the other.
We've looked at tidal effects.
But what about three or more bodies?
The Sun, after all, has several planets.
The planets exert gravitational forces on each other.
How does this change their orbits?
We will see how even very small orbital changes, small perturbations, can be important.
These small perturbations can reveal unseen worlds in distant regions of space.
So, orbital perturbations, that's next time.
I'll see you then.
