I want to start this lecture with an unsettling observation.
There is something very strange about the orbit of our Moon.
It doesn't stay fixed in space.
Yes, the Moon orbits the Earth, but the path it follows is continually shifting.
Why?
The answer to that question is part of a fascinating story.
So far we've seen some of the basics of Newton's orbital mechanics,
how gravity shapes the orbits of planets around the Sun and satellites around the Earth.
For example, the Earth orbits the Sun.
That is, the Earth repeats the same elliptical path each year.
So from the point of view of the Earth, the Sun moves against the background of the stars,
and it's the same path each year.
The Sun passes through the same constellations, and that's the zodiac,
the fixed set of constellations that the Sun passes through over the course of one year.
So suppose the Moon's path were a fixed closed orbit in space,
then the Moon would also appear to pass through a fixed series of constellations.
But in fact, there is no lunar zodiac.
The path of the Moon through the sky is continually changing.
In the last lecture, we saw that the tidal interaction of the Earth and Moon affected the Moon's orbit.
The Moon is slowing the Earth's rotation, and its orbit is getting bigger.
But that is a slow process, tens or hundreds of millions of years long.
What we're talking about today is much more rapid.
The Moon's path through the sky shifts by more than one degree each orbit.
Why?
If the Earth and Moon were the only bodies in the universe, this could not happen.
As Newton showed, the orbit of the Moon would be a fixed ellipse in space.
But the Earth and Moon are not the only bodies.
Other bodies also exert gravitational forces on the Earth and Moon.
The most important of these is the Sun.
The Sun pulls at Earth, and the Sun pulls at the Moon.
And because they are in slightly different places, they are pulled by the Sun in a slightly different way.
And that extra force changes the Moon's orbit.
Let me mention just two of the effects.
The first is an effect on the perigee of the Moon, the point of closest approach to the Earth.
The perigee moves around in the plane of the Moon's orbit.
We say that the perigee precesses around the Earth.
And it takes about nine years to make one circuit.
But also the orbital plane of the Moon moves around over a period of about 19 years.
Now, Newton knew all this, and he attempted to explain it by calculating the gravitational influence of the Sun and so on.
And he got only a very approximate answer.
A really detailed account took centuries to work out.
Nowadays, of course, we use sophisticated computer calculations.
Even the ever-shifting orbit of the Moon can be explained by the action of gravitational forces.
Here's another example.
If only one planet orbited the Sun, it would follow a simple elliptical orbit, just as Kepler understood.
But suppose we imagine the Sun with two planets.
Our solar system, of course, has more than two.
The two planets orbit the Sun, but they also exert a gravitational pull on each other.
Those forces are comparatively weak.
The planets are much smaller than the Sun, but they are not zero.
Physicists would call this extra force a small perturbation.
In effect, the two planets are continually nudging each other very slightly.
It's no longer the case that the planets pursue independent, endless orbits around the Sun.
The planetary orbits are continually changing in small ways because of the nudges from other planets.
Now, each of these examples, the Earth-Moon system orbiting the Sun, the Sun and two planets,
is an instance of what physicists call the three-body problem.
Three bodies move in space, exerting gravitational forces on each other.
How do they move?
The three-body problem is not 50% harder than the two-body problem.
The three-body problem is incredibly complicated.
There are so many possibilities.
They're complex motions.
There's no neat solution.
There's no simple law like Kepler's Laws.
Whole branches of mathematics have been invented to cope with the three-body problem.
For example, chaos theory had its origin in studies of the three-body problem.
It's a really hard problem, but it is also unavoidable.
There are a lot more than three bodies in the universe.
So for the next three lectures, the effects of gravity on the motions of more than two bodies will be our concern.
In this lecture, we'll talk about small effects, like the nudge of one planet that it exerts on another planet.
In the next lecture, we'll look at larger and more dramatic effects in the three-body problem.
And then in lecture 11, we're going to ask, what can we say about millions of bodies?
And it's more than you might think.
So let's begin by listing the contents of our solar system.
There's the sun, of course.
That's 99.9% of the mass of the solar system.
And since ancient times, there are six bodies that we would call planets.
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
Some planets also have moons orbiting around them.
And also there are comets pursuing their own long elliptical orbits around the sun.
And so matters stood until 1781, when William Herschel, the English astronomer,
discovered a new planet out beyond Saturn.
Saturn's about 10 astronomical units from the sun.
The new planet is almost 20 astronomical units from the sun.
Its orbital period is more than 84 years.
That's a huge discovery.
It's like finding a new continent.
It's not something that happens every day, and Herschel became famous.
He was granted a knighthood by George III.
And some people wanted to call the new planet Herschel, but cooler heads prevailed.
And the planet was christened Uranus, in keeping with the mythological names of the other planets.
So over the next few decades, Uranus was observed very carefully,
and Herschel himself discovered a couple of moons.
And in 1821, Alexis Bouvard, a French astronomer, noticed something kind of funny.
Uranus does not seem to be following its orbit exactly as Newton predicts.
So let me give you the simplified version.
For one part of its orbit, Uranus seems to be moving too fast.
And then a few years later, it's moving a bit too slow.
So there are two possible conclusions.
Maybe Newton's law of gravitation is not exactly right.
I mean, Uranus is very far from the sun.
Maybe Newton is only approximate at such distances.
George Aire, the English astronomer royal, favors this idea.
The second possibility, though, is that maybe there is an undiscovered planet
beyond Uranus nudging it in its orbit.
It's accelerating it here, decelerating it there.
This is Bouvard's idea.
But he dies before he can really get anywhere with it.
So in 1845, the English mathematician John Cooch Adams
attempts to figure out where the undiscovered planet must be.
And he uses a kind of iterative process.
So you start out with an assumed orbit for the unknown planet.
And you calculate its effect on Uranus using Newton's laws.
You compare that with the data.
And then you adjust the unknown orbit to improve the agreement
between the calculations and the data.
And you continue until you're satisfied.
And Adams is never really satisfied.
So Adams tries to communicate with Aire, the astronomer royal,
to urge him to search for this new planet.
But Aire, of course, is not very sympathetic to his theory.
He thinks Newtonian gravitation may be wrong at such great distances.
And also, Adams is not a good communicator.
He's very tentative.
He's unsure of himself.
He keeps adjusting his calculations.
He does not ever quite say, look here, and you'll find it.
So Aire mostly ignores him.
Sounds too vague, too hard, too unlikely to succeed.
Astronomers who do try to follow up on Adams' suggestion
are hampered by a lack of adequate star maps of the region
that makes it hard to recognize anything that does not already belong.
So in 1846, the French astronomer Urban Le Verrier
at the Paris Observatory, brilliant, patient, self-confident man,
but also with a kind of irritating personality,
Le Verrier independently takes up Bouvard's suggestion.
And he follows the same path as Adams,
but he arrives at a much more definite solution.
And he communicates his ideas to Johann Gallet,
an assistant at the Berlin Observatory.
So Gallet points his telescope in the region of the sky
that Le Verrier suggests.
And almost at once, less than an hour after he starts,
he finds something new.
Over the next two nights, he confirms that the new object
is moving with respect to the background stars.
It's definitely a planet, one that came to be called Neptune.
Now, Neptune had actually been observed before,
even by Galileo, who noted it as a star in 1613.
But Galileo was the first one to see it
and know what it was that he was seeing.
And so to this day, people wonder who should get the credit
for the discovery of Neptune.
Adams, Le Verrier, Gallet?
Well, Le Verrier's calculations were published first,
and they led to the actual telescopic discovery.
And he also made a more precise prediction
about where to find the planet.
And Adams himself said Le Verrier deserved most of the credit,
and many historians agree.
And Le Verrier certainly agreed.
But in fact, neither Le Verrier nor Adams
had done a very accurate calculation.
They did not really figure out Neptune's orbit
or figure out its mass very closely.
But since Neptune was so far from the sun,
over 30 astronomical units, it did not move very fast.
And so their calculations were good enough to find it.
There are two points I would like to make.
First, the discovery of Neptune was a tremendous vindication
of Newton's law of universal gravitation.
Tiny variations in the orbit of Uranus
meant that either Newton was wrong
or there was an unknown planet, and the planet was there.
Second, the discovery of Neptune was really the first time
that gravity was used as a tool for discovering the unknown.
Adams and Le Verrier were able to deduce the existence
of something new in the universe
just by seeing the effects of its gravity on a known object.
So gravity lets us see the unseen,
and it's the perfect tool for that purpose.
Why?
Because everything in the universe
exerts gravity, and gravity affects everything in the universe.
We will return to this idea again and again
in the lectures to come.
It's the idea behind more than one amazing advance
in our knowledge of the universe.
Let me mention just one such advance,
one that has emerged over the last two decades,
the discovery of planetary systems beyond our own.
That is to say, planets orbiting other stars beyond our sun,
what astronomers call exoplanets.
Consider a planet orbiting a distant star,
but really the planet and the star orbit each other,
both of them orbiting a common center point.
The star, of course, is much more massive than the planet,
so that point is close to the star,
maybe even inside the star.
The star wobbles around as the planet follows its orbit.
What produces a wobble like that?
Well, it's, of course, the gravitational force
of the planet on the star.
It's equal and opposite, of course,
to the gravitational force of the star on the planet,
but because the star has so much more inertia,
it doesn't move very much.
Now, the wobble is so small,
and the stars are so far away that any side-to-side motion,
that is to say motion at right angles to our line of sight,
what astronomers call proper motion,
any proper motion is too small to see,
but motion toward us and away from us,
motion along our line of sight,
radial motion, that can be detected by careful measurements.
How?
The answer is the Doppler effect.
If you look at a light from a star
and you split it into different colors,
you look at its spectrum,
you find that certain specific wavelengths
are darker than you might expect.
These wavelengths are absorbed by gases
in the star's outer envelope.
These wavelengths are called spectral lines.
They often appear as dark vertical lines
on the continuous rainbow spectrum from the star.
And these lines are characteristic
of the elements making up the star,
the same elements that we have
in laboratories here on Earth.
So we know exactly what wavelengths of light they represent,
but the spectral lines from a star might be shifted.
The wavelength might be less or greater
because the star might be moving toward us or away from us.
And this is called the Doppler effect
after the Austrian physicist Christian Doppler.
Now, if the star is moving toward us,
the lines are shifted toward the blue end of the spectrum.
That's called blue shift.
If the star is moving away from us,
the lines are shifted toward the red end of the spectrum.
That's called red shift.
Now, suppose we see the lines of a star change.
Red shift and blue shift and red shift and blue shift.
It changes over a period of days or weeks or months.
And we know that the star is wobbling in space.
And from that wobble,
we can deduce the existence of an unseen body
orbiting the star, nudging the star this way and that.
In other words, we can deduce the existence of a planet.
So let me demonstrate the idea using sound instead of light.
This is a lovely piece of old apparatus
that's actually designed to demonstrate the Doppler effect.
On the end of this rotating arm,
there's a small metal whistle.
And if I crank the machine fast enough,
the whistle will go round and round,
air will pass through the whistle,
and it will emit a single pure note.
But if you listen, you will hear the pitch of the note
vary up and down as it goes.
Listen to this.
You see, the pitch is higher when the whistle is approaching you.
And it's lower when the whistle is moving away.
So even with your eyes closed,
you can tell that the source of the sound
is moving back and forth,
toward you and away from you,
because of the Doppler shift in the frequency of the sound.
Let's listen again.
Now, this works best when we listen to it from the side.
Let us say we are roughly speaking
in the plane of the circular path of the whistle.
If we were to listen to the whistle
from directly above, straight over the plane of the whistle,
there would be no Doppler shift at all.
Why?
Because the whistle would not be approaching us
and receding from us.
So if we listen from there,
there would be no Doppler shift.
So what does that mean?
Well, if we are going to use the waggle back and forth
of a star to find our exoplanet,
then that method will work best
if we're looking at the planet and the star
from within the plane of their orbit.
If we look at the planet and the star
perpendicular to that plane,
then we won't see any Doppler effect at all.
Of course, most planetary systems are somewhere in between.
This idea, to use the Doppler effect
to find planets around other stars,
is called the radial velocity method.
It tells you the period of the orbit.
It tells you the size and shape of the orbit.
It even tells you the mass of the planet.
And since the mid-1990s, astronomers have used
this radial velocity method,
together with a couple of other methods,
to find hundreds and hundreds of planets
beyond our solar system.
The first ones discovered were those
that had the biggest effects on their parent stars.
They were large planets in pretty close orbits
around their star.
But now we can detect much smaller planets,
much further out.
And we can see very complicated star wobbles
that indicate two or three or more planets.
Remember how we said that Herschel's discovery
of a new planet was not something that happened every day?
Well, actually, nowadays it happens,
if not every day, at least several times a week.
Planets turn out to be quite common in our universe.
And how do we know?
We can see the effects of their gravity.
Okay, let's return to our own solar system.
The planets orbit the sun,
but they exert gravitational forces on each other.
They continually nudge each other,
so the orbits are slowly modified.
Actually, this fact worried Isaac Newton.
He thought after a long time,
the orbits of the planets would get out of whack.
The planets might even run into each other.
He thought that maybe God intervened from time to time
into the solar system to set things right.
Now, a century after Newton, Pierre Simon Laplace,
the great French mathematician,
did some extremely detailed and laborious calculation.
He came to the conclusion that the orbits
in our solar system were pretty stable.
And we've looked into it with modern computer calculations.
And those calculations say that the chances
of a planetary collision is low.
One computer study set the odds against the Earth
against Mercury running into Venus
during the lifetime of the sun
at several billion years at 100 to one.
So even over billions of years,
the orbits of the planets in our solar system
should not change too much.
How come?
Why shouldn't they change more?
Well, most of the changes we expect
in the orbits are oscillatory.
The orbits do not simply change
in one direction without bound.
So the orbit of Mars, say,
might become a little more eccentric for a while.
The ellipse might be a little elongated for a while
as it is nudged around by the other planets.
But then later on, after a few million years,
more nudges will tend to make the orbit more circular again.
And the idea is that everything is continually changing,
but those changes generally stay within bounds.
The Earth's orbit, which seems so constant,
also changes slightly over time in one way or the other.
And these changes have had important effects.
For example, over the last few million years,
the Earth has experienced repeated glaciations,
ice ages, they come every couple of hundred thousand years.
And we now think that these repeated ice ages
have been triggered by small periodic variation
in the Earth's orbit and rotation,
due to the gravitational influence of the moon
and other planets in the solar system,
which brings us to the case of Mercury.
Now Mercury has a fairly elliptical orbit.
Its eccentricity is 0.21,
but the major axis of the orbit of Mercury
does not stay still.
It gradually turns in space.
And that means that the perihelion point,
the point of closest approach to the Sun,
possesses very slowly it.
It moves very slowly around the Sun.
How slowly?
In a century, it moves about 5,600 seconds of arc,
which is one and a half degrees.
Now almost all of this,
more than 99% can be accounted for
by just the gravitational influence
of other planets in the solar system,
as they a nudge Mercury, its orbit should possess,
we can calculate, by over 5,500 arc seconds per century.
But there is just a little bit left over.
43 arc seconds per century, to be precise.
43 arc seconds is only one 80th of one degree.
And that's the extra shift
in the perihelion point of Mercury over 100 years.
So that's extra once we take into account
the gravity of the known planets
and using Newton's laws and so on.
So there are two amazing things here.
One is it's amazing that astronomers can measure
such a tiny shift so precisely
that we can detect 43 arc seconds per century.
But even though that perihelion shift is tiny,
it's terribly important because it tells us
that there is something going on that we don't know.
Now, back in the 1850s,
when this problem of Mercury's orbit first came to light,
our old friend, Urbán Laverrier,
thought he knew the answer.
Of course, he said,
this is just like the discovery of Neptune.
To account for Mercury's extra shift, he proposed,
there must be an unknown planet
exerting some extra influence on Mercury.
And so he posited the existence of a small planet
orbiting inside Mercury's orbit.
And the undiscovered planet even got a name,
Vulcan, named after the god of fire.
Now, this is not the same planet Vulcan
as we have in the science fiction TV show Star Trek.
It's not the planet where Mr. Spock is from.
But as we will see, this Vulcan is just as fictional.
If there really were a planet Vulcan
orbiting so close to the sun,
then from time to time,
it would have to cross in front of the face of the sun,
where it could be spotted by observers on Earth.
That's called a transit of a planet across the sun's face
and transits of Mercury and Venus
are well known and commonly observed.
Vulcan being even closer to the sun
would pass in front of the sun even more often.
So Laverier spent the last 20 years of his life
trying to find evidence of a transit of Vulcan.
That is to say, a real observation
to go with his hypothesis of a new planet.
He wanted to be the man who had discovered two new planets.
But alas, it was to no avail.
After decades of searching,
astronomers had to admit that no such planet actually exists.
So that leaves us with a mystery.
The tiny, uneradicable mystery
of the perihelion of Mercury,
which moves about 1% faster than it should
going around the sun.
That extra shift is only one degree every 8,000 years.
Nevertheless, from the point of view of Newtonian physics,
it is a puzzle, an anomaly.
The mystery of Mercury was eventually solved
by no less than Albert Einstein.
But the final solution to the problem
required a whole new theory of gravity,
a strange and beautiful theory,
the general theory of relativity.
We'll talk about that beginning in lecture 14.
We've seen how a small gravitational nudge
can make small changes in the orbit of another body.
And that change, though small, can be important.
But if the nudges are bigger,
or if they are timed just so,
remarkable things can happen.
And that will be the subject of our next lecture.
In our next lecture, we will see how gravitational
interactions among three bodies
can lead to amazing phenomena,
complex motions with beautiful and surprising patterns.
Not just in mathematical theory,
but in the actual motions of our solar system,
from the asteroids to the rings of Saturn.
So next time, we'll learn how gravity calls the tune
for the intricate dance.
