Last time, when we were talking about perturbations of orbits, we mentioned a computer study of
the long-term stability of the orbits of the planets in our solar system, and we said
that most likely those orbits will be stable for billions of years. But there is a small
chance, less than one in a hundred, that something catastrophic happens. The problem is mercury.
Mercury might collide with Venus, or go careening off elsewhere in the solar system. Other planets
might be affected. If this does happen, it won't happen all that slowly by astronomical
standards. Once it starts, the destabilization of the solar system only takes a few million
years. And the main culprit behind all the confusion is the planet Jupiter.
Jupiter is of course the most massive planet, but it is nowhere near to Mercury. How can
its influence be so decisive? It's because Mercury and Jupiter might fall into something
called an orbital resonance. To put it simply, it's all a question of timing.
In this lecture, we're going to say more about the three-body problem, but not just
tiny effects. We'll see striking patterns that emerge from three-body interactions,
including some really beautiful phenomena. We'll see elegant and surprising moves in
the intricate dance of gravity. So we'll consider a simple situation called the restricted
three-body problem. We have two large bodies, for example, the Sun and a planet. So we have
a large primary body and a smaller body that orbits it. And let's make things as easy
as possible. We'll suppose that the planet's orbit is circular. Now we add a third body
whose mass is very tiny, for example, a small asteroid. The Sun and the planet are not affected
significantly, but the tiny asteroid moves in continually shifting gravitational forces.
And what that means is harder to predict. Over time, the asteroid's orbit might be
very strongly affected by the planet. How? By orbital resonance. So what is resonance?
Resonance happens whenever a small periodic force produces a large effect on a periodic motion.
And resonance is quite a general phenomenon, not just an effect of gravity and orbital
mechanics. It's all a question of timing. So, ingredient number one for resonance,
you need some kind of periodic repeated motion. For example, consider a child on a swing,
moving back and forth like a pendulum. Left to itself and neglecting friction,
that swinging motion would repeat over and over and over. And for a real child on a swing
in the playground, the motion repeats about every four seconds. That's the natural period of swing.
Ingredient number two for resonance is a small, repeated periodic force. In our example,
every so often we give the child a push. Each push is the same in the same direction,
and the pushes have a timing of their own, the time between pushes. So suppose we push
with the same period as the natural swing period every four seconds. Then each push
happens at the same point in the swing. And over time, the effect of the pushes adds up,
and the child is swinging a lot. They like that. Each push can individually be quite small,
but the effect of all the pushes adds up. And that's resonance. But suppose we push
with a different timing. Suppose we push every three seconds, or every five seconds,
or every seven seconds. What happens then? Well, sometimes we are pushing the child faster,
but sometimes we're slowing the child down. And over time, the effects of such pushes tend to
cancel out. We are out of resonance. And I can report, from personal observation,
if you try this with a real child on a real swing, she will complain. She will tell you
that you aren't pushing right. There are other possible resonances. Suppose we push every eight
seconds. That is, say, every other swing of the child. This has a very similar effect.
Each push happens at the same point in the swing, every other swing. The pushes have a big cumulative
effect. So this is still a kind of resonance. But in this case, it would be a 2 to 1 resonance.
Why? Because the periods of the pushes and the swings have a 2 to 1 ratio.
So here's the general picture. Resonance can happen when a periodic motion is affected by a
periodic force. If there is a simple ratio between the two periods, a 1 to 1, or a 2 to 1 ratio,
or maybe something a little more complicated, then a small force can have a very big cumulative effect.
The phenomenon of resonance is everywhere. Consider, for example, how a radio receiver works.
The electromagnetic waves from a transmitter a hundred miles away are very weak. The electrons in
the radio receiver are hardly affected at all by such a weak electric field. However, the radio
contains an oscillating electric circuit. That is, a kind of circuit that naturally oscillates at
just the same rate, which might be thousands or millions of times per second. And that allows
the weak radio wave to produce a big response. Lots of electrons move in very significant ways.
We can tune in to the signal. But to do this, though, we have to tune our receiver so that
its oscillating frequency is just at the right resonant frequency with the radio wave.
Okay, let's return to orbits and gravity. Consider the Sun and the planet Jupiter. As we said,
Jupiter is very massive, more massive than all of the other planets combined. But it's still pretty
small. It's still only one one-thousandth of the mass of the Sun. Orbiting the Sun, there are
thousands of of minor bodies, the the asteroids, which are much smaller than any planet. And many
of the asteroids orbit in the so-called asteroid belt, a region of the solar system between the
orbits of Mars and Jupiter. Now, consider one of the asteroids in the asteroid belt. We're not
thinking about three bodies, the Sun, Jupiter, and the comparatively tiny asteroids. Now, consider
three bodies, the Sun, Jupiter, and the comparatively tiny asteroid. So Jupiter's gravity tugs on the
asteroid. The strongest pull happens when the planet is closest. That is, when both planet
and asteroid are on the same side of the Sun. Now, from our discussion in the last lecture,
we might think that the long-term effect of this might be small. The small nudges
generally cancel out in the long run. But that might not be true at all. There might be a resonance
at work. You see, we have a periodic motion, the orbit of the asteroid, affected by a periodic force,
the pull of Jupiter. And the real question is, what is the timing? The orbital period of the
asteroid is less than the period of Jupiter's orbit, because its orbit is smaller than Jupiter's
orbit. So let's suppose for a moment that the asteroid has just one half of Jupiter's orbital
period. That happens for an asteroid whose orbit is at around 3.3 astronomical units.
This means that the asteroid is in a 2 to 1 resonance with Jupiter. So what happens?
Well, when Jupiter and the asteroid are aligned on the same side of the Sun, the asteroid experiences
a small tug of gravity. The gravity of Jupiter is continuous, of course, but it is strongest
when the planet is closest. So after one full orbit of the asteroid, after that point, the asteroid
is back to the same point in space. But Jupiter is on the other side of the Sun, far away.
Then after another asteroid orbit, the asteroid is once again back at the same point. But now,
Jupiter is back on that side, and the two are lined up again. So the tug of gravity from Jupiter
exactly repeats itself at exactly the same place in the asteroid's orbit. And over time,
the effect accumulates. Orbit of the asteroid changes significantly. Now, at first, it becomes
more eccentric, more strongly elliptical, and then it begins to change in other ways.
What happens after a long time? Well, that is hard to predict. The asteroid might run into something,
a planet, another asteroid, something like that. And this has happened many times over the lifetime
of the Solar System. The asteroid may simply end up in an orbit that is no longer in resonance
with Jupiter, and therefore less vulnerable to further perturbations. But whatever happens,
an asteroid in a two-to-one resonance with Jupiter will not stay in that orbit for a very long time.
Let's take a look at a graph of the asteroid belt population. The horizontal axis is the radius
of the asteroid's orbit in astronomical units. And by Kepler's harmonic law, of course,
that tells us that the radius of the orbit is related to the orbital period.
The vertical axis shows the number of asteroids with orbits of any given size.
And the resulting graph has some very definite features. For instance, the outer edge of the
main asteroid belt lies at about 3.3 astronomical units, exactly at the two-to-one resonance point
with Jupiter. Almost no asteroids have an orbit there, and there are relatively few asteroids
further out. We can see another dip in the graph at about 2.5 astronomical units. Many asteroids
have orbits a little larger or smaller than this, but there are almost none that are right at that
radius. And when we calculate the corresponding orbital period, we find that this gives us
a three-to-one resonance with Jupiter. An asteroid in this orbit would circle the sun
exactly three times in the time that Jupiter orbits once. So that's the condition for orbital
resonance. There are other obvious dips in the population graph. One is located at the
five-to-two resonance point. Another is located at the seven-to-three resonance point.
There are, in effect, gaps in the asteroid belt. These gaps were discovered by the American
astronomer Daniel Kirkwood about 150 years ago, and they're called Kirkwood gaps. And as Kirkwood
himself realized, they are due to orbital resonances with the giant planet Jupiter. That
is, asteroids in these orbits are especially strongly affected by the pull of that planet.
So these orbits don't last long. The Kirkwood gaps, in other words, are treated by timing
and gravity. Now orbital resonance can also make certain orbits especially stable. Let me tell
you about a lovely example of this out in the asteroid belt. There's a family of asteroids
called the Hilda family. It's named after the asteroid 153 Hilda, which was discovered in 1875.
And it's the largest of the group. But the family has over a thousand members.
The Hilda asteroids are not very close together in space, but they all have similar orbits,
orbits with a semi-major axis of about 4.0 astronomical units. And this puts them in an
exact three-to-two resonance with Jupiter. But the effect of this resonance is rather curious.
Many of the Hilda asteroids have fairly elliptical orbits, with eccentricities up around 0.3. Yet
even so, a Hilda asteroid never comes very close to Jupiter. Why not? Because of timing.
When a Hilda asteroid is at its farthest point from the Sun, closest to Jupiter's orbit,
the planet itself is always somewhere else, far away from the asteroid.
In effect, the resonance with Jupiter protects the Hilda asteroids from strong perturbations
by the gravity of Jupiter. So here's a similar, even more spectacular example of orbital resonance
in the Solar System, the rings of Saturn. So recall Lecture 8. These rings are an orbiting
swarm of millions of chunks of ice. They're orbiting inside the Roche limit of Saturn.
And in the late 17th century, Giovanni Cassini noticed something about the rings that is
fascinating to this day, that the rings are not uniform. They're divided into sections.
So here are the main sections working inward from the outside. There's ring A, the outer ring,
and then there's a dark gap, the Cassini division. Then there's ring B, the middle ring,
and ring C, the inner ring. And so the question is, why is there a gap between A and B?
And the answer is orbital resonance. So the closest large moon of Saturn is called
Mimas. It's about 400 kilometers across, and it orbits Saturn every 22.6 hours.
Now an ice boulder within the Cassini division in the rings would orbit every 11.3 hours. That's
a 2 to 1 resonance. So over time, the small gravity of Mimas has a large effect. Ice boulders orbit
is changed to one that is larger or smaller. In other words, the Cassini division is just like
a Kirkwood gap in the asteroid belt. Now since the 1980s, we've been able to inspect Saturn's rings
close up from deep space probes, and we find that Saturn's rings are immensely complex. There are
several minor rings, there are also hundreds of gaps, and some of this is caused by small moons,
ice mountains, if you will, orbiting within the rings themselves. And other features of the rings
are caused by complicated interactions with Saturn's many large moons. Saturn's rings are a beautiful
natural laboratory for orbital resonance. Saturn's rings are gravity at its most spectacular.
The rings of Saturn are also a perfect place to see other delicate effects of gravity.
And one lovely example is the F-ring, a very narrow ring just outside the A-ring. So what
keeps the particles in the F-ring from dispersing? What holds it together? And the answer is
shepherd satellites. There are two small moons, Pandora on the outside and Prometheus on the
inside, each one of them only about 40 kilometers across. And the effect of Pandora's gravity
on bodies in the F-ring is to remove energy, to force them into a smaller orbit. But the effect
of Prometheus' gravity on bodies in the F-ring is to add energy, to push them into larger orbits.
And so the net effect of both shepherd moons is that the F-ring stays bunched up,
like a flock of sheep. And that's all due to extremely tiny gravitational effects
from the small shepherd satellites. Two other moons of Saturn also have a special relationship
with each other. They're called Janus and Epimetheus. Both of them are between one and
200 kilometers across. Janus is a bit larger. And each moon takes about 16 hours to orbit Saturn.
And they practically share the same orbit. There's only 50 kilometers difference
in their orbital radii. So, suppose Janus is the outside one. Then after a few years,
Epimetheus, orbiting on the inside, begins to catch up. And as they approach each other,
the moons exert a small gravitational pull on each other. Janus is pulled from behind.
So its mechanical energy decreases. Epimetheus is pulled from ahead. Its mechanical energy increases.
And so the net result is that Janus shifts to a slightly smaller orbit, and Epimetheus shifts
to a slightly larger orbit. And in fact, they switch roles. Now Janus is on the inside,
Epimetheus is on the outside, Janus moves ahead, and Epimetheus lags behind.
Suppose we're standing on Janus, looking at Epimetheus. The other moon approaches along
the inside orbit. It shifts outward and then drifts backward along the orbit.
That's a pattern called a horseshoe orbit. And at the next encounter, Janus is on the inside,
Epimetheus is on the outside, and the same maneuver happens in reverse.
So even though the two moons have almost the same orbit at any given time,
they never actually get very close to each other. They stay more than 10,000 kilometers apart.
And they continue this dance for millions of years.
By the way, there are a handful of very small asteroids orbiting the Sun that do a similar
horseshoe orbit maneuver with the Earth. The shifting orbit, they shift orbits from just inside
to just outside the Earth and vice versa, but they never come very close.
Okay, here's what we are learning about the restricted three-body problem. Gravity can not
only perturb the orbit of a small body, it can also regulate it. It can also keep it stable
for a very long time. And the most remarkable and important example of this
is the Lagrange points. These are points that were discovered by the French mathematician
Joseph-Louis Lagrange in 1772. Like Cassini, Lagrange was Italian by birth. He was an adopted
Frenchman. And he spent his career extending and deepening Newton's system of mechanics.
So consider again an orbiting system of two large bodies, the Earth and the Moon, say.
And there's a third body, we'll call it a satellite, which will change its location, of
course, relative to the Earth and Moon as it orbits. But Lagrange discovered special points
where a satellite can actually stay fixed, that is, fixed in relative terms to the Earth and Moon.
And these five Lagrange points are designated L1 through L5.
Of course, the satellite is not really stationary. It moves as the Earth-Moon system moves,
in effect it flies in formation with them. So L1 is on the line between the Earth and Moon,
but it's closer to the Moon. Now ordinarily, a satellite orbiting the Earth closer than the Moon
would orbit faster. But the Moon's gravitational pull effectively cancels some of the Earth's pull.
The satellite actually orbits with the same period as the Moon, so it stays between the
Earth and the Moon. Then there's L2, also along the Earth-Moon line, but outside the Moon's orbit.
Ordinarily, we'd expect a satellite orbiting farther away than the Moon would orbit more
slowly, but the Moon's gravitational pull effectively adds to the Earth's pull,
so the satellite actually orbits with the same period as the Moon. It stays behind the Moon as
seen from Earth. Then there's L3, which is also along the Earth-Moon line, but on the other side
of the Earth. It's just inside the Moon's orbit. And finally, there's L4 and L5. And these are
points that are actually on the Moon's orbit, but they are 60 degrees ahead and behind of the Moon.
That is to say, the Earth, Moon, and satellite would form an equilateral triangle.
All five Lagrange points orbit the Earth synchronously with the Moon.
Now suppose you are close to, but not quite on, a Lagrange point. Suppose you're moving
nearly, but not quite at the right velocity. What would happen? Well, the L1, L2, and L3
points are unstable. If you are not exactly in the right place with this right velocity,
you will drift farther away. It's like a marble sitting on top of a dome. If the marble goes
slightly to one side, it rolls off. Actually, a better analogy in this case is a marble on a saddle
shape. It will tend to roll off in certain directions. But L4 and L5 are stable. If you
start out close to one of these points, you may drift around in a complicated way, but you will
stay close. It's like a marble in the bottom of a bowl. If it starts slightly to one side,
it just rolls around near the bottom. The regions of stability for L4 and L5 are
large, tadpole-shaped regions around the Lagrange points, and a satellite can wander around inside
this region. L1 through L3, though unstable, can still be useful. Consider a remarkable
recent space probe called WMAP that stands for the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe.
It's designed to study the cosmic microwave background and how it is slightly different in
different directions. That's the Anisotropy part. More about that in lecture 23. Well,
in the early 2000s, WMAP was positioned close to the L2 point of the Earth Sun system. So this
allowed it to orbit the Sun more than a million kilometers from the Earth, but also to stay close
to the Earth for communication. But because L2 is unstable, the spacecraft had a tendency to
drift away over a period of weeks, so it used small rocket thrusters to keep it in place.
But L4 and L5 are more significant. Objects can stay near these points
without any extra rocket thrusters. In other words, we might find natural objects there.
So it comes as no surprise to find this phenomenon, too, at work in the Saturn system. There are
small moons at the L4 and L5 points of many of Saturn's large moons. For example, Tethys,
which is about 1,000 kilometers across, is associated with two small moons,
Telesto and Calypso, each about 30 kilometers across, and they orbit at the Saturn-Tethys,
Saturn-Tethys, L4 and L5 points, 60 degrees ahead and behind of Tethys.
But the most impressive example of this is at the L4 and L5 points of the Sun-Jupiter system.
There we find many asteroids sharing Jupiter's orbit, and these asteroids come in two clumps,
one ahead and one behind Jupiter in its orbit. They're called the Trojan asteroids. The larger
ones are actually named after the heroes in Homer's Iliad. The L4 asteroids, the front group,
are mostly named after Greek heroes, Achilles and so on. And the L5 asteroids, the rear group,
are mostly named after the heroes from Troy, Aeneas and so on. So how many are there?
There are thousands of Trojan asteroids in each group.
So the stationary points that Lagrange discovered are not just mathematical curiosities,
they are real features of our own solar system, and doubtless, they are real features of other
planetary systems as well. They are important special patterns in that intricate gravitational dance.
So, horseshoe orbits and Lagrange points are also phenomena of orbital resonance. There's a special
relation between the orbital periods of the Trojan asteroids and of Jupiter. The ratio is
one to one. The periods are the same. In the intricate dance of gravity, timing is everything.
Now, in this lecture and the last, we have found that the three-body problem is incredibly
complicated and rich. But what can we say about more bodies interacting via gravitation?
What can we say about the motion of a thousand bodies or a million? Imagine hundreds of stars
in a star cluster, billions of stars in a galaxy, or thousands of galaxies in a whole cluster of
galaxies. At first, these situations seem to be far too complicated to be understandable.
But here's the surprising fact. We can say useful things even in such complicated situations.
There are important general facts that hold for three bodies or for three trillion bodies.
Whenever a bunch of objects move through space, interacting with each other,
held together by mutual gravitation, then certain mathematical facts hold true.
Understanding those facts, those subtle consequences of the law of universal gravitation,
will help us understand the formation of everything from planets to whole galaxies.
It will once again tell us that there is more to the universe than we can see.
So, the million-body problem, that's next time. I'll see you then.
