The
motion of three bodies interacting by gravity can be complicated and surprising, but what
about a million bodies or a billion?
What about the motion of an entire galaxy?
In the last two lectures, we saw some of the intricacies of the three-body problem.
We studied small perturbations, orbital resonances, horseshoe orbits, Lagrange points.
But what if the situation involves many, many bodies, all moving through space, all exerting
gravitational attraction on each other, like a whole galaxy composed of a hundred billion
stars?
What can we say about such a situation?
More than you might think.
Our basic tool is computer simulation.
We can program the computer with the rules of mechanics, including the law of universal
gravitation.
We can define a collection of bodies, their masses, their positions, their velocities.
And the computer calculates all the forces, figures out how everything moves.
This is called an in-body simulation.
In stands for some large number.
How large?
Well, it depends on how powerful your computer is.
For the largest simulations today, billions.
In the first lecture of this course, we saw such a simulation showing the collision between
two galaxies.
We saw how the gravitational interactions between the two galaxies disrupted their structure
and eventually caused them to merge.
And this sort of process is going on all the time.
For instance, orbiting our Milky Way galaxy is a smaller dwarf galaxy called the Large
Magellanic Cloud, or LMC for short.
It's a familiar object in the skies of the Southern Hemisphere.
Now, the LMC is classified as an irregular galaxy because it seems to lack a simple overall
shape.
However, it appears that the LMC started out as a spiral galaxy, but the neat spiral structure
has been dismantled by the gravity of our galaxy.
So with a supercomputer, we can simulate such processes.
We can simulate superclusters of galaxies evolving over billions of years.
We can have a whole universe in our computer.
But even with powerful computer simulations, we still need a lot of physics to understand
what is happening.
So suppose we simulate a cluster of stars.
We have a thousand stars all orbiting each other.
It looks complicated, but we have some ideas to help us understand.
There are three useful principles, mathematical theorems of Newtonian mechanics, based on
Newton's laws of motion and the law of universal gravitation.
Two of these principles are familiar, but the third one is brand new.
So here's principle number one, the conservation of angular momentum, which you'll recall
from lecture six.
So if our cluster has a net rotation about some axis, that rotation persists.
If the cluster contracts, the rotation speeds up.
If it expands, the rotation slows down.
Principle number two is the conservation of mechanical energy, which is also from lecture
six.
The total mechanical energy, the kinetic energy plus potential energy, stays constant.
Now kinetic energy is simple.
The total kinetic energy is just the sum of the kinetic energy for each star.
And faster motion means a larger kinetic energy, and slower motion means less kinetic energy.
Potential energy, though, is a bit more complicated.
Potential energy is associated with gravitational forces.
If we have two stars at a distance r apart, then the potential energy equals minus g times
m1 times m2 over r.
Remember, gravitational potential energy is negative, and it tends toward zero if the
two masses are very far apart.
So if we have thousands of stars, the total potential energy is a sum of terms like that.
One term for each pair of stars, and that can be quite a sum.
If we have 10 stars, there are 45 distinct pairs of stars.
If we have 100 stars, there are almost 5,000 pairs of stars, and if we have a million stars,
there are about half a trillion pairs of stars.
That sounds like an impossible calculation, but here's a shortcut.
Roughly speaking, the potential energy of a cluster of stars with a total mass m and
a radius r is potential energy approximately equal to minus g times m squared over r.
It's simple, but it's a very approximate estimate.
We're ignoring how the stars are distributed within the cluster.
If the stars are concentrated toward the middle, the potential energy is more negative than
this.
If the stars are distributed more uniformly through the sphere, the potential energy is
a bit less negative than this.
But even so, our approximate equation for the potential energy of a spherical cluster
of stars works surprisingly well.
For a dense, compact cluster of stars, r is small, and so the potential energy is lower.
That is more negative, farther from zero.
And if you have a sparse, widespread cluster, r is large, and so potential energy is higher.
That is, it's less negative.
And if stars are scattered through space extremely far apart, the potential energy is close to
zero.
Here's what the conservation of energy says.
Assume the cluster is isolated, then kinetic energy plus potential energy stays constant.
If the cluster shrinks, potential energy gets more negative, it goes down.
So the kinetic energy must increase.
The stars must speed up.
If the cluster expands, the potential energy gets less negative, that is to say it goes
up, so the kinetic energy must decrease.
The stars slow down.
So to help us understand how the various energies can change over time, we'll make a graph over
time with four lines.
The first line is the energy equal to zero line, which is just there for reference.
Obviously, that stays level.
In the second line, the kinetic energy line is always above the zero line, but it might
go up and down.
The potential energy line is below the zero line, and it might go down and up, because
of course, whenever kinetic energy goes up, potential energy goes down, and vice versa,
because the fourth line, the total energy, kinetic energy plus potential energy, must
stay straight and level.
The total energy is conserved.
If the total energy E equals kinetic energy plus potential energy is greater than zero,
then the cluster can and will disperse into space.
Most of the stars will escape.
If the total energy E equals ke plus pe is less than zero, then the cluster is held together
by gravity.
Maybe a few stars will eventually escape, but most will not.
The conservation laws for angular momentum and energy tell us a lot about what will happen,
but there is also a third principle at work.
Principle number three is something new.
It was proposed in an 1870 lecture by the German physicist Rudolf Clausius, and Clausius
is interested in applying Newton's laws to systems of molecules.
A gas is composed of trillions and trillions of molecules, and Clausius finds a remarkable
consequence of Newton's laws that is applicable to such systems.
He called it the virial theorem.
The name comes from the Latin word vis, meaning force, so he sort of called it the force-ish
theorem.
It's a theorem about the average behavior of the system depending on what forces are
acting, and we'll use the version that is applicable to gravitational forces.
So our system consists of n bodies moving under mutual gravitational attraction.
It's gravitationally bound together so that the kinetic energy plus potential energy is
less than zero.
The kinetic energy is positive, of course, but the potential energy is negative.
So for the virial theorem, we now consider a new combination of energies.
We take twice the kinetic energy plus the potential energy.
That is to say, we're now counting kinetic energy twice as much.
This quantity is not conserved.
It can go up and down, but it has a remarkable property.
The virial theorem of Clausius states that over time, two times the kinetic energy plus
the potential energy is zero on average.
That is, on average, the kinetic energy is about equal to the negative of the potential
energy divided by two.
And this two, by the way, is related to the exponent in the 1 over r squared gravitational
force.
So, in other words, the average speed of motion given by the kinetic energy is related to how
densely clumped together the cluster is given by the potential energy.
So if speeds are faster than this, then twice the kinetic energy plus the potential energy
is greater than zero.
The system will tend to expand.
If the speeds are slower than this, then twice the kinetic energy plus the potential energy
is less than zero, and the system tends to contract.
And if the speeds are just right, twice the kinetic energy plus the potential energy is
equal to zero, and the system might stay about the same over time.
Now, as far as I can tell, there is no official scientific name for twice the kinetic energy
plus the potential energy.
So to make our discussion a bit easier, let's introduce one of our own.
We'll call that combination of kinetic and potential energies the fugacity, and we'll
denote it by F. Fugacity is a word borrowed from chemical physics.
Fugacity is the tendency of a gas to expand.
The word fugacity is related to the English word fugitive.
The gas molecules are fleeing from each other.
So according to the Virial theorem, the force-ish theorem, the value of fugacity, the running
away property, tells us whether or not the system expands.
It expands if F is positive.
It contracts if F is negative.
And in the long run, F is about zero on average.
So here's a graphical view of the Virial theorem.
Again, we have four traces over time.
Kinetic energy, the energy equal to zero line, the total energy, and potential energy.
The conservation of energy tells us that the total energy line is exactly horizontal.
The kinetic and potential energy lines go up and down, but in opposite directions.
The Virial theorem says that, in the long run, these four lines are equally spaced.
So let's take a computer example.
We have a cluster with a thousand particles.
The particles here are starting out moving too slowly, so the fugacity is less than zero.
So at first, the system contracts.
The potential energy gets more negative.
The kinetic energy increases as the stars speed up.
The total energy, of course, stays the same, but the fugacity now becomes positive.
The system expands again.
So the system oscillates in and out for a while.
And in the long run, what happens?
Well, a few stars wind up far away, but most stars are now part of a denser cluster.
The kinetic energy and potential energy curves settle down, and all four lines are equally
spaced.
On average, the fugacity, F equals twice the kinetic energy plus the potential energy,
is about zero.
The Virial theorem holds true.
Now, Clausius' discovery is a truly amazing fact.
It's true for any number of bodies as long as they are held together by their mutual gravitation.
This fact, the Virial theorem, became a powerful tool in the hands of astronomer Fritz Vicki.
Vicki was Swiss by birth, but he came to the U.S. in 1925 and made his career at Caltech.
He was a true genius, a remarkable and creative mind, and he was also eccentric and opinionated
and difficult to get along with.
Vicki made many discoveries and insights decades before other astronomers caught up with him,
and we'll meet him several times in this course.
And in 1937, Vicki applies the Virial theorem to a cluster of galaxies, the coma cluster.
This is a cluster of about a thousand galaxies, like the masses in our computer model.
And we can estimate several things about the cluster.
We can estimate the masses of the visible galaxies, the masses of the stars.
We can estimate the size of the cluster.
We can estimate the speeds of the galaxies in the cluster by using the Doppler effect,
which we discussed in lecture nine.
From these, we can estimate both the kinetic energy and the potential energy, and so calculate
the fugacity of the coma cluster.
So, does the Virial theorem hold?
No.
F is much greater than zero.
The kinetic energy is much too large.
So does that mean that the coma cluster is dispersing?
That's unlikely.
The coma cluster has been around for billions of years.
Sticky has a more interesting idea.
So suppose only part of the mass of the cluster were actually visible.
Then our estimates for kinetic energy and potential energy would be wrong.
If we could only see half the cluster mass, for example, our estimate of the kinetic energy
would be too small by a factor of two.
But potential energy depends on interactions between the masses, and we would only see one
quarter of those.
That is, our estimate of the potential energy is wrong by a factor of four.
This discrepancy would throw the Virial theorem out of whack.
So consider two side-by-side computer simulations of a thousand identical masses.
On the left, the masses move at one speed.
On the right, they are moving much more rapidly, yet they do not disperse.
It looks at first like the Virial theorem is in trouble.
It looks like we're seeing too much kinetic energy in that cluster.
Well, what's really happening?
Actually the cluster on the right has more mass than we are showing.
If we included the invisible bodies as well, then the Virial theorem applies equally to
both.
So Sticky's idea is this.
We seem to see too much kinetic energy in the coma cluster.
So maybe that means that there is mass in the coma cluster that is not visible to us.
This is what astronomers have come to call dark matter.
We can use the Virial theorem to estimate how much dark matter there must be in the coma
cluster.
We are using gravity, in other words, via the Virial theorem as a way to see the invisible.
So Sticky says that the coma cluster must have a lot of unseen matter.
The visible galaxies are only a small fraction of what's there.
And the same thing is true of other galaxy clusters.
They also have lots of unseen mass.
And the same thing is true of the galaxies themselves.
Decades after Sticky's discovery in the 1970s, the American astronomer Vera Rubin becomes
interested in galactic rotation.
She's studying spiral galaxies, which are a common type of galaxy, including our own
galaxy.
And in a spiral galaxy, the stars mostly lie in a relatively thin disk about a central
bulge.
The spiral pattern origin in the spiral galaxy is a bit more complicated.
It's often due to perturbations from nearby galaxies.
But the stars in the disk of the galaxy orbit the galaxy.
So the orbital speed of a star in the galaxy tells us how much mass can be found within
the star's orbit, how much mass the star is orbiting.
So let's recall that the circular orbit speed is v-circ equal to the square root of g times
m over r.
So if we know orbital speed and the distance from the center of the galaxy, we know m,
the mass that the star is orbiting.
So Rubin measures the orbital speed using the Doppler effect.
And the typical orbital speed in the outskirts of a visible disk of a galaxy is about 200
kilometers per second.
In fact, that's just about the orbital speed of our sun in the Milky Way galaxy.
And from this, we can calculate that our galaxy and other spiral galaxies have about 100
billion times the sun's mass.
But Rubin finds a very few stars that orbit the galaxy much farther away, far beyond the
edge of the visible disk of the galaxy, several times as far from the galaxy center.
So you might expect their orbital speeds will be a lot smaller.
They're orbiting the same galaxy, the same mass, but at a much larger r.
But instead, Rubin finds that the orbital speed is about 200 kilometers per second.
It's about the same.
The larger orbit, therefore, must enclose more mass to have the same orbital speed.
And that means that the visible galaxy is only a small part of the whole.
Most of the mass of the galaxy is in a large, invisible halo of dark matter, extending into
space beyond the visible edge of the galaxy.
So what is dark matter?
Dark matter is the missing mass in galaxies and clusters of galaxies.
And what is this dark matter?
What is the nature of this dark matter?
Well, it's not stars.
We'd see stars.
And there are other kinds of matter that can be seen with other kinds of telescope.
If you have cool hydrogen gas between the stars or dust clouds, then you can see those
with radio and infrared telescopes.
If you have hot ionized gas, you can spot that with X-ray telescopes.
And we do see a lot of each of these.
A cluster of galaxies, for example, contains lots of very tenuous hot gas in the space
between the galaxies.
But these kinds of matter are not nearly enough to account for the missing mass.
The conclusion we must draw is that most of the mass in the universe is something we cannot
see.
Now, Tsviki and Rubin both raised another possibility.
Maybe Newton's law of gravity is not quite correct at large distances.
The Virial theorem and the formula for orbital speed could be just wrong at large distances.
For large systems like galaxies and galaxy clusters, the laws would be different.
And physicists call this idea Mond, that stands for modified Newtonian dynamics.
And in this alternate theory, there's no dark matter at all.
There's just a different law of gravity.
So which is true?
Is there dark matter?
Or do we have a modified law of gravity?
Well, there might be a way to tell.
If there is dark matter, we might be able to roughly map it out.
How could we do this?
Well, gravity bends light.
This is called gravitational lensing, and we'll talk about that more in lecture 18.
So by studying how light is bent, we can approximately map out dark matter.
Of course, if Mond is true, then dark matter, so-called, is just a bad way of thinking about
how gravity really works.
So if we made maps of light bending in modified Newtonian dynamics, there'd be an apparent
halo of dark matter around every large object, like a galaxy or a cluster.
Because the dark matter there would only be a kind of shadow of regular matter.
It could never be separated.
So here's a computer model of a galaxy cluster under ordinary Newtonian gravity.
The white dots are galaxies.
These are things we can see in an ordinary telescope.
The blue dots are dark matter that comprises most of the cluster.
The reddish cloud is that hot, thin gas that we can see in an X-ray telescope.
But now suppose two such clusters collide.
This, by the way, is a computer simulation that was created in a computational physics
course I taught a while back.
A collision of galaxy clusters is a huge event.
It takes hundreds of millions of years to happen.
And what does happen?
Well, the galaxies mostly miss each other, so they mostly pass through.
And the dark matter clouds also pass through each other.
But the hot gas clouds do collide.
And the result is you have two clumps of galaxies on either side, you have two clumps of dark
matter, and one clump of hot gas in the middle.
This simulation assumes the existence of dark matter.
If dark matter really exists, then a collision can separate the dark matter from the gas.
So does this ever really happen?
Consider this image of the cluster 1E065756, known to astronomers as the bullet cluster.
And really, this is a composite of three images.
The white spots are visible galaxies.
The red is hot gas, as shown by an x-ray telescope.
The blue is dark matter, mapped out by the light bending technique I've described.
And this cluster is just like our model.
The gas and the dark matter have been separated.
And this could never happen in Monde, modified Newtonian dynamics.
In that theory, dark matter is not real stuff.
It's just a kind of shadow of ordinary matter.
So this separation is a key piece of evidence that Newtonian gravity is right and that dark
matter is real.
Gravity reveals that most of the matter in the universe cannot be seen at all.
It's dark matter.
What is it?
We don't know.
It's a major puzzle in physics.
And we'll return to that in lecture 22.
Meanwhile, gravity tells us that there is more to the universe than meets the eye.
And it also tells us something important about how things in the universe first formed.
It's another application of the virial theorem worked out more than 100 years ago by the
English astrophysicist James Jeans.
So imagine we start with a cloud of gas in space.
The cloud has a certain density, a certain temperature.
So what happens?
Well, there are two reasonable guesses.
The first is that the cloud might just disperse into empty space.
The second guess is that there might be gravitational collapse.
All the parts of the cloud attract each other and the whole thing contracts.
So what is it that determines which one of these two possible fates will happen?
Now this is an important issue.
Galaxies, stars, and planets all started out as big gas clouds.
So the gravitational collapse of a tenuous cloud of gas is the first step to the formation
of almost anything in the universe.
Jeans says the key to this is the virial theorem.
But he does not apply it to a cluster of stars or galaxies.
He applies it to the individual molecules in the cloud of gas.
Potential energy is still a measure of how clumped together that mass is.
It's still reasonable to estimate the potential energy of a cloud of mass m and radius r by
minus g times m squared over r.
The kinetic energy of the molecules, though, is just the heat content of the gas, and that's
related to temperature.
And the kinetic energy is also proportional to the mass.
So the cloud will contract or expand or stay the same, depending on whether the fugacity
twice the kinetic energy plus the potential energy is negative or positive or zero.
Now gravity, of course, is very weak.
So for a small cloud, the potential energy, which depends on the forces between things,
is close to zero.
So the kinetic energy dominates and the fugacity is positive, and the cloud expands and tends
to disperse.
But now consider a cloud that is 10 times bigger in radius and has the same density and temperature.
Its volume is a thousand times bigger, so its mass is a thousand times bigger.
The kinetic energy is a thousand times bigger.
But how does the potential energy get multiplied?
Well in our formula, the potential energy depends on m squared divided by r, so the potential
energy is multiplied by a thousand squared divided by ten.
In other words, the potential energy is multiplied a hundred thousand times.
So for a large cloud made of the same stuff, with the same temperature and the same density,
the negative potential energy is more important.
The fugacity, two times the kinetic energy plus the potential energy, is negative, so
the cloud must contract.
Genes works out just how big a cloud has to be for gravitational collapse to occur, and
it's called the genes mass.
It depends on the density of the gas and the temperature of the gas.
So if the mass of the cloud is less than the genes mass, the cloud will disperse into space.
If the mass of the cloud is greater than the genes mass, the cloud will undergo gravitational
collapse.
So how big is the genes mass?
Let's take a molecular cloud in our own galaxy.
It contains about a thousand hydrogen molecules per cubic centimeter.
It has a temperature of about 10 to 20 degrees above absolute zero.
The genes mass for such a cloud is several times larger than the mass of our sun.
A cloud larger than that will contract, which is why the stars in our galaxy mostly form
in groups altogether, several stars at a time.
Genes' insight is that gravity determines where and how and when tenuous clouds in deep
space can contract to form stars and galaxies and planets.
Almost five billion years ago, a cloud of hydrogen and helium gas, with a few other
things, found itself on the right side of the genes line for gravitational collapse.
Why?
The cloud might have been compressed a little by the shockwave from a nearby exploding star.
In any case, driven by its own gravitation, the cloud contracted to a tiny fraction of
its original size and eventually formed the sun and the planets of our solar system.
But of course, the sun and the planets do not continue to contract.
Other internal forces balance the inward pull of gravity.
That balance is called hydrostatic equilibrium.
For solid planets, that collapse is halted by interatomic forces, the same forces that
keep us from falling into the ground toward the center of the Earth.
The sun, though, is much larger and it's made of gas, so that's a more complicated story.
There's a continual struggle between gravity pulling inward and pressure forces pushing
outward.
Pressure forces fueled by nuclear reactions in the sun's core.
How that happens in the sun and other stars, and how that struggle will turn out in the
far future, is the subject of the next lecture.
So, the billion year battle.
That's next time.
I'll see you then.
