We are halfway through our course on gravity.
It's a turning point in the story.
Here's that story so far.
Gravity is a force part of Newtonian mechanics, and gravity has some special properties.
It's very weak compared to other fundamental forces of nature.
It is an attractive force between masses, and it is a universal force.
That is, every mass exerts gravitational attraction on every other in exactly the same way.
The strength of the gravitational force decreases with distance.
It is proportional to 1 over the distance squared.
We've seen lots of phenomena that are governed by gravity, both everyday phenomena on Earth,
and also exotic phenomena in deep space.
We have also found that gravity lets us see things in the universe that would be otherwise
invisible.
We can see planets around other stars, or dark matter in galaxies.
Our turning point is a revolutionary new point of view about space, time, motion, and gravitation
developed by Albert Einstein, beginning about 1905.
These ideas and their implications will be our main business for the rest of the course.
Like Einstein, we first must lay some groundwork, and occasionally it may seem that we've wandered
away from the topic of gravity.
We'll talk about the speed of light, about clocks and time, and so on.
What do these things have to do with gravity?
Well, what we're doing is we're building a foundation.
In the lectures to come, we will need every part of that foundation to build our new understanding
of gravity.
Einstein's work grew out of a remarkable shift in physics during the 19th century.
It's a shift from thinking about forces between particles to thinking about fields in space.
This shift introduced new ideas that extended physics beyond Newton's mechanics.
And these new ideas were powerful and very successful, but they also introduced some
profound puzzles of their own.
So consider an example of gravity in action, a planet orbiting the Sun.
Here's what we said.
We said the planet is steered by a gravitational force exerted by the Sun.
It is the planet gets its marching orders, so to speak, from the Sun, to use the phrase
coined by physicist John Wheeler, whom we will meet later in the course.
But in fact, the Newtonian picture is actually much more than that.
The planet gets its marching orders instantaneously from everywhere in the universe, since everything
everywhere exerts some gravitational force on the planet.
This idea is known as action at a distance.
The Sun over there somehow exerts a force that acts on the planet over here.
Even Newton thought this was a weird and disturbing idea.
Here's a paraphrase of what he had to say about it.
He said, I describe gravity, but I do not explain it.
And as a philosophical matter, it does seem absurd to me that one body could exert a force
on another body far away with nothing between them to convey that influence.
But Newton had no idea how that influence is really conveyed.
In the early 19th century, an alternative point of view emerged.
The idea arose in connection with electric and magnetic forces.
These are long range interactions, like gravity.
Electric charges, positive or negative, exert electric forces on each other.
Moving charges, electric currents, exert magnetic forces on each other.
And at first, it looks like more of the same action at a distance.
But the English physicist Michael Faraday had a different idea.
He said there are electric and magnetic fields in space.
So what is the electric field?
What every point in space, even empty space, the electric field is present.
At each point in space, that field has a certain strength and a certain direction.
The field might vary from place to place, and it might be changing with time.
Electric charges are the so-called sources of the field.
That is to say they determine the field values everywhere in the universe.
And we could map out the strength and direction of the electric field in space.
So given that the field exists, the electric force on any particular charge is completely
determined by the field where the charge is.
That is, an electrically charged particle gets its marching orders locally.
Locally from the field at the point where the charge itself is.
So we can express this as an equation.
Let's suppose the local value of the electric field is E, and we put an electric charge
Q in the field at that point, then the force F experienced by the charge is given by F
equals Q times E.
This means that the same field can affect different particles in different ways.
A positive charge is pushed in the same direction as E.
A negative charge is pushed in the opposite direction.
And a neutral particle, one with Q equal to zero, experiences no force at all.
So we can see the effect of the field when we see charges pushed this way or that.
But the field exists in space even if no charges happen to be present.
Okay, let's sum it up.
Charges tell the field how to arrange itself in space.
And then the field tells charges how to move through space.
And that's Faraday's big idea.
And magnetic fields and forces work out pretty much the same way.
It is natural to imagine that the same idea could be applied to gravity.
So masses determine a gravitational field everywhere in space.
That gravitational field exists even in empty space.
For example, the Earth sets up a gravitational field in this room.
Now that field is nearly uniform.
It's about the same everywhere in the room.
And it points downward.
In fact, that is how we define downward.
It's the direction that the gravitational field points.
Down means the direction of the gravitational field.
So an object in this room, like this apple,
experiences a force due to the local gravitational field.
The falling apple gets its marching orders directly from the field right here,
not directly from the Earth down there.
It seems like science fiction to say that the Earth is surrounded by a force field.
But that is exactly what gravity is.
And lots of gravitational physics sounds very natural in this new field language.
For instance, here's the principle of equivalence.
All objects have the same acceleration in a given gravitational field.
Here's the tidal effect.
The gravitational field can have different values in different places.
Here's the idea of hydrostatic equilibrium in field language.
At each point in a body at equilibrium, pressure forces balance the local gravitational field.
So is this just a different way of speaking, or is there anything really new in it?
Well, I think we can identify several new concepts in the field theory.
First, the field exists even in empty space.
And second, the field is not the same thing as the force that it exerts.
The same field may exert different forces on different objects placed in the field.
The apple and I here in the same gravitational field experience different gravitational forces.
Third, objects get their marching orders locally from the field at their location.
Fourth, a field can vary from place to place and can change over time, but it doesn't really move anywhere.
The field already exists everywhere, so some places it might have value zero.
The field doesn't move.
That means that if mechanics is the science of force and motion, and a field isn't a force,
and a field doesn't move, a field is beyond mechanics.
Faraday said that an object gets its marching orders locally.
There is no instantaneous action at a distance.
But isn't that cheating a little bit?
Doesn't the field itself get its marching orders at a distance?
Not really.
Let's go back to the electric field.
A body with electric charge is surrounded by a field.
Faraday visualized this by drawing lines in space.
The direction of the lines indicates the direction of the field.
The density of the lines indicates the strength of the field.
So the charge is surrounded by radial field lines.
And that means that the field is radial in direction at any point,
and its strongest closest to the charge where the field lines are bunched together.
Now, move the charge.
Does the field respond instantaneously?
Actually, no.
The change in the field spreads outward at a finite speed.
The field at one point affects the field at the next point, and so on.
It takes some time for news of the change to work its way out to distant places.
To describe this precisely, we need some field equations.
These are mathematical relations governing how the field varies in space and time.
These field equations are not quite like any of Newton's laws.
They do not directly describe how forces affect motion.
The field equations are therefore not really part of Newtonian mechanics.
So for electric and magnetic fields, the field equations are Maxwell's equations.
First put together by James Clerk Maxwell, the great 19th century Scottish physicist.
And Maxwell's equations have a great mathematical symmetry and beauty about them,
and inside that mathematics, they contain a secret.
Using his equations, Maxwell is able to show that changes in electric and magnetic fields
move through empty space in the form of waves.
That is to say as moving oscillating disturbances in space.
And the speed of the wave is determined by electric and magnetic physics.
So the electric force between two charges is governed by an electric constant,
something like Newton's constant G for gravity.
And we could do an experiment to measure its value.
And there's another constant that determines the magnetic force between two wires carrying electric current.
And again, we could find that force, that force constant, by means of a laboratory experiment.
Maxwell shows that the speed of his electromagnetic waves depends on these two constants.
And from the results of electric and magnetic experiments, he calculates that speed.
It's called C and is equal to 3 times 10 to the 8th meters per second.
That's about 300,000 kilometers per second.
And Maxwell realizes that is the speed of light.
In Maxwell's day, it is known that light is a kind of wave phenomenon.
And the speed of light has been measured pretty well by that time.
What is not known is what sort of wave light is.
What is it that's waving?
Maxwell says light is an electromagnetic wave.
Light is a moving oscillating disturbance of electric and magnetic fields in empty space.
This means that fields are not just complicated ways to talk about forces.
Fields are real in themselves.
They have physical phenomena of their own without any particles of matter being present.
Because light can carry energy and momentum from place to place, the fields can carry energy and momentum from place to place.
And these fields are not really part of mechanics.
Mechanics is the science of force and motion, that is, the science of how particles of matter move around.
The fields are not made of matter, so they lie outside the realm of Newtonian mechanics.
Now this was a hard notion to accept in the 19th century.
Maxwell himself tried to think of electromagnetic fields in a mechanical way.
He imagined complicated displacements in an all-pervading substance called the ether.
And in that case, light waves would be mechanical disturbances, like sound waves in air.
In other words, light would be just vibrational waves in the ether.
But Maxwell found it hard to make this idea work out in detail.
He needed to make some pretty amazing assumptions about the ether.
First of all, the ether must fill all of space so that the light waves can reach us from distant stars.
And the ether must have almost no mass at all, or we would see its gravitational effects.
And finally, the ether must be incredibly stiff and must be more rigid than diamond
so that the speed of the waves can be so very fast.
Well, Maxwell himself was sensible enough to separate his mathematical field equations
from his speculations about the ether.
But suppose he was right. Suppose light really turns out to be a mechanical wave in the ether.
Then light would be something like a sound wave.
But the speed of sound is much slower, of course.
It's about 345 meters per second, roughly a millionth of C, the speed of light.
So let's think about doing some experiments on sound waves.
Suppose a steady wind is blowing past us in the laboratory. What would we see?
Well, we see the speed of sound is faster downwind.
Let's say the sound waves are carried along with the moving air.
And the speed of sound would be slower upwind.
And the same thing would be true whether the air is moving through our lab,
or our lab is moving through the air.
Now here on Earth, we are doubtless moving through the ether.
The Earth orbits the Sun at about 30 kilometers per second,
and the Sun orbits in our galaxy at 200 kilometers per second.
So there should be a pretty good ether wind blowing through our lab.
And thus, the speed of light should be different in different directions.
In 1881, Albert Michelsen, the great American experimental physicist,
does a remarkable experiment in Berlin.
Michelsen has developed an extremely sensitive optical device called an interferometer,
and he uses this to compare the speed of light in different directions.
And he finds no difference at all.
So in 1887, he repeats the experiment
more carefully with Edward Morley in the United States.
This new experiment would be able to detect an ether wind
of only one kilometer per second at just 3% of the Earth's orbital speed.
But again, Michelsen and Morley find no measurable effect.
The speed of light seems to be the same in all directions.
And that's a big puzzle.
Several of the greatest scientists of the late 19th century
tried all kinds of ideas to explain the results.
I'm thinking about the Irish physicist George Fitzgerald,
and the Dutch physicist Hendrik Lorenz,
and the great French mathematician Henri Poincaré.
They said, well, maybe our laboratory instruments
are also affected when they move through the ether.
Maybe they become distorted in space
so they don't correctly measure distance, and so on.
And maybe this happens in a way that just exactly hides
these changes in the speed of light.
This is close to the real answer, but it is not quite right.
Now, at about the same time this was going on, along comes Ernst Mach,
an Austrian physicist and philosopher.
This is the Mach in Mach number, by the way,
which is the speed of an aircraft as a multiple of the speed of sound.
And Mach made many discoveries in aerodynamics.
But he also wrote a sharp critique of the basic concepts of Newton's mechanics.
So, Newton said that space has an absolute meaning,
a meaning independent of the objects that are occupying space.
Newton also said that time has an absolute meaning.
It's a meaning independent of processes that take place in time.
And Newton said that the inertia of a body was an intrinsic property,
independent of that body.
An intrinsic property independent of that body's relationship
with the rest of the universe.
Absolute space, absolute time, intrinsic inertia.
None of these, Mach believed, were justifiable as basic assumptions.
So, Mach said that physics needed to be rebuilt on a more reliable foundation.
So, by the beginning of the 20th century, physics is in a state of confusion.
And onto this stage comes Albert Einstein.
Now, Einstein is something of a paradox.
He's a shy, humble, good-natured introvert.
Yet, he's also the most celebrated scientist since Isaac Newton.
Einstein is not a person of action.
He's mostly lived in sleepy university towns
and thought about the universe.
And yet, he's a revolutionary figure with an influence far beyond science and academia.
Einstein was born in Germany.
And as a young man, he became a Swiss citizen.
And then in his 60s, a citizen of the United States.
All three countries claimed him.
And he was fascinated since childhood by mathematics and physics.
Einstein deeply appreciated the field theory of Faraday and Maxwell.
And he also absorbed Mach's profound critique of Newton.
And he set himself to the task of solving some of the most important problems in physics.
So, our story opens in 1905.
Einstein is finishing up his doctorate in physics at the University of Zurich,
while working at the Swiss Patent Office to pay the rent.
And in that year, he publishes half a dozen of the most consequential papers in the history of science.
Now, three of the papers are on statistical physics,
which is the subject of his PhD research.
And these are very important papers.
In fact, one of them includes a method by which the actual sizes of atoms can be determined.
And that's how the sizes of atoms were determined a few years later.
One of the papers is a revolutionary advance in quantum theory,
for which Einstein would eventually receive the Nobel Prize in physics.
But the two remaining papers are his most famous work, the work that concerns us now.
The first one, in June, lays out Einstein's special theory of relativity.
And the second one, in September, is a second short paper on relativity,
which includes the most famous equation in the world, E equals MC squared.
So, what is it all about?
Well, in 1905, Einstein is thinking about Galileo's ship.
Recall that Galileo imagines doing various experiments in a smoothly moving ship.
And he finds that no mechanics experiment, that is to say, no experiment about force and motion,
can detect that the ship is moving.
And this is why we cannot feel the motion of the Earth through space as it orbits the Sun.
This is Galileo's principle of relativity.
But if the aether idea is right, you could detect the ship's movement through the aether.
How?
By doing an electromagnetic.
Experiment, like measuring the speed of electromagnetic waves,
the speed of light, in different directions.
And so Einstein asks, all right, what if the ship is moving at the speed of light?
Then light could not move forward in the lab at all.
That would be very different from being at rest.
So the principle of relativity would just be wrong.
But to Einstein, this seems too high a price to pay.
So Einstein proposes a bold idea.
He says, maybe we cannot detect the motion of the ship, even by speed of light measurements.
After all, Michelson and Morley couldn't.
Einstein says we should elevate the principle of relativity
to a fundamental law governing all of physics, mechanics, electromagnetism, and beyond.
And if some of those branches of physics need to be modified to make this work,
so be it.
Here are Einstein's basic postulates.
The first postulate is that every observer, whether at rest or in uniform motion,
sees the same general laws of physics.
And the second postulate is, the speed of light,
see, is the same, independent of the motion of the source.
Therefore, it follows that every observer, at rest or in uniform motion,
must measure the same speed of light in every direction.
Now, this is impossible to reconcile with the ether theory.
So we get rid of ether theory.
But we keep Maxwell's beautiful equations about electric and magnetic field.
This idea is also a bit counter-intuitive.
Suppose I stand at rest and shoot a beam of light at speed c.
You pass by me at speed ½ times c in the same direction.
So how fast do you observe the light beam going?
Well, common sense says that you observe the light beam traveling ahead of you at ½ times c.
And Einstein says no, you would observe the same speed c for the light beam.
So how can this be true?
Einstein's answer is profound.
The world consists of space and time.
Different observers measure space and time in different ways.
And these differences are exactly what make everything consistent.
The different observers will actually agree about quite a lot.
They'll agree about the general laws of physics.
That's one of the postulates.
They'll agree about the speed of light in empty space.
That's another one of the postulates.
They'll agree about which events take place in the universe.
An event is something that occurs at a particular place in time.
And they'll agree about which objects are accelerating and which ones are not.
Recall Galileo's principle of inertia, Newton's first law,
no net force means no acceleration.
So all observers agree that this law is true.
Sometimes we call them inertial observers.
Now here are some things that observers might not agree about.
They might not agree about which objects are moving and which ones are not.
To myself, I seem to be at rest.
But you might see me moving.
And they might disagree about what time and in what place various events occur.
So Einstein introduces the idea of a frame of reference.
A frame of reference is just a system of assigning times and locations
to events in the universe.
A frame of reference is a set of time and space coordinates.
And different observers have different frames of reference.
So another thing that our observers might disagree about is the behavior of clocks.
And this is a famous effect of relativity.
It's called time dilation.
A moving clock actually runs slowly.
So imagine a clock at rest ticks once per second.
Now suppose we see that clock moving past us near the speed of light.
Now those ticks of the clock are separated by a lot of space
and also by more than one second of time.
That is, the moving clock is ticking slowly.
And this is a real effect.
For example, short-lived particles last longer
if they are moving close to the speed of light.
So what's wrong with the moving clock?
Nothing. It's working fine.
We'll say much more about these effects in lecture 15.
Einstein starts from his reimagined principle of relativity
and he rebuilds all of physics from the ground up.
That sounds almost hilariously ambitious, but that's the program he undertakes.
And he finds that Newton's laws of motion require modification,
especially at speeds close to see the speed of light.
Maxwell's field equations, on the other hand, need no changes at all.
The physics of gravity, he sets aside for later work.
Notice how Einstein does all this.
He reaches backward past Newton's physics to Galileo's original insight.
No laboratory experiment can detect the motion of the laboratory.
We cannot define absolute motion, only relative motion can be measured.
By holding on to this principle, even when electromagnetic fields are present,
even when electromagnetic fields are present,
Einstein is led to a whole new framework for physics.
Einstein is like a magician and he's just pulled a very big rabbit out of a remarkably small hat.
But in 1905, Einstein is also at the start of a 10-year intellectual quest,
a quest that will lead him to a whole new way to understand gravity.
Other people provide ideas and discoveries along the way, but the quest is Einstein.
In the next lecture, we'll see Einstein, the magician, pull another huge rabbit out of the hat.
Einstein, trying to understand gravity, will reach back beyond Newton
to another of Galileo's basic discoveries, that all objects in a gravitational field
fall with the same acceleration, as we know.
Einstein will see that familiar fact in a completely new way, and in so doing,
he will revolutionize the physics of gravity.
