In 1905, Albert Einstein introduced a new framework for physics.
It's the first real revision of Newtonian mechanics in over 200 years.
The new physics is based on a familiar principle, the principle of relativity.
The principle that the laws of physics look just the same in a moving laboratory as they do in a laboratory at rest.
So you cannot do an experiment in a lab that would detect its motion.
We can measure the motion of one object relative to another, but absolute motion has no experimental meaning.
Now, Einstein postulates that all inertial observers see the same laws of physics,
and that includes the same speed of light, c, which is 300 million meters per second.
But to make this principle work, ideas of space and time and force and motion require adjustment.
Then last time we recounted what Einstein called the happiest thought of my life.
Galileo, back in the 1600s, said that everything falls with the same acceleration.
And Einstein in 1907 says this means that free fall is equivalent to zero gravity.
It means that gravity has laboratory effects exactly like an accelerating frame of reference.
And this is Einstein's new version of the principle of equivalence.
Now, Einstein knows that this idea will lead to a new general theory of relativity.
But the road to the new theory requires him to think about special relativity in a new way.
So for this lecture we will suppose that gravity is zero.
That is, we are doing all of our experiments in a freely falling laboratory.
Whether that laboratory is near the earth or out in deep space, our frame of reference is inertial.
The law of inertia holds good.
So everything we say is covered by the special theory of relativity, Einstein's theory from 1905.
And in the next lecture we will see how to apply this lecture to gravity and Einstein's general theory.
So when Einstein began to publish his ideas about relativity, not everyone accepted them.
He was still a clerk at the Swiss Patent Office until 1909, though by 1914 he did have a prestigious research professorship in Berlin.
Some people, however, were very interested in his work from the very start.
And one of these was his old mathematics professor, Hermann Minkowski.
Now Minkowski thought very deeply about Einstein's work.
He came to an interesting conclusion about it.
He said relativity is really a theory of four-dimensional geometry.
So what is Minkowski's new point of view?
To see what he is getting at we need to make a detour through plane geometry.
Now a plane is a flat 2D surface and we often describe the plane using coordinates which we give traditional names to.
X and Y. The X-axis is a horizontal line and the Y-axis is a vertical line.
And note the key fact here, the two axes are perpendicular to each other.
So any point in the plane can be labeled by two numbers, X and Y, its address.
X is how many meters right of the center point you are, and that might be negative.
And Y is how many meters up from the center point you are, and that too might be negative.
It takes two numbers to locate a point on the plane, which is why we say that the plane is two-dimensional.
To locate a point in space we would need three numbers, X, Y and Z, to give its address.
So space is three-dimensional.
Describing points in the plane in this way goes all the way back to Rene Descartes,
the 17th century French philosopher and mathematician.
The really beautiful thing about it is that we can relate geometrical ideas to numerical or algebraic relationships.
So let me explain what I mean by an example, the distance between two points.
So consider points in the plane with addresses 2-1 and 5-5.
How far apart are they?
Well, we can use coordinates to figure it out.
We make a right triangle.
Two sides are parallel to the X and Y axes, and so are at a right angle.
And the hypotenuse of the triangle is the diagonal line segment between the two points.
From the coordinates we can find the length of the horizontal and vertical sides.
The X length is 5-2, which is equal to 3 meters, and the Y length is 5-1, which is equal to 4 meters.
And now we can use a famous geometrical relationship for triangles, the Pythagorean theorem.
And this is often written in this way, a squared plus b squared equals c squared.
Of course, by itself a formula like that means nothing. We need an interpretation.
We must ask, what do the terms mean? When does the formula apply?
Well, our formula applies to right triangles, triangles with one right angle.
A and B are the length of the sides next to the right angle, and c is the length of the hypotenuse, the third side.
For our triangle, c is the distance between our points.
c squared equals a squared plus b squared, which equals 9 plus 16, which is 25.
Therefore, c equals the square root of 25, which is 5. The distance between the two points is 5 meters.
And this approach works in general. Given any two points with coordinates x1, y1 and x2, y2, we can make a right triangle,
with sides parallel to the axes and the hypotenuse between the points.
So the x side length would be delta x equal to x2 minus x1.
So is this negative? Don't worry if it's negative. We're going to square it.
And the y side length delta y is y2 minus y1, and in each case that Greek letter delta means difference,
the difference in x or y between our two points.
So let's call the distance between the points d.
Then the Pythagorean distance formula is d squared equals delta x squared plus delta y squared.
There's actually something rather profound in this formula.
The two sides of the equation are very different.
On the right hand side, we chose the coordinates, we chose where to put the center, how to arrange the axes,
and two different people might do that differently.
Your x and y might not be the same as my x prime and y prime.
I use primes to emphasize that they're not really the same coordinates.
We might assign different coordinates, in other words, to the same point.
We might even find a different delta x and delta y between the same pair of points.
So it seems like everything might be different, but something is always the same.
And what is the same? The distance between the points must be the same.
The meaning of distance does not depend on our choice of coordinates.
So in the distance formula, the left hand side is the same whether you compute it with your x and y coordinates,
or I compute it with my x prime and y prime coordinates.
We can disagree about x's and y's, but we must agree about d.
So our plane might represent the math of a county.
Towns are located at various points on the plane.
And the towns have some geographical relationships.
Town A and B are 10 miles apart.
Town C is closer to A than it is to B, and so on.
So we bring in a team of surveyors to set up a coordinate system for the county.
Every town, every house, every tree gets assigned coordinates x and y.
All of the coordinate addresses are published in a big book.
And now to find the distance between two points in the county,
we can just look up the coordinates and apply the formula.
Now later, suppose a second team of surveyors comes in.
They set up a coordinate system of their own and find a bunch of new x's and y's.
But their coordinates are centered in a different place from the first team's coordinates,
and their axes point in different directions.
Nevertheless, you can find distances just as well with their data.
In fact, the formula you use looks just the same,
and you always get the very same distances between points in the county.
So coordinates are just how we choose to describe positions by numbers.
Distance has a real meaning that does not depend on our choice.
Data from either team of surveyors is equally good for calculating distance,
because both teams are describing the same geography.
Okay, back to Minkowski and Geometry.
Minkowski says that the world we live in is really four-dimensional.
Now this is less strange than it sounds.
Suppose you and I are trying to arrange to meet in a city.
So we say, we'll meet on Fifth Avenue. That's one number.
But one number is not enough. Fifth Avenue is really long.
So we say, we'll meet at number 42 on Fifth Avenue. That's two numbers.
Okay, that's better. But there's a 20-story building at this address.
So we say, meet at number 42 on Fifth Avenue on the sixth floor. That's three numbers.
But we still left something out.
The time of our meeting.
We have to say, meet at number 42 on Fifth Avenue on the sixth floor at 1 p.m.
It takes four numbers, three spatial coordinates and time to arrange our rendezvous.
And that, by the way, is why the GPS system requires you to receive signals from four satellites
to locate yourself in space and time.
It takes four coordinates to map out our universe of space and time.
Now, Minkowski has a name for this four-dimensional world that we live in.
He calls it spacetime, one word for one thing.
Everything that happens in our universe lies somewhere in spacetime.
And the points in spacetime, things with both a where and a when, are called events.
The physical universe is just the totality of all events.
And all of our statements about where and when, about length and duration, are statements about spacetime.
What then is a frame of reference?
Well, that's just a way of assigning space and time coordinates to events,
like a team of surveyors with measuring tapes and stopwatches,
finding three spatial coordinates and one time coordinate for each event.
Different frames of reference, different teams of surveyors,
might assign different space and time coordinates to the events in spacetime.
But the new coordinates describe the same spacetime just as our two teams of surveyors
were describing the same geography of the county.
But we have some work to do to really understand Minkowski's idea.
Here is problem number one.
There are four dimensions. How can we figure anything out in four dimensions?
And the answer is most of us can't really think in four dimensions.
So we simplify.
Instead of three space dimensions, we imagine just two, or even just one.
We can imagine one dimension of space labeled by the x-coordinate.
We might imagine, for example, that everything we care about happens along a single line, like a long highway.
And with it we have one dimension of time, called that the t-coordinate.
And that lets us draw a picture of spacetime, a spacetime diagram.
The space coordinate x runs horizontally, left and right.
The time coordinate t runs vertically, the future is up, and past is down.
Any event is just a point in our diagram.
Well what about a physical object? What does an apple look like?
Well at any moment in time, the apple has a location.
And you put all these together, and the apple is a long red line stretching from past to future.
Minkowski calls this the world line of the apple.
The shape of the world line in spacetime tells us how the apple is moving.
So an apple at rest will have a world line that is straight and vertical in our diagram.
An apple moving right or left will have a world line that is tilted, and a higher speed means more tilt.
An apple that is accelerating will have a world line that is curved somehow.
So here's the law of inertia in spacetime language.
If there is no net external force acting on the apple, its world line is straight.
That sounds simple, but it is a fact worth remembering.
And also notice the time axis. We can think of that as a world line too.
It's the world line for an object that's at rest in the center of the spatial coordinate.
But there's a problem, another problem with thinking in spacetime.
Call this problem number two. Our spacetime axes have different units.
We measure space in meters, and we measure time in seconds.
If our team of county surveyors measured y in miles at x in millimeters,
we would find their position data very hard to use.
So Minkowski's answer is clever.
Multiply time by c, the speed of light.
In other words, the time coordinate is really ct, c times t.
c of course is 300 million meters per second.
Why use that speed?
Because Einstein showed us that everyone agrees on its value.
It's a universal speed built into the laws of physics.
Because the speed of light is so fast then, even a short time is a long distance.
One billionth of a second, one nanosecond, is about 30 centimeters, a foot.
One second is 300 million meters, most of the way to the moon.
So different frames of reference correspond to different coordinate axes,
different ways of assigning four numbers, ct, x, y, and z, to events.
And Minkowski asks, is there something that is the same in all frames of reference?
Something like distance, always the same even though coordinates might be different.
Yes. He called it spacetime interval and denoted it by s.
It's like a distance between spacetime points, the events in the universe.
But it is different in a surprising way.
So let's suppose we're given two events.
We have the time coordinates and the space coordinates for each.
And we're simplifying so we only consider x coordinates for space.
Delta t is the time interval between the events.
And we multiply c to get c delta t, the time difference measured in meters.
And delta x is the spatial separation of the two events.
So here's the equation for spacetime interval.
s squared equals c delta t squared minus delta x squared.
Actually, that looks a lot like the Pythagorean distance formula.
d squared equals delta x squared plus delta y squared.
But there's one important difference, a weird minus sign.
The interval squared equals time difference squared minus space difference squared.
And now I can finally share a joke with you.
Some years ago I did another series of lectures on quantum mechanics.
And in quantum mechanics there is a particular minus sign in the physics of the electron.
And it is very important.
It has all kinds of huge consequences.
So I called it the most important minus sign in the universe.
But privately I knew that there was another minus sign just as vital.
And here it is, the other most important minus sign in the universe.
That minus sign is the whole difference between the familiar geometry of the plane and spacetime geometry.
So here's Minkowski's essential idea.
Different frames of reference, different observers choose different space and time coordinates.
They obtain different time and space intervals, c delta t and delta x between events.
However, all observers will find the same spacetime interval between the same events,
as calculated by the Minkowski formula.
s squared equals c delta t squared minus delta x squared.
Let's look at an example.
Event A happens at the origin, at coordinates 00.
Event B is 10 meters of time later, that's about 33 nanoseconds, and 8 meters to the right.
So c delta t equals 10 meters and delta x equals 8 meters.
The spacetime interval between A and B is therefore given by s squared equals 10 squared minus 8 squared,
which works out to 36, so the spacetime interval s equals 6 meters.
Now that looks a little funny on the spacetime diagram.
Spacetime interval is like the length of the diagonal line from one event to the other.
On our picture it looks longer than either of the two sides,
but here we see that it's actually shorter, it's only 6 meters.
How can that be right?
The reason is simple.
Our diagram is drawn in ordinary space, where the Pythagorean formula works.
The events actually live in spacetime, where Minkowski's formula works.
So if you study the spacetime interval formula closely, you might notice something worrisome.
What if delta x is actually bigger than c delta t?
For instance, maybe the two events are simultaneous, so c delta t equals 0,
but they happen at different points in space, they're separated only in space,
and then the formula tells us that s squared is negative.
Now this is not as bad as it looks.
Remember, spacetime interval is not exactly like distance.
There is only one kind of distance between points in the plane,
but there are three possible kinds of spacetime interval between events.
There are time-like intervals where time dominates and s squared is positive.
And there are null intervals where c delta t and delta x are the same size and s squared is 0.
And then there are space-like intervals where space dominates and s squared is negative.
All three of these have a slightly different meaning.
So let's imagine a couple of events.
There's the first one, it's a flash of light, call it event f, from a camera flash bulb.
And here's the second one, the light flash reaches Greta, who is standing 20 meters away,
so we'll call that event g.
What is the spacetime interval between f and g?
Now notice that on a spacetime diagram, the light flash traces out a diagonal line.
f and g are separated in space by delta x equal to 20 meters.
So how big is the time separation?
Well, it's pretty short because light travels very fast.
In fact, it travels at the universal speed c, so c is delta x over delta t,
and this means that the time separation measured in meters is c delta t, which is delta x.
In other words, the time separation between the two events is also 20 meters.
And since the time and space separations are the same, the spacetime interval s squared is zero.
It's a null spacetime interval.
f and g, the origin and the destination of the light flash, are not the same event,
but they are separated by a spacetime interval equal to zero.
And why is that? Because light travels from one event to the other at the speed c.
But now suppose we look at the same story in a different frame of reference.
We have different space and time coordinates, x prime and ct prime.
The camera and Greta might be moving in this frame of reference.
The distance between them might be different.
Delta x prime and c delta t prime may be different for the events in this frame.
They will not equal 20 meters anymore.
So what is the same? The spacetime interval, which is still null.
Therefore, the new delta x prime and c delta t prime must still be the same size.
So how fast does the light travel from f to g in this frame of reference?
Well, the speed in this frame of reference is called v prime equal to delta x prime over delta t prime,
and that's just equal to c.
The light flash travels at the same speed c in this frame of reference.
This is wonderful. This is what Minkowski is trying to tell us.
Einstein phrases things as physics.
The laws of physics, including the speed of light, are the same in different reference frames.
Minkowski phrases things as geometry.
Different coordinate systems in spacetime lead to the same spacetime interval between two events,
just like the distance between two points in the plane.
And these two principles are really the same thing.
So how did Einstein react to Minkowski's idea?
Well, at first he was a bit skeptical.
It seemed an overly mathematical way of looking at things.
But he soon became a convert.
He realized that the right way to think about physics is to think about spacetime.
He realized that relativity is about spacetime relations between events.
Now, to show you the power of the spacetime view, let's think about one more example.
Imagine a clock sitting at rest in our laboratory, and it ticks once each second.
Tick, tick, tick. Each tick is an event in spacetime.
Well, what is the spacetime interval between two ticks?
Well, obviously, delta x is zero. The ticks happen at the same place, the clocks at rest.
In the time interval, delta t is one second.
So c delta t is 300 million meters.
Actually, we'll call this delta t sub p, where p stands for proper time.
Not because it's the best or most correct time, but it is the time in the clock's own reference frame,
the reference frame in which the clock is at rest.
Since there is no delta x in the clock's frame, the spacetime interval is easy.
S equals c times delta t sub p.
Now suppose we look at things in a different reference frame.
In this reference frame, the clock is moving at speed v.
The two ticks do not happen at the same place.
Now delta x is not zero.
But the squared spacetime interval, s squared, must be the same as before.
Thus, we could write an equation like this.
c delta t sub p squared equals c delta t squared minus delta x squared.
Now, knowing the speed of the clock, we could work everything out.
But for now, I want you to notice something qualitative.
Delta t is the time between ticks of the moving clock.
But since delta x is not zero, this cannot be the same as delta t sub p.
In fact, delta t must be a bit larger than delta t sub p.
So the clock at rest ticks with a time, delta t sub p, equal to one second between the ticks.
The same clock seen in motion ticks with delta t greater than one second between the ticks.
The moving clock runs more slowly.
This is time dilation, just as Einstein had discovered in his original 1905 paper.
In a spacetime diagram, the stationary clock has a vertical world line,
and the moving clock has a diagonal world line.
The ticks of a clock are points along its world line,
and the stationary clock have a certain separation in time.
The ticks of the moving clock look more spread out.
They have the same spacetime interval between them, but delta x and delta t are both bigger.
And it looks funny drawn in a spatial diagram,
but that's because the geometry of our planar diagram is not spacetime geometry,
and our planar distance is not the same as spacetime interval.
The basic concepts of Minkowski's spacetime, space and time coordinates,
events, world lines, and so on, the spacetime interval, time dilation,
they're all just tools that Einstein is going to be able to use.
He's going to be able to use it to build a new theory of gravity, the general theory of relativity.
And what is the nature of gravity in the new theory?
Gravity is a kind of warp, or curvature, in Minkowski's spacetime geometry.
So it is to this strange idea, seemingly beyond our ability to imagine,
that we will turn in the next lecture,
gravity as the curvature of spacetime.
