Gravity is not really a force, not in the usual sense.
It is in fact a kind of warping of space-time.
A body in free fall, steered only by gravity, follows a geodesic, the straightest path in
a curved space-time.
That path appears curved, like the routes flown by airliners, but it is an inertial path,
a path of the longest clock time between events.
As Wheeler put it, space-time tells matter how to move.
Then, what about Newton?
Do we just throw out the physics of the Principia?
Not at all.
First, Newton's physics is still quite accurate, unless gravitational fields are extremely
strong or objects are moving very fast, Newtonian mechanics is still a close approximation.
Second, and more importantly, we can still use the familiar concepts of gravitational
physics to get insight into the new theory.
That is, we can see Newtonian concepts through Einsteinian eyes.
And there is no better example of this than the profound connection between space-time
curvature and tides.
Einstein may tell matter how to move, but that is only half the story, and Einstein
knows this.
By joining together the curved geometry of Riemann with the space-time of Minkowski,
as his friend Grossman suggested, Einstein has found his new way to think about gravity.
But where does space-time curvature come from?
And that's the second half of John Wheeler's aphorism.
Matter tells space-time how to curve.
To make his theory of gravity complete, Einstein has to figure out how matter tells space-time
how to curve.
And he struggles with the question from 1912 to 1915.
His quest is to discover the equations that govern space-time curvature.
So what do we mean when we say that space-time is curved?
What is curvature?
How do you define it?
And as usual, we'll return to ordinary two-dimensional geometry for inspiration and enlightenment.
So what does it mean to say that a surface is curved?
Well, here's what it does not mean, that the surface is bent in a third dimension.
It is handy to visualize surfaces in that way, and we will often use that to help us.
But that idea is not really what we mean by a curved surface.
There are a couple of reasons for insisting on this.
To begin with, we would like to define curvature in an intrinsic way.
We want to refer to angles, points, and lines, and distances that lie within the surface.
That's philosophically important, as we think about the universe of space-time.
We do not want to have to step outside of the universe in order to define space-time curvature.
And there's another reason.
Consider a piece of paper.
It is flat.
It has zero curvature.
The geometry of lines and angles on the piece of paper is Euclidean plane geometry.
And the paper is still flat in this sense if we roll it up or even wrinkle it.
The geometry of the figures drawn on the paper will not change if the paper is curled around.
That kind of extrinsic curvature in a third dimension, if it exists, is simply irrelevant.
So by thinking about two-dimensional surfaces, we can identify two kinds of curvature.
The first is called positive curvature.
That's the kind of curvature that the surface of a sphere has.
And the second is called negative curvature.
And that is more like the surface of a saddle or the side of a vase.
How is geometry different on a curved surface?
Well, one way to begin is to think about triangles.
In flat Euclidean geometry, the angles of any triangle add up to exactly 180 degrees.
It does not matter whether the triangle is large or small, they're all the same.
But in spherical geometry, in a surface of positive curvature, the angles of a triangle
always add up to a bit more than 180 degrees.
Now, the difference is not always easy to spot.
For very small triangles on a sphere, the angles add up to only a little more than 180 degrees.
But the larger the triangle, the greater the extra angle measure that it gets.
So consider a triangle on a globe consisting of one pole and two points on the equator.
Now each of the equatorial angles of our triangle is automatically 90 degrees.
So it is easy to make a triangle with three right angles, that's 270 degrees in all.
And by the way, the curvature of a sphere is called positive precisely because the triangles
have an extra angle measure to them.
It's a positive difference.
Now in saddle geometry, a surface of negative curvature, small triangles also look nearly
Euclidean.
But the angles of a triangle always add up to a bit less than 180 degrees.
And the larger the triangle, the greater the deficit in angle.
That's why it's called negative curvature because the triangle sum has a deficit.
So here's another way of defining curvature.
It's based on parallel lines.
First, let's think about Euclidean geometry.
We'll start with two points and a line segment in between.
And we can create parallel lines passing through the two points at right angles to the segment
joining the points.
Now let's imagine we have two particles that move along the lines with the same constant
velocity.
Then those two particles maintain exactly the same distance apart.
The two parallel lines in other words do not get closer together or farther apart.
And that's Euclidean geometry.
But next, let's look at spherical geometry.
We have the same setup with two points and a segment between them.
And we construct our two parallel lines.
These lines of course are geodesic paths, great circles on a sphere.
So we can construct them by just taking the chalk and following our nose.
But if two particles travel along these parallel lines, they start to approach each other.
Their initially parallel lines, if extended far enough, actually intersect each other.
Thus, on the spherical Earth, we can imagine two travelers some distance apart at the equator.
Each one faces north and starts walking.
They walk in the straightest lines they can.
They follow their noses straight north, but their paths eventually meet at the north pole.
So in a surface of positive curvature, parallel lines tend to converge.
We can also consider saddle geometry, the geometry of a surface of negative curvature.
And again, the parallel lines are geodesic paths, but particles moving along the lines
actually move away from each other.
Initially parallel lines in the surface of negative curvature diverge.
We can define the amount of curvature as a measure of the tendency of parallel lines
to converge or diverge.
And this is something called the deviation equation.
And it goes like this.
We imagine two particles starting out a distance d apart.
And they move with speed v along initially parallel lines.
And if each one goes straight, it falls a geodesic path in the surface,
but they find that they have a relative acceleration.
They approach or diverge from each other, and we'll call that relative acceleration A.
That relative acceleration is positive if they tend to get farther apart, and it's negative if they converge.
And so we represent the curvature by the letter R, which stands for Riemann.
And here is the deviation equation.
A equals minus R times v squared times d.
Now that minus sign means that R is positive if the relative acceleration is negative.
That is, the surface, like a sphere, has parallel paths that converge.
And likewise, R is negative if the relative acceleration is positive.
That is, a surface like a saddle has parallel paths that diverge.
So let's translate these ideas to the realm of spacetime.
The lines we're talking about are the world lines of particles.
And straight lines are geodesics, the world lines of freely falling particles.
So how do we make a couple of initially parallel world lines?
Well, we start with two particles close together in space, and we arrange that the particles are both initially at rest in the same frame of reference.
Then their world lines will be parallel in a spacetime diagram.
So here's an easy example to think about.
Take two apples and drop them at the same moment.
Initially, both apples are at rest.
Their world lines are parallel.
And both apples follow geodesic paths in spacetime as long as they are in freefall.
And now we ask, is there any tendency for the apples to get closer together or farther apart?
That would be a sign of curvature in spacetime.
And the naive answer is, no, the apples fall with the same acceleration.
Therefore, they stay the same distance apart.
So there is no actual curvature.
But by now, we are sophisticated gravitational physicists, and we know that the real answer is that there is such a tendency.
There is a tendency for the apples to draw together or draw apart, and that tendency is the tiny tidal effect.
So think back to lecture 8.
Newton said that the force of gravity on the apple is not quite the same at every point.
The force of gravity, the one thing, always points toward the center of the earth,
so it lies in a different direction in different places.
And the force of gravity is weaker if the apple is farther away.
That's the basic gravitational physics behind ocean tides and a host of other phenomena.
And that leads us to Einstein's realization.
Gravitational acceleration, by itself, is no indicator of spacetime curvature.
If you just adopt a freely falling reference frame, then there is no acceleration.
It's just an issue of map projection.
But the tidal effect is the sign of curvature.
See, we're taking a Newtonian concept and seeing it through Einsteinian eyes.
So consider our two apples falling near the earth, and let's place one above the other.
The upper apple accelerates less, the lower one accelerates more,
so the apples tend to separate.
There is a positive relative acceleration.
These parallel world lines, therefore, tend to diverge from one another.
And that means a negative curvature in spacetime.
On the other hand, suppose the two apples are side by side.
They're separated by the same distance as before, and each one accelerates toward the center of the earth.
So that means they are also slightly accelerating toward each other.
And the relative acceleration in this case is just half as much as in the upper and lower example.
So these parallel world lines tend to approach each other.
And that's a sign of positive curvature in spacetime.
Positive curvature half as great as before.
Thus, spacetime is curved.
And the curvature is related to something familiar, the tidal effect.
That is, it's related to differences in gravitational acceleration at different points.
And we can tell from our example that the curvature can be different in different directions.
Now we've actually discussed enough mathematics already that we can calculate the spacetime curvature for ourselves.
So let's take a couple of minutes to do that.
First, we need the tidal effect equation from lecture 8.
If we have two apples separated by a vertical distance d, and they're at a distance r from the center of the earth,
which has a mass m, we said that two such falling bodies have a relative acceleration given by
a equals g times m over r squared times 2d over r.
And a positive value here means that the apples are drawing apart in space.
Next, we apply the deviation equation.
a equals minus r times v squared times d.
But what do we mean by v?
The particles start out at rest.
Well that's true, but they are still, in a sense, moving through time.
Each second they go 300 million meters of time into the future.
That's a spacetime speed of c, the speed of light.
So, putting the deviation equation together with the tidal equation we get
minus r times c squared times d equals
g times m over r squared times 2d over r.
And the d's cancel, and we can solve for the curvature r.
r equals minus 2 times g times m over c squared times r cubed.
This is the spacetime curvature in the vertical direction.
Well, what about the horizontal direction?
Well, in that case, the apples converge and the relative acceleration is half as great.
So, there's no need to go through the math.
We can write down the answer for spacetime curvature in the horizontal direction.
r equals plus g times m over c squared times r cubed.
It's half as much as before, but with the opposite sign.
Now, if you are paying very close attention, you might have noticed something interesting.
But imagine six apples arranged around a central point.
There's a top apple and a bottom apple, right and left, front and back.
And all of them fall from rest, and each opposite pair of apples experiences a relative acceleration.
So, each pair of apples measures spacetime curvature in a different direction.
So, the top bottom pair yields negative spacetime curvature.
And the right, left and front, back pairs yield positive spacetime curvature, exactly half as large.
So, if we add up the curvature for all three perpendicular directions, the total is zero.
We can write that r total equals zero.
What does this mean?
Is r total always zero?
In an empty space, the answer is yes.
If the apples tend to approach in some directions, they tend to move apart in others.
If spacetime curvature is positive in some directions, it is negative in others.
But what if our six apples are not in empty space?
What if there's some mass in the middle of them?
Then the gravitational pull of that mass will pull apples inward from all sides.
Each pair of apples will approach each other.
That's positive curvature.
And so, the total curvature, r total, will be positive.
How positive?
That depends on the mass between them.
And we can work it out in detail.
We imagine we have a sphere containing mass with a density rho.
Rho is a Greek letter traditionally used for density.
The apples are arranged as before at six points on the surface of the sphere.
And each apple accelerates toward the center of the sphere due to the sphere's gravity.
And we can calculate the rate of inward acceleration for pairs of opposite apples.
And we can figure out the spacetime curvature.
And then we can add up the curvatures for apples along the three perpendicular directions.
So, I invite you to work out the details on your own.
You know enough to do it.
But for here, let's skip to the final answer.
R total equals 4 pi g over c squared all times rho.
In other words, we have learned that total spacetime curvature is equal to a constant
times the density of matter.
And that's a profoundly simple relationship.
The density of matter at a point determines the total spacetime curvature there.
Matter tells spacetime how to curve.
Now let's take a look at the constant in the equation.
It involves g, Newton's gravitational constant, and therefore g determines how strong gravity
is.
That is, how much curvature a given density of matter produces.
Now in ordinary units, g is tiny.
And c squared in the denominator is huge.
So for ordinary densities of matter, spacetime curvature is very small.
What we have derived is a simplified form of the Einstein equation.
The equation Einstein finally reached at the end of 1915.
It's the governing equation for the gravitational field.
It's like all of Maxwell's equations for electromagnetism all wrapped up in one.
This is the equation that governs the warp of the world that we call gravity.
And if you look the equation up in a textbook on general relativity, it looks like this.
Now rather than explain the equation in detail, let's just appreciate it for a moment.
It looks very different from the equation that we discovered here, but its essential
meaning is exactly the same.
On the left hand side is the total curvature at a point in spacetime.
There's r standing for Riemann.
The right hand side, t, represents how much matter and energy is located at that point
in spacetime.
And also, it represents how the matter is moving, which is something that we left out
in our analysis.
And connecting the two sides of the equation is a constant that involves g, Newton's gravitational
constant.
Now there are some minor differences, there's a minus sign, and 8 pi instead of 4 pi, and
c is raised to the fourth power instead of to the second power, but all of these differences
are due to just technicalities and definitions that we haven't explained.
In its essence, the Einstein equation has the same meaning as our simplified version.
The Einstein equation has so many beautiful things about it that I hardly know where to
begin.
But let me tell you about one of its most remarkable features.
The right hand side of the Einstein equation represents matter and energy at a point in
spacetime.
And one of the most basic laws of physics is that that energy is conserved.
It can move around, it can change form, but it is conserved.
And we know, of course, that mass is equivalent to energy, we call E equals mc squared.
And that fact means something about the t-quantity in the Einstein equation.
A mathematical physicist would express what I'm trying to get at in this way.
The divergence of t is zero.
Now rather than defining that term divergence, let me just tell you what it means.
It means that the total mass energy that goes into a spacetime point equals the total mass
energy that comes out.
No mass and energy is created or destroyed at that event.
That's the conservation of mass energy.
So the right hand side of the Einstein equation has divergence equal to zero.
Now here is the amazing part.
The left hand side of the Einstein equation, the side involved in curvature, must have
divergence equal to zero.
It is a mathematical theorem.
It's a necessary truth of Riemannian geometry.
We could not imagine a world in which that divergence is not zero.
It would be like imagining that 2 plus 2 was equal to 17.
Therefore, if the Einstein equation holds, both sides of the equation must have divergence
equal to zero.
So what does that mean?
Well, at first it might seem that we have two different independent laws of physics.
The conservation of energy, or mass energy as we've called it, and the Einstein equation,
is the law of gravity.
But logically, once you have the law of gravity, the conservation of energy follows automatically.
It's not a separate principle.
It's a kind of footnote to the Einstein equation.
Or we could put it another way.
Einstein's equation tells us what it is about the universe that makes energy conserved.
Gravity, space-time curvature, is the cop that enforces the conservation law.
Well, with the Einstein equation, the long quest is ended.
It began with a simple thought experiment.
What would gravity be like for someone in free fall?
The answer is, like no gravity at all.
From that, we've been led with Einstein to a new kind of theory, a theory unlike anything
that had ever been proposed before.
Gravity is really space-time curvature.
Space-time tells matter how to move, matter tells space-time how to curve.
It's a beautiful theory.
But is it right?
Well, in 1915, Einstein had just one good piece of evidence.
You see, his theory and Newton's theory give approximately the same results in normal circumstances.
So in most cases, the theories are indistinguishable.
But if gravitational fields are very strong and objects are moving very fast, then the
theories begin to predict slightly different things.
So consider the solar system.
Now among the planets, Mercury is the one that orbits where the sun's gravitational
field is strongest, let's say closest to the sun.
And also, Mercury moves fastest in its orbit.
So Einstein calculates Mercury's orbit in his new space-time theory, and he finds that
it should not be a perfect closed ellipse.
The orbit should instead precess around the sun.
Why?
Because the space-time through which Mercury is moving is actually curved.
And so Einstein calculates how rapidly the axis of the orbit should precess.
And he finds that it should be 43 seconds of arc per century.
Now that is a number that should set off fireworks in your head.
But in case you've forgotten, let me remind you, back in lecture 9 we saw that there is
a tiny unexplained anomaly in the orbit of Mercury.
In other words, we said that the orbit precesses at 43 seconds of arc per century more than
we expect from known causes.
Now Laverier believed that this was due to some unknown planet close to the sun.
And he spent years trying to find that planet without success.
The anomaly remained unexplained.
But now Einstein can explain the anomaly exactly with his new theory of gravity.
That's pretty good evidence.
But the really decisive tests of general relativity will still be a few years in the future.
So how important is Einstein's discovery?
Well in Washington D.C., in front of the National Academy of Sciences, there is a famous statue
of Einstein by Robert Birx.
It was dedicated in 1979 on the 100th anniversary of Einstein's birth.
So Einstein sits on the steps, deep in thought, and on his lap is a notebook.
And written on the page of the notebook, there are three equations.
Equation number two is the equation for the photoelectric effect, which Einstein explained
using Planck's photon energy formula.
Einstein's work was a milestone in the development of quantum theory, and it was for this work
that he won the Nobel Prize in 1921.
Equation number three is E equals MC squared, the famous relation between mass and energy,
probably the most famous and consequential equation in the history of science.
Equation number one in Einstein's notebook is the Einstein equation of general relativity,
the equation that relates mass and energy to the curvature of spacetime, the fundamental
equation of gravity.
This discovery is as profound and consequential as either of the other two.
While the quest may be ended, but now that we have the prize, we can begin to learn its
value.
Einstein's theory of gravity opens the door to a universe of unexpected phenomena, gravitational
waves, black holes, the expansion of the cosmos.
But just as wonderful is the way that curved spacetime changes our understanding of things
more familiar and ordinary, I'm thinking in particular of the many effects of gravity
on light.
So next time, we will see how Einstein's theory of curved spacetime of gravity has
its most far-reaching application and finds its most striking confirmation in the curve
of light.
