We have been following Einstein on an amazing journey to an amazing destination.
General relativity, the theory that gravity is actually the curvature of space-time.
As John Wheeler put it, space-time tells matter how to move, and matter tells space-time how to curve.
But space-time is the arena of all of physics, and that means that space-time curvature, gravity, affects all of physics.
It affects time, distance, motion, and also light.
We already mentioned the effect of gravity on light in lecture 14.
When we introduced Einstein's principle of equivalence, a freely falling laboratory is physically equivalent to one with zero gravity,
and an accelerating laboratory is physically equivalent to one with a gravitational field.
And from this idea, we predicted the phenomenon of gravitational redshift.
As a light wave travels upward in a gravitational field, it undergoes a redshift, that is, its frequency is decreased.
And this effect is actually observed in the spectra of white dwarf stars, which are very compact and have very strong gravitational fields.
And here on Earth, the effect was detected in the remarkable Pound-Rebka experiment, as a tiny shift in the frequency of gamma rays
going from the basement to the top floor of the lab building at Harvard.
We also saw that there was a more intuitive way of looking at gravitational redshift.
Quantum physics tells us that the energy of light comes in discrete packets.
Particles of light called photons.
The energy E of one photon is related to the frequency F of the light by Planck's formula.
E equals H times F, where H is Planck's constant, which is very small in value.
So as a photon goes upward in a gravitational field, it loses energy.
In somewhat the same way that any object thrown upward would lose kinetic energy and slow down.
Photon can't slow down, of course, but its energy decreases.
And by Planck's formula, this means a decrease in the frequency of light, a gravitational redshift.
So to illustrate how gravity and space-time curvature affects absolutely everything,
I want to show how gravity can change our thinking about something ordinary.
Something that at first seems to have nothing to do with gravity.
I'm talking about the idea of temperature, how hot or cold an object is.
Temperature seems to have nothing to do with gravity.
But the temperature of an object does have something to do with light.
A warm body radiates thermal radiation out into the space around it.
Now at everyday temperatures, this thermal radiation lies in the infrared range.
At thousands of degrees, like the surface of the sun, it lies more in the visible range.
But in any case, thermal radiation is light.
And the thermal radiation depends on temperature.
A hotter body emits more of it.
And the average frequency of the thermal radiation of a hotter body is greater.
So it's easier to state this in terms of photons.
And indeed, it was the study of thermal radiation that led Planck to his formula in the first place.
The higher the temperature of a body, the more photons it emits per second.
And the greater the energy of the photons it emits on average.
So imagine two walls facing each other with nothing in between them.
And the right hand wall has a temperature, so it emits photons of a thermal radiation.
And these photons are absorbed by the left hand wall.
And the left hand wall also has a temperature, so it also emits photons of thermal radiation.
And these are absorbed by the right hand wall.
And in equilibrium, each wall emits the same amount of energy that it absorbs per second.
And so in that way, that wall is neither cooling down by emitting too much energy, nor heating up by emitting too little.
And what will, that will happen, there'll be equilibrium when the two walls are at the same temperature.
So this is a basic rule of the science of thermodynamics, which is the physics of heat and temperature.
If two bodies can exchange energy with each other, and they are in equilibrium with each other,
then those two bodies are at the same temperature.
But now, let's add gravity to the picture.
Instead of two walls side by side, imagine the walls are one above the other.
In other words, we have a floor and a ceiling in a gravitational field.
The floor is at some temperature, so the floor emits thermal radiation.
And those photons from the floor fly upward and lose energy as they go.
The photons that reach the ceiling have less energy than they started out with.
And don't forget gravitational time dilation.
The floor is emitting some huge number, call it a zillion of photons per second.
But an observer on the ceiling sees everything on the floor happening slowly.
That's gravitational time dilation.
So that is, the floor is emitting less than a zillion photons per second.
So the radiation that reaches the ceiling has fewer photons per second,
and those photons have less energy on average.
And the reverse happens for photons going downward.
They increase in energy as they fall.
And an observer on the floor sees everything happening more quickly on the ceiling.
That's the other side of gravitational time dilation.
And so the photons arrive at the floor at a higher rate and with a higher energy on average.
Therefore, if the floor and the ceiling are to be in equilibrium,
that is, if each one is emitting the same amount of energy that it is absorbing per second,
then the floor and the ceiling cannot be at the same temperature.
The floor and the ceiling must be at different temperatures.
The floor must be warmer and the ceiling cooler to compensate for the effect of gravity.
So the basic rule of thermodynamics that bodies in equilibrium have the same temperature
has to be changed in the presence of gravity, that is, in the presence of spacetime curvature.
So if two bodies in a gravitational field are in equilibrium,
then the lower one is at a higher temperature and the higher one is at a lower temperature.
Well, how large is this effect?
Well, it's the same size as the gravitational redshift or the time dilation.
Remember the pound-rebka experiment between the basement and the top floor of the lab building?
The effect was just two and a half parts per quadrillion.
That would be about the difference between the floor and the roof of the lab.
So this effect is far too tiny to be observed on Earth.
But the larger point remains, gravity affects every branch of physics
because every kind of physical phenomenon happens in curved spacetime.
Now, we made our argument about temperature based on gravitational redshift,
that is, an effect of gravity on light.
But Einstein understood from the start that this was not the only such effect.
So in 1911, still several years before he completes his theory,
Einstein predicts that light rays should be bent by the gravity of the Sun.
Well, why the Sun in particular?
Well, the Sun has the strongest gravity of anything that's nearby.
And how much would light rays be bent by the Sun?
And the answer is not very much.
Einstein predicts a deflection of about 0.9 seconds of arc.
It's a tiny angle and he bases this prediction on Newton's gravity
plus the equivalence principle.
So what would this mean practically speaking?
Well, suppose we could observe a star right next to the visible disc of the Sun.
Then the ray of light from the star is bent slightly toward the Sun as it passes.
So we see light coming from an apparent direction that is shifted outward from the Sun.
So Einstein calculates that the apparent position of the star
should be shifted outward from the Sun by 0.9 seconds of arc.
That's something like taking an object a mile away and shifting it by a quarter of an inch.
Now in 1915, with the full theory available, Einstein revisits the problem
and he realizes that his 1911 calculation was not quite right.
Why not?
Because the 1911 calculation used Newton's theory of gravity
and his new 1915 calculation takes into account the full curvature of spacetime.
And the actual deflection of light should be just twice as great,
about 1.75 seconds of arc.
And that would be a shift of half an inch seen from a mile away.
So Einstein's work was published during World War I.
And here's a remarkable fact.
Despite the war, the most important reader of his work was an Englishman.
Arthur Eddington, later Sir Arthur, was a brilliant astrophysicist at Cambridge.
And both Einstein and Eddington disapproved of the war.
Einstein, though a professor in Berlin, was actually a citizen of neutral Switzerland.
And Eddington was a Quaker and a conscientious objector to military service.
Eddington believed that scientists in warring countries should resume their contacts
and collaborations as soon as the war ended.
So during the war, Eddington studies Einstein's papers
and he realizes just how important it will be to test the new theory of gravity.
He thinks very carefully about the bending of light.
Now he cannot make the necessary measurement to check the theory.
The sun is just too bright to see any stars near it, except during a total eclipse of the sun.
Then the moon would just cover up the bright disc of the sun
and the stars next to the sun would become visible.
A very careful telescopic observation during an eclipse
might measure the apparent positions of stars near the edge of the sun's disc.
It could ask, are they shifted?
And if so, by how much?
So Eddington knows that there will be an eclipse of the sun on May 29, 1919,
which is six months after the armistice ended World War I.
And this eclipse will be visible from the island of Príncipe
in the Gulf of Guinea off of West Africa.
And this eclipse will have an especially long period of totality, almost seven minutes.
And because of this, that will allow the best observations to be made.
So Eddington organizes an expedition with telescopes and cameras and all kinds of instruments.
And during the eclipse, he takes careful astrophotographs showing stars next to the eclipse sun.
And then he carefully compares with photographs that show the same stars when the sun is elsewhere in the sky.
Now Eddington's data is pretty rough by modern standards, but it's clear enough.
On November 6, 1919, at a dramatic joint meeting of the Royal Society and the Royal Astronomical Society,
Eddington announces that Einstein is right.
The stars shift by 1.75 seconds of arc.
Okay, there are two immediate consequences of this announcement.
First, Einstein's theory is powerfully confirmed by Eddington's observation of light is deflected by gravity.
And furthermore, the amount of the deflection agrees with Einstein's space-time curvature theory, not simple Newtonian gravity.
And the second consequence is that Einstein becomes the most celebrated scientist of the 20th century.
The idea that gravity can bend light catches the imagination of the public.
And Einstein becomes the object of popular fascination, which he remains to this day.
The bending of light by gravity, though, is more than a curiosity.
It's more than a sensitive test of Einstein's theory.
So let's recall Fritz Zwicky, the Caltech astrophysicist that we mentioned in Lecture 11.
Back when he realized that galaxy clusters contain more matter than we can see.
Well, in 1937, he also suggests that we might use the gravity of a galaxy, or a galaxy cluster, as a kind of cosmic lens.
So consider a convex lens made of glass.
Light refraction and the shape of the lens cause light rays to be deflected inward toward the axis.
So if we look through the lens, this effect magnifies objects behind it.
And if the lens has a more irregular shape, it might form multiple images, and they might be stretched out or distorted in some way.
Now consider a nearby galaxy with more distant galaxies far behind it.
Because of the gravity of the nearby galaxy, light from the distant galaxies is deflected inward, just as in a convex lens.
So things behind the gravity appear slightly magnified.
The nearby galaxy might block a direct straight through view of what's behind it, but to each side, the distant galaxies will appear shifted outward, and maybe a little squished.
A round galaxy would appear as an oval, or even squashed to a thin arc.
The mass of the nearby galaxy also may be distributed in an irregular way, so we might even see more than one image of a single background galaxy.
Now, like so many of Zwicky's ideas, this one took decades to bear fruit, but we now know hundreds of examples of gravitational lens effects.
So here is a beautiful example.
This is an image from the Hubble Space Telescope.
It shows a distant cluster of galaxies about two billion light-years away.
But the gravity of that cluster has warped and distorted the light of even more distant galaxies behind it.
We can see those galaxies as streaks and arcs around the periphery of the nearer galaxy cluster.
Those distorted images are produced by gravitational bending of the light in the warped space-time around the nearer cluster.
We can use gravitational lensing to map out the mass that produces the effect.
This includes both visible matter and dark matter.
It only depends on gravity.
So we can use gravitational lensing to produce maps of dark matter.
And we also saw this in lecture 11.
We looked at an image of the bullet cluster, a pair of galaxy clusters that collided and passed through one another.
And the image is a composite of three images.
There's the visible image showing the galaxies in white.
There's an x-ray image showing hot hydrogen gas in red.
And there's a map of the dark matter in the clusters, which is blue.
And how do we obtain a picture of the invisible dark matter?
By careful measurements of the distortions of shapes of distant background galaxies.
Using gravitational lensing, we can see the unseen.
The story of light and gravity has a few more surprises for us.
And to explain them, we need to think again about space-time.
So let's recall Minkowski's picture of space-time from lecture 15.
And once again, let's use the usual simplified diagram in two dimensions or three dimensions to represent four-dimensional space-time.
So we have a vertical axis, the CT coordinate, time measured in meters.
And we have horizontal axes, x and space, or perhaps x and y, to space axes pointing horizontally.
And points in space-time are events.
And physical objects are represented by world lines stretching from the past to the future.
Now, suppose we send a light pulse from one end of our lab to the other.
What does it look like in space-time?
Well, it's a diagonal line, the world line, if you will, of a photon.
And we draw that line at 45 degrees because the light moves one meter of space per meter of time.
Now imagine that a light flash occurs at some events.
And the light from the flash spreads out in all directions from the event.
What does that light look like in space-time?
Well, it's a stack of circles of increasing radius representing the spreading light.
It's a light cone, a cone made up of 45 degree lines, the world lines of the outward bound photons from the flash.
Now recall the space-time interval, that peculiar distance measure in space-time.
Between the emission and absorption of a pulse of light, that space-time interval is zero.
It's a null interval.
And that's because the squared interval is s squared equal to c delta t squared minus delta x squared.
And that expression is zero for the emission and absorption events because c delta t is equal to delta x.
So, we say the world line of a photon is a null line, and the light cone of an event is made out of null lines.
Now an object at rest is a vertical line in our space-time diagram.
And two events on that world line, two ticks of the clock of an object, have a positive squared space-time interval between them.
So we call that a time-like interval.
So, if the interval is time-like in one frame of reference, then it must be time-like in any frame.
That is, even if the object is moving, the space-time interval between two points on its world line to clock ticks is always time-like.
It can never be null.
And therefore, the object can never be moving at the speed of light.
This is a famous fact of special relativity.
No object that can be at rest can move at the speed of light, but the speed c, 300 million meters per second, is an absolute upper bound to the speed of ordinary objects.
A photon is a slight exception.
It always moves at speed c in a vacuum, never slower and never faster.
But the upper bound applies to you and to me, and to any spaceships that we might build.
There is a speed limit to the universe, and that speed limit is c.
So consider the world line of an object in space-time.
Let's pick an event on that world line, call it here and now.
The future world line of the object must lie inside the light cone of here and now.
It might run up the middle of the light cone or lean to one side or the other, but the light cone encloses every part of space-time that the object could possibly reach.
And this is true for objects and also all kinds of energy and any sort of signal or information.
These only places and times that can be reached from the here and now are those parts of space-time that lie inside the light cone, formed by a flash of light here and now.
Physicists sometimes say light cones describe the causal structure of space-time.
What a mouthful.
Well, here's what that means.
If I do something here and now, then the only things that I can affect by my action, the only effects for which I can be a cause, lie inside the light cone of here and now.
Let's take an example.
Alpha Centauri is a star.
It's 4.3 light years away.
In other words, it would take 4.3 years to reach Alpha Centauri even moving at the speed of light.
So nothing that I do here and now can have any effect there one or two or three years from now.
Those events are as unreachable as the past.
They're in fact unreachable in almost the same way because they are beyond my ability to affect in any way.
So what does this have to do with gravity?
Well, since gravity affects light, it must also affect the light cones.
That is, space-time curvature also warps the structure of possible cause and effect.
And exactly how this happens is a little subtle.
A clear understanding of what's going on requires us to use a good map projection for our curved space-time.
And one of the first people to work it out properly was our friend, Arthur Eddington.
So here is a space-time diagram in Eddington coordinates, his map projection.
Roughly speaking, time is vertical and space is horizontal in the diagram.
And a massive object like a star appears as a fat world line running up the middle.
So what do the light cones look like around the star?
Well, far away from the star, gravity is very weak.
The light cones look just like they do in Minkowski's space-time.
They are symmetric cones with 45-degree sides.
But nearer to the star in the region where the gravity is very strong, the inside edge of the light cone,
the side nearer the star, is still at 45 degrees in Eddington's map projection.
So inward moving light still traces a 45-degree line in our diagram.
But the outside edge is not at 45 degrees.
It is slightly more vertical, as if outward moving light goes slower.
Is the light really moving slower?
No, that's an effect of our map projection, like the distortions of the shapes of the continents on a map of the Earth.
But it does capture one aspect of the space-time curvature near the star.
So in the Eddington projection, light cones near a massive object are a little narrower and a little tilted inward.
That's how the light cone structure is warped.
And this qualitatively shows a real effect of space-time curvature.
So suppose we try to bounce a radar signal off the surface of the star.
Now the ingoing signal travels along a 45-degree line, as usual.
But the signal does not return on a 45-degree line.
The light cones are distorted in curved space-time.
So the light comes back out more slowly as it were.
The round-trip time is longer than we would otherwise expect.
There's an extra time delay.
And this is a real effect predicted by Erwin Shapiro in 1964.
Now we can't bounce radar signals from the Sun, but we can go partway there.
And since the late 1960s, we've been able to bounce radar signals from Venus and Mercury.
And these signals return with an extra time delay, just as Shapiro predicted.
Nowadays, we can do similar experiments with spacecraft.
We send a radio signal to the spacecraft, which then relays it back to Earth.
We can also go the other direction, outward from the Sun rather than inward.
So out-orbiting Saturn is the Cassini probe, named after the mapper of Saturn's rings.
And a radio time delay with Cassini confirms Einstein's theory to about two parts in 100,000.
It's an excellent and precise test of Einstein's general relativity within our own solar system.
In fact, the effect of gravity on light yields several of the key pieces of experimental evidence for Einstein's theory.
Gravitational redshift observed by Pound and Rebka, the bending of starlight observed by Eddington,
the time delay of radar signals predicted by Shapiro.
And furthermore, massive galaxies and galaxy clusters can form gravitational lenses,
and these distort the appearance of more distant galaxies as seen from Earth.
And we can use the distortion to map out the dark matter in galaxies and galaxy clusters.
So we're using the effect of gravity on light to see invisible parts of the cosmos.
In Eddington coordinates, the space-time curvature near a massive body produces a distortion of the light cones.
They tilt inward a little.
And as we will see in lecture 20, when gravitational curvature of space-time becomes very strong in the collapsed stars known as black holes,
the distortion of the light cones becomes hugely important.
But before we consider black holes, we will explore some other effects of curved space-time.
The gravity of a rotating body has a twist that Newton never dreamed of.
Nearby bodies are dragged around slightly by the rotation.
And disturbances of the gravitational field travel as gravitational waves through empty space,
like the electromagnetic waves that make up light.
In effect, there are ripples in space-time.
And these two effects are some of the strangest gravitational phenomena yet discovered.
And they are also the focus of some of the most precise experiments in all of contemporary physics.
So twists and ripples of space-time.
That's next time. I'll see you then.
