Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, the theory that gravity is really the curvature
of space-time, is much more than an update or a modification of Newton's Principia.
It is a complete rethinking of our basic concepts of space, time, motion, inertia, and gravity.
And it also encompasses completely new phenomena, unlike anything in Newtonian gravity.
We saw several examples in our last lecture, the strange relation between gravity and temperature,
and the many effects of space-time curvature on light.
So here are two features of Newtonian gravity.
First, the gravity of a planet does not depend on how it is moving.
It does not depend on whether the planet is rotating or not.
The gravitational force it exerts on nearby objects is just the same.
Second, in Newtonian physics, the only physical effects of gravity are the forces exerted
on masses.
In an empty space, where there are no masses, there are no gravitational phenomena.
Gravity only means, in other words, forces acting between bodies, and in an empty space,
there are no forces, there are no bodies.
That is how it is in Newtonian gravity.
In Einsteinian gravity, though, things are very different.
We only have a new theory that we're trying to understand.
How do you go about it?
Well, it helps to make analogies to other theories that you already have, other theories
that you know.
And so, for inspiration and guidance in looking for new gravitational phenomena, we will turn
to electromagnetism.
So electric charges exert long-range forces on one another, like charges that say charges
of the same sign repel each other, while opposite charges, charges with opposite signs, attract.
And the electric force does have a resemblance to Newtonian gravity.
For instance, the strength of the electric force decreases as 1 over the distance squared.
And like gravity, the simple force between charged particles is not the whole story.
First, moving charges, such as electric currents and wires, exert and experience an additional
kind of force besides the electric force, and this is called the magnetic force.
For example, the charges circulating in one electromagnet can exert a force on another
electromagnet, so magnetic effects are a very important part of the theory.
That's why we call it electromagnetism.
Second, as Faraday and Maxwell taught us, even in empty space, spaces where there are
no electric charges at all, electric and magnetic fields have a rich physics of their own.
And the prime example of that rich physics is electromagnetic waves, which are traveling
disturbances of electric and magnetic fields, moving at the speed c through empty space.
Electromagnetic waves include visible light, radio waves, and x-rays, and Maxwell's theory
of electromagnetic fields includes all of these various phenomena.
So Einstein's theory of curved spacetime is, in many ways, the gravitational equivalent
of Maxwell's field theory.
So that motivates us to ask, is there a gravitational version of magnetic forces?
Is there gravito magnetism?
And it forces us to ask, can there be gravitational waves in empty space?
And the answer to both questions is yes.
So we'll begin with gravito magnetism.
Gravitational effects do to the motions of matter.
It's a bit tricky to understand, so we'll have to go back to the basics.
Gravity is really all about inertia.
In what frame of reference does the law of inertia hold good?
In a freely falling frame, a lab that's in a falling elevator or an orbiting spaceship,
the law of inertia holds good.
A free body moves in a straight line at a uniform speed.
Its world line in spacetime is a straight path.
The free fall frame, in other words, is an inertial frame.
A frame attached to the Earth's surface, on the other hand, is not inertial.
A free body accelerates downward.
We call that acceleration gravity.
It's the result of a gravitational force.
But we now know that in spacetime, the falling body's world line is a geodesic.
It's a straight line in a curved spacetime.
So now let's consider a rotating lab.
We might imagine doing our experiments on a merry-go-round.
Is that an inertial frame?
No.
In a rotating lab, we feel all sorts of strange forces due to inertia.
There's the centrifugal force.
It's a mysterious outward push toward the rim of the merry-go-round.
And there's also the Coriolis force, an equally weird sideways deflection of moving objects.
Anything moving toward the rotation axis is deflected in the direction of the spin, and
anything moving away from the rotation axis is deflected in the opposite way.
Now these apparent forces are pretty familiar.
The Coriolis force, for instance, shapes the wind patterns on the rotating Earth.
It's why hurricanes in the northern hemisphere of the Earth rotate counterclockwise.
At the center of the storm is a region of low pressure.
And as air tries to move inward from the sides, it is deflected by the Coriolis force.
That starts a counterclockwise circulation.
We say that the centrifugal force and the Coriolis force are not real forces.
That they arise only because our reference frame is not inertial.
On the other hand, if you take Einstein's principle of equivalence seriously, that
makes them exactly as real as the gravitational force.
So how do you know if you are in a rotating reference frame?
That's not hard.
You can just check to see whether the law of inertia holds.
Do your arms tend to go outward even if nothing is pulling them?
That is, is there a centrifugal force in your reference frame?
If so, then you are rotating.
If not, then you are not rotating.
You might be in an inertial frame.
It's a question you could answer by an experiment within your laboratory.
So if you want to stop rotating, then you just adjust your motion so that these rotational
forces go away.
And the best tool for finding a non-rotating frame in your lab is a gyroscope.
A gyroscope, like this one, is a heavy object that can spin about an axis.
If we support it symmetrically, that is to say right at its center of mass, then it will
not precess around when we set it spinning.
Its angular momentum will be conserved.
Now since the angular momentum points along the rotation axis, then that axis will point
in a fixed direction in space, a fixed direction in an inertial, non-rotating frame.
So if I set this gyroscope spinning, then its axis will point in a constant direction,
even if I rotate the platform that it sits on.
We can therefore use a gyroscope to detect whether or not our lab is rotating.
And the best ones are very sensitive.
A laser-based gyroscope can detect a rotation rate of one turn per thousand years.
But there is a second method for detecting rotation.
We could use a telescope.
We point our telescope at a distant star.
If the star stays put in our field of view, then we are not rotating.
But if the star drifts to one side, we are rotating.
In fact, this is the easiest way to tell that the Earth is rotating.
The Sun and the stars and everything move across the sky.
So we have two different methods, the gyroscope method versus the telescope method.
The gyroscope method relies on physics within the lab.
We ask ourselves, does the law of inertia hold?
And the telescope method relies on the rest of the universe.
Does the rest of the universe seem to move around?
And here is a remarkable fact.
These two methods lead to the same result.
That is, whenever the gyroscope tells us that we are not rotating, the telescope says the
same and vice versa.
This fact was pointed out by Ernst Mach, the Austrian physicist whose critique of Newton
was such a big influence on Einstein's thinking.
Mach said, maybe this agreement of gyroscopes and telescopes is no coincidence.
Maybe there is a physical reason for it.
Mach thought that distant masses in the universe might determine inertia in the lab.
Thus, the inertial non-rotating frame for the lab was somehow fixed by the distant stars.
Mach guessed that this might be some kind of gravitational effect.
And that suggestion is often called Mach's principle.
So Mach says that inertia and gravity are related.
Hmmm, that sounds familiar.
Indeed, Mach's principle was one of Einstein's inspirations in developing general relativity.
So what does general relativity actually say about the subject?
Do the gyroscope and telescope methods always necessarily agree about rotation?
The answer is, somewhat surprisingly, no.
And this was discovered in 1918, just a few years after Einstein published his theory.
It is an application of Einstein's theory of the Einstein equation worked out by Joseph
Lentz and Hans Turing, who were also Austrian physicists like Mach.
It is called the Lentz-Turing effect.
So let's imagine a gyroscope that sits inside a massive shell of matter.
The shell is not rotating, but you can see through it.
It's made of something transparent, like glass.
We also have a telescope that points along the axis of the gyroscope.
So when nothing is rotating, the telescope always points through the shell at the same
star.
The telescope and the gyroscope tests agree.
Now we start the shell of matter rotating rapidly.
When we do that, what's going on inside the shell?
Well, the gyroscope axis is still determined by inertia.
That is, if we are inside the shell and we orient ourselves according to the gyroscope,
then we will feel no centrifugal force.
Our reference frame is inertial.
But when we then look through the telescope that's attached to the gyroscope, we will
see the distant stars in space moving across the field of view.
So according to the telescope method, we are rotating.
The gyroscope and the telescope no longer agree.
So inside the shell, if you stop your rotation according to the gyroscope, then the stars
appear to go around.
If you stop your rotation according to the telescope, then you feel your arms pulled
outward by centrifugal force.
There's something about the rotation of the massive shell that has made the difference.
Now the difference between the gyroscope and the telescope methods might be small.
So for example, suppose the shell was the mass of the earth and it was the radius of
the earth and we were inside it.
And we set the shell spinning around at one revolution per second.
That's pretty fast.
The equator is moving at one seventh of the speed of light.
So once you get it spun up, how much would the gyroscope and telescope methods disagree
at the earth's center?
And it turns out that the disagreement is about one degree per month.
In other words, if we align ourselves by the gyroscope, then we'll see the stars going
around once every 30 years.
That's pretty slow, but it's not zero.
So what is going on?
Well, in fact, this is a new effect of gravity.
It's a gravito-magnetic effect, and it's produced by the moving mass in the shell that
surrounds us.
The rotation of the shell drags the inertial frame inside by a very slight amount.
That's why the lens-tearing effect is sometimes called frame-dragging.
Now does this contradict Mach's principle?
After all, the gyroscope method and the telescope method no longer agree.
Well, I like to think of it as Mach's principle in action.
You see, the whole universe, according to Mach, determines the inertia in the lab by
maybe something like a gravitational effect, but the shell is massive and close.
So the rotating shell has an exceptionally big vote on what the inertial frame inside
will be.
And so if the shell is rotating, that will pull the inertial frame along with it just
a bit.
Now something similar would happen if we put a gyroscope beside a rotating planet.
The rotation of the planet would drag nearby inertial frames around due to the lens-tearing
gravito-magnetic effect.
So the gyroscope axis would precess slightly relative to the stars in the direction of
the rotation of the planet.
So is this really true?
Well after decades of theorizing, we can now finally say, yes, it is true.
And that's because of one of the most amazing experiments ever performed.
Gravity probe B.
So was there a gravity probe A?
Well yes, in the 1970s there was a gravity probe A. It was a NASA satellite designed
to test gravitational time dilation.
And gravity probe B is also a NASA satellite experiment, but with a much longer history.
Work on it began 50 years ago in the early 1960s.
The satellite was finally launched in 2004, and the final results were announced in 2011.
What took so long?
Well to do this experiment, scientists had to overcome enormous technological challenges.
But the heart of gravity probe B is a set of four gyroscopes and a telescope.
The gyroscopes are ultra smooth spheres of fused quartz coated with a thin layer of niobium.
Their shapes are perfect spheres to within a millionth of a centimeter.
And the telescope tracks one or more guide stars out in space.
That is the spacecraft keeps itself non-rotating by the telescope method.
And then instruments in the spacecraft check to see if the gyroscopes precess around as
predicted by lens and tearing.
And even that is not easy.
As you might imagine, it's hard to measure the rotation of something so utterly smooth.
And here are the results.
All four gyroscopes in gravity probe B confirm the frame-dragging lens-tearing effect to
within the known margin of error.
Well how big is the error?
Well the cautious estimate puts that at around 15 percent, 15 percent.
That sounds pretty crummy.
But it is about as precise as Eddington's eclipse measurement of the deflection of starlight.
So frame-dragging is not just an exotic, barely measurable detail of the Earth's gravitational
field, that is, of the curved space-time around the Earth.
Some places in the universe experience a much greater frame-dragging effect.
For example, consider a neutron star.
We mentioned neutron stars in lecture 12.
A neutron star might be twice the Sun's mass, but only 10 kilometers in radius.
And it's rotating up to a thousand revolutions per second because angular momentum is conserved
in the collapse of the star that forms the neutron star.
So the axis of a nearby gyroscope right next to a spinning neutron star would process relative
to the stars many times around per second.
And near a rotating black hole, the frame-dragging effect can be even greater.
Remember Wheeler's motto, matter tells space-time how to curve.
Matter in motion, a rotating planet or star, curves space-time in a different way.
The rotation of a massive body imposes a kind of twist to space-time geometry, dragging
inertial frames along with the rotation.
Now other kinds of motion have other kinds of effects on space-time.
When some of the motion in the universe is not steady and continual like rotation, there
are extraordinarily rapid and violent motions.
There are stellar explosions and collisions and near collisions between stars and so on.
As the matter in these events redistributes itself, the gravitational field changes.
That is, space-time changes around the masses.
Those changes in space-time spread outward into space as gravitational waves.
So what is a gravitational wave?
Gravitational wave is a traveling disturbance in the curvature of space-time.
Now that is a slightly weird idea.
The wave moves through space, but the wave is also a property of the space through which
it moves.
But within the wave, space is really empty.
It contains no matter at all.
A gravitational wave is just a moving change in the geometry of space.
Einstein himself found this a bit hard to understand.
For a while in the 1930s, he thought that gravitational waves might not even really exist.
He thought he'd proven that they were simply artifacts of the mathematics, but not actual
physical phenomena.
But within a few months, he found a mistake in his proof.
So in fact, gravitational waves are a genuine part of the space-time theory of gravity.
They are ripples in empty space-time.
So let's ask ourselves some questions about gravitational waves.
First, how fast do those ripples move?
And it turns out that gravitational waves move at sea, the speed of light.
One question?
If a gravitational wave passed by through this room, how would we know?
One way is to use a pair of masses that can move freely, that is, inertial masses.
Consider a pair of pendulums.
Now the masses at the end of the strings are not inertial in the vertical direction.
Obviously, they aren't in free fall after all.
But the masses can move freely from side to side.
So as a gravitational wave passes by, the distance between the two pendulums changes.
They get slightly closer together, and then slightly farther apart.
Not because any forces are exerted on them.
This is really a form of the tidal effect, a relative acceleration of the masses due
to space-time curvature.
The space between the masses is being distorted this way and that.
So if we could carefully monitor the distance between the two masses, then we might be able
to detect the small changes produced by the wave, the gravitational wave, the traveling
distortion in space-time.
This is the idea behind LIGO, that stands for Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave
Observatory.
It's the most ambitious effort yet to detect gravitational waves from space.
There are two facilities, one in Louisiana and one in Washington State.
In LIGO, massive mirrors hang from wires four kilometers apart.
And the distance between them is measured by interferometry, a technique akin to that
ultra-precise method used by Michelson to search for changes in the speed of light.
Now, the apparatus is fantastically accurate.
It can detect a change in that four kilometer distance less than the diameter of an atomic
nucleus.
But even with such accuracy, LIGO could only detect the most powerful sources of gravitational
waves.
Why?
Well gravity is a weak force, and gravitational waves are expected to be themselves fantastically
weak.
To generate them, you need a whole lot of mass moving very violently.
Things need to be rapidly changing in time, and not symmetrical.
The steady rotation of a massive body like a neutron star produces no gravitational waves.
And any radial expansion or contraction like an exploding or collapsing star would not
generate any gravitational waves either.
To get detectable gravitational waves, you need something rare like a collision between
two neutron stars or two black holes.
So LIGO has been running for several years now, and at the moment, as I speak, there
has been no detection yet of gravitational waves.
Nevertheless, we are pretty sure that gravitational waves do exist.
Why are we so sure?
That involves a dramatic and fascinating discovery.
So here's another question about gravitational waves.
Do gravitational waves carry energy?
At first it seems that they cannot.
After all, they are made out of nothing but empty space.
They are literally nothing but geometry.
On the other hand, suppose that our two hanging masses are connected by an elastic thread.
As the distance between them changes, the thread is stretched and relaxed.
Over time, friction will heat the thread up.
And that's energy.
Energy has been added to the system.
So gravitational waves must in some manner carry energy.
About 20,000 light-years away, there is a remarkable star system.
It's called PSR 1913-16, also called the Binary Pulsar.
It was discovered in 1974 by Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor of the University of Massachusetts.
It's a binary star system, but both stars are neutron stars.
They're ultra-dense remnants of stars somewhat more massive than our Sun.
And one of those neutron stars is a pulsar.
The pulsar rotates rapidly and emits a periodic radio pulse toward the Earth.
And in the binary pulsar, that radio pulse comes about 17 times per second.
This precisely timed radio signal allowed Hulse and Taylor to track the motion of the
stars with extreme precision.
Now the orbit of the two stars is a very close one.
At the closest, the stars are less than a million kilometers apart.
The orbital period of the two stars is only seven and three-quarters hours.
So here's what we have, two very massive objects orbiting each other very fast, hundreds
of kilometers per second.
Now we said that mere rotation could not generate gravitational waves.
That's because the distribution of mass within the rotating object does not really
change with time.
It's in a steady state.
But here we have two discrete masses moving around each other through space.
The configuration of those masses does change rapidly with time.
It's a perfect system for generating gravitational waves.
So there should be ripples in space-time geometry spreading out from the binary pulsar.
Now at 20,000 light-years distance, these waves are too weak even for LIGO to detect.
For one thing, the waves are in the wrong frequency band.
LIGO is tuned to higher frequencies to try to detect colliding black holes and so on.
But the gravitational waves carry energy.
And that should cause the binary pulsar system to lose energy over time.
And we can use Einstein's theory to calculate how much.
And actually, it's quite a lot.
The gravitational wave energy output from the binary pulsar system is about 2% of the
total light energy output of our own sun.
Now as the system loses energy, the two neutron stars move into a closer orbit.
They move faster.
Their orbital period gets shorter.
Paulson-Taylor find that the orbital period is getting shorter.
It's getting shorter by 76 microseconds each year.
Now that does not sound like much, but it is precisely measurable thanks to the pulsar.
So the stars are spiraling inward toward one another.
They will collide eventually in a few hundred million years, but here is the important point.
The rate of energy loss from the system exactly agrees with the prediction of Einstein's
general relativity.
And that is why we can be so confident that gravitational waves do exist after all.
We cannot detect them directly yet, but we can measure the energy loss in the binary
pulsar.
That loss can only be reasonably explained by the ripples in space-time spreading out
from the rapid orbital motion of the two neutron stars.
It's a wonderful discovery, and in 1993, Hulse and Taylor won the Nobel Prize in Physics
for it.
Gravity is not just a simple attraction between masses.
Gravity is the interaction of matter and energy with the geometry of space and time.
It's a complicated and sometimes bizarre business.
The rotation of a mass can drag inertial frames along with it in the lens-tearing effect,
which we've measured directly for the first time with Gravity Pro-B.
And violent motions can produce gravitational waves, ripples in space-time, not yet directly
observed by LIGO, but indirectly observed in the slow, inward spiral of the binary pulsar.
So in the next lecture, we will study massive objects, which have collapsed completely under
their own gravity.
We will see how such objects distort space-time so strongly that some parts of the universe
are forever hidden from the rest, they are beyond the horizon.
These are objects with such powerful gravity that not even light can escape them.
And yet, they are the power supplies for the brightest energy sources in the cosmos.
Next time, Black Holes.
