This time, we will discuss gravity at its most extreme.
We will describe massive bodies that warp space-time so strongly that nothing, not even
light, can escape.
This time, we will talk about black holes.
In effect, we are resuming a story that we began back in lecture 12.
There we talked about the internal structure and the life history of a star.
And at each stage of the star's lifetime, it was in hydrostatic equilibrium.
That's a stalemate between the inward pull of gravity and the outward push of pressure
forces.
Now, for an ordinary star like our Sun, that internal pressure is due to huge internal
temperatures, millions of degrees.
And this kind of temperature is maintained by nuclear reactions in the core.
But that can't go on forever.
Eventually, the nuclear fuel runs out.
What happens then?
Well here is one possibility.
At extremely high densities, quantum degeneracy forces could restore the equilibrium.
These forces do not depend on temperature.
They're more like the forces inside a solid planet.
So the Earth would not collapse on itself, even if its interior were at absolute zero.
The probable fate of our own Sun is a white dwarf star.
So roughly speaking, it's the mass of the Sun in the volume of the Earth, a million
times the density of ordinary matter.
And in a white dwarf, the internal pressure comes from quantum degeneracy of electrons
in the stellar material.
But as Chandra Sekar showed, this force cannot support a star more than 1.4 times the Sun's
mass.
That's the Chandra Sekar limit.
So what happens to a more massive star?
Well, if the star is not too massive, it is probable that it will form a neutron star.
One of those neutron stars packs two solar masses into a radius of about 10 kilometers.
That's 100 million times the density of a white dwarf.
In a neutron star, there are no distinct atoms.
It is like a giant atomic nucleus, held up by quantum degeneracy pressure among the
neutrons.
Newtonian gravity is not really sufficient to describe neutron stars accurately.
The space-time curvature around one is very strong.
So consider gravitational time dilation, which is a notable effect of Einstein's gravity.
On the surface of a white dwarf star, a clock runs about 0.01 percent slower than a distant
clock.
That's a small effect.
But on the surface of a neutron star, a clock runs perhaps 30 percent slower than a distant
clock.
That's a lot.
So in 1939, just before World War II, the American physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer later
the scientific director of the Manhattan Project during the war, works together with
his students, George Volkov and Hartland Snyder, to study the gravitational collapse of very
massive bodies.
And they ask, is there an upper limit to the mass of a neutron star, like Chandrasekhar's
limit?
And the question is, it's hard to answer, because the exact physics of ultra dense matter
is not well known.
And even today we are not completely sure about the details.
Some physicists have speculated that there is an even denser stage than a neutron star,
a so-called quark star.
Anyway, here's what Oppenheimer and his students find.
No matter what, however the ultra dense physics works, there is an upper limit, and it's
somewhere less than three solar masses.
So for stars more massive than that, no final hydrostatic equilibrium is possible.
Once their nuclear fuel runs out, the gravitational collapse will be complete.
What happens then?
Again, it's a tricky question.
It is hard to sort out the actual gravitational physics from the distortions of map projections.
It's like trying to navigate in the Arctic with a Mercator map projection of the Earth.
The east-west distances on the map will be wildly wrong when you're close to the pole.
The best short description of the final state of complete gravitational collapse is actually
due to John Wheeler.
He said, the star becomes a black hole.
Now once the star has collapsed, we can no longer see it.
Only its space-time distortion, its gravity, remains.
Actually, the idea of a black hole is not that recent.
It goes back to the late 1700s and the writings of two men, John Mitchell in England and Pierre
Simon Laplace in France.
And we've met both gentlemen before.
Mitchell was the man who invented the torsion balance used by Cavendish in Lecture 5.
And Laplace was concerned about perturbations of planetary orbits in Lecture 9.
Now Mitchell and Laplace both know that light travels at a finite speed, C. The speed has
been measured approximately by their day.
And they both guess that gravity affects light.
In fact, they probably think that light is made of particles streaming through space,
like Newton believed.
So in Newtonian gravity, every star or planet has an escape speed, the escape.
And anything that escapes out into deep space from those bodies must travel at least that
fast.
So here's the idea, if a body is massive and compact enough, then its escape speed
will be faster than C, the speed of light.
And in that case, light would not be able to escape from the surface of that body into
deep space.
So it could be that the most massive bodies in the universe are quite invisible to us.
So let's repeat their calculation.
From Lecture 6 we know the formula for the escape speed of a star of mass m and radius
r.
The escape equals the square root of 2 times g times m over r.
So for a star of a given mass m, how small would r have to be, how small would the radius
have to be for the escape speed to equal C?
So we can just set v escape equal to C in our equation, and then solve it for r.
And here's the result.
R equals 2 times g times m over C squared.
If the star is smaller than this radius, light will not be able to escape from its surface.
Well how big is this?
If we put the mass of the Sun into the equation, 2 times 10 to the 30th kilograms, we find
that r is about 3 kilometers, which is even a bit smaller than a neutron star.
Now this is a simple calculation based on nothing but Newtonian gravity.
Nevertheless, it yields a correct answer.
And this is convenient, but actually it's also somewhat dangerous.
We need to be careful how we think about this, because the whole conceptual framework of
Newtonian gravity is wrong.
So what is escape speed?
We said it is how fast you have to go to escape a star or planet without any additional
push along the way.
So the escape speed for the Earth's surface is about 11 kilometers per second.
But you know you could actually escape the Earth's surface without ever going that fast.
And how would you do it?
Well by applying a continual force.
So imagine that we had a ladder one million kilometers high.
That would be hard to build, but it's possible in principle.
So you climb the ladder slowly, maybe it takes you years to reach the top.
And at that distance, the Earth's escape speed is less than one kilometer per second.
So you launch yourself that fast and you escape.
And you never had to travel anything like 11 kilometers per second.
But this kind of picture of escaping slower than the escape speed does not work in Einstein's
gravity.
Black holes are something very different from the dark stars that Mitchell and Laplace imagined.
A truer picture of black holes began to emerge in 1916.
That's the year after Einstein published his theory.
And in that year, a young German astrophysicist named Karl Schwartzschild, who would tragically
die a few months later from a disease contracted in the trenches of World War I, Schwartzschild
discovers a mathematical solution to the Einstein equations.
This solution describes the space-time geometry of a point-like mass.
That is, it describes the gravitational field of such a mass.
And Schwartzschild notices that something funny happens at the radius r equals 2 times
g times m over c squared, exactly the radius we calculated just by setting the escape speed
equal to the speed of light.
In this context, however, it's the radius at which the gravitational redshift becomes
infinite.
And this radius is now called the Schwartzschild radius.
But something funny that Schwartzschild noticed at this value of r is actually the result
of the map projection he is using for space-time.
You really need a different set of coordinates, a different map projection, to really understand
what's going on close in.
In fact, the coordinates you need are Eddington's coordinates, which we saw in lecture 18.
Eddington introduced them in 1924.
So in Eddington's map of Schwartzschild's space-time, the gravitational field of a point
mass, time is vertical as usual and space is horizontal.
And the point mass is a vertical line in the center.
And light cones show how a flash of light would spread out from various points.
Far from the mass, the light cones are at 45 degrees in Eddington's map.
But closer to the mass, the inward side of a light cone is still at 45 degrees, but the
outward side looks more nearly vertical.
And at the Schwartzschild radius, the outward side is completely vertical in the diagram.
And inside the Schwartzschild radius, both the inward and the outward sides actually tilt
inward.
Well, what does this mean?
Well consider an event inside the Schwartzschild radius.
Then a flash of light from that event cannot go outward at all.
All directions are effectively inward toward the point mass, so that light from that event
can never get out.
Events inside the Schwartzschild radius, in other words, can never be seen by any outside
observer.
We have a black hole.
The Schwartzschild radius of the black hole is called its event horizon.
Events inside are beyond the horizon, and cannot be seen by an outside observer.
Now, nothing is really there at the event horizon, it's just a mathematical surface
formed by the outer edges of light cones that are just barely trapped by gravity.
Now remember, the world line of an object must always stay within its light cones, the
light cones of events along the world line.
That's just the space-time way of saying that C, the speed of light, is the speed limit
for everything.
Therefore, any object that crosses the event horizon can never come back out.
All such objects must move inward, all roads lead to Rome.
And no mere force can prevent that inward movement.
A force acts within space-time.
It curves the world line of an object, but the inward movement of an object within the
event horizon is built into the very structure of the space-time geometry within which it
moves.
So, suppose we send a space probe into a black hole.
What does the space probe see as it falls in?
Now note that the space probe must be very ruggedly built.
The tidal effect near the black hole will try to stretch it and squeeze it very powerfully.
So the probe falls inward and passes the Schwarzschild radius without incident.
After all, there's nothing really there.
Very soon after that, the probe approaches the center and is crushed to a point there.
That's the end of the story of the probe.
But what do we see from a safe distance about the probe's journey?
Well we see the probe approach the horizon.
Its clock appears to run slower and slower.
Its radio reports get less frequent and more redshifted, and very close to the horizon,
the probe fades from view.
We never actually see the probe cross the horizon.
And in fact, outside observers never see anything actually cross the event horizon.
And that's why Oppenheimer called black holes frozen stars.
As the star collapses, its surface never quite appears to cross the horizon.
At least it never appears that way to an outside observer.
The surface does fade quickly from view right next to the horizon, and the star really does go black.
And an observer who is riding on the collapsing surface will see himself cross the horizon,
though of course he could never report this fact to the outside world.
So let's take a look at the anatomy of a Schwarzschild black hole.
There's a central point, and all the mass is here.
So the density and curvature become infinite at the center.
That's called a singularity.
It's a mathematical term for a point at which a function tends to infinity.
And in a sense, the singularity is a kind of edge to the spacetime we know.
Surrounding the central singularity is the event horizon.
It's a mathematically defined surface.
Among other things, it keeps the singularity hidden from view.
Because the horizon is a one-way surface for energy and information.
Stuff goes in, but never ever comes out.
It's a point of no return.
Now, outside the horizon, the spacetime curvature,
the gravity of the black hole influences nearby objects.
And out here, the attraction of the black hole is not inexorable anymore.
Then the Earth's gravity is inexorable.
If the sun were a black hole, the Earth and planets could continue to orbit it as usual.
So, what is a black hole made of?
In a sense, it isn't made of anything anymore.
All of the ingredients that made it have disappeared and been squeezed into the singularity.
The final state of the black hole is extremely simple.
It does not depend on what the black hole was made out of to begin with.
John Wheeler, that coiner of vivid phrases, gave us a vivid phrase for this fact.
A black hole has no hair.
Its properties, like chemical composition, simply no longer exist in the universe.
Now, one property that does remain is the angular momentum of the black hole.
And that's because of the lens tearing effect.
Rotation affects the spacetime geometry around an object.
So we can still see the rotation in the gravitational field around the black hole.
So, what is a rotating black hole like?
Well, that was worked out in the 1960s by Roy Kerr, a mathematical physicist from New Zealand.
The central singularity in a Kerr black hole is ring-shaped.
And the event horizon is now somewhat oblate.
It's not exactly a sphere.
And outside the black hole, the frame-dragging effect is extremely strong.
In fact, there is another surface called the ergosphere.
Within that surface, light and matter must move around in the direction of rotation.
Standing still is not possible within the ergosphere, although it may still be possible
to actually escape from the black hole from inside the ergosphere.
Okay, so do black holes really exist, either of the Schwarzschild or the Kerr type?
Can we observe them?
How?
Black holes do exist.
We can observe them by their interaction with other matter near them.
The matter falling into a black hole generally forms something called an accretion disk.
This is a thick disk, like a collection of matter orbiting just outside the black hole.
The accretion disk is very dense, it's rapidly moving, it's turbulent and violent.
The matter in the accretion disk is extremely hot and it's laced with strong magnetic fields.
So what does all that look like from a distance?
Well the accretion disk is a bright but very compact source of x-rays.
Why x-rays?
Because the temperatures are very high in the millions of degrees.
Now because of rapid, turbulent motions in the small accretion disk, the x-rays can fluctuate
very rapidly in intensity.
Those rapid changes are the key point here.
A really large object cannot change its apparent brightness all at once.
That's because light from different parts of the object travel different distances to
reach us.
So even if the object did change its actual brightness in an instant, we would see a more
gradual change as the light reached us at different times.
So a rapidly changing source of light, or of x-rays, must be relatively small.
So in 1970, NASA launches the Uhuru satellite, an orbiting x-ray observatory.
And one of the astronomical objects that it discovers is called Cygnus X1, which is a
highly variable x-ray source in the constellation Cygnus.
The x-ray intensity from Cygnus X1 varies in less than 10 milliseconds.
So the source must be smaller in size than the Earth.
Also radio waves are detected from the same object, and those can be located very precisely
in the sky.
And then ordinary telescopes find a blue star called HDE 226868 at the same point in space.
But the blue star is not the source of the x-rays.
Using the Doppler effect, we can detect changes in the velocity of HDE 226868.
The star must therefore be orbiting with an unseen companion body.
This is exactly how we find exoplanets, the planets around other stars as we saw in lecture
9.
So from the velocity changes, we can work out the mass of the companion.
And that mass is at least 6 solar masses, and it's more likely 10 solar masses.
That cannot be an ordinary star.
We would see an ordinary star that large.
It's too big for a white dwarf or for a neutron star.
The only possibility is that it's a black hole.
So here's what's going on.
What we have here is a binary star system.
We have an ordinary star and a black hole in a fairly close orbit.
So close that the black hole draws mass from the visible star and forms an accretion disk.
The hot, dense inner part of the accretion disk, only a few thousand kilometers across,
produces rapidly fluctuating x-rays.
Now Cygnus X1 was the first one discovered, but now we know many other examples of rapidly
fluctuating x-ray sources.
Now that by itself does not mean a black hole.
Neutron stars can have accretion disks too.
But there's often a visible companion star that allows us to determine the mass of the
thing we're looking at.
And this way we have discovered quite a few fairly small black holes.
They have 5 or 10 or 20 times the sun's mass.
But there are really, really big black holes elsewhere in the universe.
And where are they found?
In the centers of galaxies.
Our galaxy, the Milky Way, contains a few hundred billion stars, plus gas, dust, dark
matter, and so on.
And it is disk-shaped, a spiral galaxy.
And we're in the disk about 30,000 light-years from the center.
The center of our galaxy is actually in the direction of the constellation Sagittarius.
We can't see it very well with visible light.
There are clouds of dust that obscure our view.
But we can see the center of the galaxy with infrared and radio telescopes.
What we find is that the galactic center is a complicated and violent place.
There's a radio source there called Sagittarius A, one of the brightest in the sky.
And there are also x-ray emissions, bright flares lasting less than three hours.
That means that the source must be smaller than our own solar system.
And infrared and radio telescopes show that stars near the center are moving rapidly.
Those motions indicate the gravity of an unseen object.
How massive is it?
It's several times, no, several million times the mass of our sun.
At the center of the Milky Way lies a supermassive black hole.
And other galaxies have black holes too.
Some of those are hundreds or thousands of times larger than ours.
So black holes are actually fairly common in the universe.
And there are some real monsters out there.
One place defined a black hole is in what astronomers call an AGN.
That stands for Active Galactic Nucleus, which is a somewhat understated name for something
pretty spectacular.
Galaxies with AGNs have extremely bright central regions.
There are radio emissions, x-rays and so on, and an AGN can be observed billions of light
years away.
There are several types of AGNs, radio galaxies, quasars, blazars, etc.
One fairly nearby AGN is in the galaxy M87, a giant elliptical galaxy in the Virgo cluster
just over 50 million light years away.
The nucleus of M87 emits x-rays and radio energy and it shoots jets of hot matter out
into space.
And it's all powered by one of the largest black holes known, seven billion times more
massive than our sun.
So the apparent energy output of a really hot AGN can be 100 times the total energy
output of the Milky Way galaxy.
And most of that energy is generated in a small region in the center.
So where does all that energy come from?
It comes from gravitational potential energy.
As matter falls in toward a supermassive black hole, it releases a lot of gravitational
potential energy.
That's what heats up the accretion disk.
And recall from lecture 11 that Helmholtz thought gravitational potential energy was
the energy source of our sun.
But he was wrong about the sun, but that is actually the energy source for an active
galactic nucleus.
So that leaves us with a paradox.
Black holes can escape from inside a black hole, yet black holes are the power supplies
for the brightest objects in the universe.
So how do such monster black holes like those that lie in the hearts of AGNs form in the
first place?
We understand how smaller black holes can form by the core collapse of a dying star,
but there aren't any stars with a million times the mass of the sun.
So theories about the origin of supermassive black holes vary.
Some think that they were formed by mergers of many smaller stellar sized black holes
in the early days of their host galaxies.
And others argue that the huge black holes formed first by some other process and that
the galaxies formed around them.
Active black holes, in other words, might be the seeds of galaxies.
The jury is still out.
It is worth noting, however, that it might actually be easier to form a giant black hole
than a smaller one.
Well, what do I mean?
To form a black hole, you need to get a big mass inside a small volume, inside its own
Schwarzschild radius, in fact.
Then the laws of space-time curvature will do the rest.
So to make a black hole of some mass M, you have to achieve a certain density of matter.
But suppose you are trying to make a black hole 10 times as massive, a mass of 10 M.
That would have a Schwarzschild radius, 10 times as big, and therefore, in some sense,
and I'm ignoring some pretty serious issues of space-time curvature here.
In some sense, within that radius, there is a thousand, that's ten cubed, a thousand
times the volume.
So the density you must have to create that black hole of mass 10 M is only a hundredth
the density that you need to create a black hole of mass M.
Pretty large black holes, therefore, might be able to form in some quite different way
from an over-dense star cluster or giant colliding dust clouds or something.
What about tiny black holes?
So far, we've only talked about black holes about three times larger than the mass of
the sun, or greater.
But let's consider for a moment the possibility of something much smaller.
A black hole with the mass of Mount Everest would be smaller than an atom.
Could such a microscopic black hole exist?
And how could such a microscopic black hole come into being?
Well, a tiny black hole could not form by the collapse of a massive star.
And the same argument that suggested that a huge black hole might be easier to form
means that a tiny black hole would be much harder.
To get a tiny mass within its own tiny event horizon, we would need to create quite incredible
densities.
The material of a neutron star would be almost a vacuum by comparison.
Now some have suggested that tiny black holes could form in the first moments of the universe
when everything in the whole universe was packed densely together.
However, no one has found any evidence for the existence of tiny black holes.
Others have proposed that even tinier black holes, ultramicroscopic black holes, just
might be created in a particle accelerator, like the Large Hadron Collider at the CERN
Laboratory in Switzerland.
And they base this on a highly speculative idea that gravity might become much, much
stronger inside the energetic particle collisions in the accelerator.
Without that huge amplification of gravity, it simply could not happen.
But no amplification of gravity has been found, and no super tiny black holes had ever formed
in the Large Hadron Collider, which is too bad in a way.
Super tiny black holes would be far too small to be dangerous, and they'd be fascinating
objects of study.
So large black holes do exist.
Black holes are a real and fascinating part of modern astrophysics.
Active galactic nuclei powered by supermassive black holes are truly awe-inspiring.
But Einstein realized as early as 1917 that general relativity can be used to understand
something even grander.
Einstein's theory allows us to think about the entire universe.
It's a tool for cosmology, the scientific study of the universe as a whole.
Newtonian gravity, forces acting between masses, is not suited for cosmology.
But Einsteinian gravity, the curvature of spacetime, yields many insights.
So next time we will open new chapters in the story of gravity, from Einstein's greatest
mistake to Edwin Hubble's greatest discovery.
We will see how gravity shapes the structure and the history of a changing universe.
