In this lecture and the next, we will apply Einstein's theory of gravity, general relativity,
the theory of space-time curvature, to the entire universe.
After taking on supermassive black holes in active galactic nuclei, the universe itself
is probably the only topic that could seem even more ambitious.
The study of the universe, as a whole, is called cosmology, and modern scientific cosmology
dates to 1917, less than two years after the Einstein equation, when Einstein himself began
to explore the implications of his theory for the structure and dynamics of the cosmos.
First, let's get the big picture.
What is the universe like on the largest scale?
The distribution of matter and energy in the universe does not seem to be very uniform.
The stars have a lot of matter in a comparatively small volume.
The space between the stars is almost empty.
There are lots of stars within galaxies, but very few in between.
And galaxies themselves are found in clusters, and even clusters of clusters.
And even the distribution of dark matter, which we can map out by gravitational lensing,
is pretty clumpy.
Some places there is a lot of dark matter, other places, much less.
So think about it this way.
Let's pick a cube of space, a thousand kilometers on a side.
What is inside the cube?
How much matter is in it?
The answer depends a lot on where you pick it.
A cube inside the Sun, or inside the Earth, will be a lot different from a cube out in
interstellar space.
So pick a much bigger cube.
Pick a cube a thousand light-years on a side.
Once again, it matters where you pick it.
A cube inside a galaxy contains millions of stars.
A cube out in intergalactic space has few stars or none.
Now pick a really stupendous cube, two hundred million light-years on a side.
But still small compared to the universe itself, we can see things more than ten billion light-years
away.
The contents of such an enormous cube are pretty much the same wherever you pick it.
Any cube of that size will contain millions of galaxies in hundreds of clusters and superclusters.
So what's the moral of the story?
Well although the universe is locally not very uniform, on the very largest distance
scales it is actually much the same everywhere.
And this fact is true as far out in space as we can observe, that is more than ten billion
light-years.
This fact, this uniformity, is sometimes called the cosmological principle, though it is really
more an observation about the cosmos rather than a principle.
So on the very large scales in the universe it is homogeneous, that is more or less the
same at every point, and isotropic, that is more or less the same in every direction.
And that is the big picture.
The big picture is pretty simple.
And all of the individual objects in the universe, the planets, the stars, and the galaxies,
are just details.
So suppose the universe is homogeneous and isotropic as we've said, and it's filled
with matter, very sparse matter on average, but uniform.
And our galaxy is sitting somewhere in it.
So according to Newton's law of gravity, what would be the net gravitational force
on our galaxy?
Now that's a somewhat tricky question.
After all, space has no end.
It goes on forever.
So there is an infinite amount of matter out there.
On the other hand, there is about the same amount of matter in every direction.
So the most plausible answer to our question is that the net gravitational force on our
galaxy is zero.
Our galaxy is not pulled either this way or that way.
And the same should be true for any galaxy anywhere in the infinite universe.
Of course, in our immediate vicinity, matter is clumped together.
So there are local gravitational forces in one direction or another.
The Earth is pulled toward the Sun as it orbits.
The Sun is pulled toward the center of the galaxy as it moves, and so on.
Galaxies move around within galaxy clusters, influencing each other, sometimes even colliding.
But in the really big picture, there are no net cosmological forces or accelerations.
So according to Newton's theory of gravitation, the universe might be roughly static.
That is to say, the details could be very dynamic.
Things could move around a lot locally, but the big picture might not change much over
time.
Such a universe could exist forever, without beginning or end.
Now this is the kind of universe that Einstein has in mind in 1917, when he decides to apply
the Einstein equation to the whole universe.
And remember, in general relativity, gravitational forces are not the essential reality.
After all, if you adopt a freely falling frame of reference in your lab, those forces are
actually zero.
But the tidal effect, the relative acceleration of two freely falling objects, is important,
because the tidal effect is directly related to spacetime curvature.
So Einstein imagines a universe containing sparse uniform matter.
The density is very low, but it is not zero.
The universe is not empty.
And now we recall the Einstein equation.
In word form, it says that the total spacetime curvature is equal to a constant times the
density of matter.
Now the constant involves G, Newton's gravitational constant.
And so for the universe, since the density is not zero, the curvature is not zero.
And therefore parallel lines in spacetime must approach or diverge from one another.
That's what curvature means.
So imagine two galaxies in the universe some distance apart.
Perhaps they lie on either side of our 200 million light-year cube.
Only gravity acts on the galaxies, so each galaxy follows a geodesic path in spacetime.
Since there must be some spacetime curvature, the relative acceleration of the two galaxies
cannot be zero.
In fact, according to the Einstein equation, that relative acceleration must be negative
because the curvature is positive like the density.
Thus, the galaxies might be moving closer together at increasing speed that is a faster
and faster, or the galaxies might be moving apart at a decreasing speed that is slower
and slower.
But in any case, the galaxies cannot just stay put relative to each other.
Each one of our two galaxies is following a freefall path, a straight line in spacetime.
And so the relative acceleration of the two galaxies is a kind of cosmic tidal effect.
Each galaxy is at rest with respect to the stuff that is immediately around it.
So that means that if the distance between the two galaxies is changing, it's really
space itself that is expanding or contracting between them.
Therefore according to the Einstein equation, a homogeneous universe cannot be static.
It must change over time.
So either the galaxies are getting closer together faster and faster, the universe is
contracting, or the galaxies are getting farther apart more and more slowly, that is
say the universe is expanding.
Einstein's theory of gravity predicts a changing cosmos.
Now Einstein recognizes the conclusion, and he does not like it.
It seems implausible to him, and he rather likes the old Newtonian universe which could
stay more or less the same over time.
Einstein thinks that the cosmological prediction of his equation is a problem with his theory.
So he does something that he later calls his greatest mistake.
He adjusts the theory to solve the problem.
Einstein introduces a new constant called lambda, that's the capital Greek letter lambda
there.
It's called the cosmological constant, and here's the new version of Einstein's equation
in word form.
Total spacetime curvature plus lambda is equal to a constant times the density of matter.
The constant lambda acts as a kind of cosmic anti-gravity.
If it has just the right value, total spacetime curvature could be zero, at least on the largest
scale, even if matter density is not zero.
Then there would be no cosmic relative acceleration between the two galaxies.
Everything would balance, the universe could remain static.
So this is Einstein's solution to the problem, in his view, of a dynamic, evolving universe.
But other scientists had other ideas, I want to mention three of them in particular.
The first is Willem de Sitter, a Dutch astronomer working in Germany at the time.
De Sitter is fascinated by Einstein's general relativity and its cosmological implications.
He thinks Einstein's original equation makes more sense.
He is willing to accept the idea of an evolving universe.
And De Sitter also finds a mathematical solution to Einstein's modified equation, and this
solution is a universe with a cosmological constant, but little or no actual matter.
So instead of being static, like Einstein's universe, in De Sitter's spacetime, the universe
expands at an accelerating rate, all driven by the cosmic antigravity of the lambda term.
Next on our list is Alexander Friedman.
He is a Russian mathematician and physicist, an expert on meteorology and fluid mechanics.
And like so many Russian scientists, he has a complicated and difficult life during World
War I and the Russian Revolution.
But he keeps up with the latest developments as best he can.
And in the early 1920s, Friedman becomes interested in Einstein's new theory.
He developed his own mathematical solutions to the Einstein equation, this time without
lambda.
And these solutions describe different kinds of universes.
Each one of Friedman's universes is homogeneous and isotropic, that is, these are big picture
models of the universe without the details.
And in some universes, space itself is curved, like a 3D version of a sphere or a saddle.
And some universes expand without bound, some expand and then contract.
It all depends on the rate of expansion and the density of matter.
All of Friedman's universes change over time.
None of them are static.
The third scientist I want to mention is Georges LaMaitre, a Belgian astronomer and physicist
and also a Catholic priest.
LaMaitre considered mathematical model universes that were related to those of De Sitter and
Friedman.
And he thought very carefully about their physical meaning.
So suppose the universe is expanding, space is getting bigger, the galaxies are getting
farther apart.
If we extrapolate backward in time, that means that a finite time ago, however many billions
of years, space had zero size.
All of the galaxies were at the same point.
This means that the universe itself has a finite age.
It was a beginning to time, a first instant.
It is hard to get our minds around such an idea.
If we ask the question, what happened a trillion years ago, then we think that there is an
answer even if we don't happen to know it.
But it might be that there is no answer to that question.
It might be that space time itself does not contain any moment that could be described
as a trillion years ago.
That's the kind of conclusion that LaMaitre draws from his analysis.
And of course, LaMaitre, the priest, might be predisposed to accept the idea of a moment
of creation.
LaMaitre has a rather brilliant idea to test these theories.
By using the red shift of light emitted by galaxies, we can see if they are moving away
from us.
That is, if the distances between the galaxies and us are increasing.
So we can determine whether the universe is expanding, and if so, how fast.
In his paper on cosmology in 1927, LaMaitre includes some data on galaxies suggesting
the expansion.
But when the paper is translated into English by LaMaitre himself, this data gets left out.
So astronomers elsewhere are not aware of it.
So to recap, Einstein thinks the universe is probably static, roughly the same over time,
and he's willing to modify his theory to allow this.
The sitter, Friedman, and LaMaitre each consider the possibility of a universe that expands.
That is a more natural consequence of the relation between curvature and matter in the original
Einstein equation.
And LaMaitre understands that observations are the key to settling the question.
Which brings us to the American astronomer, Edwin Hubble.
Hubble did not start out to be a scientist.
He actually studied law before he turned to astronomy.
And after World War I, Hubble begins to do astronomy research at the Mount Wilson Observatory
north of Los Angeles.
When Hubble first starts out, scientists are not even sure that galaxies are galaxies.
For example, consider M31, the Great Spiral in Andromeda.
Before 1920, it was not possible to make out individual stars.
So what is M31?
After 1920, there are two theories.
It might be a vast system of stars beyond the Milky Way, an island universe, some called
it.
Or it might be a bright diffuse object of some kind, a nebula, within the Milky Way.
The key question to answer this is, how far away is M31?
And the really difficult question is, how do we figure out how far away it is?
The answer had actually been found as long ago as 1908.
In that year, Henrietta Levitt at Harvard University made a study of giant variable
stars, the ones that Levitt studies are called Cepheid variables, because the prototype of
this class is a star called Delta Cepheid in the polar constellation Cepheus.
So a Cepheid variable star is a pulsating variable.
It's a star that grows and shrinks, getting somewhat brighter and dimmer as it does so.
Through her observations, Levitt discovers a mathematical relation between period and
luminosity for Cepheid variables.
Period in this case means the time for one complete pulsation, that is the time between
peaks and brightness, and this is a few days or weeks for Cepheid variables.
Luminosity is the light output of the star at its brightest.
Now these are giant stars, tens of thousands of times brighter than the sun, and it turns
out that period and luminosity are connected by a simple rule.
The longer the period, the brighter the star.
So why is this such a wonderful discovery?
Well first, Cepheid variables are very bright stars, so they can be seen very far away.
And second, since there is a relation between period and luminosity, it is really easy to
find out the luminosity of a Cepheid variable.
You just measure its pulsation period, and you can do that with a calendar.
And third, finally, if you know the luminosity of a star, and you measure its apparent brightness
in the sky, then you can figure out how far away from Earth it must be.
It's like Cassini and Rache's measurement of the distance to Mars in lecture 5.
They found a yardstick for measuring the solar system, and that was a crucial step toward
applying Newton's theory of gravity to the heavens.
Now Henrietta Levitt has found a yardstick for mapping the galaxies, and that will be
a crucial step toward applying Einstein's theory of gravity to the cosmos.
The Cepheid variable yardstick triggers a whole series of discoveries.
So in 1915, Harlow Shapley at Princeton uses Cepheid variables to map out the Milky Way
galaxy, and he shows that we are not near the middle of the galaxy, as many had supposed
before then.
Actually, we're out in the suburbs.
And in 1924, Hubble uses the 100-inch diameter telescope at Mount Wilson to find Cepheid
variables in M31.
He measures their period and their apparent brightness, and he proves that M31 is far
beyond the Milky Way.
It's another galaxy.
And all these diffuse smudges of light seen in telescopes turn out to be distant galaxies
scattered in space.
So throughout the 1920s, Hubble explores this universe of galaxies, and he's assisted
by Milton Hummelsen, himself a remarkable astronomer.
Hummelsen started out as a mule driver, and then a janitor at Mount Wilson before finally
joining the scientific staff there.
Hummel and Hummelsen are able to measure two key things about a galaxy.
They can measure its distance using Cepheid variable stars, and they can measure the speed
of the galaxy toward us or away from us using the Doppler effect.
Slowly they accumulate data, and a remarkable pattern emerges.
First, as LaMaitre had noted, almost all galaxies are getting farther away.
Their light is red-shifted.
Second, one can make a graph of red shift, that is speed of recession, versus distance,
and each dot on the graph would be a galaxy.
And roughly speaking, there is a linear trend.
The further away a galaxy is, the faster it moves away from us.
In symbols, we can write V equals H times D, where V is the speed of recession, and
D equals the distance of the galaxy, and H equals a constant, the same constant for
all the galaxies, and it's now called Hubble's constant.
In 1929, Hubble announces his discovery to the world that galaxies are all getting farther
and farther apart as time goes on.
Why is that?
What we have described it as a kind of motion, such and such a galaxy, is moving away from
us.
But what is really going on is that the space containing all the galaxies is getting larger.
The universe is dynamic and changing.
Not just the universe, but the very shape of space-time is dynamic and changing.
It's just as Desitter and Friedman and Lemaitre had guessed.
It is just as Einstein's unmodified theory of gravity had predicted.
Einstein, of course, hears about Hubble's discovery, and he realizes that his cosmological
constant, lambda, is no longer necessary.
There is no reason to try to force the universe to remain static by introducing a cosmic anti-gravity
term in the equations, because the universe is not static.
Einstein came to regard the cosmological constant as the greatest mistake of his life, a failure
of nerve to accept the implications of his beautiful gravity theory.
And after Hubble's discovery, Einstein collaborated with Desitter on some cosmological calculations
with no lambda anywhere in sight.
Our story about gravity seems like the most important story in all of science.
Space-time is curved.
That cosmos itself is expanding.
What could be bigger news than that?
Yet, in some respects, during the years after Einstein and Hubble, this branch of physics
was a backwater.
The main focus of physics during the middle decades of the 20th century was on the physics
of matter, that is, quantum physics, nuclear physics, and particle physics.
In those fields, there were many technological innovations in electronics and nuclear energy
and so on, and there were glamorous scientific achievements and rapid progress in research.
In gravitation and cosmology, on the other hand, progress was sometimes agonizingly slow.
Let me give you three facts to illustrate this.
Fact one, here's a question.
In the 40 years after Einstein discovered general relativity, that is, up to 1955, the
year Einstein died, how many scientific conferences were held worldwide to focus on relativity
and gravitation?
The answer is zero.
And here's fact number two.
The first Nobel Prize in physics was awarded in 1901, but it was more than 70 years before
the first Nobel Prize was awarded for a discovery related to gravitational physics, that is,
for a topic that is part of our course.
President Einstein's Nobel in 1921 was awarded for quantum physics, not general relativity.
And here's fact number three.
It took a very long time to establish an accurate observational basis for cosmology.
The objects in the distant universe are very difficult to observe.
You need powerful telescopes, sensitive instruments, and lots of care and patience.
When I began graduate school 30 years ago, there were disputes about the basics.
The universe is expanding, yes, but exactly how fast?
What is the actual value of Hubble's constant H, that is, the relation between speed and
distance in the expanding universe?
And one research group estimated the value at around 50 in the usual units, another estimated
the value at around 100 in the same units, and both groups figured they'd measured
it to within 10%.
Obviously, they couldn't both be right, and indeed both of them were wrong.
So what was the problem?
The problem was measuring distances to very far off galaxies.
That's hard.
To measure the overall expansion of the universe, to avoid getting confused by the local details,
we have to look at the big picture.
We have to look to the other side of that 200 million light-year box.
And that is an interesting distance.
200 million light-years is too far for us, even with today's instruments, to make out
sapphire variables, Henrietta Levitt's yardstick for the cosmos.
Nowadays, though, we do have a better handle on Hubble's constant.
And you might not be surprised to hear that its value in the units I mentioned is about
70, about halfway between 50 and 100.
But that's a pretty firm number now, and its uncertainty is probably less than 2%.
Astrophysics really began to blossom in the 1960s with new discoveries in astrophysics.
There were pulsars, active galactic nuclei, and so on.
These were astronomical objects involving ultra-strong gravitational forces.
But most important for cosmology was the discovery of the cosmic microwave background.
Well, what is that?
So the universe is expanding.
Before long ago, it was a lot smaller.
Everything was closer together.
The early universe was dense and hot, as Lemaitre had suggested.
In the 1940s, several physicists reasoned that there might still be electromagnetic radiation
left over from that dense, hot era long ago.
Of course, at present, that radiation would be a lot fainter and at a longer wavelength
due to redshift from the expansion of the cosmos.
As I said, gravitational physics and cosmology were backwater subjects then, and no one took
this prediction very seriously.
Then in 1965, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson at Bell Labs make an odd discovery.
They are trying to create an ultra-quiet microwave receiver, but there is microwave noise in
every direction they point their antenna.
So for a while they think their equipment is faulty.
Gradually, they realize that they are seeing nothing less than the leftover radiation from
the early universe.
This microwave noise is a relic of a time when the universe was less than half a million
years old.
At the time when the radiation was produced, the ambient temperature, everywhere, was thousands
of degrees.
But the present day temperature of the radiation is much lower.
It's just 2.7 degrees above absolute zero.
The discovery of the cosmic microwave background began a new era of gravitational physics.
That meant much more exact measurements and a much more detailed understanding of cosmology.
What happened in the early universe?
What is happening in the universe today?
And now cosmology and gravitational physics in general are some of the liveliest and most
exciting areas of science.
There are astounding new discoveries every few years.
Throughout this course, we've used gravity to see the invisible, the planet Neptune, planets
around other stars, dark matter in galaxies, black holes.
Gravity tells us that much of the stuff in the universe is invisible.
In the next lecture, we will find out how recent cosmological measurements have led
to a shocking surprise about gravity.
We will learn that we can see directly only a small fraction, a few percent, of what exists,
and that Einstein's greatest mistake might not have been a mistake at all.
