Last time we saw how Einstein's theory of gravity predicts something amazing.
The universe itself cannot be static in time, it must be expanding or contracting.
Einstein tried to fix this by inserting a cosmological constant lambda into his gravitational field equation.
Then Hubble discovered that the galaxies are all moving apart, that space is expanding.
And after that, Einstein abandoned his cosmological constant, he called it his greatest mistake.
So the universe is getting larger, and the things in it are getting farther apart.
And looking back, we realize that the universe has a finite age, about 13.7 billion years by modern estimates.
The very early universe was extremely dense and extremely hot.
The cosmic expansion is something like an explosion, except there is no edge to the explosion.
It happens everywhere, space itself is getting larger.
One early critic of this theory described it in this way, the universe started in a Big Bang,
and that name stuck, the theory is now called Big Bang Cosmology.
Big Bang refers to the first moments of the cosmos, the origin of everything in the universe.
Now, as often happens, a new theory explains many things, the Hubble Redshift Law, the cosmic microwave background.
But it also introduces puzzles of its own.
So I want to spend some time talking about the puzzles posed by Big Bang Cosmology,
and the way that modern cosmology has tried to solve them.
Each puzzle reaches back in time to an earlier stage of the universe.
And the solutions require two things, an understanding of matter and energy, of atoms, nuclei, particles and fields,
and, most crucially, an understanding of gravity.
Gravity has governed the evolution of the universe from its earliest moments.
Here's the first puzzle.
Where did the galaxies come from?
Our earliest direct look at the universe is the cosmic microwave background,
that is light made up from an early stage of the universe when the universe was less than half a million years old.
And here's the trouble.
That background is extremely uniform.
If you look in different directions, the radiation is almost the same, the same to about one part in a hundred thousand.
That means that in the early days, the matter in the universe was very evenly spread around.
Nowadays, the matter has clumped together into galaxies and clusters of galaxies.
So how did that happen?
How did the galaxies form?
And the answer is gravity.
Recall from Lecture 11 the Gene's Criterion for the Collapse of a Cloud of Matter.
It turns out that the early universe was not perfectly uniform, that is, some regions were slightly denser than others.
And the variations in density were small, but they were enough for gravity to work on.
Not only could they collapse, but they could collapse fast enough to outrun the cosmic expansion.
And it is those regions that contracted to form the first galaxies.
And that happened pretty early on, within 200 million years of the Big Bang when the universe was less than two percent of its present age.
Now for our second puzzle.
Where did the chemical elements come from?
The universe is mostly made up of hydrogen, the lightest element.
Heavy elements, carbon, oxygen, iron, and so on, are formed inside stars by nuclear reactions.
But if we examine material that has never been in a star, we find a certain mix.
75% hydrogen, hydrogen whose nucleus is made out of one proton, and 25% helium, helium whose nucleus has two protons and two neutrons.
And there are traces of other things.
There are rarer isotopes of hydrogen and helium, and there's lithium and so on.
And evidently, that is the composition of the stuff out of which the galaxies formed.
So how did this original mix of elements come about?
And the answer is Big Bang Nucleosynthesis, the formation of elements in the first few minutes of the universe.
In the first moments of the Big Bang, the universe was unimaginably dense and hot.
But within a second or two, as the universe expanded and cooled down to about a trillion degrees,
protons and neutrons formed out of the energetic quark plasma that existed before.
The protons and neutrons then undergo nuclear fusion reactions like those in the interior of a star.
Hydrogen is converted to helium, and helium into heavier stuff.
But this only goes on for a short time as the universe continues to expand and cool.
So how fast do these reactions run?
Well that depends on the density of the protons and the neutrons available.
How long do the reactions last?
That depends on gravity.
More mass means that the expansion had to be faster in the earlier moments.
Now you might ask, wouldn't more mass have slowed the expansion down?
Isn't that the way that gravity works?
Well think about it this way.
We know how fast the universe is expanding right now, that's Hubble's constant.
More mass in the universe would indeed have slowed the expansion down more over its history.
So the more mass there is in the universe now,
the faster it had to be expanding at the start to match the expansion rate today.
So here's the overall point.
The abundance of the elements, the original mix of hydrogen and helium,
gives us a clue about the first few seconds of the universe.
And when you work out the details, both the galaxy formation and the element formation puzzles
reveal something very interesting.
If we include only ordinary matter in our calculations,
that is matter made out of protons, neutrons and electrons,
we cannot solve either puzzle.
There is not enough mass around to cause galaxies to form.
And the early universe expands too slowly so that more than 25% helium is produced.
Thus, there must be another kind of matter present in the early universe.
Of course, we already knew this.
There is dark matter in the galaxies discovered by Fritz Zwicky and Vera Rubin back in lecture 11,
and mapped out in space by gravitational lensing in lecture 18.
But the answers to our two puzzles do tell us some important things about that dark matter.
It tells us that dark matter is not made of protons or neutrons, it is something else.
Why?
Because otherwise it would participate in Big Bang nuclear reactions
and spoil that original mix of the elements.
And the dark matter must be cold, that is its particles are not moving too fast.
Why?
Well, otherwise their kinetic energy would be too large
and they would not be able to participate in gravitational collapse to form galaxies.
And finally, to make everything work out, there must be about six times more dark matter
than ordinary matter made out of atoms.
The dark matter, in other words, must account for most of the matter in the universe.
So what is the dark matter made of?
At the moment, we have no idea.
It does not absorb or emit light, and it does not participate in ordinary nuclear reactions.
We detect it only by its gravitational effects, by its effect on velocities in galaxies and
galaxy clusters, by gravitational lensing of the light from distant galaxies, by its
contributions to the formation of the earliest galaxies, and by the rate of cosmic expansion
during nucleosynthesis.
There are lots of physics experiments going on now to find out more about the dark matter,
but so far, gravity is our only way to see it.
Even dark matter, however, cannot explain our next two puzzles.
So here is our third puzzle.
Why is the universe so uniform?
All large regions of the universe look the same.
The cosmic microwave background is extremely uniform.
You could explain this in principle if different regions of the universe had interacted somehow.
Then extra matter from over here could go over there, and things could even out.
But the universe is not old enough for this to have happened.
Even light from one part of the universe could not have reached the other by now.
The distant parts of the universe have not had time to negotiate, so to speak.
So how did they arrange the large-scale distribution of matter to be so very even?
Now, before we try to solve that one, let's mention our fourth puzzle.
Why is the space of the universe so flat?
Remember the mathematical universes that Alexander Friedman devised based on Einstein's equation
of space-time curvature?
All of them expanded.
Friedman universes, however, had different geometries for three-dimensional space.
That is, if you consider just a slice of space-time, a moment of time, the Friedman universes fall
into three types.
They might have positive spatial curvature analogous to a sphere, they might have negative
spatial curvature analogous to a saddle, and they might have zero spatial curvature analogous
to a flat plane.
In a Friedman universe, the curvature of space depends on density, the total density of all
kinds of matter and energy in the universe.
So when we observe the universe, it appears that the space of the universe is almost exactly
flat over large scales.
So why is that true?
Well, in 1981, the American physicist Alan Gooth proposed a weird and dramatic theory.
He said that very, very early on, the universe could have been quite different from today.
Instead of something like a Friedman universe filled with matter, it might have been more
like a desitter universe, almost empty, but with a cosmological constant.
Cosmological constant returns.
Einstein's lambda might have been huge for a tiny fraction of a second.
Now, this idea is not as wacky as it sounds.
Without going into the details, there are some plausible ways for the physics of elementary
particles to produce a huge value of lambda, at least for a short time.
Now we called Einstein's cosmological constant lambda cosmic anti-gravity.
That is to say, ordinary gravity tends to slow down the expansion of the universe over
time, which makes sense.
The galaxies exert gravitational attraction on one another.
But in desitters anti-gravity universe, the expansion happens at an accelerating rate.
The size of the universe increases exponentially.
Gooth called this cosmic inflation.
Now, the time of cosmic inflation did not last very long.
It was all over when the age of the universe was only 10 to the minus 30th of a second.
However, during that incredibly brief time, the universe expanded more than a trillion
trillion times.
So how could Gooth's inflation theory solve our horizon and flatness puzzles?
Well first, inflation means that widely separated points in space were once much closer to each
other before cosmic inflation separated them.
And that means that we could explain how the universe could be as uniform as we see it.
And second, inflation would tend to flatten out whatever spatial curvature the universe
had.
So take a balloon.
Now blow the balloon up to the size of the Earth.
A small patch of its surface is almost exactly flat.
The idea of inflation obviously poses a puzzle of its own.
Why did inflation ever stop?
If the universe started out with a huge cosmological constant lambda, then where did it go?
Then the cosmological constant, constant, well not necessarily.
If we go back and examine the Einstein equation, the equation that connects spacetime curvature
to matter and energy, we realize that we can introduce the cosmological constant on either
side of the equation.
We can either regard it as a correction to the curvature side as we did before, or we
might regard lambda as a contribution to energy density.
The inflation idea is that the universe started out filled with a kind of energy, and this
energy acted as a cosmological constant, driving a very short period of very rapid inflation.
But this kind of energy was unstable and then decayed into other kinds of energy, and in
fact the energy released at the end of the cosmic inflation period could be the source
of all the matter and energy that we see in the universe today.
So cosmic inflation is a beautiful theory, and it neatly solves some very difficult puzzles.
But do we have any actual evidence for it?
In fact, we do.
The end of the inflation era, really the inflation moment, was not perfectly simultaneous everywhere.
That is, in some places it ended slightly sooner, and in some places slightly later.
That fact would lead to variations in the density of the leftover matter and energy.
In effect, the end of inflation produced giant sound waves in the universe, and as the universe
expanded, those sound waves stretched out.
So by the time that the cosmic microwave background formed, they were up to a million light-years
long.
So the density variations in those million light-years sound waves affected the light
passing through the universe, and this effect is an interesting bit of gravitational physics
in itself.
It's called the Sacks-Wolfe effect after the two physicists who figured it out in the
1960s.
So let me take a moment to describe the Sacks-Wolfe effect.
Suppose some photons of light enter a region of somewhat denser matter.
Because of gravity, the entering light is blue-shifted, the photons gain energy as they
go in, and then the photons lose energy again as they emerge from the denser region.
However, in the interim the universe has expanded a bit.
Matter everywhere in the universe, including in the denser region, has spread out.
So the uphill climb out of the denser region is not as steep.
In other words, the photons do not lose all the energy that they gained.
This means that the photons of the cosmic microwave background record a little bit of information
about the matter that they fly through.
Variations that are coming to us from slightly denser regions should have slightly higher
energies.
The Sacks-Wolfe effect is small, but it means that the cosmic microwave background records
some information about the density variations in the early universe.
Now our best data to date comes from the Wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe, WMAP.
It's a NASA satellite that operated between 2001 and 2010.
We met WMAP briefly in lecture 10 because of its remarkable orbit near one of the Sun-Earth
Lagrange points.
Now according to the WMAP data, the cosmic background is almost perfectly uniform, but
it does have measurable variations, and furthermore, the characteristics of those variations match
inflation theory very closely.
And here's a bonus.
Those slight variations in density produced at the end of the inflation period and measured
by WMAP are just enough to initiate the formation of galaxies in the early universe.
The inflation theory is a bold hypothesis indeed.
Deposits that matter, energy and gravity were all once quite different.
In the first 10 to the minus 30 seconds of the universe, it was dominated by cosmic antigravity.
And that brief era and its aftermath have shaped everything that we see.
This is a huge extrapolation of our present knowledge into the earliest moments of the
cosmos.
Nevertheless, the inflation theory has a lot of evidence to support it, including some
fine details of the cosmic microwave background.
As far as we can tell now, it is a correct picture of the earliest universe.
I have mentioned four main puzzles so far.
Two of them were solved in part by the presence of dark matter.
Two of them were solved by the theory of cosmic inflation, and all of them were essentially
puzzles about the very early universe.
But our fifth puzzle is different from the others.
It is not about the early universe at all.
There is something strange and quite unexpected about the way that gravity is shaping the
universe in our own era today.
This begins with a question.
Exactly how has the universe changed over time?
It has expanded, but how has the rate of expansion changed?
That's essentially a question about gravity.
How has gravity affected the evolution of the universe?
And so we answer this question by appealing to a basic principle of observational cosmology.
When we look farther out into space, we are looking farther back into time.
The most distant galaxies observed are just about 13 billion light-years away, so we see
them not as they are now, but as they were 13 billion years ago, when the universe was
less than 1 billion years old.
So imagine that we extend Edwin Hubble's diagram, the diagram of redshift velocity
versus distance for galaxies very, very far.
We include galaxies billions of light-years away, but we do not expect to get a straight
line because the speed of expansion has changed.
Hubble's constant, which is the slope of that graph, isn't actually constant over
time.
The shape of the curve we do get will then tell us about the history of cosmic expansion.
Now here's the problem.
How do we reliably determine the distance to such very distant galaxies?
Hubble used Cepheid variable stars, which are thousands of times brighter than the sun,
but they are not bright enough to see more than 200 million light-years away.
Here is what we need.
We need something that is brighter than any star so that we can see it really far away,
but whose actual luminosity is known exactly so that we can use its apparent brightness
to determine its distance.
Luckily, nature provides just such objects, supernovas.
Supernovas are super gigantic explosions of stars, first identified by Volter Bade and
our old friend Fritz Ficke.
Back in lecture 12, we discussed the core collapse of dying stars at the ends of their
life.
The largest stars formed neutron stars or black holes.
Essentially, a supernova explosion is what that kind of core collapse looks like from
the outside as the sudden release of energy blows the outer parts of the star out into
space.
Now supernovas come in different types, which are recognizable from their spectra and the
curve of their brightness over time and so on.
We are interested in type 1a supernovas, and here's how they occur.
A white dwarf star is in a close binary system with an ordinary star.
A matter is pulled from the companion on to the white dwarf, so the white dwarf slowly
grows in mass.
But remember, there is an upper limit to the mass of a white dwarf because eventually gravity
will overcome the quantum degeneracy pressure of the electrons.
That's Chandrasekhar's limit, 1.4 times the mass of the sun.
When the white dwarf reaches this limit, it collapses.
Well, what happens?
Well, either a neutron star is formed or the star simply blows itself to smithereens.
Either way, a huge amount of energy is released.
That is, there is a huge explosion.
Now notice the best part.
Wherever this happens, whatever the circumstances, the collapse always happens at the same mass,
Chandrasekhar's limit.
Therefore, all type 1a supernova explosions should be about the same.
That is, they should have about the same luminosity.
Well, how bright is such a supernova at its very brightest?
Well, it's about 5 billion times brighter than the sun.
That is bright as a small galaxy all on its own.
We can see one of these explosions from very far away.
The bad news is that type 1a supernovas are infrequent.
They might occur only once every few centuries in a particular galaxy.
The good news is, we can see millions and millions of galaxies, so we can find a lot
of supernovas.
So we keep a telescopic eye on many galaxies, and every so often, we spot a type 1a supernova
in one of them.
We measure its peak brightness, and then we use that to determine the distance to the
galaxy.
And we measure the redshift from the galaxy and determine its recessional velocity.
And that adds another point to the Hubble diagram of velocity versus distance.
And we keep this up until we have enough data to draw conclusions about the history of the
expansion of the universe.
What I've described is exactly what two different groups of astronomers were doing
in the late 1990s, and their conclusions were so unexpected that each group thought
they had done something wrong until they compared their data and realized that they'd made
a discovery.
And here is what they discovered.
The expansion of the universe is not slowing down, it is accelerating.
What is happening?
Apparently, the cosmological constant lambda is not zero after all.
Not only was cosmic anti-gravity present at the beginning of the universe during inflation,
but there is a tiny amount left over.
And that left over lambda is pushing galaxies apart today at an ever increasing rate.
Now cosmologists do not actually call this cosmic anti-gravity.
From thinking about inflation theory, and especially the energy release at the end of
inflation, it seems more natural to think of lambda as a kind of energy density, an energy
density present somehow even in empty space.
We do not see this energy density directly, but only its effects on the expansion of the
universe that is by its gravitational effects.
So it is dark, like the dark matter, but to distinguish the two we call this dark energy.
Dark energy has some strange properties, so consider ordinary matter by which I include
the dark matter as well.
As the universe expands, the density of matter gets smaller because the same particles are
spread out over a larger volume.
The density of radiation energy, light, the microwave background and so on, gets smaller
even more rapidly as the universe expands because the radiation both spreads out in
space and undergoes redshift.
However, as the universe expands, the density of dark energy does not change.
Dark energy is the energy of empty space, so as space expands, there is more of it.
So how much dark energy is there?
Well early in the universe, during nucleosynthesis, galaxy formation and so on, the dark energy
was an insignificant component of the cosmos.
If we had lived in those days, very likely we would not have noticed the dark energy
at all.
The early universe slowed down as it expanded, just as Friedman's mathematical models did.
However, during that expansion, ordinary matter and radiation spread out, while the density
of dark energy stayed the same.
So several billion years ago, dark energy and matter had about the same density, and
today there is more than twice as much dark energy as matter in our universe, and that's
why the expansion is now accelerating.
So what lies in the future of a universe with dark energy in it?
We'll make the simplest assumption that the dark energy remains constant.
As the universe continues to expand, the dark energy will, relatively speaking, become more
important.
The universe will look more and more like the sitter's universe, nearly empty of matter,
but with an accelerating expansion driven by dark energy.
A hundred billion years from now, we would find a very different universe around us.
Our local group of galaxies would still hang together, as would other galaxy clusters.
Their own local gravity holds them together, even as the cosmos expands.
The galaxies themselves would look a bit different a hundred billion years from now.
They would mostly contain very old, dim stars, and some galaxies would have collided and merged.
But most importantly, the galaxy clusters would be more isolated.
Other clusters would be dozens of times farther away than they are now, and they would recede
from each other faster and faster, driven by cosmic antigravity.
Dark energy is the source of this cosmic antigravity.
What is it?
Nobody knows, and that is our final puzzle.
It's a puzzle whose answer we simply do not know.
In particle physics, a large value of lambda, as during inflation, or a zero value of lambda,
might make some sense.
The actual situation, a tiny value of lambda that is not zero, is much harder to explain.
Nevertheless, the data is pretty clear.
The expansion of the universe is accelerating.
There must be a cosmic antigravity term in the Einstein equation, after all.
Dark energy, whatever it is, is real.
In this lecture we've been describing the lambda-CDM model of the universe.
It stands for Dark Energy, CDM for Cold Dark Matter.
It is the best model we have for explaining the structure and evolution of the universe.
But it does not explain the nature of either the dark matter or the dark energy.
So here are the present contents of the universe.
It's about 70% dark energy, about 26% dark matter, and 4% ordinary matter.
In effect, we only really understand about 4% of the stuff in the universe.
The rest, 96% of everything, is still unknown.
Unknown that is, except for the effects of its gravity.
We have answered many of our cosmological puzzles, but the answers have been surprising
and often enigmatic.
Sometimes the answers raise even more questions than before.
For instance, remember our very first puzzle, the formation of galaxies.
The early universe was nearly uniform, matter was distributed very evenly, and later on
gravity was able to amplify those small variations in density so that galaxies, stars, and planets
could begin to form.
Without that, life as we know it would have been impossible in the universe.
In a real sense, therefore, gravity is the force ultimately responsible for all life.
So next time we will take a deeper look at the unique properties of gravity that cause
this to happen.
We will see how gravity, the same force that pulls the apple down and steers the stars
in their courses that bends light to distort its time and space and regulates the expansion
of the universe, gravity is also nature's ultimate force of creation.
