We begin by reminding ourselves of a paradoxical property of gravity, a fact that has truly
cosmic implications.
Let's imagine a cloud of masses held together by mutual gravitation, a cluster of stars
perhaps.
In Newtonian terms, the cloud has both kinetic energy and potential energy.
The kinetic energy is positive and depends on how fast the stars are moving.
The potential energy is negative and depends on how closely the stars are clumped together.
Both potential energy and kinetic energy might change a bit as the stars move around, but
the total mechanical energy, kinetic energy plus potential energy, is constant.
And if the cloud is bound together by gravity, that total is negative.
In lecture 11, we learned about the virial theorem, which tells us that, on average,
and in the long run, there is another relation between kinetic energy and potential energy.
A quantity we called fugacity, F equals 2 times kinetic energy plus potential energy,
is about zero, on average.
Now suppose we intervene in our cloud of stars and remove some energy from it.
We slow down each of the stars by a bit.
What happens to the cloud?
Well, reducing the kinetic energy makes the fugacity, F, negative, and that means the
cloud contracts.
And as it contracts, gravity causes the stars to speed up, and after a while a new equilibrium
is established, and once more the fugacity, twice the kinetic energy plus the potential
energy, is about zero.
But the potential energy is more negative because the cloud is smaller, and that means
the kinetic energy is more positive, the stars are moving faster than before.
And that is kind of weird.
If we regard the cloud of stars as a kind of gas, the kinetic energy of the cloud would
be the temperature of the gas.
Faster particles mean a higher temperature, a hotter gas.
But when we remove energy from the cloud, we are cooling it down by removing heat.
But what happens in the end?
The temperature of the cloud is higher than before.
When you remove heat from the cloud decreases energy, the temperature rises.
That's very strange.
Nothing else in nature acts this way.
In ordinary systems, if you remove heat, the temperature goes down.
But in systems dominated by gravity, heat and temperature can work backwards.
So what accounts for this sort of bizarre behavior?
Well it relies on some unique features of gravity.
Gravity in Newtonian terms is a universal, long range, attractive force between masses.
And no other force in nature has that combination of properties.
And this is no trivial matter.
Global life on Earth depends on light from the sun.
We are all either directly or indirectly solar powered.
And that energy is generated in the sun by nuclear reactions, by hydrogen fusion in the
core.
And those fusion reactions require extremely high temperatures, millions of degrees to
take place.
But the original gas cloud forming the sun and the planets was very cold, only 10 or
20 degrees above absolute zero.
So where did the high temperatures come from to begin the nuclear reactions?
And the answer of course is gravity.
The original gas cloud was larger than the genes mass for its density and temperature,
so rather than dispersing, the cloud began to contract under its own gravity.
The gas increased in speed and heated up.
Now much of that energy was radiated into space, but that just made the cloud contract
and heat up even more.
And eventually the center of the protostar in the middle of the cloud grew hot enough
to start nuclear reactions.
So gravity started with a sparse cold cloud of gas, concentrating it and heating it up
by huge amounts until a star was born, the sun.
To see how weird this really is, we need to think about how things work without gravity.
We need to talk about the basic physics of heat and temperature, thermodynamics.
Thermodynamics is governed by two fundamental laws, and the first law we already know, that
energy is conserved.
That is, energy can change from one form to another, kinetic energy, potential energy,
heat, radiation, and mass itself we know represents a kind of energy, but energy cannot be created
or destroyed.
That's the first law of thermodynamics.
The second law of thermodynamics is sometimes phrased this way, entropy cannot decrease.
Entropy can only stay the same or increase.
But what is entropy?
Well that's a huge and fascinating question which we can only answer in brief.
One way to put it is this, the entropy of an object is a measure of its microscopic disorder.
That is, entropy tells us how higgledy-piggledy things are at the molecular level.
And another equally true way of defining entropy is this, the entropy of an object is a measure
of information, specifically how much information we lack about the microscopic molecular level
details of the object.
So consider a gas like the air in this room.
We know only a few things about the gas.
It's total mass, it's chemical composition, it's pressure, it's temperature, it's humidity.
What we do not know about the gas is much greater.
We do not know the exact positions and velocities of all the molecules.
So that missing information means that the system has a lot of entropy, and it means
that the locations and movements of the gas molecules are completely disordered.
But suppose instead that the air molecules were all located over in one small corner
of the room, then we would know a bit more about where the molecules are, and that would
constitute a little more order in the microscopic state of affairs.
Thus, if all the gas were located in a smaller volume, it would have a lower entropy.
The second law of thermodynamics says entropy tends to increase, not decrease.
So if the air starts out all in one corner, a situation of lower entropy, it will tend
to spread out into the whole room, a situation of higher entropy.
But higher entropy does not spontaneously lead to lower entropy, so if the air starts
out spread throughout the room, it does not spontaneously gather together in one corner.
The air in this room also has a pretty uniform temperature, and that means that thermal energy
is distributed more or less evenly among the molecules in different parts of the room.
It isn't that the molecules all have exactly the same energy, the gas contains both slow
molecules and fast molecules, but molecules in different parts of the room are equally
likely to have a given amount of energy.
But suppose the air over there were hot, and the air on the other side were cold.
That is a more orderly distribution of energy.
We know more about the energy of any given molecule.
We know that a molecule over here is more likely to have a higher energy, and a molecule
on the other side is more likely to have a lower energy.
The distribution of energy is more ordered.
That means the uneven temperature distribution has a lower entropy overall.
Thus, if we start out with an uneven temperature, that temperature difference evens out.
Gravity increases.
But if we start out with an even temperature, that is a situation in equilibrium.
It will not happen that part of the room will somehow get colder and the rest warmer.
That would decrease entropy.
And of course, we do remember from lecture 18 that gravity can change the rules of temperature
and equilibrium, but we are ignoring gravity for the moment.
Okay, so the entropy of a gas will be greatest if it is spread out evenly throughout its
volume and at a uniform temperature everywhere, and according to the second law of thermodynamics,
any cloud of gas should tend toward this situation.
But that raises a rather perplexing question about cosmology.
In the last two lectures, we discussed the cosmic microwave background, which is in effect
a snapshot of the universe when it was less than half a million years old.
And what does that snapshot look like?
It appears to be extremely uniform.
The microwave background varies from point to point by less than one part in 100,000.
So that means that the gas in the early universe was spread very evenly throughout the universe
and at a uniform temperature everywhere.
In other words, the gas in the early universe had a very high entropy.
Yet today, the matter in the universe is not spread out very evenly, at least not on scales
much less than 200 million light years.
The matter is clumped together into galaxies, stars and planets, and it is far from a uniform
temperature.
Some parts of it are close to absolute zero, but other parts are at millions of degrees.
These differences make the universe much more interesting, and they make life possible.
We rely on the fact that the center of the sun is at millions of degrees, but the surface
of the earth is not.
So how did we get so much variety and complexity out of a smooth uniform early universe?
The answer is gravity.
As the whole cosmos expanded and cooled, the expansion controlled by gravity acting at
a cosmic scale, gravity also caused local parts of the universe to contract and heat
up, then galaxies formed and within galaxy stars and all the rest.
Now it is important to be quite clear about this.
The law of entropy does not absolutely prevent the creation of order.
It simply requires that a price must be paid for order.
So water molecules in a storm cloud can assemble into a beautifully ordered ice crystal, a
snowflake, which is a very low entropy object.
But when that happens, the water releases heat energy into the air, and that energy increases
the microscopic disorder of the surroundings.
So entropy can go down in one place, as long as it goes up more, someplace else.
But there is no place outside the universe for us to put extra entropy.
The problem is that the whole universe seems more ordered now than it did billions of years
ago when the cosmic microwave background formed, and the driving force creating that order
has been gravity.
So does this process contradict the second law of thermodynamics?
Does gravity make entropy actually decrease?
No, but entropy works a little differently for systems when gravity is important.
So consider our collapsing cloud of stars at the beginning of the lecture.
The stars at the end occupy a smaller volume that would tend to reduce the entropy.
But because of gravity, the stars also have a higher speed on average, and that would
tend to increase the entropy.
So because of gravity, smaller and hotter can sometimes be a higher entropy than bigger
and cooler.
In other words, gravity can change the entropy equation so that a less uniform distribution
of matter and energy is actually favored by the second law of thermodynamics.
And that is how galaxies and stars and planets could form in the first place, even though
the universe started out at a very uniform temperature and density, gravity is the force
of creation that allowed the formation of everything around us.
Now that is already an amazing conclusion about gravity, but the connection between
gravity and entropy is even deeper and stranger than that, and to see why we need to turn
again to the subject of black holes.
Now we theoretical physicists like to use thought experiments, which are imaginary experiments
maybe impractical in reality, that are designed to test our ideas and theories.
And a black hole is an ideal piece of equipment for thought experiments.
Why?
Well, a black hole is such an extreme object, its gravity is so powerful that it tests our
ideas in the most extreme way.
So let's use a black hole to test the laws of thermodynamics.
So let's start out with some ordinary object.
Let's use our apple.
The apple has energy, heat energy, chemical energy and so on.
The mass of the apple represents a very large energy content according to Einstein's relation
between mass and energy, E equals MC squared.
So the apple also has entropy.
We lack a lot of information about the detailed locations and motions of the molecules that
make up the apple.
The molecules and their movements are not perfectly ordered.
And according to the laws of thermodynamics, energy is conserved and entropy cannot decrease.
Now we toss the apple into a black hole.
It falls through the event horizon, tidal forces tear it to pieces.
The pieces are crushed to zero size in the central singularity.
The apple is gone.
What happened to the energy and the entropy of the apple?
Well, the energy of the apple is still around.
Where?
In the mass of the black hole.
Even though the matter that went into a black hole has disappeared, the gravitational field,
the curved space time around the black hole remains.
The strength of that field tells us the mass of the black hole.
So when the apple falls into the black hole, the gravitational field increases a little.
The mass of the black hole is greater, and since mass is a measure of energy content,
the black hole's energy has increased.
That's where the apple's energy went.
So the first law of thermodynamics still works.
But what about the second law?
Hasn't the entropy of the apple disappeared?
Remember, John Wheeler's aphorism about black holes, a black hole has no hair.
A black hole is an incredibly simple object, much simpler than an apple.
It is nothing but a naked gravitational field left over from a completely collapsed object.
All the details about the matter that formed the black hole, its chemical composition and
so on, are completely gone from the universe.
Without any microscopic details, without microscopic order or disorder, there is no entropy.
The entropy of the apple has vanished.
The second law of thermodynamics is in trouble.
This was the dilemma that Jacob Bekenstein pondered in the early 1970s.
Bekenstein, who is now a professor at Hebrew University of Jerusalem, in those days was
a graduate student of John Wheeler at Princeton.
And Wheeler's question to him was, do black holes really violate the law of increase of
entropy?
Well, Bekenstein had an idea.
Maybe black holes themselves have entropy.
Maybe the entropy of an ordinary object, of course, is like an apple, is the amount of
information we lack about the microscopic locations and motions of the particles making up the
apple.
But Bekenstein says, maybe we should calculate the entropy of a black hole slightly different.
But differently, the entropy of a black hole is really our lack of information, not about
the microscopic details, but about the past.
The entropy of a black hole is the amount of information that we lack about the matter
and energy that crossed over the event horizon as the black hole formed.
In other words, black hole entropy is the information that has been lost in the black
hole.
Bekenstein analyzes this problem for his PhD thesis in 1972, and he is able to use quantum
physics to make a rough estimate of the entropy of a black hole, and his answer is startlingly
simple.
The entropy of a black hole is proportional to the area of its event horizon.
Now, this is a very beautiful idea, and we want to note several things about it.
First, this makes a really surprising connection between two very different kinds of ideas.
The event horizon is just a mathematically defined surface in empty space.
So why should an abstract geometrical object like that be related to entropy, which has
to do ultimately with information?
But of course, the horizon is a very special surface.
Information can only cross it in one direction, inward, and that's why the horizon area is
related to entropy.
The entropy of the black hole is just the total amount of information that has crossed
that surface since the black hole formed.
Now, second, Bekenstein does rough calculations to show this really does work out.
When you toss an apple into a black hole, the horizon area does increase by a tiny amount,
and the total entropy of the universe, including the black hole entropy, does go up.
Third, the entropy of a black hole is a staggeringly large number.
The entropy of the sun, a giant ball of super hot gas, is pretty huge.
Now imagine a black hole is formed of the same mass as the sun.
The Schwarzschild radius is about 3 kilometers, so its surface area is a bit more than 100
square kilometers.
And Bekenstein's formula yields an entropy for that black hole that is immensely greater
than the sun's present entropy.
So when a star collapses to form a black hole, its entropy increases dramatically, which
is of course perfectly consistent with the second law of thermodynamics.
Finally, Bekenstein's idea seems to agree with an earlier discovery about black holes.
This earlier discovery was made by the English physicist Stephen Hawking.
It's called the area theorem for black holes.
And Hawking said, suppose we consider two black holes that run into each other.
What happens?
Well, it can be very complicated.
Tremendous gravitational waves are produced and carry a lot of energy away, and in the
end we are left with one, somewhat bigger, black hole.
Using Einstein's equations, Hawking was able to show that, no matter how the collision
takes place in detail, the horizon area of the final black hole is at least as big as
the sum of the horizon areas of the two original black holes.
Or to put it more simply, total black hole horizon area never decreases.
And that sounds a lot like the second law of thermodynamics.
In fact, it was christened at the time the second law of black hole mechanics.
So you might think that Hawking would like the idea that Bekenstein had that the entropy
of a black hole is proportional to its horizon area.
But in fact, Hawking's first thought is that Bekenstein must be wrong.
And here's why.
If something has both energy and entropy, it must also have temperature.
And if it has a non-zero temperature, then heat can flow from it to something colder.
But a black hole can never transfer heat to anything else.
Energy can only flow into a black hole.
So in effect, Hawking argues, its temperature has to be exactly absolute zero.
And this is why Hawking concludes that a black hole cannot have a real entropy.
Hawking therefore sets out to disprove Bekenstein's idea.
Stephen Hawking is, of course, probably the most famous physicist of our time.
And the fame he has received really is deserved.
Not only has he made profound contributions to theoretical physics, he's done so
in the face of heartbreaking physical handicaps.
And no one has thought more deeply about gravity and its relation to the rest of physics.
So Hawking sets out to do a very sophisticated mathematical analysis.
He analyzes the quantum physics of matter and energy in the close vicinity of a black
hole just outside its event horizon.
Now, Bekenstein's argument was kind of a heuristic one with quite a bit of hand waving.
So to prove that argument wrong, Hawking includes everything that Bekenstein left out.
And what he finds is astonishing, not least to himself.
He discovers that black holes are not quite black.
Because of quantum physics, there is a very faint outward radiation from a black hole,
exactly as if the black hole had a real temperature.
Energy can flow out of a black hole.
Now, the Hawking temperature of a black hole is extremely close to zero.
A black hole the mass of the sun would have a quantum temperature less than one 10 millionth
of a degree above absolute zero.
And the larger the black hole, the lower the Hawking temperature.
Now, after our discussion of gravity and temperature in lecture 18, I should clear up one point.
This is the temperature of the black hole's thermal radiation when it has reached a point
very far from the event horizon.
It already has the effect of gravitational redshift on temperature built into it.
An observer near to the event horizon might see something different.
But this is the temperature that matters for thinking about the equilibrium of a black
hole and the distant universe.
A black hole, the mass of the sun, or larger, would certainly not be an equilibrium in our
universe.
If it would absorb more energy from the cosmic microwave background at a comparatively hot
2.7 degrees above absolute zero, then it would radiate outward.
So the black hole would slowly grow in size.
But Hawking says that a black hole left in absolutely empty space could eventually evaporate.
So that might take a ridiculously long time.
So how long would a one solar mass black hole last in empty space?
Well, measured in years, it's more than 10 to the 67th power.
Black hole temperatures are almost zero, and black holes are nearly black.
But there is an essential difference between nearly black and perfectly black.
Put it this way, Wheeler told us that a black hole has no hair.
But thanks to quantum physics, a black hole is very slightly fuzzy.
Hawking's discovery confirms Beckenstein's original hypothesis.
Black holes do have entropy and temperature.
The entropy of a black hole is indeed proportional to the surface area of its event horizon.
And that fact is true, both for non-rotating and for rotating black holes, for black holes
of both the Schwarzschild and Kerr varieties.
Now I find this a truly wonderful story, it's one of the most exciting in all of science.
And in fact, my own first published paper was about whether Beckenstein's arguments
applied to black holes that can carry electric charge.
Now we have not said much about electrically charged black holes.
They are theoretically possible, but in fact we do not expect to find them in nature.
Even intergalactic space has positive and negative electric charges floating around,
protons and electrons from ionized hydrogen gas.
So if a black hole had significant positive charge, for example, then it would quickly
attract the electrons, not by the relatively weak attraction of gravity, but by the incomparably
stronger electric force.
Those negative electrons would zoom into the hole, quickly neutralizing its charge.
But charged black holes are useful for thought experiments, for testing our ideas.
And when we do the analysis, we find that Beckenstein's idea works out just as well
for them.
Beckenstein's and Hawking's discoveries give us a glimpse of something wonderful.
When you put quantum physics together with curved spacetime, you find all kinds of new
insights about gravity and information and entropy.
But actually, this is just an extension of what we talked about at the beginning of
the lecture, how gravity changes the way that entropy works.
Because of gravity, a smooth and uniform early universe can develop into the clumpy and
varied universe we live in.
And that fact about gravity is the ultimate reason for the order and complexity around
us.
And a black hole is just the most extreme version of the same fact.
Matter in the black hole is so clumped together that it is squeezed into a point singularity.
And its entropy still exists in the area of its event horizon.
This is not only a wonderful story, but it might be a clue to one of the naughtiest problems
in physics.
Up to now in our course, we've stuck to physics that is pretty well established.
Sometimes we have run into unanswered questions.
What is dark matter?
What is dark energy?
But for the most part, although the ideas have sometimes been strange and unfamiliar,
the physics is well established and well tested.
But there are important questions about gravity that we still cannot answer, especially about
the relation of gravity to quantum physics.
Despite Galileo and Newton and Einstein and even Stephen Hawking, there are mysteries
that we cannot yet solve.
So next time, we will engage in a little speculation.
We will explain why we still don't quite understand the quantum nature of gravity.
We will sketch a few of the theories that have been proposed, lots of theories, but
no well understood answers.
And among those theories, we will find an interesting possibility that the peculiar connection
between spacetime and entropy might just be the key to unlock the mystery of gravity.
