There have been two revolutions in our understanding of gravity.
The first was Isaac Newton's revolution.
He showed us that gravity is an attractive force that acts between every mass and every
other mass.
That idea is a key part of the system of mechanics in his Principia.
Then there's Albert Einstein's revolution.
He showed us that gravity is really an effective curved spacetime, and that idea is a key part
of the general theory of relativity.
We do not simply discard Newton's ideas once Einstein's ideas arrive.
True, we no longer regard Newton's mechanics as the absolute truth, but in many respects
his ideas are as useful as ever.
We noted that Newton's physics gives an excellent approximation to general relativity
in planetary orbits, for example, the corrections of general relativity are very small.
But more importantly, the effect of Einstein's theory is not so much to demolish Newton's
ideas as to shed light on their deeper meaning.
For example, the tidal effect in Newtonian physics turns out to be the very measure of
spacetime curvature in Einsteinian physics.
Why bring this up?
Because we know that our present understanding of gravity is incomplete.
We know that another revolution is necessary.
How do we know this?
Quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics is the physics of the microscopic world, the behavior of elementary
particles.
It is another very different, but also revolutionary change to Newtonian mechanics, which is sometimes
called classical mechanics.
The theory of quantum mechanics was developed in the first decades of the 20th century,
and it stands to this day as the most successful and widely applicable theory of physics.
And here's the problem.
We do not have a good quantum theory of gravity.
Well, why would we need such a thing?
Well, here's why.
If quantum mechanics is logically consistent, it must apply to everything.
For instance, in quantum mechanics, the location of a particle can be indeterminate.
In some situations, it is impossible, even in principle, to tell whether an atom or an
electron is in one place or another place.
But even an atom or an electron has a gravitational field.
The presence of the particle affects space-time around it in a tiny way.
So either the particle does have a definite location after all, that is, there is something
wrong with quantum mechanics, or the curvature of space-time is also somewhat indeterminate.
That is, there is something wrong with Einstein's general relativity.
When Stephen Hawking used quantum theory to show that black holes are not quite black,
that they emit faint Hawking radiation, he really just applied quantum theory to everything
but the gravity.
In other words, we do know something about quantum mechanics in warped space-time.
We do not know much about quantum mechanics of warped space-time.
There is no way around it.
We need a quantum theory of gravity, a quantum description of space-time itself, and that
is the greatest unsolved problem in theoretical physics.
We do have some clues.
For instance, there are three fundamental constants of nature.
There's the speed of light relating time and space, and also energy and mass.
There's the gravitational constant G connecting mass with space-time curvature.
And there's Planck's constant H, which connects photon energy and frequency, that
is, H sets the physical scale of the quantum world.
And because this last constant has a very tiny value, the strange effects of quantum
mechanics are typically very small compared to our everyday experience.
Now Max Planck himself noted that these three constants can be put together into a length.
It's now called the Planck length, and it sets the basic scale of nature.
And it is very, very, very tiny.
L sub p equals the square root of H times G over C cubed, which works out to be about
four times ten to the minus thirty-fifth meters.
We expect that if we could examine the world at that kind of tiny size scale, the simple
space and time we know would turn out to be something quite different.
And to understand physics at length scales that small, we would need to understand quantum
gravity.
So do we ever actually think about lengths so small?
Well, indeed we do.
Recall our description of the anatomy of a black hole.
Within the event horizon, there is a central singularity where everything is crushed to
zero sides.
What we should really say is, at the singularity, things are crushed down to the Planck scale
because beyond that, we have no real idea what happens.
So the Planck length is one clue, and here is another.
When we apply quantum physics to light, to electromagnetic waves, we find that they carry
their energy in the form of particles, called photons.
The electromagnetic field is somehow both a smooth, continuous wave, and also a bunch
of discrete packets of energy.
And this double nature is basic to the quantum physics of light.
So physicists conjecture that the same thing must be true for gravity.
In lecture 19, we discussed gravitational waves, moving ripples in the curvature of
spacetime.
And physicists think that there must also be a kind of particle involved, called a graviton.
Now nobody really knows what a particle of spacetime curvature would be like, and we
have no experiments on gravitons to guide our thinking.
We find it almost too difficult to detect gravitational waves at all, detecting a single
graviton would be light years more difficult.
We are facing the kinds of problems that we always face at the shadowy frontiers of physics.
We cannot quite see the way ahead.
Our familiar concepts no longer apply.
And in the search for quantum gravity, we have two special problems.
First, we lack experimental data.
We have never done an experiment showing any quantum aspect of gravity.
We have never studied anything as small as the Planck length.
We have never detected a graviton.
And second, we aren't quite sure what guiding principles to follow.
Remember how Einstein was put on the road to general relativity, the happiest thought
of his life?
His new understanding of the principle of equivalence led him there, and that principle
became Einstein's compass in the wilderness.
Later on he had to introduce a lot of fancy mathematics.
Minkowski's spacetime, Riemann's curved geometry, but the basic starting point was
simple and clear.
What Einstein did was take a known feature of Newtonian gravity, indeed a fact about
gravity that Galileo knew before Newton, and Einstein used that to see the whole subject
from a new point of view.
So perhaps that is what we need to do.
Perhaps there is some aspect of gravity that we have discussed in this course that will
turn out to be the key to solving the puzzle.
The problem of reconciling gravity and quantum mechanics has been around a long time, at
least since about 1930.
And of course physicists have not been idle.
These days we have many different lines of attack on the problem.
And so I will mention a few here.
First there is string theory, which is quite famous these days.
String theory is an attempt at a unified theory of elementary particles.
Particles are not point-like objects, but one-dimensional filaments of energy called strings.
And these strings move and vibrate and interact.
There is only one kind of string, but it can vibrate in many different ways corresponding
to all of the kinds of particles that we see.
And there is a reasonable hope that gravity could emerge in a completely straightforward
way from string theory itself.
Of course nothing is quite straightforward in string theory.
The mathematics of the theory is extremely difficult to use, and in string theory as
well we lack solid experimental data to guide us.
So string theory is an exciting and promising line of attack, but it's still only speculation.
And there is also M theory, which is a kind of generalized string theory.
One interesting feature of both string theory and M theory is that both theories envision
a universe with more than four dimensions of spacetime.
Eleven dimensions is typically what is required.
So if there are eleven dimensions, why do we see only four?
Well, it might be that the other seven dimensions are just curved into something quite small,
something like a soda straw.
The straw is a two-dimensional surface, but one dimension is wrapped up in a tiny circle.
Thus, on a large scale, a soda straw looks more or less like a one-dimensional line.
Or it may be that our universe somehow adheres to a 4D hypersurface that sits inside an 11D
hyperspace.
There could even be other universes adhering to hypersurfaces near our own.
That's a strange and intriguing possibility.
A quite different looking approach is called loop quantum gravity.
The loop in the name refers to a kind of mathematical variable, not the 1D filaments of energy in
string theory.
When loop quantum gravity, when we view spacetime at the smallest scale, at the scale of the
Planck length, we find that it is not really a continuous space at all.
Rather, spacetime is a kind of quantum lattice called a spin network.
The rules for the network are simple, and from them the physics we know should emerge,
including the physics of gravity.
That's the hope, anyway.
So far, it is still just a hope.
And we have no experimental reason to believe that apparently continuous spacetime is really
a discrete quantum spin lattice.
But in this last lecture, I want to describe another idea, another attempt to untangle
the mystery of gravity.
Is this idea, I will describe, really completely independent from the ideas that I've just
mentioned?
Possibly not.
There could be connections that we don't yet understand.
Is this idea the best and most promising idea around?
I do not want to claim that it is, but the idea I want to tell you about illustrates
how we might take an aspect of gravity that we already know about, and use it to guide
our thinking toward the next revolution in the physics of gravity.
The idea begins with something rather unexpected.
It begins with a rubber band.
When you stretch a rubber band, it exerts a force on your fingers.
That is, you need to do work to stretch it out.
You must put energy into the rubber band.
Why?
What is it about the rubber band that makes this necessary?
Well, here's what you might think.
When you stretch the rubber band, you move the rubber molecules out of place.
And there are molecular forces holding them in place, so it takes a little energy to shift
them a little.
And this sounds plausible.
Indeed, it is the correct explanation for why it takes energy to stretch a metal spring.
But it is actually wrong for a rubber band.
The man who worked out the real answer was a physical chemist named Eugene Gooth, no
relation as far as I can tell to cosmologist Alan Gooth, inventor of inflation theory.
In the 1930s, Gooth became interested in the thermodynamics of polymers.
Polymers are extremely long chains of repeated molecular units.
For example, in polyethylene, the basic unit is a pair of carbon atoms with four hydrogens
attached.
Now, rubber is made out of polymer molecules, and they're mostly wadded up in complicated
tangles.
So when we stretch the rubber band, we actually straighten out the polymers a bit.
And a straight polymer actually has about the same energy as a tangled one.
Straightening by itself does not require any energy.
But Eugene Gooth realized something else.
A straight polymer is more ordered than a tangled one.
If the polymer is straightened out, we now know more about where the pieces are.
The real difference is entropy.
A tangled polymer has a higher entropy, and a straight polymer has a lower entropy.
So we stretch the rubber band.
The polymer is straightened out.
Does the entropy decrease?
No, we can't ignore the second law of thermodynamics.
Entropy cannot just decrease.
The entropy of the polymer configuration does go down, so some other sort of entropy
must go up.
In the case of the polymers in the rubber band, the molecules must start to vibrate
faster.
So to stretch the rubber band, therefore, we must heat it up.
And that is what demands an energy input.
You can actually demonstrate this for yourself.
Take a medium-sized rubber band and place it against your lower lip.
Your upper lip is a very sensitive thermometer.
Now stretch it out, putting energy into the rubber.
You can feel it get a little warmer.
Now let it relax, allowing the energy back out.
The rubber feels a little cooler.
The energy you add to the rubber band does not go into straightening the polymers.
It goes into heating up the rubber, into raising the entropy of molecular motion to
offset the lowering of the entropy of polymer tangle.
The polymer molecules, as it were, pull themselves toward the higher entropy situation.
Gooth showed in effect that entropy, all by itself, can lead to a force.
And that's a remarkable fact.
Now in the last lecture, we saw how Beckenstein and Hawking connected black hole physics with
thermodynamics.
A black hole has entropy, proportional to the area of its horizon.
So we already know that there is some kind of relationship between gravity and curved
space-time on the one hand, and entropy and information on the other hand.
And maybe that connection is the clue we need.
Now this idea has a long history.
One of its godfathers was Andrei Sakharov, the inventor of the Soviet hydrogen bomb,
and later famous as a political dissident.
In 1968, he suggested that gravity might emerge from the complicated quantum physics of the
vacuum, the quantum version of empty space.
This would be like the way that the elastic properties of materials emerge from the complicated
interactions of atoms.
Now Sakharov was not thinking about Gooth's rubber band.
He was actually thinking about some of the properties of certain crystals, but his ideas
pointed in a direction.
A few years after Sakharov, Beckenstein realized that the entropy of a black hole, that is
the amount of information that is vanished into the hole, is related to the surface area
of its horizon.
In fact, if you take the Planck area to be the Planck length squared, the area of a square
one Planck length on a side, then the number of bits of information that went into the
black hole is roughly speaking the horizon area divided by the Planck area.
It is as if the bits were written on the horizon in ultra-tiny type, one Planck area per bit.
Now Beckenstein thought that this might apply to other things besides black holes, and his
suggestion led the Dutch physicist and Nobel laureate Gerard de Hooft to a strange thought.
Consider any region of space bounded by a surface, for example this room.
The quantum state of the contents of this room, air, apple, table, professor, constitute
a certain amount of information.
And where is this information located?
Well, inside the room, of course.
But de Hooft said, there was another possibility.
As far as the rest of the universe is concerned, that information could just as easily be regarded
as located on the boundary of the room, that is, the surface formed by the walls, the floor
and the ceiling, in the same way that information in the black hole is associated with its bounding
surface.
De Hooft called this the holographic principle.
A hologram is an apparently 3D image created by a special thin photographic film.
And de Hooft says, you can regard the information as existing inside this room, or you can regard
it as existing on the boundary of this room.
The 3D room itself is a kind of quantum hologram cast by that 2D boundary.
The same thing is true for any volume of space.
You cannot really say, it somehow makes no sense to ask, which is the correct view?
Now, the holographic principle is one of the most exciting and stimulating new ideas in
physics.
It has been the inspiration for a lot of deep thinking about gravity.
So let me tell you about one recent development.
In 2010, another Dutch physicist named Eric Verlinde wrote a paper called On the Origin
of Gravity and the Laws of Newton.
Verlinde's idea is to combine the pieces, to put de Hooft's holographic principle
together with Goeth's rubber band discovery, the idea of an entropic force.
Now in the last lecture we said that gravity makes entropy work in an unexpected way.
A cloud of gas can increase its entropy by clumping up into more condensed masses.
Gravity makes entropy favor things getting together instead of spreading apart.
And Verlinde says, maybe this is not just what gravity does.
Maybe this is what gravity actually is.
Maybe gravity is just an expression of the second law of thermodynamics.
The entropy of the universe is higher when things are closely clumped together, and the
second law tells us that this is how things will tend to go.
So in this view, gravity is an entropic force, an expression of this tendency.
And by making some assumptions, Verlinde and others have been able to derive a few of the
mathematical laws of gravity from the entropy idea.
If Verlinde is right, then the nature of gravity is something we never expected.
The universal force of Newton, the curved spacetime of Einstein, might turn out to be
expressions of entropy, consequences of the second law of thermodynamics.
Is Verlinde right?
Is this idea the key to quantum gravity?
That is hard to say.
Most ideas, after all, even clever ideas, turn out to be wrong.
And there are lots of other exciting ideas that might be true.
But I like the way that this one emerges from thinking about gravity and entropy.
Even if he is on the right track, Verlinde's thinking is still like Einstein's thinking
in 1907, at the very beginning of his work on general relativity.
That is, entropy may be the right principle to start with, but there is an arduous road
ahead and there will probably be some huge surprises along the way.
Our study of gravity has taken us on some strange journeys since we first began with
the apple.
Think for a moment about what you now know about the simple fall of an apple.
The apple falls with a constant acceleration, about 10 meters per second squared near the
earth, and every sort of falling object near the earth would accelerate the same way.
Newton told us that the earth is exerting a gravitational force on the apple.
Now that's exactly the same kind of force that steers the moon in its orbit around the
earth, or the planets in their orbits around the sun.
Since the apple were farther from the earth, the strength of the force of gravity would
be less.
In fact, if it were twice as far from the center of the earth, the force would be four times
less.
The force of gravity exerted by the earth is directed toward the center of the earth.
Why?
Because every part of the earth, near and far, pulls on the apple, and because the earth
is roughly spherical, the net effect is to pull the apple straight down toward the center.
Now Newton had two distinct concepts for mass for the apple.
There was inertial mass, which measured how much the apple resists acceleration by any
force, and there's gravitational mass, which measures how strongly the apple is affected
by gravity.
Nevertheless, for the apple, and for everything else, these two masses are exactly equal,
a fact called the principle of equivalence.
How exact is that equivalence?
Well, Uttvish checked it to one part in a hundred million.
As the apple falls, its total mechanical energy is conserved.
Its kinetic energy increases as it speeds up.
Its potential energy decreases, becomes more negative, as apple and earth get closer together.
But kinetic energy plus potential energy stays constant.
If we have two apples falling at different locations, their accelerations will be slightly
different.
They'll be slightly pulled apart, or together, and this is the tidal effect, the same effect
responsible for the rise and fall of the oceans.
Now Einstein had a different way of thinking about the fall of the apple.
He said, if you imagine yourself falling next to the apple, close enough to ignore the tidal
effect between you, you would not see the apple accelerate at all.
A freely falling frame of reference has zero gravity.
And in a similar way, if we were far out in deep space, but our laboratory was accelerating,
then the apple would appear to fall in the opposite direction from the acceleration.
That's an effect of inertia.
The apple tends to lag behind the accelerating lab.
But it is indistinguishable from gravity.
That's Einstein's version of the principle of equivalence.
And in fact, Einstein's view is that the apple in free fall follows a straight worldline,
a geodesic path, in the curved spacetime near the earth.
That path is a path of greatest clock time.
So if you strap a watch to the apple and consider all the ways the apple might go from its initial
where and when to its final where and when, that free fall path is the path that would
maximize the time registered by the watch.
And this works because of gravitational time dilation, the fact that lower clocks run more
slowly.
The resulting worldline of the apple seems curved because of our spacetime map projection.
It's analogous to the apparent curve of a great circle airline path across the earth.
Spacetime curvature is actually measured by the tendency of parallel worldlines to converge
or diverge, that is, by the tidal effect.
In empty space, the total curvature over all three directions is zero, but when matter
is present, curvature is governed by the Einstein equation.
Total spacetime curvature is a constant times matter density.
In Wheeler's motto, spacetime tells matter how to move, matter tells spacetime how to
curve.
Because of earth rotation, the inertial frame of the falling apple is slightly dragged along
with the rotation due to the lens-tearing effect, and from the point of view of the apple, the
whole universe appears to be turning very slowly.
And only in the last few years has this extremely tiny effect been measured near the earth by
gravity probe B.
If we drop the apple into a black hole, we will never see it cross the event horizon.
But if we follow along the apple's worldline, it does cross the horizon, and soon afterwards
is crushed to zero volume or to the quantum gravity scale at the central singularity.
And finally, it might turn out that the gravitational effect on the apple, the curvature of spacetime
that causes the apple to fall, is really due to a quantum entropic force, analogous to
the elastic forces of a rubber band, all of that in the fall of an apple.
Gravity lies at the heart of the most exciting questions of contemporary physics.
What went on in the first moments of the Big Bang?
What are the essential features of our universe that make it a home for life?
Can we use gravitational waves to study the universe in a new way?
What is the nature of the unseen stuff that gravity reveals in the cosmos?
Dark matter and dark energy.
How can we finally reconcile the two great revolutions of modern physics, quantum mechanics,
and general relativity?
In the lobby of the building where I work, there is a bronze sculpture of Albert Einstein.
It's a 1933 portrait by Sir Jacob Epstein, one of his most famous pieces, and I like
it very much.
I like the fact that I see it every day.
Einstein, of course, has been one of the heroes of the physics of gravity.
He understood its importance.
He understood that gravity opens the door to a deeper understanding of matter and energy,
space and time, tides and curvature, and to which we might add entropy and the quantum.
Most of all, Einstein, like Newton before him, understood that the simplest everyday
things like the fall of the apple or a falling observer contain within them clues to the
whole cosmos.
Now, Einstein's ideas and discoveries are not final truths any more than Newton's
work, but they map out the road ahead to discoveries even more wondrous and to truths
even more profound.
And that's the story of gravity, or rather the story so far.
It's a story of insights and discoveries and revolutions in human thought.
It's a story that is by no means finished.
It has been a deep pleasure to share that story with you.
And it should be interesting to see what comes next.
