We have an idea, and that idea is that language can be, or that it should be logical.
And one of our biggest problems is that somehow it never seems to be nearly as much as we
think it should.
We're surrounded by people who are using the language in what we consider the wrong
way.
And this can include, for example, our current president, President Barack Obama has in the
past often said, Michelle and I, when Michelle and I are an object, or the object of a preposition.
And so early on, when we got acquainted with him, Obama mentioned, for example, President
Bush has invited Michelle and I, and we think, well, that's not logical because I is supposed
to be a subject.
At another point, he said, the disagreement between John and I, again, we think of that
as not logical.
These things are all around us.
Another example of illogical language use that we can't escape.
If you're talking about splitting infinitives and you feel that an infinitive shouldn't
be split, then even something as famous as the opening to Star Trek has a grammatical
mistake.
And so think about it.
This is something that we've all seen, the original show, for example, the theme song,
and you have the announcement, which is to boldly go where no man has gone before.
Well, that's a split infinitive, and so there's another mistake.
Or we also see these grammatical mistakes, so to speak, in high literature.
And so, for example, we would assume that Thackery in Vanity Fair was writing at the
highest level, but at one point, poor Roslyn says, a person can't help their birth.
She doesn't say a person can't help his birth.
She doesn't say a person can't help her birth.
Or a person can't help his or her birth.
A person can't help their birth.
And so we have these errors, these illogicalities that surround us in terms of the use of our
language.
And the fact of the matter is that you could point out that a lot of things that are in
our language right now arose via what we would consider the illogical.
And so, for example, there was a time when in the second person singular, the proper
subject pronoun was thou.
And so, thou goest, and then you was only the plural pronoun, you go.
Thou goest, you go.
As time went by, you started being used in the singular, and now that feels perfectly
natural to us.
But there were people at the time who thought of the use of you in the singular as a mistake,
and we can even wrap our heads around thinking of it as a mistake now.
But here we go.
We have you in the singular and the plural, and we keep eating our breakfast.
Or another example is that often today, we think it's somehow not good when a noun is
transformed into a verb.
And so, for example, we know that there is something called structure.
But then when we hear that something is being structured, we often think, well, I don't
like that.
That's not right, because nouns aren't supposed to become verbs.
But then on the other hand, silent began as a noun, so did worship, and so did copy, and
those are now verbs, and nobody bats an eye.
And nevertheless, we hear a verb now like liais from liaison, or tweez from tweezers,
and we think, well, somehow that's unlikable, it's improper, all is not right with the world.
Like the fact that actually there was once no verb to beg.
There was a beggar, that was somebody who did a certain something, the word beg, that
was created from the word begger.
We don't think about that.
All of these things happened in the past, but there seems to be a general idea, which
is that we know that modern English is the product of change, and so there was old English,
and that's Beowulf, and that's eons ago.
Then there's Middle English, and for most of us, we were exposed to that through Chaucer,
the Canterbury Tales, and then there's Modern English, and we think that the procession
from old to middle to modern English is kind of noble, and it goes along, and you imagine
people riding horses, and you imagine French horns in the background, and that's wonderful.
But then with Modern English, somehow, somewhere around Jane Austen, we're supposed to stop
the changing.
And the idea is that the changes almost always are bad because they interfere with the logic
of the system of English.
And this isn't only us.
This is a way of looking at English usage that goes way back in terms of how English
speakers feel.
Jonathan Swift, who we know best today for writing Gulliver's Travels, and also a modest
proposal, was quite dismayed at things like that.
And an interesting one for our purposes is one that he mentioned in a letter in 1712.
He was writing to Robert the Earl of Oxford and Mortimer, the Lord High Treasurer of
Great Britain.
And he said, this is one of my favorite statements of his or anybody about English.
What does your lordship think of the words, drudged, disturbed, rebuked, fledged, and
a thousand others everywhere to be met in prose as well as verse, where, and get what
his problem with those was, by leaving out a vowel to save a syllable, we form so jarring
a sound and so difficult to utter that I have often wondered how it could ever obtain.
And so for him to say drudged rather than drudged was wrong, rebuked rather than rebuked
was wrong.
Now what's interesting about that is that this, which worried Swift, and we know that
he was a brilliant and artistically sensitive man who lived life as vividly as we do, was
worrying Swift seems rather peculiar to us today.
So we need to pull the camera back.
And the basic goal of this course is that what we want to do is examine a common notion
about English, and that is that great many people speak it incorrectly.
The fact is that a lot of this feeling that we have about the way our language is used
is based, although it's very difficult to perceive this, on myths, lies, and at best
half truths.
And if we can get beyond those myths, lies, and half truths, then we can see English as
even more of a wonder than we're already aware that it is.
And of course the idea that the language can only change in a bad way is not new.
Not only did you have a comment like Swift's, but for example Thomas Sheridan did a course
of lectures on Elocution in 1762, and he specified, nor will novelty or caprice, the sources
of fashion, have it in their power to innovate as usual.
This idea was that the novelty and the caprice must be a bad thing, that we have to watch
out for the language changing, because the changes are messing up something which, if
not changed, is good.
But the fact of the matter is that what you might call novelty and caprice have created
in our language not just random slang, but the very foundations of what we think of as
even the best parts of our language are certainly the most ordinary parts.
So for example, do.
How we use do in this language?
So you say you walk, and that's a nice vanilla sentence.
Then if you want to make it into a question, do you walk?
Do what?
We think of that as very natural in English, but if you've ever learned any other language,
the first thing you had to unlearn was do.
Do you walk?
Why do?
Negative sentence, you'll say you do not walk.
Why don't you say you walk not?
And of course in earlier English, you did.
What's the do thing?
As a matter of fact, that was what you might call a novelty or a caprice in the development
of English.
In old English, there was no such thing as that kind of usage of do.
So for example, beowulf.
You can take any old passage.
For example, you might have one passage in beowulf, which means the creator, they did
not know.
So they did not know the creator.
So the creator, they did not know.
You have to go into the old English voice.
So the creator, metod, then they did not know in a kuthun.
So they did not know metod in a kuthun.
That means creator, they not know.
There's no, there's no did.
That's something that would have been very strange to an old English speaker.
Or they didn't know the Lord God.
That and beowulf would be, ne wistond ye, not know they, dritton gott, Lord God.
So ne wistond ye, dritton gott.
There's no do in that sentence.
Or for example, little things happen that create what we just consider ordinary English
question.
We don't have any feelings about it at all.
Even though technically, if we think about where it came from and the way things were
before, we can see it as having created a wrinkle or an illogicality.
And so for example, what would you say the past tense of sneak is?
If the act of the sneaking happened yesterday, then what form do you use?
Now some of you will say sneaked.
More of you at this point will probably say snuck.
Now that's relatively new.
The truth is that before about 1920, almost everyone would have said sneaked.
And if you look at the use of snuck in literature of all levels over the past 200 years, then
you see snuck burbling up after 1920.
And then actually after about 1960 only, does snuck really take over?
And so the people on the TV show Mad Men are becoming newly acquainted and newly fond of
snuck.
Before that, and most people are saying sneaked.
Now if you think about it, snuck is quite odd.
It barely follows a pattern.
And so you sneak and you snuck, but if you peek, you didn't puck.
If you leak, then you didn't luck yesterday.
So we have this meaningless irregularity.
It kind of makes a mess of things.
It's there.
I don't think we mind.
We keep paying our taxes and going on vacations.
That's a novelty and a caprice.
Now what's important is that it's not that linguists don't value clarity.
It's certainly not that anything goes in language usage and that there's nothing to be said
about being an effective communicator.
For example, I probably know less about sports than any human being in the world.
And I mean that includes newborn infants.
It's frightening how little I know.
And I saw a headline not too long ago and it said, Spain wins first World Cup.
And I have a vague sense that there's something called the World Cup.
Even now I'm having to work to think of what sport it entails.
But I remember watching, looking at this headline and thinking, did they mean the first of many
World Cup playoffs or did they mean that Spain won this contest for the first time?
It was unclear.
These are things that one must watch for.
It's a waste of our time when people aren't clear.
But the question is, what is clear versus what is unclear?
If someone says, I know who to ask, then to not use whom doesn't make the sentences meaning
unclear.
I know whom to ask.
That'd be nice.
But if you say, I know who to ask, nothing is confusing.
The idea in this course will be that these sorts of things, the whom, the split infinitive,
whether or not you should end sentences with prepositions, et cetera, these are issues of
manners or fashion rather than logic.
We have to be aware of what the most influential rules of fashion are, certainly.
You can't say, for example, Henry and me decided to appeal to moral authority in a formal address,
for example, if you were standing behind that podium.
But the question is whether a sentence like Henry and me decided to appeal to moral authority
is illogical or mistaken, because these are different sorts of things.
There's an analogy here.
I like when pants have those little pleats around the hips, the ones that look kind of
like fish gills.
For a while in the 90s, I was making sure that most of the pants I had had those little
pleats.
In 2002, I moved to New York and various people who were not men informed me that those kinds
of pleats somehow convey that one is middle-aged or less than optimally fertile or vigorous
or that you're a father, Lord forbid, that the pleats looked elderly.
Now, that makes no logical sense.
I still think that the pleats actually are quite aesthetically attractive in the very
arbitrary sense, just like I like the color green.
They look kind of like fish gills.
They're kind of lined up.
But apparently they have taken on this connotation.
Remember one person who said, if you have the pleats, then I just think dad, and I didn't
want to look like that.
So now I have no pants with those pleats.
I've learned that that is a fashion that I must think about.
But I'm not under the impression that pants with those pleats are somehow poorly made,
that they're wrong, that they're a moral excrescence.
Language usage is rather similar.
What we want is a different way of looking at language.
Some forms are appropriate in some contexts, and some forms are appropriate in other contexts.
But we might look at these things as a matter of none of them being fundamentally misbegotten
because the study of language style can be as rich and engrossing as the study of fashion
and clothing or in manners.
I recommend the Oxford Companion to the English Language as a book to curl up with on a rainy
day if you're interested in this sort of thing, or David Crystals, the Cambridge Encyclopedia
of the English Language, which I actually like better for various reasons, some of them
arbitrary such as that I like its colors, also are useful.
Or you might want to come with me for the rest of this course because these are really
interesting issues that can give you a very different way of looking at this language.
What we're talking about is a crucial difference in how you describe what a language is.
There are two approaches.
The linguist, the professional linguist, describes language as it's used.
There's another tradition which seeks to improve language and to monitor language.
That's not a matter of describing, that's a matter of prescribing.
And so there's the descriptive tradition, that's what linguists do, then there's the
prescriptive tradition, and that's the one that I think a lot of us are more familiar
with.
Now what's important is that the descriptive tradition is not as lazy as it understandably
might sound.
Describing how a language works in terms of how people actually speak it, including
Billy and me went to the store, etc., is quite an endeavor.
For example, Huddleston and Pullums, the Cambridge Grammar of the English Language, is a door
stop of a work.
It's a massive book.
You literally could use it as a door stop.
No one has read it all the way through.
I assume that's also true of the authors.
It's a wonderful thing.
And that's how much it takes to describe a language.
We will refer to that book again as this course goes on.
So the difference between descriptive and prescriptive approaches to language, it's
not a matter of rigor, it's just a matter of philosophy.
Give you a sense of what I mean.
Let's say you're a linguist.
That's what your career has been.
And you're documenting an obscure language, which is one thing that linguists do.
And let's say that you're in a far-flung place and you ask several people, let's say it's
about 10, how to say, now I'll tell you.
And you ask various people, that 50-year-old woman, that 30-year-old man, that 13-year-old
girl, that dog, that permafridate.
I don't know.
You ask all these people.
And so now I tell you, now I'll tell you.
And what you get from all 10 of these people for that is, I do, I do, I do, I do, I do.
That's what they all say.
Now, you're a linguist, and so you're analyzing this.
You're trying to figure out how this language works and you find out that I do means now.
And as far as the I Tula Tula Ro, you find out that I means I.
And then a Tula Tula is the tell.
Pretty word, isn't it?
And then, Ro means you.
So that's what you find out.
So I to now I, a Tula Tula, tell Ro, you.
That's what you find out.
Now, that is a language.
It's a language called Muna, and it's a language spoken by a small community on an Indonesian
island called Sulawesi.
Older maps have it as celibies, but now it's called Sulawesi.
It's shaped kind of like a spider.
We know it best as the source of one of the varieties of Starbucks coffee, but a lot more
goes on on Sulawesi than making coffee, and one of them is the speaking of the Muna language,
one of the great many on that island.
Now, imagine if you have learned Aitu, A-tula-tula-ro, and then some one person kind of walks out of
the forest and he says, you know, to tell you the truth, though that's wrong, the pronouns
aren't right, ah for I and ro for you, those are the wrong pronouns, and really, as far
as the word for now, they all said Aitu, well that's wrong, no, really it should be I-T.
They don't really know what they're doing, because people don't speak the language properly.
Imagine that.
Now, what's interesting is that if you're sitting there, you're on a chair in the forest
in Sulawesi and this person comes along, you might think that that was a little odd, like
where does this person get the idea that it's wrong if ten people were all saying it one
way?
So, for example, the crucial analogy is this.
Let's say that you're in Connecticut, God knows where, and you're a Martian, and you're
trying to document this language called English, and so you hear somebody say a sentence, and
let's imagine that the sentence is something like, my sister and me went to Fiji, there's
your sentence, and you don't know how to break it down yet, but somebody says, my sister
and me went to Fiji, and so then you break it down and you find out that the words are
my sister and me went to Fiji, and we all know very well that you could run around in
Connecticut and go to a block party or something, and you could get ten people and all of them
would say something like, my sister and me went to Fiji, perfectly normal English sentence.
Now they all say that, and so you break it down and you've got it that there's this utterance,
my sister and me went to Fiji, and then someone comes along and says, no, no, no, no, the
me is wrong, that's an incorrect usage because it's supposed to be I because I is the subject.
These people don't know what they're doing. Ten people said that, and they've been saying
it since they were two years old, but no, that was wrong. It should be something else.
Now that feels natural to us because we've been taught that way, but why is that way
of looking at it so prevalent for English? But it seems odd if it's applied to a language
like Muna. There's 6,000 languages in the world, English is one of them, Muna's another,
and then there are 5,998 other ones.
It might not be that it's kind of like the fact that fish don't know that they're wet.
We're steeped in a way of looking at things that might be one of many ways of looking
at things, and the other ways of looking at things become more obvious when we imagine
how we would deal with Ayatollah, Tula Ho, in Sulawesi.
So what we're looking for is, in this course, a new perspective on what we speak, on how
we speak, and how we're going to do this is going to require pulling the camera back.
We have to take a look at what English once was, and in a larger sense, we have to look
at what language actually is. English is one of 6,000. How does language work? And this
will also give us an opportunity to examine some new findings about the history of English
that show that the history of this language is even more interesting than it's often
been supposed, because the typical history of English is that it's all about a mixture
of words, and so we're taught that there are words from Anglo-Saxon, and Old Norse, and
French, and Latin, and Greek, and some Dutch, and they all mix together, and well, good
golly isn't that interesting, and it means that we've got these layers of vocabulary.
So you've got help, and that's the original Anglo-Saxon word. Then you've got aid, which
is a more formal kind of helping, like maybe picking somebody up with gloves on so you
don't get their blood on you. Aid, and then you've got assist, and that's from Latin,
and assist means that maybe you help pushing a button or something like that. So we've
got these layers. That's very good, but there is a lot more to the history of English than
that. The truth is, English is a language that began with a grammar like Germans. If
you've ever suffered through a German course, Old English was very similar. And then this
German-like language became a strange, yapping hybrid of basically Welsh and Germanic, and
then that hybrid was streamlined into a much easier language than it should be by Vikings
coming to the island and screwing it up. That's the real story of our language. The mixture
of the words is nice, but there was much more drama going on in the household than that.
You can get a sense of it from a language that we're going to meet again shortly. It's
called Frisian, and Frisian is a close relative to Dutch, like Dutch. It's spoken in the
Netherlands mostly, and there are about 12 Germanic languages. English is part of the
family, and there are about 12 in this family. It's called Germanic. Frisian is the one
that's the most like English today, and it gives us a clue as to what English in a way
should be, i.e. what it would look like if it hadn't had a very peculiar and fascinating
history. This is how close English and Frisian are. I'm going to render this in my best
Frisian. My parents spoke it at home when they didn't want me to understand. Good buter
and good cheese is good English and good Frisian. That's good butter and good cheese is good
English and good Frisian. Now, the fact of the matter is you could not understand that
much of Frisian actually spoken, but the fact that you can match the languages up like that
shows that English and Frisian are much closer than English and Tagalog, or even English
and German or English and Dutch. You can look at sentences from Frisian, and what they
are is a snapshot of what English would be under other circumstances. For example, in
English we might say, as we always do, of course, do we eat apples? In Frisian that
would come out as itto we apples. You could understand somebody saying that, but notice
that it's eat we apples. Well, why don't we say eat we apples? What's the do? As we talked
about that is because of peculiar things that happen to English in particular, and actually
more interesting things than actually ever happened to Frisian. Or if somebody asks you
what you're doing, and you are gnawing on a Macintosh, and you are two people, you might
say, we are eating apples. Now, in Frisian the same people would say, we itto apples.
They say, we eat apples. So what are you doing, Fred and Ginger, or if they were Frisian,
what are you doing? I met a Frisian once, his name was Peter, so let's say that there's
Peter and assume that there's probably people named Petra. So, Peter and Petra, what are
you doing? And they would say, we itto apples. We eat apples. Why don't we say we eat apples
in that way? Why do we say we are eating apples? If there's another language that you've learned,
almost certainly when you use the present, you don't always use the progressive. Why
is English like that? Why does Frisian have the uh suffix, itto. They don't just say it,
eat, like us, they have the itto. They have many more suffixes than English does. English
doesn't have those suffixes for a reason. In general, what we're going to see is that
the story of English has always been one of endless transformation, endless chaos as a
matter of fact, a magnificent trippy kind of chaos. But then, at a certain time, a fashion
arose seeking to stop that transformation. It's a peculiar thing and we're going to work
with it. And finally, there's something else that we're going to see in this course, which
is that when we understand the difference between descriptivism and prescriptivism, so
to speak, then we can look at some very real social changes that there have been in English
usage over the past few decades that have been the result of cultural and technological
changes. Because the fact of the matter is that English usage is more informal than it
once was. That's in speech, that's in writing, and that includes the texting and the email
that concerns so many of us these days. And these things can be seen as and are often seen
as a matter of a decline in standards. But in the light of what we're going to see in
this course, we can also see it as enriching the public use of the language and liberating
it from strictures from different times, which in many ways were arbitrary. What we're going
to see in this course is that there's a great deal to admire and to explore and to wonder
about in this language, which it's easy to miss given the ways that we're often trained
to look at it. And so in this course, as we go through the various lectures, what I want
to do is in general pull the camera back. Because when we pull the camera back, we can
examine the way we've been taught English in school from a more distant perspective
than we're often accustomed to. We're going to look at the light that foreign languages
can shed upon our own. Because the fact is that as I said, English is one of 6,000 languages,
and we can never really understand what it is that we're speaking, that we're writing,
that we're thinking about, that we're judging until we look at what a language is all over
the world, from Sulawesi to the island of Flores in Indonesia to Australia to Africa
to everywhere else. We will look at notions of formality and informality in language and
how those relate to notions of correctness, appropriateness, error, etc. And we're also
going to look at what grammar actually is. We'd like to have a new conception in this
course of grammar, because as I said, linguists are very concerned with grammar, quite obsessed
with it, as a matter of fact, but it's something different from what we're often told. So quick
preview, there is no future tense in English in the proper sense. Want to know what I mean
by that? Then stay with me. The idea in this course is to look at the English language and
by extension language in general with a new pair of glasses. I think it'll be a lot of
fun, so please stay tuned.
