I said that in order to develop a new way of looking at this language called English,
we're going to have to pull the camera back.
And in this lecture, we are going to do that in a major way.
We're going to look at how this language called English emerged,
and we have to go back further than Old English.
We're going to go way, way back.
And we're going to see that the very beginnings of this language
have always been a matter of what you might call structured chaos
rather than anything that we would see as logic.
Specifically, we're going to look at the emergence of,
of all things, English's most recent parent language.
Languages have parents, so it's just like the evolution of fauna and flora.
The languages that we have today were not the languages that there were in antiquity,
were not the languages that there were at the dawn of time, etc.
English's most recent parent was a language that we call proto-Germanic.
And proto-Germanic was one of a brood of puppies, so to speak.
And among that brood, proto-Germanic was the odd one.
And so with English, oddness goes way, way back.
It's a family trait.
And so let's look at proto-Germanic.
In order to understand what proto-Germanic is,
we have to understand where even proto-Germanic came from.
Most of the languages of Europe are the descendants of a single ancient language.
We don't know what that language was called because it was never written down,
but we today call it proto-Indo-European.
And this is a language that would have been spoken by a group of people
at a time when, therefore, French and Spanish and German and Russian and Welsh and Greek
and all of the other languages that are now spoken in Europe,
except for a very few, would not have existed.
Those languages are descendants of something that existed a long time ago.
Proto-Indo-European split into various kittens in a brood, so to speak,
such as Italic, which became what is today the Romance languages,
or Slavic, which became today's Slavic languages like Russian and Polish,
or Celtic, that's Welsh and Irish Gaelic and others,
or Greek or Germanic.
And Germanic is what then became various languages such as English.
It's interesting.
Archaeologists have recently discovered who the people were who spoke Proto-Indo-European.
It's not absolutely certain, but it's at the point where we can say with virtual certainty
that the people who spoke this language that we call Proto-Indo-European
were a people called the Yamnaya, or if you're not being pretentiously Slavicist,
the Yamna people.
And they lived on the steps north of the Black and the Caspian seas.
Today that area is partly the Ukraine and partly southern Russia.
And the Yamnaya people were an interesting group.
They were nomadic for one thing.
They had an interesting burial trait.
When somebody died and they buried them, they lay them on their backs and put their knees up.
That was something that was a defining feature of the Yamnaya people.
If you find somebody who's buried in that yoga-like position, then that's a Yamna if it's in that area.
And they had, most importantly for our purposes, they had wagons, they had invented the wheel,
and they were riding horses.
And that meant that these Yamna people got around.
They didn't just stay where they were, they moved.
One place that they moved was Eastward.
And so there were Yamna people who ended up giving birth to the people
who gave birth to the languages that are now spoken in India as well as a great many that are spoken in Iran.
So that was the Eastern movement.
So they're Indo-European languages spoken there, i.e. Indo.
Then Yamna people also moved west into what is today, give you a guess, Europe.
And so Indo over in the east, European, that's in the west.
So from these Ukrainian slash Russian steps they moved in.
And as various descendants of this group were separated, their languages started becoming different.
New words, new sounds, new grammatical constructions.
And so pretty soon you had different branches of what started out as one language.
One of those branches was this Proto-Germanic language.
Now, we don't know what its speakers called it because Proto-Germanic wasn't written down either.
But we do know that Proto-Germanic split into a brood.
Today that brood consists of, depending on where you draw the line between language and dialect, about a dozen languages.
And they really split into two easy groups.
There's North Germanic and there's West Germanic.
The North Germanic languages, and this is a really difficult fact about them to retain.
And so listen closely.
The North Germanic languages are spoken in the north.
And one of them is Icelandic.
And probably the most distinct thing about Iceland is its northwardness.
And so Icelandic.
Faroese is very similar to Icelandic.
And that's another one of the Germanic languages.
Then there is the Scandinavian trio.
There's Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish.
Don't tell their speakers, but those three are really dialects of one language.
And now I can say it because my sister married a Dane, and so I've heard a lot of it.
They're all the same, even though different.
So Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish.
Then there's West Germanic.
West Germanic contains German.
And then another one of the West Germanic languages is Yiddish.
Yiddish, culturally of course, is a language with a Jewish heritage,
but linguistically Yiddish is a variant of German with a lot of Slavic and Hebrew vocabulary.
Then there's Dutch.
Dutch and German are quite similar, but different.
Afrikaans, spoken in South Africa.
Afrikaans is an offshoot of Dutch.
Then there's our friend Friesen that we met in our last lecture.
And it's close relative, the language that I'm speaking right now.
Now, from words in all those languages, even though no proto-Germanic speaker wrote the language down,
we can reconstruct what the words were.
And so for example, what would the word have been for daughter in proto-Germanic?
This language spoken in today.
What is the southern part of Denmark and also the northern part of Germany?
Well, in English, we know that the word is daughter.
In German, it's tochter.
In Dutch, dochter.
In Norwegian, daughter.
Swedish, daughter.
Icelandic, daughter.
And then in Gothic, which is now dead.
That was an East Germanic branch, but it was written down.
The word was dochter.
If you look at all of those words and you use some other techniques of historical language reconstruction
that need not concern us here, then we know that the proto-Germanic word for daughter was dochter.
And we can do that for word after word after word.
And pretty soon, we have a sense of what this language was that nobody spoke.
And that's proto-Germanic.
You can even create a proto-Germanic sentence.
This is something that's been done.
And so, for example, if a proto-Germanic speaker wanted to say,
the sheep that didn't have any wool saw horses.
If that's the sentence that you want to quote the person to sing,
then linguists have reconstructed that it would have been something like,
I was so woollenabd, so erhuans.
That's my proto-Germanic voice, I imagine.
Even the women probably talk like that.
So that is a sentence.
The sheep that didn't have any wool saw horses.
For some reason, when linguists reconstruct these proto-Indo-European or proto-Germanic sentences,
they always seem to have to do with sheep,
and usually the sheep are running away from things.
I'm not sure why that is, but that is one of those sentences.
So that is proto-Germanic.
Now, for our purposes, what's important about proto-Germanic is not how you said daughter
or the fact that they maybe talked about sheep,
but that proto-Germanic was odd.
Proto-Germanic was a really peculiar branch of proto-Indo-European, this Yamna tongue.
It was specifically strangely less complex than you would expect.
Very, very peculiar.
Its verbs in particular really made no sense in terms of the way proto-Indo-European verbs were supposed to be.
Verbs and proto-Indo-European were, quite frankly, a nightmare.
You can take all of proto-Indo-European's descendants and trace backwards as to what the ancestral state would have been,
just like we did with the proto-Germanic words for daughter.
And we find that the verbs were just ridiculously complicated.
And so, for example, there were forms not only just for we and you all and they in the plural,
but you had two different kinds of weeds.
And so, for example, there was what we might think of as the vanilla we,
and so what are you doing, Peter and Petra?
We're eating apples, and so we too sitting here.
But if you think about it, there are two kinds of weeds,
because there can also be we when you mean me and someone who isn't here.
And so, for example, you can think of it as the married we.
And so, we'd love to have you for dinner, Craig, and what you mean is you and your wife who isn't there.
Once you start using that we, you know you're really married, something I've discovered.
That's the sort of alternate we.
So there's vanilla we, and then there's the me and someone else we.
You had different verb forms for those two different kinds of we-ness in proto-Indo-European.
Proto-Indo-European had different verb forms for when you're doing something to yourself.
And so, for example, if you wanted to say to leave behind, and you had a verb for to leave behind,
and you wanted to say, well, I'm leaving myself behind, there was a form for that.
If you were, say, a society woman and you were feeling that you were getting ahead of yourself
and you're thinking to yourself, well, I'm leaving myself behind.
If there were such things as a society woman in Yomna society, there was a form for that.
There was a form for the perfect.
So Elvis has left the building they didn't use have.
There was a whole set of endings just for that.
And so, if Elvis has left the building behind, well, there was a whole form for that with the leave behind verb.
It was rather frightening, and so the verbs came in many, many, many flavors.
Now, all of a sudden, that changes in proto-Germanic.
And it's something that's quite unexpected because in other branches of Proto-Indo-European, such as Greek,
the verbs remain nightmarishly complicated.
If any of you have ever had Greek in school, then you know that just learning all of the different tenses
and aspects and the mediopassive, et cetera, all of that makes learning Greek a delicious challenge.
But somehow in proto-Germanic, things were different despite the fact that languages are supposed to pass on their traits.
So, for example, a random example, Lyndon Johnson.
He had penetrating brown eyes, milky white skin, long ears, and he was tallish.
Apparently, that was true as many as three generations back in his line.
And this kept getting passed on in the genes.
So, ancient Greek is like Lyndon Johnson compared to his great-grandfather.
Proto-Germanic is different. All of a sudden, in proto-Germanic, really, there are just four verb forms.
You've got a present, and you've got a past, and you've got a subjunctive, and then you've got a passive.
And so, for example, I was left behind, and that's all there is.
And so, whereas there were six baroque forms for proto-Indo-European,
that's even putting it into the basic way, somehow in proto-Germanic it's contracted.
And even beyond that, with proto-Germanic, it seems that there was something going on.
And so, for example, for the verb to take, nemenon, there were passive forms.
And you had passive for I, you, he, and for about ten minutes, those two wheeze hung on.
But they dropped away. There was something funny going on in proto-Germanic, and then you all and they.
And so, in the passive, you had various forms for all of those.
But for some reason, in the plural, all the passive forms were all the same.
So the endings weren't different. It was all the same for both of the wheeze and the you and the they.
And all of these things in themselves look like random details about some language that is long dead
and that none of us have any reason to care about.
But the fact of the matter is that what proto-Germanic looks like, if you compare it to what ancient Greek looked like,
if you compare it to what Sanskrit looked like, or ancient Persian,
it looks like somebody was doing something to proto-Germanic.
It looks as if proto-Germanic was going through some sort of problem.
What it looks like, and this is what linguists see in a language like this,
if you compare proto-Germanic to its brother and sister languages at the time,
it looks like somebody had been learning it and not well.
And furthermore, we can even get a possible sense of who it was who was not learning the language well.
There's something historical going on that you can see in of all things these tables of verbs
and other things that make proto-Germanic different from other ancient descendants of proto-Indo-European.
So for example, in proto-Germanic, just as in English now, this is something that traces back to proto-Germanic,
you have what are called by grammarians strong verbs.
And all that means is that when you put it into the past, instead of adding an ed, say walk and walked,
you change the vowel inside of the word.
So the past of C is not seed, it's saw, or the past of come is not come'd but came.
You change the vowel inside.
Now if you're an English speaker, that seems like the most ordinary thing in the world.
It's like the fact that water makes things wet.
But if you think about it, in European languages beyond Germanic, that's not the way things work.
The vowels may change, but that's only part of the meal.
Consonants change as well when you're making a past tense form. All sorts of things happen.
Spanish, for example, saber to know.
If you've learned Spanish, then you know that there's some verbs that really challenge you.
And it's not just in some vowel in the middle changing.
And so saber, the infinitive, to know.
You know, sabes, okay, fine.
So then, if you know that the first person singular ending in Spanish is o, like hablo espanol,
I speak Spanish, sort of.
Then you think that no in Spanish, if you know is sabes, then it should be sabo.
But it isn't. That's a schoolboy mistake.
The form for I know is se.
You just have to know, and there's no reason.
It just kind of kicks you in the keyster.
And then, if you're going to put it into the past, it's not a matter of just changing a vowel,
you've got consonant mess as well.
So supe, where'd the p come from?
You are not to know. It's not your business.
You just have to learn it.
If you put it in the subjunctive, then sepa.
And so you've got the vowel change, and then you've got that strange p consonant.
These are the sorts of things that happen when a good card carrying Indo-European language
changes into the past or into other things.
And somehow in Germanic, though, in the past, you just have this little vowel change.
And what's interesting is that if you look at languages around the world,
then the ones that do that, among those that do,
the ones that are most prominent for doing that are of a particular family other than Indo-European.
It's the Semitic family.
The Semitic family is a family spoken mostly in the Middle East,
and the shop window languages of Semitic are Arabic and Hebrew today.
Jesus' Aramaic is one of those languages.
Aramaic is still spoken.
And actually, across the Red Sea in Ethiopia,
Amharic and a bunch of other languages are also Semitic.
Now, what's interesting for our purposes about Semitic
is that Semitic has that same usage of vowels for the past tense.
So he writes in Hebrew today is who kotev.
Now, if you want to say he wrote,
now you kind of think that if English is sort of the default language,
then he wrote should be who kotev'd, but it isn't.
They have their own way of making past tense.
And the way they do it is he wrote is who katov.
And so the katov stays the way it is.
It's this consonant skeleton.
The vowels change, kotev katov, that makes it past tense.
And it's interesting that that's a Semitic tree that you see
and, of all things, proto-Germanic.
There's a sound thing that happens in proto-Germanic.
It's very peculiar.
There's something about proto-Germanic consonants.
If in other Indo-European languages there's a P,
then often it'll be an F.
So for example, if Latin has P for father, pater,
then notice that in English it's not father, it's father.
Or if Latin has, for example, tres for three,
we don't have tree, we have three.
Or if Latin has conus for dog, we don't have conus,
we have hound, which is from the same root.
Now what that is, is it something regular that you see,
with the P becoming an F and the T becoming a th and the C becoming a he.
It's called Grimm's Law.
It was discovered by Jacob Grimm, who's also famous for the fairy tales.
And this isn't only something about Latin and English.
This is a difference between Indo-European and proto-Germanic.
This strange thing happened to the consonants.
So Indo-European for father, pater, proto-Germanic, father.
Indo-European, tres for three.
Proto-Germanic, tres, what's a th?
An Indo-European for a dog, quón.
And then proto-Germanic, hondas.
It's very interesting.
It's almost as if something strange was going on with somebody's children.
Because this isn't how languages change all of the time.
Let's say that there's the word popcorn.
And you are a father and you're passing your language on to your child.
And so you've got popcorn and then your child instead says popcorn.
No, no, popcorn, popcorn.
Why is it an f?
Why would that happen?
Or if you think about it, because the corn has the c sound, it would be a h.
And so you say, listen, junior, popcorn.
And junior says, popcorn, my pa.
See, that's not normal.
It's as if either some generation was uniquely mentally ungifted
or, more likely, they were foreign.
Somebody was learning proto-Germanic,
having a hard time pronouncing those consonants.
It looks like they had a lot of hissy kinds of sounds, lots of th's and th's and th's.
And those hissy sounds, once again, are very common in the Semitic group.
And so the question is, what happened to proto-Germanic?
And the question has to be asked, because normally languages pass on their traits.
Lyndon Johnson and his ears or all of the ridiculously baroque verbal mechanisms
and proto-Indo-European passed on to the equally ridiculously baroque verbal mechanisms
in an ancient Greek or a Latin or many other languages.
And somehow, proto-Germanic was highly streamlined.
If somebody held a gun to your head and said, would you rather learn, for example,
proto-Indo-European or proto-Germanic, then you would certainly choose proto-Germanic
because it just would have been easier.
And the question is, why does a language get that way?
It isn't just random.
People don't just shed complexities of their languages over generations for no particular reason.
It's because something intervenes.
And in this case, it makes perfect sense that, and it's generally thought that,
proto-Germanic was learned by some other group of people.
And it was learned by enough of them over a long enough period of time
that it rendered the language less complex in the same way as we in classrooms
will learn another language and generally never completely master the system.
And it takes shortcuts because it's harder to learn a language after the age of about 16
than it is before then.
It's almost impossible to learn a language perfectly after that point.
So apparently, there was some sort of invasion or migration of adults who spoke something else,
something very different, who took this language and made it into something different,
which then became the language that I'm speaking right now.
Now, we're not sure at this point who this was,
but we may never know because this is one of those things that took place without writing.
And if something isn't written down, then it can be very difficult to reconstruct the details,
especially when we're talking about language, of course.
But some have supposed that there must have been something going on with proto-Germanic
and of all people, the Phoenicians who were people who lived in Lebanon, Syria, and Israel.
And what's important about those Phoenicians is that they spoke a Semitic language.
It was very closely related to Hebrew.
And something else that's important about the Phoenicians is that they were a restless bunch,
they were vigorous traders, and most importantly, they were seafarers.
And so the Phoenicians tended to get around.
They experienced Europe in a way that other Semitic-speaking peoples had not.
And so the idea is that perhaps they were the ones who occupied the proto-Germanic area
and they would have learned the new language of the area
and passed their version of this proto-Germanic onto children,
and as a result, the language would have changed.
And what this means is that what we see in proto-Germanic, and therefore in English,
is evidence of incomplete learning.
And what makes this hypothesis, and at this point it's only a hypothesis,
but what makes this hypothesis attractive is, for example,
that you have the vowel changes for the past tense.
That's something that Semitic languages do here, these traveling Phoenicians,
that you have the hissy sounds.
Linguists call them fricative sounds, such as this is the ph, and the ph, and the ch.
These are sounds that are particularly common in Semitic languages.
They were particularly common in Phoenician,
and so a Phoenician rendition of proto-Germanic would have a lot of those sounds,
and this would explain this Grimm's law process, which otherwise seems to have just come out of nowhere.
And so what this means is that of all things, proto-Germanic was the product of perhaps Phoenicians,
or almost certainly somebody, doing to the language exactly what we have done
to so many languages in classrooms when we don't learn them completely,
and then history kept going.
Now, in terms of the actual archaeological record, the Phoenicians are only recorded
as sailing as far west and as far north as Portugal.
That's as far as we can take them.
However, we know that technologically it was possible for people to sail all the way
from the Mediterranean up around Europe to northern Europe,
because there was a Greek, his name was Pythias, and he was recorded as making exactly that voyage.
And so the Phoenicians could have done it, and it maybe wasn't written down.
And another tantalizing tidbit is that the Phoenicians were vanquished by about 200 BC,
and that means that if they did reach northern Europe,
then it would have been just when proto-Germanic would have been spoken
around 2,500 years ago in that area, and before proto-Germanic broke up
into today's modern parcel of Germanic languages.
Now, we cannot be sure about the Phoenicians.
There's actually been a shard of Phoenician pottery found under the seashell near Denmark,
but of course that doesn't mean that Phoenicians actually settled in the area
and had children and tore the language to pieces.
These are hard things to ascertain, but what is almost certain is that proto-Germanic
was not just a matter of Yamnea people's descendants migrating to that area
and continuing to speak uninterrupted a descendant of proto-Indo-European,
because it's too different, it's too simplified, it's oddly streamlined.
It's obvious that some group of people learned proto-Germanic
in a way that stripped it of a lot of its original Baroque accretions
of the kind that left Sanskrit and ancient Greek and other descendants
of proto-Indo-European as the wedding cakes that they had always been.
Proto-Germanic became kind of, I guess you would call it,
a highly elaborate pretentious cupcake, but it wasn't a wedding cake,
and this is because someone had learned it, all of which is to say.
English is not a language which is a product of a stepwise development
from something that was hideously complicated and stayed that way
and then is today under threat by people trying to undermine it.
You can think of it this way.
English was undermined in its way before its own birth.
It was undermined in the womb.
What happened with English was that there was this proto-Indo-European ancestor
and it developed descendants, one of which was the ancestor of what is English today,
but that descendant itself had a very peculiar history.
That descendant was a bastard in a sense because it seems to have traits from it
that are mixins kind of like with ice cream from some other group.
And more to the point, that other group basically, talk about sheep,
there was wool that was shorn off of the skin of this language.
A lot of the complexity, a lot of the baroque-ness that defines a card carrying early proto-Indo-European language
such as Sanskrit or Old Persian or Ancient Greek, all of that.
So a great deal of that is gone in the proto-Germanic language.
Now at this point, when proto-Germanic exists, English does not exist yet at all.
English, you might say, is just a twinkle in proto-Germanic's eye.
But the fact is that even at this early stage, we see that the language has been pigeonized in a way,
not to the extent of the way that Tonto the Indian speaks, but there's been a major shearing of hair.
And so English's very roots are in what you might call a kind of destruction.
And then the process continues of not only the destruction, but the mixture.
And that's what comes down to us as the English language today.
So not only is English a great mixture of words,
English is also a matter of constant breakdown of something that was once much more complex.
And here we are today.
In the next lecture, we'll take a look at the next phase of English's development,
which is as much a matter of chaos and decline as it is a matter of building.
