So, we saw in the previous lecture that there's a bastard heritage to English in that old
English seems to have been a kind of Saxo-Friesian hybrid, but English has continued to be a
bastard, so to speak, and in this lecture we're going to see that actually within the
Germanic subfamily, English is actually a hybrid of two subfamilies of the Indo-European group
rather than being a pure Germanic language.
This is something that linguists are increasingly opening up to, that English has a much more
interesting history even after the Anglo-Saxon period than was previously thought, and it
starts with something as innocent, if exotic, as this.
You're in Northern England, you probably aren't, but pretend that you are, and there's
something called sheep scoring numbers, and actually, we're back to the sheep, they're
more often used in nursery rhymes and children's games, and they are quite different from any
kind of English numbers, and so, for example, one to five goes, aina, peina, para, pedara,
pump, what in the world is that?
Or then six to ten, and this is something that somebody from there will remember from
childhood, goes ithy, mithy, aware, lavera, dig, and what kind of numbers are those, and
this is something that you find people who don't know each other throughout Northern
England knowing, and if you compare these numbers to, of all things, Welsh, then you
know where they came from, and so, for example, aina, Welsh for one is un, or pedara, well
how's that for?
Well Welsh, it's pedara, and then, pump, what a cute word for five, especially because
that's Welsh for five, or, for example, dig, being the word for ten, well, in Welsh, dig,
and it gets down to very specific things, and so, with these play numbers, the word
for eleven is aina dig, and so, one ten, and wouldn't you know in Welsh, the word for eleven
is un ar deg, which is one and ten.
The word for fifteen in these weird numbers is bumfit, that sounds cute, but where does
it come from?
If you're going to make up a number for fifteen, you might make up the nonsense word bumfit
because it sounds like smacking a baby on the behind, but you might make up any number
of things, and why is it that people all over the place who don't speak Welsh have that
word, and it turns out that in Welsh, the word for fifteen is pumfit, so it's clear
these numbers came not from English, but they're Celtic, they're not precisely Welsh, they
don't match up precisely with Welsh today, but it's obvious that these are from some
language that is an ancestor to Welsh, specifically, these numbers are Celtic. Celtic is one more
subfamily of Indo-European. Today, the Celtic family is small, it includes Welsh, Cornish,
in the south-west of England, up north, Irish and Scottish Gaelic, then you go over the
English Channel and in France there's a Celtic language called Breton that is spoken there,
and the Celtic languages are mostly on the ropes, but they are there, and what's interesting
is that they were once more there. These are the languages that were spoken by the inhabitants
of the British Isles before there was any kind of Germanic invasion, including what
was likely this original Saxon occupation, and it's increasingly clear that there are
central constructions in everybody's English today that are not actually English in origin
at all, but are reflections of the fact that an awful lot of people who spoke Celtic languages
like Welsh and the others learned this Germanic language that had been brought from the other
side of the North Sea, and so what this means is that today we speak a language where we're
using Celticisms of all things, grammatical constructions from languages that we speak
and know nothing, that we do not speak and often know nothing of in our everyday constructions.
One of them is what we're going to call meaningless do, and I've made brief reference to it before
in our lectures. Meaningless do is the do that has no meaning of its own that ends up
just taking up space in question sentences and negative sentences, and so I walk, good,
make it into a question. If you're a Friesian, it's going to be walk you, but for us it's
do you walk? If you negate it, then you don't say, I walk not. You feel that one did in
earlier English and in any normal Germanic language you still do, but in English you
say I do not walk. What's do? Why do? We're so used to it in English, we don't find it
in any language that we're likely to learn, and the funny thing is that if you look at
the languages of the world, and we're talking about all 6,000 languages of the world, you
might think that every other place you land you'll find somebody using do in this way,
but you don't. The only languages in the world that use do in the way that English does and
exactly that way are Celtic ones, and so for example in Welsh you'll have a sentence for
for example do I open? Now I, I, open, agor, and so I open, I open, I open, I open, I open,
I agor, those are the two words. Now to say do I open, you say nes, I agor. Nes is the
do word. Very interesting, that's the way it's done. If you want to say I did not open,
now here's a kink with Celtic, the verb comes first all the time, and so in Welsh for example
to say I did not open, what you say is did I not open, and that is a statement, but that
means this nes word again, and so nes did I, nes i dhym agor, did I not open. So that's
the way it happens in Welsh, that same usage of the do word. And what's interesting is
it gets even more specific. Meaningless do is something that we first see in English
in documents in the southwest of England, and the Celtic language spoken in the southwest
of England is called Cornish, and Cornish uses do just like Welsh does, and so for example
if you are asking somebody do you love, then you say guacara, gua is do you, it's the you
form of the do verb. And so you see in these Celtic languages the exact same usage of do,
and the likeness gets even closer. It's interesting, in Welsh and Cornish you don't only use meaningless
do in your negative and your question senses, you also use it in ordinary vanilla affirmative
senses, and so for example in Welsh you can say nes i agor did I open, but then you can
also just make a statement nes i agor, and that means I opened, and so I did open. Now
what that's like is what we think of as kind of the quaint do, and what that means is that
in earlier forms of English this meaningless do was used in ordinary affirmative sentences
as well. So for example Hamlet, this is a matter of speaking Shakespeareanese if you
want to. Hamlet's mom, Gertrude says alas, how is it with you that you do bend your eye
on vacancy, and with the incorporeal air do hold discourse, those do's, they're not
just quaint, they're a kind of grammar at that time. Hamlet answers my pulse as yours
doth temporarily keep time and makes his helpful music. What that is is English at a stage,
when this contact with Celtic languages was more recent, and therefore it was even more
like Celtic languages, then it is now. And what makes this likeness even more striking
is that that kind of usage of do is utterly unknown anywhere else in the world documented
to linguists at this time. The closest thing to it is that there's a dialect of Italian
spoken way up on some mountain top by probably about four and a half people where it's been
discovered, this dialect is the Monetese dialect, it's been discovered that in questions
you can use do in this way, not in negative sentences and not in affirmative, but in
questions if you are an Italian peasant on this mountain top and there are only three
or four others of you and you're in a mood, you can use it. And so if you are this peasant
and you want to say, you know something, I shouldn't say that, they're peasants because
in this stage they are not. If you are an architect living up on top of a mountain and
there are only about four of you and you want to say something like where is he going, then
the default way is go nda, for me all Italians have high voices. So go nda, where he go,
but the word for do is fa and you can say go fal nda, so where do he go, go fal nda,
you can say that and that's in the Monetese dialect of Italian and actually apparently
a similar one, so five people over on the other mountain top. That is the only example
known to linguists in the world at this point and clearly that's just a hair out of place.
What's important is that in this region there were these Celtic languages spoken that used
do exactly the way English does. The other Germanic languages don't do that, so obviously
there was a causal relationship. Now I know what all of you are thinking. I'm sure that
all of you are fluent speakers of colloquial German and I know that I'm going to hear from
some colloquial German speakers in letters in this set if I don't briefly mention this.
I know what you're all thinking and that is that in colloquial German there is something
that's kind of like meaningless do, but the thing is there isn't and what I mean by that
is this. Let's take say Bavarian. Bavarian is a southern German dialect, very different
from the Hochdeutsch that we Americans learn in school and you can render an ordinary sentence,
say about cutting a bag open. Let's say you're going to say, I'll cut the bag open. Now the
way that you would say it is, I tuo den Zachelschneiden and so in terms of the rhythm that's I do
the bag open. I tuo den Zachelschneiden. Now you can say that, but that is not equivalent
to somebody in English saying I do cut the bag open because it has a meaning. We're talking
about meaningless do. If you say, I tuo den Zachelschneiden, then what you mean is out
of many alternatives, I could set up a trap for an opossum, I could go online and see
if I could find the giant tinker toy set that I used to have when I was a kid and built
little houses to escape from the world. I already knew it was a difficult place or I could cut
the bag open and so you tuo den Zachelschneiden. That's when you use that do. It has a meaning.
You use it to indicate, for example, that you're doing something out of many alternatives or
that you're highlighting that particular activity that you're doing and that's true of all of
the uses of do in colloquial German dialects. It's similar, but it's not the same thing
and it's not obligatory. Only in English do you have this do that has no meaning whatsoever
that you have to use. We can't say I walk not. And so that do, because it parallels
the Celtic construction so beautifully, is an inheritance. The reason that English users
do that way is because it was learned by an awful lot of people who use do that way in
their own languages. So that's a Celticism. There is another Celticism in our language
and it's something that also feels very ordinary to us. And that is something that we can call
the difference between what are you doing versus what do you do? And this requires us
to think about tense. Present, past, future. The way we're taught about how English works,
you can see it in grammar books, and this is the way that people are taught overseas
as well when they're learning English, is that we have a present. So let's say I build.
We have a past. I built. We have a future. I will build. And that all makes it look like
English works like Latin and what we think of as normal other languages. But have you
ever thought about the fact that I build is not present tense, that I build is actually
a rather peculiar sentence. Let's imagine that you come upon somebody and they've got
bricks and mortar and they're building a wall. Notice I say they are building. They're building
a wall. And let's say that you ask that person, so, Ted, what are you doing? And Ted looks
up in his overalls and says, I build a house. No. There's no way that Ted would say that
without an accent. If anybody looked up and said, I build a house, it would be more likely
that the person would look up and say, I build a house. God knows where that person is from,
but they don't speak English natively because it's wrong. If you're sitting there laying
down the mortar, you don't look up and say, I build a house. You say, I'm building a house.
You always use the progressive. Now, that seems quite ordinary to us, but it is weird if you
look at languages in general. For example, European languages normally. Imagine if, let's
say that you have studied Spanish. And even if you only got so far, you know that if you're
sitting there writing a letter and somebody comes in and says, so, Brian, what are you
doing? And you want to say, I'm writing. What are you saying in Spanish? You're escribo.
Now, you could say, yo estoy escribiendo. I am writing. But what that means is I am
writing right now. Well, good for me. That's something that you would say if you were really
emphasizing the ongoingness and the immediacy of the activity, but really, you're escribo. You
don't have to specify with the progressive. Our doing that in English is actually rather
peculiarly anal in its way. If you're a Germanic person. And so, so, Jurgen, what are you doing?
And Jurgen is writing a letter. He does not look up and say, I am writing, which would
only say that if he's trying to say, I'm writing the letter right now, and then you're going
to grab it and you're going to go send it to Liesl. What he would say, he'd look up
and say, I'm writing. In other words, normal European languages are ones where in terms
of the present, when you're asked what you're doing, you say, you do it. I write a letter.
I build a wall. Why is that that in English we have this, this tick where we have to say,
I am building the wall right now. Goodness gracious. That is actually something very
weird that you certainly do not do in any other language that you learn unless you learn
three guesses, a Celtic language. It's the exact same thing in, for example, Welsh and
Cornish. So, for example, let's say that in Welsh, you're talking about Mary. She's
Myer in Welsh. And Mary is singing. Now, with Welsh, you have this peculiarity from our
perspective. The verb is at the front. And so, when you say Mary is singing, you have
to say, is Mary singing? But the way that it would go is, Myer is Mary and then in singing,
in Camel is how it comes out. So, what are you doing, you Welsh person? Well, I, the
Welsh person doesn't say, I sing. The Welsh person, just like we would, says, I am in
singing. So, Myer in Camel. Now, that's something that also goes on in the Cornish language
as well. This is just very typical of them. Now, you notice that there is a difference.
And so, for them, they don't say, I am singing. They say, I am in singing. But once again,
earlier English was even more like them. It just happens to have changed somewhat as time
has gone by. And so, English starts with that exact kind of construction. You used to say,
for example, I am on hunting. And then that was shortened to something that you'll find
familiar. I was a hunting. So, I was on hunting. And then as time goes on, things shorten and
so I was a hunting. And then the started being left off and so I was hunting. But it used
to be that we said a form of I am in singing. So, what this means is those are two constructions.
That seem so ordinary to us. This business of popping off with do all the time with no meaning.
And when talking about what we're doing at any given time, specifying in oddly, oddly
obsessive fashion that we're doing it at that exact moment. Those are things that make English
very strange unless we compare English to Celtic, where those things have been quite
ordinary since before what we call English actually existed. And to old English speakers,
these usages of do and this sort of what we could call obsessive ing would have seemed
very peculiar. In old English, you couldn't say, did you see what he is doing? You would
say, saw you what he does. Like you would in any normal Germanic language now, not to
mention most European languages, English is very peculiar in that regard. Now, what we
do have to make a mention of, if we're going to understand the history of English, is we
have to make a difference between English in writing versus English as it was spoken,
especially because that difference between the spoken and the written is going to play
a role in many of our later lectures as well. Language has two renditions. The primary one
for various reasons we'll see as we go on is speech. Language has been being spoken for
all of the history of our species and so therefore possibly for a good 150,000 years. Language
has been being written only for about the past 5,500 years. So that means that if language
had existed for 24 hours, then writing would only have come along well after 11 o'clock
PM. So what language is speech and what goes on when people scratch it onto paper or papyrus
or think of the Flintstones when people are hammering it into stone, that's something
very different. And so there has been a resistance among many scholars to the idea that Celtic
had this impact on English despite the precise likenesses and the fact that other Germanic
languages don't behave this way because of something that makes sense on its face, which
is that English speakers would have met these Celtic speakers presumably starting in the
400s A.D. if not before, if we accept this Saxon shore hypothesis, but certainly from
the 400s. And yet in old English you don't have a meaningless do and in old English you
only have a whisper of this kind of obsessive progressive. That's cute. I coined that just
now. I'm going to keep it. The obsessive progressive is something that you barely see in old English.
Well these things only started in Middle English. And so if this was the result of the Celtic
impact then why would there be this gap? Well that requires exploring and the reason for
that gap is because there was a massive difference particularly in ancient times between writing
and speaking. Writing in those times was formal. It was uncommon. It was used mostly
for liturgical purposes or for record keeping or for literature. And by literature we're
not talking about flaming thigh novels and things like that. There's no such thing as
a comic book. Literature is high stuff. In other words the documents that are preserved
for us, formal poetry, prose of a highly structured and often very ritual nature, that's what
writing was for. And so writing was couched in what was thought of as prestigious forms
of language. Casual writing such as we know it barely existed if it existed at all in
ancient language societies. And so the idea that writing would keep in step with colloquial
developments was utterly unknown to people who were writing a language like old English.
What is, is considered perfectly normal that what you would find on the page if you as
an individual ever saw a printed page at all, especially outside of a church, would be completely
different from anything that you would walk around talking. And so to put ourselves in
the minds of an ancient we have to actually imagine what it would be like to never see
what we speak on the page and in fact to find it almost comical to see what we speak the
way we speak it every day on the page. And so for example, for a very long time until
only some centuries ago, for speakers of the romance languages, that's the shop window
ones of French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese and Romanian, the idea was that with those
languages, especially French, Spanish, Italian and Portuguese, you spoke those in the kitchen,
but what was in writing was in Latin. And the idea that Latin was what was used in writing
continued even when it got to the point that the speaker of one of these Latin derived
languages like what we know now it's French, Spanish, Italian or Portuguese no longer knew
Latin and couldn't follow what's spoken and barely recognized it on the page. 842 AD,
two of Charlemagne's sons rendered what are called the Strasbourg oaths. And it was considered
revolutionary that they did this not in Latin, which was thought of as the written form of
this language in France, but in the popular language. And so the Strasbourg oaths are
written in what we now recognize as an early form of French. And so for the love of God,
Prodeo Amour, at Prochristian Poblo and the Christian people. And what we see in the Strasbourg
oaths is that there is much, much less of the elaborate case marking machinery on nouns,
the business of the nominative, genitive, dative, accusative. There's clearly a simplification
that's going on. To the people in 842 AD, what that looked like was the Vulgate, the Latin
that people actually speak, and it's so different that we're going to write it down in this language.
We look at it now and we think, oh, French. But that was a new way of thinking because the idea
was that what you write is different from what people run around speaking. What people run
around speaking is different in every village and it's colloquial. And of course, there was what
we would now call a classism. You write something that's completely different. So that's the way
it was for them. In England itself, Battle of Hastings, 1066. French was the official language
for good 150, 200 years after that. The French ran the show because French was the official
language. That's what made it into writing. And people who spoke English during all of their
lives, people who romanced in English, chopped potatoes in English, died in English, wrote in
French. That was considered perfectly ordinary. And what happened after that, and here that was
yet another situation where people accepted that what you wrote was different from what you spoke.
After that, when the French started retreating and the English started running their own society
again, was that they started writing in a newly natural way. Habits from the old days of writing
in this old English that was certainly, especially by the 700s and 800s, quite different from the
way people actually spoke, had died and people started writing in a different English. That
English is so different from old English that it's what we call Middle English. What Middle
English was, was certainly what English had been becoming for a long time, even during the Anglo
Saxon period when what you wrote stayed relatively frozen as Anglo Saxon. So what that means is that
Middle English starts showing meaningless due, and God, I love this, the obsessive progressive,
I don't know why I didn't come up with that before. That is something that only pops up in
Middle English because at that time, because there'd been a blackout in the writing of English,
the old starchy habits of writing something that most people probably didn't speak anymore,
died away. And so there was a more honest rendition of the language on the page. But what that
rendition was, was the way English had been spoken for a long time before, and that was an English
that was shot through with these Celticisms. So we assume that Celticisms started infiltrating
English pretty much with the first generation of Celts that started learning the languages
brought over by these Germanic invaders. But there were several centuries that went by,
that is from the 400s AD, 449 AD, to be precise, if we take it from the invasion of the Anglo
Saxons and Jutes, all the way up to the 1100s when English starts coming back onto the page,
there was a whole time when the way English was written down was different from the way people
spoke it quote unquote, in the street or out in the fields. So there were people using meaningless
due, we assume, there were people using the obsessive progressive, we assume quite early on,
on a sunny day in England in 520 AD, Celtic people, especially people of Celtic heritage,
would have been using these constructions. Never would a scribe sitting up in a castle
writing on a piece of vellum with a quill pen actually write old English in that way. That
would have been thought of as something colloquial, something passing, because writing at this time
was what we could call scripture. It wasn't writing in the sense that we know it of scribbling
shopping lists and texting and, you know, LOL, etc. You were scribing and you didn't scribe
what the person in the street said. You only started doing something more like that when
the end of the English blackout happened and you had Middle English, which was a more honest
rendition. And so what that means is not only that we speak a magnificent bastard tongue in that
we have Celticisms that we now don't even think about. And the meaningless due and the obsessive
progressive are only two. There are many more of them that time will not allow us to discuss.
But it means that the reason that we don't see this in the beautiful procession of old English
documents is based on the same kind of impulse to resist change in the language that leads us to
preserve whom or to take it even further that makes it unthinkable to us to put
whole nother on the page or to start writing vegetables rather than veggie tables, which I'm
not sure all of us even think of it as in the depths of our minds. And so the main lesson
from all of this is, however, that English is a mixture starting with the process of
proto-Germanic becoming old English, where we have this Frisian Saxon hybrid. And then there's
more hybridity because English becomes a Germanic language that is deeply pinched by Celtic grammar
as well. And then the story goes on.
