We saw that there is a great deal of hybridicity in the history of the English language.
We saw that first, Old English was actually a mix of Frisian and Saxon, and then we saw
that after that there was a meeting of Germanic and Celtic that created the very heart of
what English is now.
As it happens, this hybridity is one of two highly disruptive things that happen to create
the language that we speak today.
And to gain perspective on the other one, we need to pull the camera way back this time.
We need to pull it even further back from Proto-Indo-European to see what human language
is like in general.
In this way, we can situate English within the norm of language history.
And the fact is that the norm of what a language is like is not what we might expect.
So what is a normal language?
A normal language, and remember that there are 6,000 languages, and so this is something
that's been happening all over the world for a very, very long time.
A normal language is the product of eons of step-wise developments, of transformation
of material, of reinterpretation of material, and renewal of material.
It's an endless change.
The word I like to use is morphing.
And so for example, in Old English, which isn't that far back from Modern English, no words
began with V. You could not say, I'm going to cry.
That going to expression didn't exist yet.
And there were almost as many case markings on nouns as there were in Latin.
Modern English emerged from that language step by step.
And of course, there were no sharp dividing lines.
No one woke up one morning and said, Prithee, we are now speaking Middle English.
This is something that happened imperceptibly to any human being.
But after a while, the language had become a different one completely.
Now the point is that when that kind of process goes on over endless stretches of time, the
result is an amazing amount of complexity.
Things keep building.
The development of the expression, I'm going to, for example, would be one of them, which
took its place alongside the I will future, and the way of expressing the future where
you don't mark a doll, such as saying, I turn 31 tomorrow.
And it made the array of future tense constructions in English actually quite complex, as far
as I have a hard time getting it.
One thing adds to another, multiply that by a thousand different things going on all
the time.
And what you get is how language works.
And when it works normally, it's actually quite amazing.
As a matter of fact, typically, if you look at one of the 6,000 languages of the world,
it's almost oddly difficult to our eyes.
If you think about what we think of a language being in terms of English and the French or
Spanish or German that we probably took in school.
An example of this is Navajo.
And generally, when we think of Navajo, we think of the people and the participation
of Navajo speakers in World War II.
However, Navajo, of course, is a language and not just a code, as those code talkers
used.
It's substituting some Navajo words for English concepts, but it is a language.
It's spoken in a small region in the American Southwest, mostly Arizona and New Mexico.
And what's interesting about Navajo is, and Navajo isn't unique in this, but I'm using
it as an example, is that there's no such thing as a regular verb.
So we assume that in a language, you have your regular verbs that are based on patterns
that you get tested on.
And then there's a small, annoying collection of irregular verbs.
In Navajo, all of them are irregular, and yet people speak this language every day and
it's passed on to children.
At last count, there were about 150,000 people who spoke it.
So for example, just, and this is oversimplifying it, but take the five basic kinds of verbs
in Navajo.
There's a present, there's a past, there's a future.
And then for our purposes, we can say that there is also a subjunctive in Navajo.
And then there is also a repetitive.
So we're going to take those five, present, past, future, repetitive, subjunctive.
Now suppose we had a verb play.
So how would you conjugate play?
Well, in the present, the verb for play is ni.
Now in the past, it's ni with a catch in the throat.
That's odd to us, different, not complicated really, just different.
So present, ni, past, ni, future, ni, and there's a kind of a hissy sort of L.
And so ni, ni, ni, and then the subjunctive, ni, and then the repetitive is ni.
Now the sounds are different, but that in itself is just the way it is.
You might think that you could memorize those patterns, and so ni, ni, ni, ni, ni, okay.
But then the problem is that if you're trying to find the pattern,
gradually you find that there just isn't one.
And so for example, you can look at another verb, another innocent, ordinary verb, cut.
So we have the one for play.
Then you look at cut, and you figure that it's going to be the same business of putting
a catch in the throat, and then a his sound, or something like that.
But it isn't.
And so present, past, future, subjunctive, repetitive for play, ni, ni, ni, ni, ni, okay.
Then for this cut verb, it's gish, gish, gish, gish, gish.
Now you don't have to memorize any of that, or even process it as it's going by, to see
that it's completely different from what was going on with the play verb.
And so that's the way it works.
And it's not just that, for example, the cut verb is regular, and the play one is irregular,
and that if you look at other verbs, you start settling, and you feel like you're in Kansas
again.
It's just one pattern like that after another.
Each verb has to be memorized separately, and it just gets worse and worse and worse.
And so for example, if you're trying to work out what the word for I is in Navajo, you
find out that it's different in the present, past, and the future.
And so in the present, if you want to say I'm playing, then you say shne, and so that
the sh is I.
And if you were learning Navajo, you think, okay, they've got a word sh for I.
But then in the past, if you want to say I played, it's se ne, not sh.
So that just goes out the window.
Then in the future, if you're talking about yourself as time goes by, then it's not sh,
and it's not se, it's desh.
And so I will play as desh ne, and Navajo just keeps going on and on like that.
There's one more little bit, and I'm just going to fly by this, because I don't want
to overburden you because I suspect that Navajo speakers have small strokes every day, just
expressing ordinary sentences.
But there's this prefix that you add to your verb forms that has no actual meaning.
If you asked the Navajo what this prefix meant, they'd say, well, I don't know, pass
the sol.
But you have to have it, and that meaningless prefix is different in the present and past
and in the future.
And so really, to say I'm playing, shne is incomplete.
You have to say na shne.
Nobody knows what na means, it's just there.
Then if you say I played, it's not se ne, it's ni se ne.
If you say I will play, well, that prefix happens to be the same in the future, ni desh
ne.
No one can explain any of this who speaks the language, just like we can't explain English
grammar on the fly while we're driving to work.
But this is the way things are.
So that's Navajo, and the amazing thing is that that's normal.
If you're a linguist and you're analyzing a language that is spoken, God knows where,
that almost no one's heard of outside of where the language is spoken.
That sort of thing is typical, not the kind of tidy English-y, French-y, German-y sort
of thing that we're used to.
Now, to understand how this sort of thing works and why, we can contrast a Navajo with,
say, an Indonesian.
In Indonesian, things are very different.
For example, if you wanted to learn how to conjugate the verb for to play, then you would
find that, really, there isn't much that you have to learn at all.
So play is main.
And in I, you, he, she, we, you all, and they, it's just main, main, main, main, main, main,
main.
There are no endings that you have to memorize, no prefixes, it's just like that.
If you're talking about cutting something, then the verb is memotong, memotong, memotong,
memotong, memotong.
And so all of that is quite simple.
And with Indonesian, you find that with just about anything that you're trying to pick
up, it's always that user-friendly.
It's very interesting.
I had occasion to go to Indonesia about two years ago, and I knew not a word of it, despite
the appearance that I put on in these lectures.
I do not speak every language in the world.
And got off the plane, didn't know a thing.
And when I was there, I quickly realized that this was not a place where you could get by
with silly French or Spanish.
And really, most of the people outside of very official settings did not speak English.
And so I realized, wow, if I'm not going to be squinting moron for this week, I have to
actually learn some of this language.
And the funny thing is that because the language is so user-friendly, none of this business
of no such thing as a regular verb, rather things seem to be almost too regular, I was
actually having conversations within days.
Now, I don't mean that we were talking about Nietzsche.
These were very low-level conversations in which I was often clearly being laughed at,
but I was actually getting things done with people who didn't speak my language.
I managed to get a window seat instead of an aisle seat in the airplane.
Everybody laughed, but I got it across.
I managed to sneak my water bottle through the metal detector because I wanted to keep
drinking my water, and I learned the words for saying it.
I was laughing, but my thirst was slaked.
And so this was because Indonesian is oddly easy.
Now why is that?
Of course, sometimes one thing is just different from another.
Skunks are black and white, and salamanders are some other color, and well, that just
is.
But actually, there is a difference between, a reason for the difference between a Navajo
and an Indonesian, and it gets into often a matter of just numbers.
Navajo is spoken by fewer than 200,000 people.
Indonesian is spoken by 200 million people, and it has been for a very long time.
To get more specific, Navajo is a language that has rarely been learned by adults.
You're grown up, you're not going to learn that.
You might learn some broken-down version of it.
But as you can see, Navajo is so difficult, and I've given you just a fragment, that
unless you are an innocent baby with nothing in your head and the amazingly plastic skills
of infants for learning language, then Navajo is probably going to be beyond you.
Navajo speakers even know that.
They are used to there being no such thing as anybody who really learns the language.
Indonesian is something that is quite different.
It's very much a public language.
It's spoken in a region where there are several hundred different languages spoken.
It is the lingua franca of what is now known as Indonesia.
And so most people who speak Indonesian are using it as a second language.
A great many people, and maybe most of the people who use Indonesian, learn it or learn
it in a real way as adults.
So there's a little innocent bit of terminology that we use to distinguish those two cases.
We say that a language like Navajo is esoteric.
This is what linguists call it.
And a language like Indonesian is exoteric, and with the exo, think of the outside connotation
of that.
An esoteric language is one of these in-group languages, and exoteric language is one of
these lingua francas.
So there is a very innocent misconception that we might have, that we have to get over
if we're going to fully understand, and what all of this is for, is fully understanding
how English came to be the way it is and why.
And that is that we might think that a language spoken by a small isolated group that we might
call less culturally developed in some ways.
Those languages would be the easier languages, while the Englishes and the Frenches and the
Japanesees would be more difficult because they are the vehicles of what we might call
civilization with tall buildings and psychoanalysis and depression and the sorts of things that
we associate with being an advanced human being.
That actually is not the case.
Really, the smaller the language, the more national geographic the language is, the harder
it tends to be, while the languages that are associated with airplanes and pollution tend
to be the easier ones.
And notice then, in terms of this course, that English is a lot more like Indonesian
than it is like Navajo.
Now the reason for this is that adults are bad for languages in a way.
Basically human beings are capable of learning a language with perfect command, including
no accent, until they are about in their mid-teens, and there's no set time exactly.
But after a certain point, call it 15, 16, we've passed what psycho linguists call the
critical language phase.
And learning languages gets harder after that, and almost impossible to manage in any perfect
way.
And so, for example, in America, even children of immigrants, one often finds, will speak
their parents' language quite fluently, and so they live in this language partly.
But when you examine their command of the language, you find that they even don't speak
a language perfectly, even in terms of grammar.
They have English as their dominant language, and even though they've been exposed to the
other language as children, they haven't been completely surrounded by that language.
And it tells in the way that they speak this language, too.
They've never had the opportunity to master the subtler aspects of their parents' languages.
And this is something that's quite common.
Some people are more aware of it than others.
I remember, I had a, I think I can admit that I had some relationships before I was married,
and with one of them, it was a woman who had lived in Germany until she was six, and spent
every summer in Germany, and she had grandparents who she only spoke German with.
And I was already clinically insane at this point, and so I decided that if she and I
were going to be together, then I needed to learn German.
That's when I started learning German.
And I worked, you know, much too hard at it, and got to the point that I could speak the
language with a kind of fluent hideousness.
And I found that when she and I went to Germany, I had the experience that everybody always
has, got off the plane, couldn't understand anything anybody said, couldn't think of how
to say simple things like, how do I get to the bathroom or something like that.
But for some reason, I noticed, I actually could understand everything that the girlfriend
said.
And she spoke fluent German.
She had no trouble understanding anybody else, completely comfortable in the language.
But I could always understand her.
And when I did my German compositions for one of my classes, where I had to write in
a formal way, I gave her some of it to check, and she had trouble with it.
What all of that was was something very ordinary.
This person spoke fluent German.
Her German was far beyond what mine could ever have become.
But I could understand her because her phenology, her accent, was rather American because she
had grown up in America.
So I as an American English speaker found her easier to understand.
And the reason that she had a little trouble with my formal compositions is because she
spoke the German of a child.
And if you think about it, children are brilliant little linguists, but she had never had any
reason to learn German on the level that it's used by Goethe, et cetera, not that I ever
commanded it in that way myself.
Nowadays, linguists have a name for that phenomenon.
It's called heritage language.
And so for example, heritage Russian is something that's been pretty well studied.
So for example, someone might say, a person who grew up with Russian speaking parents,
they speak Russian, you could listen to them, wouldn't have any idea what they were saying
unless you were Russian.
But if that person says something like, when I'm around Americans, dot, dot, dot, then
they might say, So that's the sense.
So when I, and then around Americans.
Now to a native Russian, that is a comprehensive sentence, but it's faulty.
And so for a meta-conflict, the case marking is wrong.
And Vagrug around, when you're talking about, I'm around Americans, that if you think about
it is rather idiomatic and in actual Russian, you wouldn't use around in that way.
It sounds kind of like, I'm that silly old joke about, it's about somebody who's not
thin.
And I imagine somebody in suspenders drinking a martini and saying, well, she was so big
that when she sits around the house, she sits around the house.
That kind of around.
That Vagrug Americansi is that kind of around.
The way you would put it in Russian is you would say, in the presence of Americans.
Now, that heritage speaker probably could put it that way if you put the thumb screws
on them, but that's something that they would have to work at and they still might get
it wrong.
So you don't put it in the proper way because it will require mastering two case markers
properly and mastering a kind of idiomaticity specific to Russian.
That is heritage Russian.
Heritage speakers, and this has bearing on what we're going to learn about English, also
tend to screw up gender.
And this is something that you can see even when you don't know the language.
And so, for example, you can do quick detective work.
A Russian part of the sentence, spoken in Minnesota by a child of Russian immigrants,
was one where you could listen to it and if you have any sense of the basic traffic rules
of a good card carrying Indo-European language, you know that it's wrong.
There was a person who was recorded as saying for my brother and my sister, my brother and
my sister.
Now, how do you know that's wrong?
Because if it's an Indo-European language, brother and sister are going to be different
genders.
And that means that the my is not going to be the same for both.
What Indo-European language, except English, we'll get to that, would have moibrat, my
brother, moisistrat.
There has to be a difference between the mois.
And it is wrong.
It should be moibrat and mayasistrat, because this is an Indo-European language, masculine,
feminine, and maybe a neuter, not just moi and moi.
If any Indo-European language is like that, something happened to it.
And so, you know, follow me and we'll get to English and what happened to it.
So this heritage effect is something that makes the difference over time between a Navajo
and an Indonesian.
There are languages which are regularly learned incompletely because of various socio-historical
processes.
And so what this means is that most of the languages of the world are more like Navajo
than like Indonesian.
So for example, Navajo is not unique.
There were hundreds of Native American languages spoken in the United States alone before whites
arrived.
And all of them were marvelously complicated.
Navajo is an extreme, but if you look at the whole map, speckled with all of the different
Native American groups, zero in on any one of those languages and you find yourself getting
a happy kind of headache and thinking how in the world did they keep all of that straight.
So the Navajo is the regular kind of situation.
Then there are situations like Indonesian which are something different.
They are lingua francas.
And our definition of lingua franca here is a streamlined, user-friendly kind of language.
That term traces back to an actual speech variety that was called lingua franca with
franca meaning French.
And what lingua franca was was a boiled down romance language variety that was spoken especially
by sailors and traders around the Mediterranean.
It was a bit of Spanish, a bit of French, a bit of Portuguese, a bit of Provençal, more
than a bit of Italian with shards of other things in it.
Very little grammar and that was called lingua franca because it could be used around the
Mediterranean to trade.
Nobody pretended that it was an actual language.
Now by extension we refer to a lingua franca in a general sense as a kind of lingo, a variety.
Notice I'm not saying language because they're not in all cases that people can use to communicate.
There are many, very much languages in the world that have that lingua franca function.
And so these things are very predictable.
You can even look at the way a language's grammar works and tell whether it is one of
these exoteric lingua francas or one of these esoteric insider languages.
So for example there's one language where if you're analyzing it you find that they're
extremely particular about locating things.
And so there's a word ini and that means this here.
Itu means that there.
Maitu means that near him.
Watu means that over there by him.
Hattu means that up there.
Naha means that that we can hear but not see.
So you have all of those demonstratives and that's just quite ordinary.
That's one language.
Then there's another language related to this one where you just have two things.
Ini, that's this, and itu, that's that.
Now you can take those two and let's say that they don't have a label on them.
And if someone asked you which one of those languages is spoken by 200,000 people somewhere
you'll never go.
And which one of those languages is spoken by 400,000 billion people somewhere that you
probably can't help going at some point in your life.
And you can know that the answer is that the one where you have this six-way distinction
which would be difficult to get a handle on unless you were an infant and had nothing
else to do, that's the one that is a tiny little language.
Specifically I have given you once again the muna language of Sulawesi.
People who speak that language would be very surprised that it's being discussed more than
once or at all over here on this side of the world.
Whereas the other language is Indonesian.
Muna is an Indonesian relative.
And Indonesian just has the this and the that.
That's why someone like me could get off the plane and speak it in a way that I could get
very basic things done.
I didn't have to learn how to say that water bottle over there by the fountain.
It was just a matter of this and that.
And so what all of this means is that we have to have a particular sense of what language
is usually like to fully understand what happened in the English language.
And so, for example, just one more time, the Caucasus, Caucasus Mountains.
There are various languages spoken.
For those of you who have had the advantage of lengthy lives, you might remember that
TV commercial, that's probably a series of commercials, for Dan and Yogurt back in the
70s.
And they went into the Caucasus Mountains and they were showing that somebody who had
probably never eaten Dan and Yogurt in their lives was about 90 years old and he was depicted
as eating this yogurt.
And the joke was, and his mother is very proud of him, and his mother was 110 and patting
him on the back.
The idea being that these Caucasus Mountain people are long lives because they eat Dan
and Yogurt in various flavors.
So that's the Caucasus Mountains.
Nowadays, I guess more vivid would be anything that happens in Georgia.
Not Georgia with the peaches, but Georgia with the vodka.
That's the Caucasus Mountains.
And so, one of the languages spoken there is called Cez.
And if you just want to say, the shepherd found the calf in Cez, which is a small language,
and so you expect that there's going to be a kind of nightmarish complexity, then you'll
find that the sentence is, and I'm just going to enunciate the sentence, the shepherd found
the calf.
It goes, ahor meshi besus, now you don't have to memorize the sentence, but just ahor
meshi besus.
Now the R is very interesting because the R just indicates that this is something that
happened to you by chance.
And so ahor meshi besus, so it happened to you, that's something that you have to have
indicated.
Ahor meshi besus, the B is a gender marker, so B, that's all it is, it indicates which
one of four noun classes things happen to fit into, and you have to use it.
And then besus, the essu, is the verb, the se, just that se, is something that has a
whole meaning.
That se means that this is something that you heard, not that you saw, and that it was
in the past, be a different marker if it's something that you're hearing right now.
And what's important is that that Cez, and the fact that it's that complex, this is
another language where they're not used to people from the outside ever learning to
speak it unless you're talking about a child who by definition would probably not be from
the outside, that kind of complexity is not strange, that is normal, that's the way languages
always are.
So what that means is that there was a time in human history, and it was actually until
relatively recently, where all languages would presumably have been like that.
So if we go back 150,000 years, and if agriculture in a serious way only begins with the Neolithic
Revolution, and depending on how you count that, that's about 11,000 years ago, then
there was an awful long time, call it 130,000 years plus, where human beings were living
in small bands, and the small bands were separated, and the small bands therefore would have had
different languages, but the chances that large numbers of adult human beings would
come in and learn these languages were slight, people more or less kept to themselves.
And so you would have had a world coded eventually, especially by about 50,000 years ago, with
languages extremely complex, like Navajo, like it says, and that's just the way language
would be.
The idea of there being a certain parcel of languages that have been learned an awful
lot by adults is a very modern condition.
What that requires is that there be the kind of transportation technology that would bring
large numbers of adults to a place where they would have to learn a new language and then
for whatever reason, and often it's an unpleasant reason socially, stay there forever, and that
kind of technology is something that doesn't exist until relatively recently, or you need
agriculture because agriculture is what creates the kind of surplus that tends to make people
move on and seek new lands to colonize, new lands to occupy.
Agriculture, for example, would have had a lot to do with why the Yamnea people who spoke
Proto-Indo-European would have moved.
If you think about it, why move?
I don't like moving.
Every time I've moved, it's been basically one of the most disruptive and annoying experiences
of my life.
You like where you are.
Most groups have songs about where they are, la, la, la, the moose, la, la, la, these mushrooms,
oh, our sky.
Why do you want to go anywhere?
Most people really don't.
You go somewhere because of some sort of impulse.
A lot of that has to do with when there are just too many people and you need to move
on, that's something that happens especially with agriculture and what we call civilization.
All of that has a significant impact on the development of language.
Next thing you know, you have large populations encountering other ones and as adults having
to suddenly learn their languages.
Next thing you know, you've got people coming across the North Sea and imposing themselves
on people who are minding their business.
The linguistic effects can be seismic.
The question about a language is not, why is it so hard?
We think that from English.
We think, why is it like it says?
Why is Navajo like that?
Really, the question is, why is a language so easy?
Why would a language be like English where you do say my brother and my sister and you
can get away with the same my with things as different in terms of gender as a brother
and a sister?
Their answers to those questions and now that you know what language is usually like, you're
in a position to understand why English is very much unlike what language is usually like.
