It was cold.
I was in a small apartment.
I was drinking bitter red wine and I didn't want to go outside because if I stepped outside
everybody was speaking German because I was in Germany.
This was a long time ago and I was all alone and because I was in Germany I figured I would
try to improve my German by doing something that I recommend you all do which is that
you get a translation into the language of a novel and not too long a novel that you
really liked and have read several times in English.
Great way to do things.
German was changing places by David Lodge and I remember I was sitting there drinking
my acrid red wine and shivering under a blanket.
I'm making it sound a little bit worse than it was and I remember thinking that there
is something that all linguists are often told that most certainly is not true and
since then linguists are increasingly accepting that it isn't and that is that I thought wow
German is more complicated than English and then the corollary of that for me was what's
wrong with English and what I was thinking about was the fact that one of the tenants
one of the main tenants of both anthropology and by extension linguistics for a hundred
years plus now has been that there's no such thing as a simple language and that's definitely
true.
So for example the Columbia anthropologist Franz Boas explained to linguists and anthropologists
and the world that Native American languages are actually extremely complex and in fact
they are certainly as complex as European languages I would now say more as many people
would and so the basic lesson that came from that and a useful one was all languages are
equally complex and that was a very useful lesson for a society that really did suppose
that if people didn't have tall buildings then they must speak nonsense languages and
that a real language is say ancient Greek or say English.
As time has gone by we've learned to nuance that conception and more realistically linguists
are now agreeing that all languages are complex to a degree there's no language that you encounter
that is ding dong in its structure however all languages are not as complicated as one
another and in that vein English is oddly less complicated grammatically than the other
Germanic languages.
That's the subject of this lecture and we're prepared to understand that because we understand
that there are esoteric and exoteric languages.
When I was noticing that night in Germany sitting out on that sidewalk grate and chewing
on a piece of bread and wondering why I was alive that really is an exaggeration.
What I was encountering was a difference such as this one let's say that you're in Germany
and you are actually a German person and therefore you're speaking German and you want to say
something like my kitty come here are you feeling better you're talking to a little cat and
the way that comes out is my kitty come here come here are you feeling better are you feeling
better you're feeling better so my come here are you feeling better simple sentence like
that.
Now what's interesting is that even with a little belch of an utterance like that you
have a great deal more complexity in German than in the English version and it would be
pretty much like that with the other parcel of Germanic languages remember that's Swedish
and Norwegian and Danish and Dutch and Frisian and Afrikaans and these languages are close
relatives of English but different.
So for example the gender question very interesting question.
We look at other languages from English and it seems like just an accident that languages
like French and German assign inanimate things to different genders and so in German you've
got forks, knives and spoons.
Spoons are men, forks are girls, women, the gobble, knives are neuter, das messe, why?
Who knows that's just the way it is and you have to learn it.
And so we think okay gender some languages have gender some don't but in fact English
is very peculiar in that vein.
We talk about the Indo-European languages and how that's most of the languages of Europe
and we're talking about dozens of languages.
English is the only Indo-European language in Europe that doesn't have gender so it's
not just that some do and some don't.
English is the only one that doesn't.
If you're talking about Europe you're talking about a land of genders.
In Europe you've got men, you've got women and you've got these in-between things that
happens with the people and that's what happens with the languages.
And so the idea that a language wouldn't have gender is very peculiar.
The only languages of Europe that do not have gender are the few that belong to a whole
different family.
So the Uralic languages, Estonian, Finnish, Hungarian, Sami, or Lapish in older terminology.
Those languages are from a completely different world.
They don't have gender although it bears saying that Uralic languages have a whole lot of
a whole lot of other things and so they are massively complex languages.
What it means is that you have this one Indo-European language in Europe, it's this English one,
that for some reason doesn't have gender.
It's a very peculiar thing and we don't realize it's peculiar because we speak this language
that has gender.
But it very much is.
The question is, why has an Indo-European passed this gender down into English?
What was the blockage?
And so horses and feet and angles were masculine.
You know what's masculine about an angle?
Barrow and tongues and nuts were women and ships and eyes and grease were neuter.
So it was just as arbitrary as the spoons and the forks and the knives in German.
In other words, normal.
That's what English was like.
And then as time went by, English just started dropping all of this as if it had some sort
of skin disease.
As late as the 1800s, down in the southwest of England, this is the Dorset dialect, there
were still remnants of gender and it looks so odd to us now, but really this is normal
English.
This is the way English should be.
And so for example, you would talk about this water, but vase tree, different genders.
This water, it's a dried up vase tree, he's a cut down.
That's what people would say.
And it wasn't that fabulously people were thinking of the tree as having testicles or
something like that.
It's just that it had a gender.
So this water, it's a dried up vase tree.
He's a cut down.
Notice I can't, I don't know how people endorse it sound, so make up your own accent.
But that is now gone from English.
English is the only language which in no dialect has gender, which is what Indo-European languages
are supposed to have.
It's odd.
English is like a tree in autumn letting the leaves go.
And the question is why?
Or reflexives.
Reflexives are interesting.
So if you learn another European language, there's something else that you have to pick
up.
In French, you remember.
And so you're thinking, well, je souviens?
But no, no.
Je me souviens.
You have to remember yourself, because remembering is a process that happens within your own
head.
In a European language, you have to mark that.
In German, sitting out on a subway grate, trying to remember when you actually had food,
then ich erinnere mich.
And so you're inside.
You remember yourself.
That's just normal in European languages.
You can jump across the continent, and as you're picking up new languages, you can pretty
much assume that you're going to have these sorts of reflexives that are a bit much, really.
You think to yourself, why do you have to say that you anger yourself?
Of course, anger is something that happens inside of you and not over under that rock
somewhere.
But you have to mark it.
It's excessive.
Languages have a way of crawling into little corners that they don't need to.
It's like a cat.
You know that if there's a corner that a cat's going to go crawl into it and find it fascinating.
If you have a box spring and there's a hole in the box spring, the cat, yeah, I'm thinking
about one of my current cats, is going to crawl up into the box spring and rest there
just to annoy you.
Languages are that same sort of thing.
Now, once again, in English, we have the same sorts of overdone reflexes, but just a little
bit.
It's kind of like this and this down in Dorset.
You can say behave yourself and you can also say behave.
You can say behave yourself.
A little odd, you know, what else are you going to behave?
You can't behave the parrot, but we say behave yourself.
We say purger yourself if we're speaking on a high level.
You can pride yourself on something.
I remember one of the most obnoxious ones of these.
There was this kid I went to school with in elementary school and he just openly thought
he was better than everybody and he would tell you, I would love to know what became
of that kid.
I'm not going to name him because he might be listening to this course, but he would
actually, he was about six or seven and he just say, I'm better than you and not me alone,
whole class.
I'm better than you.
And I remember one day being at the water fountain with this little person and he actually
pushed in front of me and he's not a bully.
He's small.
He's bespectacled.
He's Linus and peanuts and he pushed ahead of me and I said, what allows you to be ahead
of me?
You laggard and he actually said, I'm better than you.
And I said, what did you say?
And he said, I don't want to repeat myself.
That's the first time I've ever heard that expression repeat yourself.
I want to smack him.
Now I'm not a violent person, but I did actually wish to smack him.
I did not.
But he said, repeat myself.
He was using one of those overdone reflexes, you know, repeat yourself.
What else are you going to repeat?
You know, a computer monitor if they existed at the time.
But the fact is, in old English, that sort of thing was as common as it should be.
And so if you were afraid, you kind of dreaded yourself.
So I was afraid as Icandredme, kind of like I and dreaded myself.
If you looked at somebody, you besaw yourself to someone.
It was really, it was kind of too much.
It's kind of like it's too much to say I remember myself, but you just do.
All languages have things that are excessive, and English is not an exception.
So for example, he and she.
We think that's the most natural thing in the world, but there are great many languages
where there's a pronoun that's gender-neutral, as we call it, and it can mean he, she, or
it.
Off the top of my head, that's Finnish, that's Vietnamese.
If you take people who are Finnish, Vietnamese, or both, and talk to them when they're really
sleepy, even when their English is really good, they might call somebody with a mustache
a she by accident, because in their language, you have one pronoun that means things of
all genders.
In English, to say he and she and it and distinguish, really, it's a bit much.
If a Finn decided to say that, they would be quite right, because context, 99% of the
time, takes care of whether you mean a he or a she.
And so in that way, English is the cat that has crawled in, but the fact is that English
is not excessive in ways that its close kin are.
It's that Bob Newhart phenomenon, and we're just kind of stuck with it.
Another example, again, we don't think of it, but it really does mean that English is
such a peculiar tongue in that it's a peculiar outcome from what it came from.
There's a great deal which in the strict sense doesn't make sense unless you look at the
larger history of the language.
Think of hither, thither, wither, and some of you are maybe giggling already.
They're antique words, come hither.
Nobody would say that, or they shouldn't.
If you say that, you'll die alone.
And the fact is that was not always true.
They used to be very ordinary words, and there were more of them.
You have here, hither, there, thither, where, wither, and then there were words that meant
from here, from there, and from where.
So there's two here, and then there was from here.
That's what hence is.
And we use hence in a different sense now, but there's no such thing as talking about
a cat being hence.
And then there was vents, and then there was wence from where.
And nowadays, often, people will use from with wence because we don't have a sense of what
the word originally meant.
An example of that is the take back your mink song from guys and dolls, and the person singing
it is supposed to be a woman of modest education who's trying to strike in an arch sense a formal
tone in suggesting that her, shall we say, sugar daddy, to use the technical term, should
quit the premises and not give her a mink coat.
And so she says, take back the mink from whence it came, because she doesn't know that really
properly it should just be wence it came.
So that is the way it is in English.
And we just think, well, some words become obsolete.
There was a musical instrument called a shawm.
Well, nobody plays it anymore.
We don't use the word.
But in comparison, it's a little odd.
In other Germanic languages, there still are these words.
And so we talk about the little cat, my demitsu, my kitty, come here, come here, no.
That doesn't work.
Hair is the two here in German.
And that's true of every single other Germanic language.
Some of them are more anal about it than others.
But there is a two here, and then there is often a hence, thence, wence.
This is normal in Germanic.
It's an Indo-European thing in many of the groups.
And for some reason in English, we're just content with this sort of dishwater here,
there, and where.
And then we say two here, from here.
We don't have actual set words for it.
It's another one of those question marks.
English is a very peculiar language.
Something else that's peculiar about English is the way our verbs work or the way they
don't.
Think about what it's like for we Americans when we step into any European language.
You've got the conjugational tables.
If you're a certain kind of person, then you find it a kind of a fun Mount Everest.
I assume that was probably true of the water fountain, just as true of me.
If you're a different kind of a person, you find that annoying, and you would rather do
something else.
But if you're talking about Spanish, and you're talking about speaking, and the verb is Abla,
and you have to go through the I, you, he, she, we, you, all, they, then it's Abla, Abla,
Abla, Abla, Abla, Abla, Abla, Abla, Abla.
You'd have to know that.
And you're not going to get away with it by going over into German, where it's going
to be Spreke, Spreke, Spreke, Spreke, Spreke, Spreke, Spreke in Russian.
You have the same thing, Gavaryu, Gavaryu, Gavaryu, Gavaryu, Gavaryu, Gavaryu, Gavaryu.
It's just there.
And of course, all three of those were just one flavor among many within the language.
In English, no.
Think about how English works.
And so if you're talking about speaking, I speak, well, okay.
You speak, boy, sure it was hard.
And then he, she, it speaks, okay, there's a little something.
Then we speak, y'all speak, they speak.
What in the world is that?
There isn't really much there.
And we think of that as normal in the same way as I think of lemonade as normal.
And then once I had to spend five weeks in Helsinki, that's another whole story I won't
get into here.
And I got a yen for lemonade.
They don't have lemonade.
They have orangeade, they have limeade, they have mangoade, who knows how long it could
go with this, but they really do have all those things.
But then on the shelf, there's no lemonade.
And I asked, where's the lemonade?
And they said, well, we don't drink that here.
I thought lemonade was normal.
In the same way, we think that walk, walk, walk, walk, walk, walk is normal.
No, it's actually quite freakish.
Old English was normal.
Old English had Indo-European verbs, just like any European language.
And so if you love somebody, then I, Luffy, you, Lufast, he or she, Lufav, and then we,
you all and they were all Luffy of.
And so it wasn't a complete nightmare, but you had changes.
You had stuff to memorize, and the conjugations came in a variety of brands.
You had stuff to learn.
Now, endings wear away over time.
They're fragile, just like the cuffs of our pants wear away.
But in English, something happened to an unusual degree.
In fact, it's interesting.
6,000 languages in the world, there is one language in the world where when it calls
itself having conjugation, what it actually has is just one little marker in the third
person singular, and that's it.
There's only one language in the world known like that.
And that is English.
It's very odd.
You know, either you've got none, you're like an Indonesian, or you're like a Russian
giving people headaches.
But this idea that it would be walk, walk, walk, walk, walk, is odd.
Something happened to this language, there's something peculiar about English in that way.
So we go back to this German sentence.
And so you've got a little German cat, and you're calling it with your German self.
Meine Mieze, my little cat, come here, come here.
Fus du Dichbasse, are you feeling better because the kitten was sick?
Well, it has gender, so meine Mieze.
If it was mein, mein Jürgen, then it would be mein Jürgen.
You have meine, meine Mieze, and so little kitten.
And then you've got come her, not come here.
I imagine you could say that, and they'd probably kind of laugh at you as an American
trying to speak German.
Komm her, you have to have a hither word.
Come hither kitty.
Whereas if we say come hither kitty, it's hard to fit that into any plausible situation.
If you were calling somebody kitty, you'd be too familiar with it to say come hither.
It'd be kind of odd.
And then, are you feeling better kitty?
Fus du Dichbasse, feel you yourself better?
So the cat is not only feeling something, but you have to mention that it's feeling within itself.
That's too much.
That's the way languages are too much.
And that's what you do in German, where we just say feeling better.
And then fust.
And so, are you feeling du fust, not du fuul?
Du fust, it has an ending.
In other words, it's a normal Indo-European language.
It's like an earlobe on Lyndon Johnson.
English just has this pfft, and that's all you have.
What is that?
It's a typological oddity.
Typology refers to languages in comparison.
We will see the term again.
In any case, it's an odd, odd thing.
And what's even weirder is that, of course, English does have its complications,
but when it comes to the sorts that we're talking about here,
such as, what would happen in a sentence like, come here, little kitty, are you feeling better?
Where English does have a complication, where somebody would look at it and say,
that's really too much.
For example, meaningless du.
So, little kitty, do you feel better?
If we translated it that way, what's the du?
You know, there's no du, there's no reason for that to be there.
But notice that that's not actually even English.
That is something that was borrowed from Celtic.
If the whole Celtic encounter hadn't happened,
then English would just have this sort of naked feel you yourself better,
except it would just be feel you better.
Very odd thing about this little language.
And it's one thing to just know it and to notice it.
And it has been noticed.
And so, if Franz Boas was one of the rock stars of early linguistics,
one of his colleagues was linguist Edward Sapir.
And in his magnificent and highly readable and still in print in paperback book called
Language, he writes about hither, thither, and wither, and their eclipse.
And he says, quote, they could not persist in live usage
because they impinged too solidly upon the circles of meaning
represented by the words where, here, and there.
That we add to where an important nuance of direction
irritates rather than satisfies, unquote.
Now, that's well put.
But the question is, why?
Why does it irritate?
Because after all, in a real, and you know I'm going to use this expression again,
card carrying, Germanic language, there's nothing irritating
about hither, thither, and wither at all.
I rather think that people who use those words like them, just like we like our words.
So it's a very odd thing.
Now, what we're talking about in terms of the way English has been discussed by some
is the flinty directness of the language.
And so, for example, the book Globish by Robert McCrum was quite successful last year.
And Globish made a big deal of English being a very direct language that doesn't have
all of the bells and whistles, many of them quite unnecessary,
that normal languages have, such as Navajos, such as, in our case, German.
And so the idea would be that English gets down to it.
English is very meat and potatoes.
And so we don't have all of these hithers and feeling yourself and all these other things.
We just say what we mean.
And there is a short step from there to, for example,
what you might be familiar with in Strunk and White,
where a lot of the advice centers on leaving the language shorn as possible of the unnecessary.
And so we could think of this as following a kind of inner spirit of English's modern construction.
And that would mean that to use English well and to follow its spirit would be to be terse,
would be to not be flowery, and to be direct.
Now, that's an interesting idea, although it also means, presumably,
that there would be a different standard in a language like German,
because German has so many bells and whistles.
Presumably, maybe a German version of Strunk and White, we might call it
Weiss, and I imagine they have something of the sort,
would be not that you keep it as simple and direct as possible,
but maybe if you follow the inner spirit, I guess they would call it the geist of the language,
then you would be flowery and you would be almost needlessly precise,
the idea being to let it all hang out and delight in the brokeness of that language.
And so maybe they will enjoy their hithers and the remembering themselves,
and the fact that silverware differ in terms of something as deep-seated and spiritual as gender.
All that is very interesting to think about in the descriptive sense,
but in that English is a language that seems to have almost sought a certain kind of terse-ness.
But the sought is an important question here, because, of course, a language is not a thing.
Why would it be looking for something?
What we see rather in terms of how we've been looking at things in this course so far
is that English is looking kind of exoteric, exo, outside.
It's not that there's a spirit of English that has some sort of odor and texture.
I imagine if there were that spirit, for me, it would be eucalyptus.
That's something that it's called synesthesia that people have.
I'm a little synesthetic.
If there is this terse spirit, it would smell like eucalyptus.
But the fact of the matter is that spirit is not there.
It's that something happened to English.
You can tell.
You can tell just like if you look at, as we saw in the previous lecture,
a language like Indonesian with just ini and itu for this and that,
and then there's this other language where it's this, that, and then that over there by him,
and then this thing that's underneath the plant.
You know that that language is something nothing happened to.
Whereas this language was only the this and the that, something happened to that one.
English is exoteric looking in that same way.
To put it in another way, modern English, compared to old English, is kind of like
heritage Russian compared to actual, fully natively spoken Russian.
Or you could think of it as the language that I'm speaking right now is kind of like a heritage
version of Beowulf in which nouns come in nominative, genitive, dative, accusative,
and are jangling with case endings.
And you've got conjugations such as the Luffy, Lufas, etc. that we saw.
I'm speaking in a way a strangely beat up.
I'm speaking in a way a strangely beaten up version of what old English was.
Now, of course, it's been a while and we have codified this beaten up old English,
but really in comparison, it's very similar to what a heritage language is,
except that it's become regularized.
Basically, what we do know is that unlike what say an Edward Sapir assumed,
not having occasion to really think about it a whole lot, but what it looked like quite reasonably
to him, what we can know is that English is not the way it is just by accident.
These things don't just happen.
Most languages are not even like this.
So the idea of walk, walk, walk, walk, walk, that is evidence in a way of there having
been some kind of fire.
So for example, if you are walking down a street and then you see six houses and then
there's this empty lot where there's just a chimney and a bicycle wheel and a salt shaker
and some debris, and then you keep walking and house number seven is intact and house
number eight, house number nine, then something happened.
You don't walk down that block and think, well, for some reason, house number seven just kind
of wore out.
It's obvious that there was a fire there that left behind nothing but the chimney and the salt shaker
and the bicycle wheel.
In the same way, walk, walk, walk, walk, walk, walk, something burned English down.
And we're going to find out who did it.
It was people and they were given to burning things down in the next lecture.
