The story is well known. Old English was seasoned with waves of new words from Scandinavian,
from French, and from Latin in succession. And if you've studied the history of English
at all, then you've probably come away thinking of this, rightly, as having enriched the English
vocabulary, and also as thinking of it as probably the most interesting aspect of English's
development over time. In this lecture, I'd like to show that as interesting as these
vocabulary developments are, in fact, looking at these various waves of vocabulary influence,
we can see not only just a matter of amassing and accreting, i.e., building a cabinet of
curiosities, but we can see object lessons in what it is to be a language, how a language
comes to be the way it is, how our language has come to be the way it is, and what it
is that makes a language impressive in addition to matters of sheer volume. The English vocabulary
is quite rich in ways even more revealing than the mere fact that there's a whole bunch
of it. Let's take some of these waves of vocabulary influence in succession at first. So, the Celtic
story. We've seen that there is Celtic impact on English's grammar and that it's profound.
However, in terms of vocabulary, it's traditionally been thought that Celtic languages left almost
no words in modern English except place names, and that, of course, isn't interesting. Obviously,
the people who were already on the island had names for their places, and if you came
and you weren't going to make up a new name, you were probably going to take their name
for it. But the idea was that there were not words from the Celtic languages for nouns,
verbs, etc. that were not just place names. And this, if you think about it, is highly
counterintuitive. As we've seen, the Celtic speakers were there, and they were there in
numbers enough, and with influence enough, that they profoundly influenced the grammar
of the English language. And so, why would it be that these people who turned the grammar
of the language upside down left no words? Whereas, for example, in this country, there
are various Yiddishisms that have been placed into the language by the influence of Jewish
immigrants in their descendants, and so we have Shlameel, and we have Nebish, etc. Why
is it that no words of that sort would be left in English by the Celts? And often, when
there's a hair out of place of that kind, it's really a matter of no one having had
occasion to look at the question in any detail, rather than it being a matter of this truth
being an actual one. And it's being found by some people, in particular the Celticist
Andrew Brees, that there are most likely some Celtic-derived words in basic English vocabulary.
And where they are is in cases where the official etymologies of the words have always been a
little bit peculiar. Etymology is not a highly policed field, and a lot of etymological work
was done a long time ago now, under different standards than linguists and philologists
would always accept now. And sometimes, you have always been able to see that there was
something a little wrong. So, for example, the word bragg, it pops up only in the 1300s,
and the typical etymology has been origin obscure, perhaps related to the braille of
a trumpet. And so we have the word bragg, because it's an imitation of, and that's a nice idea.
But you can tell that somebody came up with that, you know, sipping their tea, and then
there's an old Norse word bragg. And what it means is either best, and so maybe there's
a relationship to that, or bragg also means poetry. And so a lot of poetry has praise
in it. And so is it, is it that you turn the word for best into a verb? Maybe that's
what bragg is. But as it turns out, there is a plausible source for bragg in Welsh. Or
for example, another odd one, brat. Where do you get the word brat? It only pops up
in 1500. And the closest anybody has come is that in old English there was a word brat
that meant cloak. And so somebody decided, well, maybe brat was the word for a child's
apron. So then you start referring to children who misbehave as brats. And so what that means
is that you're saying, well, you little apron, you know, stop spilling your, obviously this
is not science. And so you look for other sorts of things. So another example of this
would be baby, 1300s when it first pops up. And the standard at homology has been, well,
maybe it's imitating babbling. And so baby is because they go, ba, ba, ba, ba. So that's
where baby comes from. Any one of us could come up with that. That's not the way the
words for baby seem to have developed in other languages. In Russian, the word for baby is
mud units. Is it that babies go mea, mea, mea in Russia? No. Well, as it happens, Welsh
has a word baban. Now, isn't that a more plausible source for the word baby than this business
of the babbling? There are various cases like this which suggests that actually there is
a Celtic layer in a vocabulary that simply hasn't been discovered yet or addressed systematically.
Then there's Viking vocabulary. And these are an interest, this is an interest in collection
of words, but it also gives us a little bit of a lesson in how we feel about what we feel
our logical inconsistencies in the language and what would happen to them in the past
versus what happens to them today. So for example, it's well known that the Vikings
marrying in and hanging around and speaking what was surely a Norse kind of English for
a long time left a great many words in our language. 1,400 is one count that one sees.
And so if I say that on a foggy Thursday, a slide dirty neck scowling outlaw sculpted
into the bank with a knife ransacked it and crawled out the window seeming happy, every
one of those words is a Scandinavian word, i.e. not in original old English, except for
a into the with and out, i.e. the little words. So this was a very profound impact, but probably
the most interesting three words that the Vikings left in our language are the words
they, there and them. You'd think that those were some of the most basic, you know, meat
and potatoes, dinty more kind of words in this language. Those are supposed to be original
old English words, but in fact, they're not. They're borrowings and it was for a reason.
Old English had something different. It had he for they. Yeah, he, it was awkward. And
so as a sentence, I've already given you, they didn't know the Lord God. It comes out
as not knew they, Lord God. They is he. Now that was a little awkward. He was they, he
was pronounced hey, but still he, hey, little odd. And also the feminine word for they,
there was a masculine and a feminine word for they, the feminine they and the singular
she were the same word hail. So she was hail and two women was hail. That was awkward.
These things sounded too alike. That had happened because sound change had happened to wear
these words down to the point that they were a little too similar. The Scandinavian borrowings
were helpful in having the they, them and the there. You got away from this train wreck
with the haze and the heyos. It was useful therefore in this case to have these Scandinavian
borrowings. Now what's interesting and this is just a think piece because I'm not sure
if there's a solution because we live in a social reality, but it gives you a sense
of what language is versus what manners are that here is a case where we needed a fix
and we got one. There were people who came upon Old English and really clearly weren't
interested in dealing with he and they being practically the same word. And so they just
shoved in their word and that seems so right that even native English speakers started taking
it on, especially the children. But then on the other hand here in our language we have
a lack of clarity that we don't think about singular you and plural you. I'm sure that
all of you can remember times in your lives when now and then you said, no, I just mean
just you, just you Paul, not you too. You Tara and Brian stay out of it because we only
have that one. Thou is gone and so you does this double duty. Now because of that there
is an impulse that many speakers of English have to create a plural you. So there's you
and then there's you all and that comes not from somebody having some sort of aching desire
to become Gomer pile, but because one senses that there needs to be a plural. Notice also
something that doesn't get as much attention, but that I'm starting to use because I find
it useful. Who all? Who all is going to be at the party instead of the singular you? Who's
going to be at the party? Brian, not much of a party. Who all is going to be at the party?
Brian, Caitlin, Jessica and Francine. And so who all plural who makes English more complicated?
I kind of like it. It's not real language. So y'all would be a very useful thing. But
instead when we hear somebody say y'all, then our tendency is think, well, that's just
dialect. Well, that's a little quaint. Well, that's kind of ignorant. And this certainly
I would never say such a thing. And the thing is, it's based on the same impulse as the
they then there, which I think we're all very thankful for. Just something to think about.
Something else to think about though is the next wave of invasion. And this was the French
Latin onslaught. And that is the that is something where the lesson is borrowing because of technology.
And so for example, if we look at what the French gave us, then it's innumerable words.
And so air, coast, debt, face, flower, joy, people river, sign, blue, clear, easy, large,
mean, nice, poor, carry, change, cry, move, push, save, trip, wait, chair, lamp, paint,
stomach, fool, music, park, beef, stew, toast, spy, faith, bar, jail, tax, fry, all of these
words. You feel like I'm about to name every word in the language French. The number 7500
is the one that is often given as how many of them survive. And then there are many of
them that have died. And after that, there were many Latin words that entered the language.
And this was largely through literature. It wasn't that people mysteriously speaking
Latin instead of modern romance languages, i.e. the descendants of Latin, suddenly overran
England. But that Latin that was on the page, because Latin was still a significant written
lingua franca. In terms of English being written and circulated around the continent, that's
something that only started happening in a really serious way in the 1600s and 1700s.
And if you were an English speaker of very high education, you wrote in Latin, like Isaac
Newton did even by the time he lived. And so Latin words were coming in from the page.
And what often happened was that English would borrow the French and Latin versions of the
same word. So for example, cadence is a word that comes from Latin. But then on the other
hand, Latin developed into French, in which the word cadence became chance. And so cadence
at one point, chance at a later point. So we borrowed cadence from Latin. But before that,
from Norman French, we had borrowed chance. So in a way, we borrowed the word two times.
And it's not an accident that both of those words, cadence and chance, have an element
of falling in them, because both of them are from Latin's verb to fall. And it's cadere.
And so cadere gave us these two words. Ransom and redemption are the same thing. Redemption
from Latin. Redemption becomes ransom in French. And then we'd already borrowed ransom from
French. Provide and purvey are the same thing. Provide from Latin. Purvey is what had happened
to it. And so what that meant was that English was borrowing in a really interesting, promiscuous
kind of way. It was borrowing words from alternate descendants of its own parent language, Proto-Indo-European.
And so it's borrowing words from Latin. It's borrowing words from French. And it's borrowing
words from Old Norse. And one of these languages isn't even spoken anymore. So it's borrowing
words from Latin, which nobody is speaking as their native language, except as its descendants,
French, Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese. And that's something that was only possible,
because this was a world where technology allowed printing. And so now we're dealing
with a world with written language. So all of this borrowing from Latin couldn't have
happened before. There was no such thing as English all of a sudden borrowing a whole
bunch of words from, say, Proto-Slavic, which is a language that was completely dead, and
where its written sources were not making their way into England. This is something where
you have written language. The written language is something that is offered to people, and
therefore you can borrow from it and then start speaking the words. And we speak them
now. We will talk about a cadence. That is us revivifying a word that had come to live
only on the pages of the writings of long dead Latin writing authors. This is a very
interesting thing. And so it creates a kind of mixture that is often featured. And so
for example, before Hillary Clinton lost the presidential primary of 2008, the New York
Times had a sentence. She proved she had a sense of humor at a time when the country
is still debating whether to take her seriously as a potential commander-in-chief. And that
was a very typical English sentence. And she proved French. She had a sense of humor
French at a time when the country, French, is still debating whether to take Scandinavian
her seriously, French as a potential Latin commander-in-chief. So that is the etymology
of all of those words. And that is just an ordinary sentence from the New York Times.
That is not something that someone, i.e. me, created in order to show how hybrid our language
is. And what that means is definitely in terms of the enrichment of the language that English
has synonym doublets. And so typically the Anglo-Saxon word is humbler in its meaning
than the French or the Latin one. And so the pig is this snorting animal. They're much
smarter than we're told, actually. They look you in the eye. You can tell they think about
calculus. But the pig is the snorting animal. And then pork is that creature made into slices
and that you eat with a fork. That is a French word. Hiding something is Anglo-Saxon. Concealing
it is Latinate. Forbidding something is Anglo-Saxon. I forbid you, child. Prohibiting is on a sign
and that's something that is Latinate. A stench is original Anglo-Saxon. And aroma that is Latinate.
Now, the fact is that, as wonderful as this is, we can exaggerate about how much it was
the case that in Anglo-Saxon before there were not lexical doublets. And so, for example,
it's Anglo-Saxon to be deep and then it's Latinate to be profound. But in Old English, you had
Déop, deep, and then Neowolok, profound. So often it was a matter of replacing the same
sorts of things as there were in Old English. Because if a language is a language, then
it has synonyms. And if a language is a language, then it rarely has synonyms that are absolute
synonyms. One of the words will be used more in one kind of language. And so, for example,
it will be used more in one context than another. That's what it is to be a real language as
opposed to something else. So, it's just something to think about. But we're often told, if we
think about writing tips and what these doublets mean to us, that it's a good idea to try to
use as many Anglo-Saxon roots as possible. And so, for example, in New York, a place
that you can often spend a lot of time parked in your car is the Belt Parkway, which is
supposed to get you quickly around Brooklyn and off to the airport. The Belt Parkway
was created by Robert Moses. Robert Moses had penetrating blue eyes and rather pinkish
skin and small ear lobes in contrast to some other public figures of his time. But his
idea was that to name a traffic artery, you didn't use words like artery. He called
it Belt Parkway because he valued the directness, the reality, what we would today call authenticity
of using Anglo-Saxon roots. But the fact of the matter is that often, when we're thinking
about clarity, the Latinate roots have nuances that the Anglo-Saxon ones don't. Or a better
way of putting it is that the meanings are actually somewhat different. And so, for
example, conceal versus hide. Conceal has a certain connotation of excuse or fear of censure
or even conceal has a certain intimation of precision and deliberation that hide doesn't.
And so there are times when conceal would actually be more useful. Similarly, with
forbid and prohibit. Prohibit implies, partly because it exists on what we might call a
higher level of vocabulary, that you have thought it out more carefully than you maybe
do when you forbid it. You forbid the cat to go into the corner. You prohibit somebody
from taking a quorum count on a measure before list number D has been carefully discussed
by the body present, etc. Just something to think about.
Now, we've talked about the waves of vocabulary that come into the language. But then also
within the vocabulary, even the Anglo-Saxon vocabulary, there are things we see that
indicate the kinds of grammatical changes that we've been looking at. And so our vocabulary
is not only a mass, but our vocabulary is also a lesson. It shows the sorts of things
that have made English what it is. So, for example, this umlaut, this business with the
E. You start with man. You have mani as a plural. Then that becomes many. Then the E
drops off and you have men. That's how you get man to men. Now, something that happens
with the umlaut is that it creates all sorts of versions of words. It can even actually
change the part of speech of a word. So, for example, something is full and that's because
something exerted the act upon it that we designate with the verb fill. Well, why? Is
that just because someone decided it? No. Is it that somehow it has a verbal meaning
that U in full doesn't? Clearly not. It just kind of is in the modern language. But what
that was was one more example of what tacking an E onto the end of something in English
can do. It used to be that both of them were a matter of full. So, something was full and
you fold it. Except when English was a normal language, there was a verbal suffix. It was
the Ian. So, full Ian meant that you fold it up. So, full Ian. Ian, among other things,
had E in it. So, there you go. That process is going to start again. So, U in the back
of the mouth got pulled forward. Take somebody saying U, yank their tongue and they're going
to go E. So, it became the Ian. Ian drops off. You've got fill. So, full fill. Alternations
like that are due to processes like those. And you see that within what is now just vocabulary,
it's the grammar of yesterday. That's something that people would be taught. Or you see within
our vocabulary the operations of something called analogy. Now, what I mean by analogy
is that something will become a virus in a language that began as just one way of doing
things. One of them that we've seen is the plural S. It used to be that using an S suffix
to make something plural was only one of a great many ways that Old English made words
into the plural. So, stone was stan stanas, but then there was this whole group of others,
including ones that are now marginally alive today, such as ox oxen, child children. Well,
that is what we linguists call analogy. By analogy, with using an S as a suffix for the
plural, all of English's nouns started to use that system. So, it's spread by analogy.
Now, that kind of process of analogy created more things that you wouldn't expect. So,
for example, maple is not really a word or it was not in Old English. An Old English
person would ask you in their language, what is a maple? They wouldn't understand what we meant.
There was a word for apple tree, apple tree, which is one word. There was a word for a maple
tree. They had maple trees and they called it something. It was called a moppelder. Moppelder.
There's no tree involved. So, apple tree, what's that thing called, mommy? Moppelder. Oh, here's
this thing where the queer fruit, you don't really want to eat it, but you can pull it apart and
stick it on your nose and look like a rhinoceros, which we've never heard of. Well, that's called
a moppelder. Now, they had apples. That was something that they had. And so, there's an
oppelder. That's that tree. And then the oppelder has apples on it. Everybody knew that. So, what's
that, mommy? It's an apple. Where did it come from, mommy? It came from the apple. Okay. And so,
then people thought, well, if there's an apple that comes from the apple, well, there's that
moppelder over there with those little things on it. Well, that means that a maple must come from
an apple. There must be something called a maple because there's something called an apple. And
so, oppel, moppel, moppelder. And that's why we call it a maple tree. And we'll walk by it and
we'll say, well, that's an oak and that's an element. That's a maple. There's no maple. That was
based on analogy. If apples come from oppelders, then maples must come from moppelders. Or, where
do you get suffixes? If you were talking to an old English speaker, there'd be no such thing as
ness. So, we talk about happiness. Happiness is playing with sunshine or whatever that song is.
And so, you have ness. Well, why ness? Elliott ness? No. What is that? Actually, to an old
English speaker, it would have been different. Old English speakers would have thought of that
suffix as s. So, the way that you take, say, an adjective like happy and you create a noun is
you would add s to it. And so, for example, if you were clean, clan, then clean, if you want to
think of it as, if you want to make it into a noun, cleanness was clan s. If something was green
and you wanted to talk about the state of being green, then it was green s. If something was even
and you wanted to talk about that as a quality, then it was effin s. But notice that all of those
particular words happen to end in n. And you heard them a lot. So, people would hear clan s. And they
think, well, okay, it must be cleanness. Greenness, effin ness. So, they started re-bracketing the
word as we call it. So, instead of hearing the suffixes s, they heard the suffix as ness. And so,
next thing you knew, instead of talking about bitter and then the quality of bitter s, which was
originally the way it went, they figured, well, if it's cleanness, then it must be bitter ness. You're
blind. Well, it used to be that there was a quality of blindness. That's what it was. Well, now they
decided, no, no, blindness, because the suffix must be ness. And so, because of that kind of process,
suddenly you have a suffix that wouldn't have made any sense to somebody who was speaking the
language before. And at times, things are just random. If you look at this wonderful vocabulary
collection, some of it is just a matter of what happened to get into the shop window for reasons
that we cannot reconstruct now, and there probably weren't even reasons then. And so, for example,
most is in Old English, mast. That's what it is. The West Saxon dialect of Old English, in
particular, that's written in, it's mast. It's in the Northumbrian dialect, actually that one in
the Dana Law that we talked about, where it's most. Now, Old English is West Saxon in most of its
writings. That's the dialect that was used. We don't know why what has survived in Standard
English is most instead of mast. We know that there are those two different renditions. One of
them happened to be the one that we use now. We're using a particular dialect of Old English's
form of most, rather than mast, which is what people were used to in a great many other places,
in England. And then finally, in terms of randomness, many of our words are train wrecks between two,
and we'd never think of it. So we have the word Lord, and you would assume that in Old English,
there was some word Lord, or something like that, but there wasn't. What it originally was was
loaf ward. The Lord was the person who took care of the loaves, or by extension, the bread,
because that word had a wider meaning then. So you were the loaf ward, and people said it fast,
and it became a loaf ward. Then people said that faster and became a Lord, and then it became a
Lord. So loaf ward, loaf ward, Lord, Lord. So that's where that came from. Lady did not come from a
word referring to just a woman. It was, and I'm sorry to say that it was something that we don't
want to think about now. The lady was not the Lord of the loaf. She was the neater of the loaf,
i.e., kneed as in grabbing it and squeezing it. And so she was the laf digger. Dig was to need.
And so she's the loaf, loaf, she's kneading it, loaf neater. Then you get laf dig. Hey, lady, lady.
So that's where that word came from. So all of this shows that it's not just that we have a whole
lot of words. If you want to know how many, hard to say how many is sashimi a word, or is and was
different words, hard to say. But that doesn't mean that, like some linguists, I'm going to refuse to
give you an answer. The Oxford English Dictionary, in terms of what we would reasonably call words,
although it's a tough judgment call, has about 170,000 words. And so we have a great many words in
our language. Although sometimes you wonder, we have expiate, and that is to atone, expatiate, which
is to speak at length, and expatriate, which is to remove from a country. One learns that sort of
thing in vocabulary classes, or what used to be called language arts. I'm not sure whether those
would be words kept separate and kept alive, all three of them in a language that was only used
orally. Writing helps us to preserve vast layers of vocabulary, including words that are no longer
used. For example, ruthless means without mercy. Ruth means mercy. Did you know that? I don't think
it does. Please show me Ruth. Nobody would say that. It's not really a word. It's a word that's in
the dictionary, one of the 170,000. It can be preserved like that, because we have writing. But
our key concept is that the building of English's vocabulary is not just a matter of it being a
big pile of 170,000 words, but it's a matter of all of these words giving us insight into the
various processes via which words can enter a language and then transform while they're within
a language, which means that the birth of new words now, such as blog from weblog or diss from
disrespect, are just continuations of phenomena that are very long-lived.
