Imagine going back in time, and I don't mean 3 million years ago or 3,000 or even 1,000.
Imagine going back 200, 300 years ago.
It's easy to imagine that you'd have to get used to the clothing, there being more of
it and there being no such thing as a zipper, and that the music is different and food would
be different and not in ways that we would expect.
For example, broccoli.
You ever notice that people in books about the past don't eat much broccoli?
It's because broccoli was not common on American plates, in particular until the early 30s,
late 20s.
Similar with language.
We know that there are words that were used then that aren't now because the objects are
no longer important, but a lot of other things would throw us about language as used in the
past by ordinary people.
We would be writing back to the present with all sorts of things that we found cute or
peculiar about ordinary people speaking quite fluently and in terms that we very much understood,
but we'd sometimes just be kind of hitting our ears wondering if there was some slightly
loose connection.
And that is because the fact is that many of the things that in the past were seen as
quite absurd or barbarous in speech are considered perfectly ordinary now.
Many things that were considered perfectly ordinary back then are considered quite horrible
right now, all of which is to show that our sense at any given time, including this one,
as to what is proper English is often more a matter of, as I've said, fashion or visceral
preferences than anything that's actually set in stone.
And so, for example, we can get a sense of what I mean by, as always, starting with the
camera way back.
And so, let's try a whole different language and look at a construction in that language
that's perfectly ordinary that we've assigned a whole different series of meanings to here
in English.
Khosa, that's X-H-O-S-A spelled in English and actually more like Khosa, if you put
the click before it because this is one of those African languages with clicks, is a
language that's spoken in the southern part of Africa, in South Africa, and it's one
of a whole group of languages called Bantu, Swahili is one of them, and Khosa is spoken
natively by Nelson Mandela and also by Miriam Makiba, the singer who used to sing with clicks.
You saw that especially on TV in the 70s and into the 80s, Miriam Makiba.
So that's something that we hear about Khosa.
Khosa is a lot of fun.
Apparently episodes of the Jeffersons, the television show, have been dubbed into Khosa
because its speakers enjoy watching these rich, black Americans, and so if George Jefferson
is saying something like, I don't like what you bought, wheeze, I once heard somebody
imitating the Khosa dub and it's something like, wheeze, like that.
So that's Khosa.
But something else that's interesting about Khosa is one random construction in it, and
it goes like this.
We can start with what Love Thy Neighbor happens to be in Khosa.
This is not to memorize, but it's Ntande Umel Wande Waho, so that's Love Thy Neighbor.
Now of course that's something that comes from the Bible.
They have Bibles in Khosa land and so you have Ntande Umel Wande Waho, Love Thy Neighbor.
Now the word for Bible is, it's basically Bible in Khosa and so Ibaibile, and so that's
Bible.
Now, the way that you say in Khosa, the Bible says Love Thy Neighbor is the following.
Ntande Umel Wande Waho.
What am I talking about?
What that means is, you have to understand the Iti.
Iti is like.
It means like or like this.
And so it's like Bible, Love Thy Neighbor, Iti Baibilem Tande Umel Wande Waho.
That's that.
What that sentence means is, the Bible is like Love Thy Neighbor.
That's how you say it in Khosa.
That's not a white, gum popping Khosa teenager saying it because there's no such thing there.
It is ordinary Khosa.
So we would hear the English version of that sentence as something like, the Bible is like
Love Thy Neighbor, and that's our evaluation of it in English.
But in Khosa, that's the way to say it, and you're talking about something rather weighty.
And so the Bible is like Love Thy Neighbor, all of which is to say that we hear that usage
of like in a certain way, and we can't help it because it is something that is commonly
associated with that gum stretching teenager who we think of as speaking in too hesitant
away.
Actually you can put it exactly that way in a completely different place and country
with people of a different ethnicity and world view, and it's just proper Khosa.
So that's something to imagine that language patterns in many different ways and our evaluations
are a matter of the fashion.
So let's say that we go back in time, and not the Flintstones, let's go back to 1818,
what Blackboard Grammar was back then.
One source that is often consulted is by a certain William Cobbett.
Cobbett is somebody who it's wonderful to look at to get a sense of what somebody thought
of as proper English not very long ago.
This is not even 200 years ago.
William Cobbett was what his name sounds like.
He was prickly.
He was a prickly.
He was British originally.
He was one of those people whose lives straddled the Atlantic.
He did a lot of things over there.
He did a lot of things over here.
He was a writer.
He was what was then called a pamphleteer.
Today he would be a blogger, but back then he was a pamphleteer.
And as many people at that time were who indulged in writing, he was also a politician, statesman,
someone called it.
And he lived from the 1700s to the 1800s, so that's the time of William Cobbett.
He wrote various books.
One of them was a grammar of the English language.
And this was rather different from Robert Loth and Lindley Murray's tomes on this subject,
although this time, once again, it was for his son.
People like this had sons.
They were always writing books for them, giving them land and writing them a book to make them
gentlemen.
And so Cobbett had one of these sons.
And he wanted his son to command proper English.
And so he wrote down this William Cobbett, what he knew to be, what English is supposed
to be.
The idea is to lay it out.
Here's how you speak like a gentleman.
This is the proper way.
And you assume that you're going to get all these Robert Lothisms and things like that,
and that's interesting in its way.
But there's more that you get with Cobbett.
It's very much as if you've got a little bit of swimming pool water in your ear, and you
keep hitting your ear or your eye, so to speak, because you're wondering whether this person
was serious in thinking of these as the right things.
So for example, Cobbett is at one point trying to give his son what the proper past forms
of verbs are.
And like I've said, those tend to squish around in Germanic languages, these strong past forms.
And at one point, Cobbett gives a list of the ones that really just should not be used
because they're improper.
Guess what they are?
Awoke, blew for blow, built for build, it was supposed to be builded, burst, no, bursted,
clung, dealt, dug, wrong, digged, he liked, drew, froze, grew, hung, meant, spat, you're
supposed to say, spitted, right, stung, swept, sweeped is the word, swam, you swimmed, darn
it, threw, wove, no, weaved.
For him, all of those strong forms were barbaric.
They were the sorts of things that came from lazy mouths and Lord forbid, little, sunny
William Cobbett used vulgar forms like those.
And you can see this sort of thing.
There is something that has become a plaything of linguists and affiliated people recently.
It's Google Lab's engram maps.
I highly recommend them for rainy days when you have nothing whatsoever to do.
It's a great way to have Junior entertain himself.
And the engrams show through a massive aggregation of the literature that Google has formatted
and copied.
Whether over vast periods of time, what words and what constructions are most popularly
in print.
And if something's in print, especially until rather recently, you can be generally sure
that that means that it was formally accepted.
And what's interesting is that way back in the early 19th century when Cobbett was writing,
building and swimmed really were the forms.
So if you went back to those times, you would find that ordinary people sitting there doing
their needle point or refusing to give you any broccoli would be talking about how something
was builded or how they swimmed somewhere yesterday.
You'd be waiting for them to flinch or to giggle or to kind of pat themselves on the
chest as if they had indigestion.
But no, they really meant swimmed because those forms were felt to be normal.
If you look at the engram map, then you can see it's like a graph in an old movie where
a company is having a meeting and they're showing a graph of how things are going and
it falls.
That graph falls after the early 19th century and people used build it and swimmed less
and less.
But, for example, Abraham Lincoln would have said build it.
Not only did he not have a deep resonant voice, his voice is about like this, but he would
have said build it.
So he would have seemed odd to us in his height, probably his smell, his voice, and his strong
past tense verb forms.
And so, Cobbett can be a lot of fun because you look at what he considered an improper
sentence and you just marvel.
And so, for example, this is from Blackstone, Judge William Blackstone's law book.
This is Commentaries on the Laws of England.
Now, I'm going to give you a sentence from Blackstone that Cobbett didn't like.
Now, we're going to have a word that you probably haven't heard because I had never heard it
until I came across this.
A gavel kind.
A gavel kind is a system of land tenure.
And I know if I say that, then it leaves you salivating to want to know more about it because
there's nothing quite like land tenure, but gosh, we don't have the time.
But gavel kind is a kind of land tenure.
So here is the barbarous sentence.
Therefore, if the king purchases lands of the nature of the gavel kind where all the
sons inherit equally, yet upon the king's demise his eldest son shall succeed to these
lands alone.
I'm going to read it again.
Here is this sentence.
What's wrong with this sentence?
Pretend it's a game show.
Tick tock, tick tock.
Therefore if the king purchases lands of the nature of the gavel kind where all the sons
inherit equally, yet upon the king's demise his eldest son shall succeed to these lands
alone.
What's wrong with that?
You know what's wrong with that?
What's wrong with that is purchases.
For Cobbitt, purchases should have been purchased because it's supposed to be subjunctive.
So purchases is a mistake because you're letting that subjunctive go.
Now we don't see that as a problem in that sentence.
We think of Blackstone as being some pretty solid English, but Cobbitt felt differently
see that was then.
We've let the subjunctive go.
For Hugh Blair was a considered quite linguistically gifted at the time, the kind of person who
was called a returition, and here's a sentence of Hugh Blair as Cobbitt didn't like this
one.
Demosthenes could not possibly have so clear an insight as Cicero into the manners and
passions of men.
Why?
Because he had not the advantage of perusing Aristotle's treatise of rhetoric.
I'm going to read that one more time.
So Hugh Blair writes this crummy sentence, and the sentence goes like this.
This one has apparently two dings in it.
Demosthenes could not possibly have so clear an insight as Cicero into the manners and
passions of men.
Why?
Because he had not the advantage of perusing Aristotle's treatise of rhetoric.
What's wrong with that sentence?
For one thing, had not the advantage of having perused is wrong for Cobbitt because the action
referred to was before the occasion in question.
So it's supposed to be not had not the advantage of having perused, but had not had the advantage
of having perused.
Now talk about persnickety.
That makes perfect sense to me.
I get it, but I certainly would not have winced and pulled out my handkerchief or gotten the
vapors upon noticing this particular choice of tense in Blair's sentence.
Or another problem is this business with the insight.
Cobbitt says that you can have a look into a house, so that's grammatically fine, but
that you can only have an insight to a house.
You can't have, as Hugh Blair had in this sentence, an insight into a house because according
to Cobbitt, that means that you're taking an inside view of an inside.
And so it's redundant, so you don't have insight into, you have an insight to.
Now it's clear that Cobbitt had the mind of a grammarian.
These things make sense.
One understands these are grammatical preferences that any one of us might have about various
corners of the language.
I certainly have mine, where there are just ways that I wish people would put things.
Nevertheless, the fact of the matter is that it's hard to see in these things that Cobbitt
was pointing out.
Things that were for the ages.
We see this as one man's acquaintance with the English language at a particular time
and what his historically interesting sensibilities would be.
And then we have to think about ourselves and how some of our particular preferences
will look in 200 years and whether or not there would be a difference.
And this sort of thing becomes even more interesting when we think about pronunciation.
So if we went back in time, another thing we would find is pronunciation would be different
from what we would expect.
All of us are aware that Shakespearean pronunciation was not ours, but really you don't have to
go quite that far back.
My favorite example of this is the poetry of Anne Bradstreet and it's often studied
for reasons other than its vowels and its verbal patterns and it very much should be.
But you find all sorts of places in Anne Bradstreet, and notice me sounding like I'm an expert
on her poetry and that I read it for pleasure, which I do not, but I'm aware of this because
of the linguistic aspects of it, Anne Bradstreet's poetry.
So when I'm curled up on a rainy day reading Anne Bradstreet for pleasure instead of looking
at loony tunes, I find something like this.
It's what she considers a rhyme.
And so, for example, this old chestnut that we can all recite, but for the last he made
such preparation as if to dust he meant to grind that nation.
But all his men and instruments of slaughter produced but derision and lauder laughter.
Okay, well, there's something wrong.
And so we have to go back.
Obviously derision and laughter, and we know that she pronounced it laughter because we
can see laughter rhyming with other things with that particular ending series of sounds
in other places.
But that means that we have to go back to the poem and think about how it would actually
be said.
So let me do the poem again.
So Anne Bradstreet, but for the last he made such preparation as if to dust he meant to
grind that nation.
And the way it went, we have pieced out, we, meaning philologists, who are not me, yet
all his men and instruments of slaughter produced but derision and laughter.
Slaughter, which still looks like laughter, was pronounced slafter in her time.
Now it isn't now, but it was then.
And so if we could meet Anne Bradstreet and not eat broccoli with her, then you would
notice that she said slafter.
And this went even further.
This would be one of the oddest things you would find if you went back in time.
Think about the crucible.
And we've all sat through high school productions of the crucible where people are running
around speaking in vaguely British accents.
Arthur Miller is the crucible about the witch burnings.
And so we think that if women wore bonnets and people didn't bathe much, then everybody
must have had kind of a British accent.
No, there was more to it than that.
Really there's the word daughter, which is always interesting.
And there are transcripts of the Salem witch trials.
And this is really important because you're getting transcriptions of the way people actually
sounded to the extent that this peeks out from behind the spelling as long ago as the
late 1600s.
And so you're especially looking for things that people, and it's not only transcripts,
you also get things that ordinary people are writing as testimony.
And so that's important because if it's an ordinary person back then of little education,
they might be able to scribe, but they're going to make mistakes and the mistakes are
precious because they give you a sense of how people actually talk.
So take little Mary town.
She's in a bonnet.
I don't know how often she bathed, but her writing was the writing of somebody who doesn't
have much time to do it.
And so we actually have a document of little Mary town, notice I assume she was small.
She could have been the size of a house who knows.
But the constable of Popsfield, she writes with weird spelling, hath served a warrant,
have served a warrant on me, on is spelled O-N-E, she didn't know.
She wasn't allowed to go to school, we assume, on me and two of my sons, two because she
spelled two T-O-O, so of course you have to have that high tone.
And two of my sons and two, two of my dafters.
Now two of my sons and two of my, first you think a dafter might be some object that people
use to shell nuts or something like that, but obviously two of my sons and two of my
Mary, you're talking about your daughters, aren't you, no, my dafters.
Now why did she write it that way?
That's the way people said it.
She only knows how to do that.
And so you have these sorts of things.
Now did Marytown have a stook or something like that, and so she wrote it wrong just
then?
No, because elsewhere she writes, as for my dafter, Rebecca, she spells it Rebaka, as
for my dafter Rebaka, she has strang fits sometimes, she is knocked down of a sudden.
And so I knocked, but she has strong fits sometimes.
She's knocked down of a sudden, notice that very spoken of a sudden, she had dafters.
So that's Marytown, we know when she wrote it, it was September 7th, 1692.
And what's interesting about this dafter business is that it wasn't only the unlettered because
you actually have the constable himself who puts into the trial record, he writes in his,
you know, hand, I have worn, he can spell, I have worn the widow town, although he doesn't
capitalize her last name, I have worn the widow town and her dafter to appear at the
court according to time spoken of, that's Ephraim Wilds, he's dead, but he wasn't then,
and he wrote dafter.
And so what this means is that these sorts of things change.
Back then these people didn't say daughter, they would have gone Teehee at that, just
like we say Teehee when we see dafter.
Now you could even see some of these spelling pronunciations as less sloppy than the ones
that we use now.
And so for example, if it is laughter, then why isn't it that you can send your dafter
to slapter, wouldn't that be better?
But we just don't, these things tend to change.
Those transcripts are fascinating because you do get a sense of how these people talk.
And in many ways, it's closer to spelling.
And so you will see, for example, fortune written as fortune.
And so these are people who aren't saying fortune, yet they were saying fortune.
If you ventured somewhere, you ventured.
Torture was torture, which if you think about it is what the spelled word looks like.
And that's, you know, they're senior is senior, junior is junior, that's the way they actually
talked.
These sorts of things just change with time.
The sorts of things that sound utterly ridiculous to us were quite normal.
Things that sound normal to us, to them, would have seemed as exotic as broccoli, the little
trees, it doesn't really taste that good, they would have found that a very odd sort
of thing.
We consider broccoli normal and pretend to like it.
Another example is Dickens.
I read, it's embarrassing sometimes, what you haven't read and that you don't want to
admit.
I think everybody has one.
And until about two years ago, I was very good at pretending that I had read two books,
Pride and Prejudice.
I had had whole conversations about the motivations of it.
And I had never read the book.
And I had never read David Copperfield.
And I had had some pretty intelligent conversations about the characters, had no blessed idea.
I fixed it.
So now, of course, I've read every book.
In David Copperfield, I noticed something and checked and I am certainly not the first
person to notice this.
It's something about Aunt Betsy.
It's a little weird.
And for those of you who have more recently seen the movie, and I made sure to see the
movie too to keep it in my head, this is the Edna May Oliver character, the one who always
seems like she's eaten a lemon.
And Aunt Betsy talks like a Dickens matron of a certain class and in a kind of elaborate
schooled style.
But then things keep popping up.
So for example, at one point she's talking about Mr. Dick, who it would be called euphemistically
simple and is living with her.
And she says, Mr. Dick is his name here and everywhere else now.
If he ever went anywhere else, which he don't.
So take care, child.
You don't call him anything but Mr. Dick.
Now isn't that odd?
If he ever went anywhere else, which he don't.
What he don't?
And she's not one of the lower class characters.
This isn't Barkas.
This isn't Peggy.
Notice how now I can rattle off the names of the characters because finally I read that
book.
But she's not one of those people.
She's formal.
She has schooling and she is a very spit and polish kind of person.
And yet there are those don'ts where all of a sudden it seems like she's in Harlem.
And what's important is that it's not her in a mood and it's not a typo.
It's not like one of those folio mistakes in Shakespeare.
She does that.
He don't all the time.
At one point she gives this long touching speech.
If they had included it in the movie, then it could have been beautifully scored but
they didn't.
And she's talking about, well, formal, formal, formal language.
It don't matter how much, enough to live on, more, for she had saved a little and added
to it.
So she's a formal speaker but it don't matter.
So what this means is that to an English speaker of Dickens time and place, he don't and it
don't, unconjugated so to speak, had a place even in proper language that it happens not
to for us.
And yet both Dickens and Aunt Betsy were thoroughly respectable people.
The idea is that this is the standard English and yet of all things he don't, it don't.
You can go to that rainy day fun Google Ngram viewer and see, you can just check this after
finding these weird don'ts with Aunt Betsy, that in literature, and once again, literature
is mostly formal until relatively recently, you find lots of third person singular don'ts
all over the place when there are only so many quote, unquote, vulgar people who are
portrayed in fiction and certainly almost none are allowed until rather recently to
write nonfiction for the general public.
So that means that these sorts of evaluations change over time among people who are just
as concerned with looking right as we are, all of which just gives us a sense of being
but pawns in a big game.
We are people who are at a certain point in time, rather like for example, the four ages
of man.
I will one more time pretend to know a lot about Ann Bradstreet and use one of her poems.
This is the sort of thing that you run up against and it gives you a sense of where we fit.
The four ages of man and Ann Bradstreet has a very nice four lines and then she just runs
into what we think of as a wall when really it's just that pronunciation changes and not
since old English, but English that we recognize, then heaped up golden riches as the clay,
which others scatter like the dew in May.
That's good so she knows how to rhyme.
Sometimes Vainglory is the only bait whereby my empty school is Lurd and Kate.
Whereby my empty school is Lurd and we think it's going to be caught, but instead it rhymes
with bait and so for her whereby my empty school is Lurd and Kate and that to her is
a rhyme.
Ann Bradstreet knew how to rhyme.
She was a particular and thoroughly sensible person, probably a genius.
So it's not that she had a bad hair day, it's that she could actually say Kate.
So that's something you find in her.
You find it in the Salem witch trials.
You can find all sorts of evidence in literature that our sense of what proper pronunciation
is and our sense of what proper grammar is witness the writings of William Cobbett among
those of many other people, witness Dickens.
Our sense of those things always changes and that it doesn't change systematically.
A lot of it is no more systematic than the systematicity of changes in fashion.
Think about what Aunt Betsy's hair would have looked like.
No woman in America or England would be caught dead with hair like that now.
Although if you think about it, that hair was lovely and probably in terms of any kind
of universals of aesthetics, lovelier than the way most women of any class or any orientation
wear their hair now.
Nobody would.
That's just because things change over time.
In the same way, our sense of what's right and what's euphonious and what is proper
in language changes as fashion does.
So all these people can give us a sense of our place in the great firmament of what
this language is.
And it's not only what the language is now, but what it's been since way back in the
midst of time and what it's going to be.
We're just here and when we make our decision as to how we're going to relate to our language,
we should always think about the past and the future, especially the past, as much as
the present.
