Here's why I want to take you now to Cyprus.
We have seen in the past few lectures that people's sense of what proper English is has
differed over time, that what drove people crazy in 1818 is quite different from what
drives us crazy now.
And you might be wondering at this point, well, okay, those people got it wrong, but
maybe we, especially with tools of linguistic science and linguistic awareness, can get
something closer to write at least, that maybe there is more hope for us than there was for
a Robert Loth or a William Cobbett.
And I think I've already given you a hint as to how prickly a task that would be when
we saw the parcel of kittens that is pronouns in any language.
But in the next three lectures, I want to give you a new sense of what this magnificent
thing called English is so that we can see just what it is that we would like to tame,
that we would like to foster our aesthetic feelings about, and that we would like to
evaluate the prescriptive versus the descriptive orientation towards.
So back to Cyprus.
If you go to a village in Cyprus called Lithridanto, if you look at what kind of pottery they had,
there's a kind of jug that they make.
And the jug has these two lumps on it, and they're just there.
I suppose you could consider them to be rather attractive, but nobody can tell you now exactly
why the lumps are there, they're just there.
That is the Lithridanto tradition.
But if you dig, and you dig, and you dig, and you find out what ancient pottery in Lithridanto
was like, then what you find of all things is that they're very similar jugs, except
the jugs are clearly supposed to be women, and you can imagine what those lumps are supposed
to be, and all of that is graphically clear in these ancient versions of these jugs.
So what has happened is that over the years, these jugs have been being made, and what
started out as one thing, or shall we say two, gradually just became these lumps.
No one generation was really thinking about it, but today there are lumps where once there
was something else.
The something else is we can be quite sure that those ancient potters knew exactly why
they were putting them there.
Nowadays, nobody knows why the lumps are put there, it's just there.
That kind of process where we do things quite reflexively and insistently, but without having
any sense of what the original motivation for doing it was, and with that original motivation
having passed into history, that actually has a name.
It's called skeuomorphy, S-K-E-U-O morphy.
And the fact of the matter is that languages are highly skeuomorphic.
And so what that means is that when I tell you that language is never tidy, what I mean
more precisely is that there is a great deal of, for one thing, skeuomorphy in a language.
It's very natural to ask when you're looking at all the interesting things that are going
on in a language, the intricacies, the things that seem to make no sense whatsoever, and
especially the latter, why these things are there.
And so, for example, many people would look at a language like the Siberian one, ket,
where I gave that word that meant they were letting go, and it's the tondar, and ask why
does ket have all of those prefixes and all of those suffixes, as if there's some reason
why ket has that, and English doesn't.
Often, it's not that there's a reason in the sense of functionality, it's not that
there's something about the ket that makes those prefixes and suffixes necessary, it's
not that those things happened alongside those Siberian rivers for a reason that things like
that didn't happen alongside the Yangtze River.
The proper analogy is, for those of you who are into biology, with junk DNA, and so an
awful lot, a counter-intuitively awful lot, and I'm not going to give the percentage because
it seems to change every year, but a whole lot more than half of the DNA that's in an
organism seems to have no function in coding for its proteins, it's just there.
It's the product of Alithridanto-style history, language is the same way.
I want to give you an example of that, I want to give you one of the most pitilessly fascinating
examples of that that I know of, to prepare you for looking at English as a language rather
than this very familiar kitchen stool thing that we think of it as, because it's the language
that we speak.
We want to look at an Algonquian language, now what that is, is a family of Native American
languages, one of the several families of Native American languages, and there are a
great many Algonquian languages spoken, or which until recently used to be spoken, and
you can compare all of them, words in all of them, and you can reconstruct what the words
of the great grandfather Algonquian language would have been, just as you can recreate
what Proto-Indo-European words were.
So just like with Proto-Indo-European, you can have French's word, Spanish's word Mano,
and Portuguese's word Maul, and reconstruct that the Latin word was Manos, we can reconstruct
what Algonquian words were.
Now as you might imagine, we can reconstruct what the Algonquian word for winter was.
All of these Native American languages spoken in the United States have words for winter,
and it turns out that the Proto-Algonquian word for winter was Peponui, that's P-E-P-O-N-W-I,
Peponui.
Now, one of the pathal of Algonquian languages is Cheyenne, and in Cheyenne the word for
winter is Ah.
And what's interesting is that Peponui was the source of Ah, those are related words
just like Manos in Latin and Ma in French.
Well, how in the world does something like that happen?
Well, one thing happens one step at a time.
And so for example, Peponui, that's the original word.
And then, well, as you can imagine, often with words, as they're said rapidly, often,
as the word for winter will be, then you lose the final syllable, drops off, like name,
you can see from the way name is spelled, there used to be a final E, well, with Peponui
we drops off, and so you have just Pepon, so it stays right there.
Now that's easy enough, but that means that we've gone from Peponui to Pepon, that happens
over time, and of course this isn't a written language, and so no one's thinking, well,
the word used to be Peponui, now it is Pepon.
Now then, if you have Pepon, after that, well, consonants can be kind of fragile.
So let's say that those P's drop out.
So for example, what was super in Latin becomes sur in French.
So sur abondance, super abundance, the P from Latin is gone.
So with Pepon, suppose you've got peon, and suppose at the beginning of the word, beginnings
of words are vulnerable too.
So for example, Hampshire, Herford, Hampshire, Herford in Cockney English, the H's go, P's
can go too, and so Pepon, et on.
So now what started out as Peponui is et on, and that's something happening in a language
that people only live for 65 or 70 years to experience.
No one's watching this, this is what we can reconstruct.
So you have et on, then vowels tend to change, it happens all the time, and we think of it
often as colloquial, but it's just how language changes.
There's a word bad, someone in Philadelphia might say bad.
We hear that it's a Philly accent, but it's also ad changing to et, and that's just how
things go.
Well imagine if there's et on, and it changes to aein, you can call that some sort of early
Algonquian accent, same sort of thing.
Languages all work in the same way.
Aein, well suppose the n goes, and you have ae, okay suppose then the i happens to get
longer, a ae, and then suppose instead of ae, it becomes ae, these are all things that did
happen.
And finally you've got i, et, and then well sounds tend to drop off of the ends of words,
and it's not like there's some limit, nobody knows about peponui now, words are words
are words, and so ae became a, and that's Cheyenne, right there.
So you start out with people saying peponui for winter, and then after just a couple of
millennia and change, and that's about as long as this would have taken, and that's
a liberal estimate, you go from peponui to a, and Cheyenne today.
That's how language changes, and so you say well why do the Cheyenne have a, a, whereas
the word used to be peponui, and the reason is just that things happen step by step according
to this skeuomorphic process.
So an analogy would be with monopoly.
My father was very good at winning in monopoly, and would always be in these tiny little ways,
one time he had Oriental, one of those chintzy light blues, and he bought Connecticut, and
so he just had that, and I was doing very well, I had much tonier properties, and so
I thought I was gonna win the game, and so you can say that's the peponui stage.
The pepon stage is where I was stupid enough to give him I think North Carolina, one of
the Tony greens, so that he could have Vermont, because that would mean that he would have
all three of the light blues, and then he could put hotels on them, but it's those
chintzy hotels, who does that ever hurt?
I was trying to catch bigger fish, and so then pepon going to Eon is him having all
of those light blues, but you know, who cares?
Then Eon goes to Aine is that he builds hotels on the light blues, and I'm thinking well
that's the best he's ever gonna do.
Then Aine goes to IE was me actually having all of the greens, so I had them all together,
so I'm thinking well now I'm going to whip his gluteus maximus, and then IE is me having
to build the hotels on those greens, which is always expensive, almost as expensive as
it's with Park Place and Boardwalk, and then IE is that I kept going around Go and hitting
Dad's stupid hotels, and they didn't cost nothing, and then I was when I hit Connecticut
one more time and had no more money and lost the game.
Now the answer is not that Dad knew all those things were gonna happen, it happened step
by step, and I was ground into dust that day in 1978.
That is how languages work, and that therefore is how English works, and so any language
that we know of today is the end stage of a series of transformations, and the transformations
are not concerned with order, and that means that anything that's a language is a combination
of things that are systematic and alive, things that are fossilized and as dead as a wasp
nest that you're kicking along on the ground, and then things that are in between those
two stages, and you could call them either semi-fossilized or semi-systematic.
So the analogy in terms of an awful lot of what's coming out of my mouth even right now
is the tailbone.
So we have a sacrum, and then after that these little vestigial vertebrae, and we don't think
about that very much, but that's something that we have, it's programmed in our DNA.
If anything, the fact that we have those little vertebrae tippling off of the sacrum is vaguely
disgusting, but we do have it, those tailbones, that's part of being human, as are all sorts
of odd things inside of us that we don't really necessarily need.
I believe the thymus gland is one of those things, for example, but we're just kind of
stuck with it.
Languages are full of them, English is one of them.
An example is what linguists actually call cranberry morphemes, and why we call them
that is because cranberry is a perfect example.
What's a cran?
We know what a cranberry is, it's that berry that has that taste, but cran what?
You can't go pick up a cran, it doesn't seem to refer to anything.
Now it happens to come from a low German word that means crane, i.e. the odd bird, but we
can only know that if somebody like me mentions it.
What's a boysen?
What's a huckle?
What's a logan?
And to the extent that you could say what a logan is, it has nothing to do with a berry.
So why is it called a logan berry?
We just think of that.
Those are called cranberry morphemes, these little bits of language that we carry along.
They had meaning at a certain point, I'm going to make this up, that cranberries grow in
bogs and probably in some places cranes hang around in bogs, eating cranberries, something
like that.
That's the reason for calling them cranberries, but we don't really think about cranes much,
and we just say cranberry.
And there are many of those.
There are expressions with and that use classic cranberry morphemes, and so for example, ham
and haw.
Really, what do either one of those words mean, and certainly the hem is not the one
that refers to something that you do to a skirt.
Ham and vigor, vigor is a word, but doing something with them, probably not.
Kith and kin, who knows what kith is, hue and cry, this is clearly a different hue from
the one that refers to color or tint.
So in these cases, hem, them, kith, hue, they were all living words.
People don't just say nonsense things and have that somehow have an influence on a community's
collection of words, but now they are nothing.
They're husks.
They're just there.
And that's part of speaking English.
And so why, well, some things just go dead because habit has a way of creating things
like lumps on jugs.
That's part of being human.
Another example of this kind of thing.
Peas porridge hot.
Why?
Shouldn't it be pea porridge?
Why is it peas porridge?
Nobody says that.
Nobody talks about apples pie.
It's apple pie.
And peas porridge hot, you probably associate it with the medieval.
And so we're thinking that there was something about them.
And so somebody is saying, peas porridge hot, but no, they weren't silly.
They made sense.
They had grammar just like us.
What's peas porridge?
It's nothing.
We're the ones who are wrong.
It was called a piece.
So that little green thing that you pick up and you pop it in your mouth, don't you like
peas?
Peas are underrated.
That's a piece.
Now, it sounded because in English, s ended up being the general plural marker.
And that was something that took time.
But once that had happened, a piece sounded as if it was plural.
It seemed like you were saying peas.
And there must be one thing called a pea.
And so that's how that word arose.
But really, it's a mistake.
The word quote unquote should be peas.
And we have peas porridge hot as a fossil, and pea as in a way a fossilized mistake.
One pea.
That would have made somebody in about 1300 giggle in Middle English, and yet we're stuck
with it.
Same thing with cherry.
It's cherries.
Please give me a cherries, please.
Just like in French, cerries.
Their s is not what's wrong.
It was originally a cherries.
I'll have a cherries, please, and you bite into it.
I warn you not to eat more than about 10 cherries at a time.
I had a very bad time once just putting that in there.
But it was 10 cherries, really, that set me wrong.
But again, we borrowed it from French, and it sounded plural, so we figured there must
be as such a thing as a cherry.
And next thing you knew, you had a new word.
English is full of things like that.
This is one of my favorites.
If you speak English after you hit a certain age, you know that the nickname for Ellen
is Nelly.
You know that a nickname for Edward is Ned.
Dig a little, and you know that somebody who's named Nan is really named Ann, and you just
kind of accept that.
But have you ever thought about how odd that is?
Why the N?
These are not things that people just kind of pick out of the blue.
There's nothing particularly endearing about an N.
Imagine if you knew somebody named Ayesha.
Say that Ayesha is whatever the age children are when they still are a little bit imbalanced
when they walk, and they don't realize that the world is difficult, and so they smile
a lot, and you love them spontaneously.
Little Ayesha, and you're, come here, little Ayesha, come here, Ayesha, my little Ayesha,
my little Na Ayesha, never.
The N would make no sense that way at all.
So what was it about these medievals?
Again, they weren't silly.
You know, peas, parochot, made sense to them.
And so did these Ns.
There's a reason for that N, but it's all based on the skeuomorphy again.
The original word for my in English was mine.
And so for those of you who know German, mine.
For those of you who are long enough in this veil of tears called life that you remember
the Goldbergs on TV, which was about an immigrant Jewish family, one way that they signaled
their Yiddish kite in their speech was to always say mine for things.
And so please give me mine laxative.
I don't know why I said that, mine turkey, mine house, etc.
Because Yiddish is, in the technical sense, a kind of German.
Old English, same thing.
So if you wanted to be affectionate about somebody named Edward, then you'd say, well,
come here, mine Ed.
Well, come here, mine Ellen.
But if the word mine becomes my, well, people are saying mine Ed and mine Nelly all the
time.
You tend to have people who are dear to you.
And if you're in England at a certain point, then the chances that their names are Ed or
Ellen or Anne are pretty high.
So people keep saying mine Ed, mine Nelly, mine Anne.
And so the word is my, but people are hearing Nelly and Ned and Nan as nicknames.
And the next thing you know, they are.
That's where the N comes from.
So it's not that somebody decided, you know, prithee, I think that we should start using
N when we're creating nicknames, it's something that happened by accident.
And so there we are today.
Fascinating, isn't it?
And yet what it means is that an awful lot of what we say and what we know and what we
think of as ordinary are really just these chunky, clunky little accidents.
And another example of that is lie and lay.
This is a tough one.
This is one where I have been criticized on occasion for failing to make the difference,
including in one lecture I did for one of these courses I heard the other day that apparently
I slipped on one of these.
The idea is that one lays something down, but lies still.
And to listen to English is to hear people constantly talking about how they were laying
on a bed rather than lying on the bed.
Well, what really is that?
Actually it's more skeuomorphy and somehow attention has been paid to one example of
it when actually it's a skeuomorphy that became so skew that it basically just became skewed
out of existence.
So for example, an analogy to lie and lay is rise and raise.
And so you can have something rising by itself, kind of like when you lie on a bed, it's a
passive process.
And then there's laying where you push someone down on the bed or you lay a plank down on
the floor.
And raising is a matter of actively making something rise, causing something to rise.
Now the reason for that is that there used to be a living rule in the English language
in which you had pairs of verbs where the vanilla one was the passive one and then you would
change the vowel and that would be causing what the first one denoted to happen, meaning
that there's lie and then if you make something lie down, i.e. lay, well then you change the
vowel.
There is rising something like a vapor and if you're going to make something rise then
you raise it and you change the vowel.
That used to be a regular feature.
And so for example, notice that you can sit and set.
Now there's some people who will think that sitting is something that your great-grandmother
does to a chair and then setting is a matter of making something sit, i.e. say placing a
book on a table.
But notice something about that.
Notice that here is a feature where it's actually quite marginal at this point.
Really I can give you five.
And so there's lie and lay and that's the one that people get beat up about.
And then there's rise and raise and nobody has any problem with that at all.
And then there's sit and set.
Now here's another one, fall and fell.
And so there's falling and then felling is that you make something fall.
But if you think about it, to fell something, I'm not sure what occupations everybody out
there has.
But how often does the typical person nowadays fell a tree?
I fell the tree one time in my life.
I found it vaguely dissettling, rather like once when I killed a bird, I admit it now.
I did it in 1972, it's the only time I've talked about it.
And so I don't fell trees, I'm never going to do it again, most of us don't.
So it's kind of marginal.
And the other one actually that I can bring up is drink and drench.
There's a reason why both of those words have to do with water.
It used to be that you drenched your child, you made your child drink.
Now the meaning of the word has evolved.
So drink and drench has become something completely different.
Fall and fell, most of us don't do anything to trees.
Sit and set, if you think about it, we don't usually observe that one.
And if we do, to many of us it sounds a little bit rustic, or maybe a little, even elderly
or obsolete, so it's kind of like, set that book on the table, sonny.
But it doesn't sound to me like the way I heard people speaking in middle class Philadelphia
in the 60s and 70s.
And yet we focus on this one lilay when really it's not a matter of just a difference between
these two words, it's a matter of a certain kind of grammar which has persisted as if
it were lumps on a jug.
And really this is as if really they're down to half of one lump on one jug and then we're
insisting on keeping it.
So we have to have a reason for keeping it.
So that's the lilay story.
So if we look at these sorts of things, then we can actually take an English sentence and
we can see that it's really shot through with fossils and illogicalities, and that that
really is what it is to speak.
It's as simple as this.
Here's a sentence.
This is a sentence that's so casual.
People say sentences like this all the time.
It's not as if I put this sentence together to show anything.
Not at all.
A perfect sherry at twilight, must admit that is good.
A perfect sherry at twilight, raised Ned's spirits a notch and permitted him to forget
about his health.
Read that again.
A perfect sherry at twilight, raised Ned's spirits a notch and permitted him to forget
about his health.
Now that seems like a perfectly logical English sentence, but think first of all, permit.
What's the purr?
What does it mean?
Twilight.
What's twi about it?
That's a beautiful word, but I wouldn't know a twi if it bit me on the elbow.
Or permit.
Mit.
What's mit?
Mit is, you know, a candidate for office, possibly, but I don't know what a mit is.
Forget.
Well, there's getting and then there's for getting.
What's the for?
Are you getting for something?
We have no idea.
All of those things are just chunks.
Or for example, we have the sherry.
That word should be sherrys.
It comes from Cherez, the Spanish port, which used to be pronounced Cherez.
It sounded like it was a plural.
People started saying sherry.
We've talked about the N of Ned.
That is artificial.
Notch should, quote unquote, not be the word.
Really that word originally was ach.
And so you would say, oh dear, all of these aches in the board.
But you would talk about an ach and people started thinking, oh, it must be a notch.
So it's a mistake.
We don't mind.
We keep talking about the notches.
And then we have raise and rise again.
And we don't think about it as grammar at this point.
And for whatever it's worth, Ned and thinking about his health, the up and about started
out as at by.
About used to be at by out.
Then at out, about, about, about.
And we don't really think about that.
So all of that mess is going on in that sentence.
And it's capped off by the wonderful th.
And so Ned and his health, there's this word health.
Now, if somebody asks you to make happy into a noun, you would say happiness.
But how do you make warm into a noun?
You could say warmness, but you wouldn't.
You would say warmth.
Well, notice that the th is a suffix in a way.
We see that th on all sorts of words in our language.
You can, you can make a list of them in your head and it gets longer and longer.
There is wealth, there is health, there is birth and girth and youth and breath and strength.
There are so many of them.
But notice something.
Now that you know that th is a suffix, and of course we never think about it, notice
you can't add it to anything new.
There's no such thing as old.
There's no such thing as talking about somebody's shalloth.
And a clue to how old it is, is that often the sound of the root word has changed so
much over time that you can barely recognize that there is a root in there.
So strength, you can tell that strong is where it started.
But then youth, did you know that youth comes from youngth, maybe, but generally we have
other things to think about.
Wealth is from bear, so it's bear's little odd.
Sloth is sloth, that one I always think is fun.
Or mirth is Mary's, mirth.
And then Ned and his health, there's of course it's not about hell as in two horns on your
head.
It's hail and hardy, it's his hail.
Just like with wealth, it's that word wheel as in the common wheel and we don't use the
word much, but it's wheel.
And so the thuh is a typical example of a tail bone.
It's there, we use it all the time.
We don't think of it as a suffix anymore.
You can't use it, we can't wag our tail, you can't add the thuh to a new word.
And of course thuh is just a symptom of this general aspect of what a language is like
and what English is like.
It is a language where, because all languages are entities such that, there is as much
that makes no sense because it's a dead version of something that once did, i.e. there's the
skeuomorphy going on, as there is things that are systematic and that you could tabulate
in a book.
All of which is to say that if we are to impose order upon our language, if we are to have
a sense of what the right way to speak or to write is as opposed to the wrong way, then
we have to realize that what we are attempting to oppose order on is something which is already
in itself in a way that we can't change violently, marvelously, joyously, disorderly because
it's a grand mixture of things that are alive, things that are quite dead but won't quite
go away.
It actually corpses in a pretty literal sense and then things that are hovering somewhat
in between and so we have the zombies.
So for example, some, the suffix some, handsome, okay, but it doesn't seem to have anything
to do with hands, gruesome, okay, but what's a grew, loathsome, that one is somewhat more
natural.
I am given sometimes to sticking some onto the ends of words because we can process what
it means and so for example, uggsum, you know immediately what that means because there's
the analogy with handsome.
So some has some life in it.
If you poked some, it might give a little squeak, but not always, but it might, whereas
with th, if you poked it, it would just rattle, but languages are like that and so as we go
along our way in this course, looking at how we're willing to have a relationship with
this language, we have to realize that an awful lot of it doesn't make any sense and
not for a reason, but because it's inherent to languages to change in ways that are skeuomorphic
rather than based on current usage and rather than based on anything that we would call
logic.
