I was in Ottawa. It was 1995 and it was hot. I was at a wedding and I had one of those
experiences that you never forget and I can guarantee you it was not the wedding. It was
happened to be someone's birthday. Somewhere in the middle of the wedding they sang happy
birthday to this individual. Many of the people at the wedding for reasons I forget now were
from France and it happened to be these people who sang happy birthday. This is something
I had never thought about. It made perfect sense once I did have this experience but
I had never thought about it. The song they sang for happy birthday was not the one that
were used to. I am going to refrain from singing any of our happy birthday song because I
hear it's under copyright and that might be true of the French one too. But I remember
it was one that I found quite unsatisfying in comparison to our harmonically rich and
fascinating happy birthday song. It began with C'est à t'enture and they sang the
whole thing as lustily as we sing our happy birthday song. So this means that everywhere
in the world they don't sing happy birthday to you with that song that we had. As far
as I was concerned you could go into the rainforest and a bunch of people who have never been
outside of the rainforest once it's somebody's birthday they would be singing in English
that song that we know. But that is not the way it goes. There are many different ways
of singing happy birthday and in the same way there are a lot of kinds of logic and
what I mean by that is that we naturally suppose that there's an ideal state that a language
has where it's going to be logical in the way that we associate with mathematics. But
the truth is that language does make sense in that language does communicate its meaning
among quite a few people all the time but it's via a logic that is not mathematical.
It's a different kind of logic and the fact that language is logical without being mathematically
logical is something that we can see in English and it's something that we can see in language
in general. So in this lecture I want to wear my language in general hat as well as my
English language hat and give us a sense of how logic can work even when it's not logic
in the mathematical sense. So for example double negatives I don't see nothing. Now
we are told that two negatives make a positive and that therefore if you say I don't see
nothing then what you're saying is that nothing is not what you don't see and that therefore
what you see is something. Now that is clever and I think all of us have enjoyed wrapping
our heads around that and we're told that that means that I don't see nothing is not
logical. Now is it something that you're going to say when you're making a state of the union
address I would say not but it's supposed to be not logical. Problem is if it's not
logical we are rather condemning an awful lot of people because double negatives are
rather the default in languages around the world. You probably even noticed this and
so with French double negatives je ne vois rien. I do not see and then rien, nothing.
So that means I must see something. So if we're told that double negatives are illogical
then we have a bit of a French problem or we have a Russian problem and so n'y che
vont les visu. I don't see anything and so I don't see nothing which means that I must
see something. Hebrew again. I need l'oroh loom and so I don't see nothing and so I must
see something Japanese. So this is something you see again and again and again. If you
go to the linguistic section of a university library which I'm sure is something that we
all do as often as we take our children to the park. Go to the linguistic section of
a university library and you've got grammatical descriptions of languages of the world going
from the ceiling to the floor. You could blindfold yourself and turn yourself to your dizzy
and then have your finger pointed at one of the grammars and I will guarantee you that
good three times out of four and if not more you'll find double negatives as what that
language does. And so the question is if it's that common worldwide and we're talking about
logic then can we really call this an illogical construction? Could it be unclear for example?
And I think we can all admit that we don't spontaneously hear double negatives as positive.
So when someone says I don't see nothing we don't think to ourselves well therefore
they must see something and get confused. Rather we're told that we should or could be confused
in that way which is a very different thing. And in that light the truth is that the negative
in language does not follow the lines of logic as you learn it in school. It's a very different
thing. Negation is in a way richer than that. And we know it partly in things that we as
modern Americans say or at least hear all the time. So for example think about yeah
no. This is not something that you're going to find in a dictionary yet. This is not something
that you're going to find in a compact grammatical description of how English works no foreigner
would be taught it but it's an important way of managing conversation in the way English
is spoken today. What I mean by yeah no is this. Let's say one person says and that's
why we decided not to get a PT cruiser after all. I have a PT cruiser fetish. I think they've
been discontinued but it's those cars that look like old cars but have modern engines.
When I rented cars I used to always ask for it to be a PT cruiser apparently they would
turn over easily. They were adorable cars. So here's my salute to the PT cruiser. So
person A says and that's why we decided not to get a PT cruiser after all. Then person
B says yeah no we saw these Vespas the other day and we were thinking it might make sense
to get one of those for Julia. You know that yeah no? That yeah no actually makes no sense
at all because you're not denying anything. You're not contradicting. You're not dismissing.
Really that yeah no is a kind of a conversational lubricant. It's a way of gently moving on
to a different topic. The no in a way is saying no we're no longer at where you are. We're
going to go to where I am. Yeah no we were thinking blah blah blah. Now here's something
I'm going to tell you. To let you know that I do not consider myself to be above under
or to the side of any of the natural feelings we have about language. In terms of what I
don't like I don't like yeah no. I perceived it. This doesn't mean this is when it happened.
I perceived it about 10 years ago and even though I understand intellectually that what
it is is something that lubricates discourse and that it doesn't mean what the words in
isolation mean it's always struck me as a little bit pushy. One that really drives me
crazy is yeah yeah yeah. This is something that a lot of people say now. So someone will
say well I went to the drug store and it turned out it was closed and it was only 10 p.m.
Then the other person says yeah yeah yeah. I used to go to the supermarket and they used
to say they were going to close at 8 but they closed at 7. Yeah yeah yeah. People say that
all the time and it strikes me as really being a stand-in for saying you shut up. Yeah yeah
yeah. People say it all the time the yeah no longer has the literal meaning of yeses.
Every time somebody says it I want to take 11 cherries and make them eat them so that
they have the problem that I once had when I ate 10. So I'm not above these things but
intellectually we know that yeah no doesn't mean what it means in a way. And if we know
that then we know something else. This is the money fact about double negatives in English
in terms of what two negatives together mean, what the negative in a language means in general.
Have you ever thought about the fact that double negatives are standard so to speak
in every single form of English that you can think of other than the dialect that happens
to be the standard. So step outside of standard English and any other kind of English has
these double negatives. It's not just something that one population does. It seems to be if
you think about it most English that's spoken by regular people. And so colloquial American
if Ralph Crandon got upset he ain't going to tell you nothing Norton. And so you have
ain't and nothing. So that is colloquial American English well that takes care of everybody
in America. Then if you go to England it's the same thing. And so one northern British
dialect he's known going to tell you note. Note is nothing. And so known and note double
negative is right there. Cornwall down in southwestern England. That actually means
he's not going to tell you nothing. All is he. No people in Cornwall do not squeak but
they do in my head. So all bank wine for tally nothing. Baint nothing double negative. And
it just goes on and on. If you look at what has become of English exoterically and esoterically
all over the world it's always the same thing. In South America of all places there's a country
called Suriname of all things. And on the coast of Suriname in the cities there's a
language spoken that was born when American slaves learned English very quickly and they
learned it even more quickly than slaves in America did. So they ended up creating just
a whole new language. It's one part English. It's one part various African languages. Nobody
who speaks those African languages or English could understand a word of this spoken. It's
a Creole language and it's called Suriname. And if they say he's not going to tell you
anything then it's no taigi you note. Now you don't know what that is but there's the
no and the noti. They both mean not and nothing. Double negatives and Suriname Creole in any
language like it. And so it seems there's an awful lot of this illogic if there's something
that's untoward or misbegotten about it. And of course, of course, wouldn't you know, of
course, that standard English is not only weird in terms of what Englishes are now but
then there's also Old English. Old English had double negatives out the wazoo. I don't
even know what that means, but it was standard in Old English to stack up your negatives.
And so none could handle any weapon in Old English as non-imitanonous weaponous wagon.
So that's none, not, could, none weapons hold. So in other words, it's basically nobody
could not handle no weapons. I mean, it's very the wire and that was good old Old English.
So really, if you take English past and present and then today English here and there, you've got
this standard English dialect. That's how English happened to form in a particular part of England
at a particular time. And it has a rather unusual situation where you don't have to have a double
negative, although you can, and then you're told that it's wrong. But then in all the other
kinds of English that there are all over the world, not to mention in the history of English,
right down into Shakespeare, there are double negatives running around happily all over the
place and reproducing and acting like they own the place. And so it seems that really we're
talking less about logic. There couldn't be that much illogic in the world. And then remember
French, it's really just a matter of fashion. And so most languages and most Englishes have
double negatives. People are not running around bumping heads. I'm sure whether people are
referring to some ones and some things over nothings and no ones. And so logic, sure,
language has to be logical or the world can't function. But is it a matter of two negatives
becoming a positive as if we were talking about integers or ions? It seems that there's
probably a difference. Jane Austen knew, for example, take Pride and Prejudice, that book
that all of us, including me, have read so many times. She, if you go through the book,
will have passages like, when Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably
be ashamed, which certainly was not unsell them, she, meaning Elizabeth, involuntarily turned
her eye on Charlotte, not unsell them. Now that's actually a little odd because unsell them
means a lot. And so not unsell them kind of throws the whole thing out of kilter. And
that would be not a lot. And so not unsell them is a set phrase that Jane Austen, who
I think we all think of as a thoroughly considered and formal writer, used even though really
it's as if the negation has spread out of its boundaries. And it's a kind of a negation
that seems wrong in the sense of actual logic, but it doesn't create misunderstanding. There's
a lot of that kind of thing, for example, to give you a sense that this is not just about
English in French. This is the French that we learn. And we're talking about formal French,
not making sense, quote unquote. So for example, let's say that you're learning how to say,
make sure that the child doesn't touch the dog. Well, one way that you might put it in
French is basically word for word, prevent the child from touching the dog. And the way
that you say that in French is, on pêche, prevent, on pêche, que l'enfant that the
child ne touche aux chiens doesn't touch the dog. And so on pêche, que l'enfant ne
touche aux chiens, as if you're saying prevent that the child doesn't touch the dog. That's
how it's said in French. Now, that not doesn't make sense in the technical sense. It doesn't
follow the lines of mathematical logic. It would seem to cancel out the meaning of the
whole sentence. It seems that you want the child to touch the dog because you want it
not to be the case that it doesn't touch the dog. But nevertheless, even though it doesn't
make sense, still it makes sense to French people, the idea being that there's just this
sort of redundant prohibitiveness. And so you have on pêche, which is to prevent, and
then you also have the no. But the no gets even more technically illogical in other cases.
This is something that you have to learn in French. You get this somewhere late in the
second year often. I want to do it before he comes. So I want to do it, je veux le
faire, je veux le faire. And then the before he comes is odd. What it should be is before
avant que he comes, il vient. So it should be je veux le faire, I want to do it avant
qu'il vienne before he comes. Now, if you put that on your test or in composition, you
get an F. And the reason is because it's avant qu'il ne vient before he doesn't come.
So I want to do it before he comes. In French comes out as I want to do it before he doesn't
come. And that's the way you have to say it. Now, that makes a vague kind of sense. The
idea being that you don't want him to have come before you do what it is. And so you're
thinking about that as you speak. Because when we speak, we're not stringing out logical
signs. We're also thinking about the world and we're linking the signs to it. And therefore
you're thinking of him not having come as a time that is desirable for you to accomplish
something. And so il ne vient, not come. It makes a certain sense, but it doesn't follow
logically at all. It's something which you could imagine in an alternate universe. French
people will be told not to say because the negatives cancel one another out. But French
people are not told not to say that. And the French are even given to saying that that
which isn't French isn't clear. The idea being that their language is somehow clearer than
our language. And I will stay out of that battle. But I can say that they're saying that about
a language which has double negatives and also negatives that just kind of jump. I know
a Japanese person who made certainly one of the three cutest mistakes in English I have
ever heard. One of them was when a Russian person said, you like dinosaurs? I like dinosaurs
either. I thought that was great. The best one from this Japanese person though, was
he was talking about somebody of a certain Avoir du Poit, shall we say. And they were
sitting in a chair that was rather too small for them. And she said that the person's meat
was hanging over the chair. And really it should be fleshed. And she didn't know that
the word isn't meat. And we decided not to correct her because somehow it should be meat.
These n's in French are kind of like their meat is hanging over the chair of perfect
logic. And just like with that person with the Avoir du Poit, there's nothing that you
can do about it. And so we move on. For example, two, dangling, speaking of meat and chairs.
These dangling things. And so for example, you have to be careful with your hopefully.
Hopefully she will be early. And we're told that that's bad. Read about this in newspaper.
The idea is that hopefully in this case implies that the woman in question will be hopeful
herself. And so you're supposed to say it is to be hoped. Okay, that's one of those
things where you can wrap your mind around why somebody would claim this. But the fact
of the matter is that that not only is a matter of language logic often being different from
mathematical logic, but it isn't consistent. Actually, if we want to be consistent, maybe
we can leave hopefully alone. Because for example, certainly she will be early, we say.
Now no one has any problem with that. But certainly she will be early technically. Doesn't
that seem to mean that she'll be early in a uniquely confident frame of mind where she
thinks she's certain? Not only do we not think that, but we don't think that it means that
on any level. Instead, we think of certainly as a sentential adverb. So that one's allowed.
Now certainly a fluke. Well, what about supposedly? Supposedly she will be early. And with this
one to interpret it in the supposedly literal way really creates kind of a mess. And so she
will be early in supposed fashion. I'm not sure what a person would do if I told them
now look supposed, that doesn't work. Obviously it means it is to be supposed that she will
be early. And a more economical way of saying it is supposedly she will be early, just like
hopefully she will be early. Can't really be said to connote that she'll be early with
a kind of dewy eye glow on her face looking towards pleasant things in the future. And
so we have to be careful how we feel about dangling because we're more comfortable with
a lot more dangling than we think. Similarly, the dangling participle. So driving in from
the airport, the crowds on the sides of the road looked ominous. No, you're not supposed
to do that because the crowds are the subject, but they're not the subject of the clause
driving in from the airport. So it implies that the crowds were told were the ones driving
in from the airport. Driving in from the airport, the crowds on the sides, that's supposed
to be an improper sentence. But what's interesting is that the people who tell us not to do that
aren't being as consistent as they often think. Because for example, imagine a sentence like
this one. Judging from her appearance, she was quite tired. Now that's a perfectly normal
sentence, but she's not judging from her appearance. So it's not that we're thinking she's looking
herself in the mirror and also was fatigued. We mean that you judge from her appearance
that she was quite tired. And so we have different subjects, but the sentence is perceived to
be perfectly all right. And there's nothing more interesting about learning Chinese than
to find that the Chinese just dangle all over the place and think about how large their
country is. That's a lot of dangling. And so the Chinese will just have this kinds of
sentences that we happily consider to be mistakes and that we very carefully follow these rules
about. But in Chinese, what we think of as a dangling participle is just perfectly good
grammar. And so what this means is that our sense of how logic and language work probably
needs a kind of revision because language is logic, and of course there is one or it
wouldn't work is different from the kind of logic that we might try to apply to it from
the world of a particular kind of logic that has to do with math and disembodied sterile
propositions. Now, none of this is to say that we as human beings are not naturally going
to suppose that there's supposed to be some sort of relationship between logic as we think
of it in other realms and language. We are human beings and therefore we generalize.
We're human beings and therefore we analogize. We can't keep all of the things that we perceive
and all of the things that we do on completely separate tracks in our heads. And as a result,
naturally we're going to have these feelings. The question is just what we do with them.
So for example, to turn the camera on myself, I'll give you one that is not mathematically
logical that I cannot stand, but I kind of smack myself on the face or the back and I
try to make myself realize that there is no way to make language be logical in the way
that I rather anally feel that it should in certain places for aesthetically vague reasons
such as that I like green. An example, someone will say there's books on the table. I remember
being rankled by that when I was eight. It seems like the subject and the verb are supposed
to agree and it's not is books. It's are books. Books are plural and there's the verb to be
that has singular and plural forms. And so it should be there are books on the table.
Not there's books on the table. Now that to me is kind of like scrambled eggs and ketchup
should not go together. That's just the way I feel. Many people for some reason don't.
And there is a reason and it's because our language just doesn't work that way. The reason
that people are comfortable saying there's books on the table is for example, how about
this one? It's jelly beans. Someone says, what is what what is the baby crying about? You
know, what does it want? It's reaching up and screaming and yelling. What is it? It's
jelly beans. And what would mean is that it's jelly beans that the baby wants. The baby wants
those jelly bellies up on the shelf. It's jelly beans. Now, Lord forbid, anybody would say
it are jelly beans or what is the baby crying about? They are jelly beans. That would be
something that a computer based on disembodied semantic logic would create. What is the baby
crying about? And you push a button, they are jelly beans. And you think that's pretty
good. They're getting pretty good at this machine technology. But nobody like that would actually
be invited to dine with you unless they were not human because it's jelly beans is really
quite fine. Or another example of this kind of agreement is let's try this sentence. There
was water and mud on the table. Water and mud. Water and mud are two things. But there was
water and mud on the table. That's fine. Now imagine if we were going to apply our rules
strictly. And so we're going to say there are books on the table. But what about water
and mud are two things. So there were water and mud on the table. Notice how that doesn't
quite work. There were water and mud on the table. It almost feels like water and mud
or little cartoon characters or something. There was water and mud on the table even
though the agreement doesn't happen. I point that out just to show that the kind of logic
that a part of us wants, if you could see me, I'd be making air quotes, wants language
to follow. It just doesn't work because an actual language is just too complicated, too
arbitrary and too full of fossils for that logic to ever be applied consistently. And
to put a point on this, I'm going to give you the one that bothers me the most. And
this will also show you that I'm clinically insane because I've noticed that this doesn't
seem to bother most other people. It's just can't. So it's one thing to say just can't
get enough. You simply can't get enough of that. You just can't. But then some people
will say you just can't walk into the room and scream when what they really mean is you
can't just walk into the room and scream. It should be in a different order there. It
is you can't perform the action of simply as if it didn't matter walking into the room
and yelling at that person. But because just can't get enough and other usages of just
can't that makes sense are used so often, people are now taking can't just sentences
and they say just can't. So here is an example that I came across of this rather recently.
This is an athlete and he's giving some sort of pep talk. And he's saying you just can't
harbor on negative things. You have to understand the situation and deal with it. No, no, no.
You can't just harbor on the negative things. You have to understand the situation and deal
with it. That one drives me mad. But the fact of the matter is this. Now that sentence is
important for one thing. Yes, there's a such thing as wrong. He says harbor, he means harp.
And so harbor is just wrong. There's no such thing as to harbor on something in the meaning
of to stress criticizing it over a long period of time. He had a word slip at that point.
But in terms of the just can't as much as it bothers me because I think that people
shouldn't put ketchup on their eggs. The fact is that small words of that kind, especially
when you're dealing with auxiliary verbs, have a way of not coming out in order. And
so for example, we say, isn't he? But you would never say is not he? You have to say,
is he not? Why does not jump the rails and end up before the pronoun when it's contracted?
Is he not? Isn't he? That's just as arbitrary. That probably annoyed some overly sensitive
little child about 300 years ago. But nevertheless, we are stuck with it. It's just the way language
is. So with it shown that I'm not saying that anybody can go through life without thinking
about these sorts of things. We have seen in the lecture before this that English is full
of things that don't submit to logic at all, but are just junk like tail bones. And now
I've tried to get across that in language in general, it's inherent to a language not
to make sense in the sense that we think of logic as being. And now we're going to look
a little more closely at how things that we say all the time do not make any kind of sense
at all in ways that we would never think about.
