We saw in the previous lecture that in terms of logic, there is logic as language has it,
and logic as, say, mathematics has it, and those are very different things.
In this lecture, I want to take this arc a little bit further and show that in this
language that I'm speaking right now and that you presumably speak, there's a great
deal which is indisputably illogical period, no matter what system of logic you're thinking
about, and yet we think nothing of it.
If anything, we find these things quite endearing because they are the language that we speak.
And the reason I want to point these things out is because I want us to move on to a more
celebratory sense of what English is instead of the one that we're often taught.
And in this case, I want to give you a metaphor that I often think of in terms of our orientation
towards our language and how we speak it and how others speak it.
The idea that what we want to do is make English more logical in the way that other
people speak it or write it is one which, from the perspective of a linguist, reminds
one of, of all things, the beach.
Imagine it's about 630 and it's high tide and there's someone out on the beach and
you kind of squint and you look at them closely and you see they have a big towel.
And what they're doing is they remember what the beach was like around one o'clock in the
afternoon when everything was nice and dry.
And what they're trying to do is keep the beach dry and the tide just gets higher and
higher.
We know that soon it's going to be smashing up against the cliffs, but this person and
with just a towel is trying to keep the beach dry.
Now even if that person told you that they're just trying to keep the beach as dry as possible,
we'd think, wow, there's something highly peculiar about what this person is engaged
in.
Well, seeing language as something that we need to make more logical is, from my perspective
and that of a great many people who study language, very much like watching people trying
to dry off the beach.
So I want to see if we can look at things in a different way by showing you how utterly
wonderfully illogical this language is in ways that you generally have no reason to
even think about.
So for example, something I've mentioned before in the course, I want to expand on it a little
bit now.
If you have taken a great many other languages and if you've bought this course then you
probably have, then you know that quite typically verb conjugation offers you a whole bunch of
endings that correspond to I, you, he, she, it, we, you, all, and they.
So for example, if you learn Spanish and you're learning the verb for to buy, comprar, then
you know that you were put through compra, compras, compras, compras, compras, and then
you have to learn all the other flavors of that.
So that's one way that a language is.
Now of course Spanish is one of 6,000 of the world's languages.
There are great many other languages and especially these days now that we're learning languages
such as Chinese and school more, you may have been exposed to a language that does things
in a different way with the verbs.
So for example, in Chinese, I buy, will, my, you buy, need, my, he buys, taught, my, and
it just stays that way all the way through the I, you, he, we, you, all, they, paradigm
as they say.
Don't say paradigm.
Once when I was in college I said paradigm in a class and that teacher never liked me
again, paradigm.
So you can have a language where you have all of these conjugational endings or there's
nothing.
Both of them, I think, seem to all of us as alternate ways that things should be.
But in that case, imagine if there were an alternate universe Mandarin where I buy was
will, my, and then you buy was need, my, and then he buys was taught, my, and there was
just this consonant.
And then it went on and we buy was will, my, and you guys buys need, my, and they buys
taught, my, but just with he, she, and it, it was my, and there was just this consonant.
That would seem a little unharmonious.
Well, the fact is that that is exactly like this walk, walk, walks, walk, walk, walk.
Think about how English goes.
So you have I walk, you walk, he, she, it walks, and then we walk, you all walk.
They walk.
What's this?
Now, we think of it as the most natural thing in the world.
It's just like what goes up must come down.
But the fact is that as I mentioned before in the course, there is one language out of
the 6,000.
Imagine a little airplane flying around the world like in the old universal film logo.
One language in the whole world where in the present tense, when you're conjugating,
what you have to know is that only in the third person singular do you have to put on
a little marker.
That language is English.
If you think about it, that doesn't make any sense.
We're used to it.
That doesn't mean it makes any sense.
It's quite illogical.
And yet we just deal with it all the time.
Who knows how many times I've done it just in this lecture?
That's one very odd and actually quite senseless thing about English.
And I don't think that we're going to be changing it anytime soon.
Another example, you never think of these things.
They seem so typical because fish don't know they're wet.
We as English speakers don't know that we're wet to really use a clumsy kind of analogy.
But how about this one?
Definite article.
So for us in English, that's the.
That very ordinary little word, you imagine if the had a taste, it would be like cork.
At least that's what I've always thought.
It's this little corky word.
Now if you take a typical language, and English in so many ways isn't, if you take a typical
language, then the definite article is something that switch hits as other things.
So whatever is used as that definite article is actually something that lives somewhere
else or that used to live somewhere else.
So take French, if you've had French, although this applies with Spanish in the same kind
of way.
You have l and you have l, those are your definite articles.
So lucha, the cat, meow, and then la lune, the moon.
I don't know what sound the moon makes.
Now l is the definite article and it's masculine and you have to know that.
But then if you take more than about 10 minutes of French, you learn that it is also an object
pronoun for masculine things.
And so I see it if it's masculine or I see him, je le vois, so it's that same look.
Same thing with la, if something is feminine.
If you see her or that object that's arbitrarily marked feminine, je le vois.
Okay, now in itself, that I know is not an interesting fact, but bear with me just for
about what I imagine will be 53 seconds.
In German, it's the same thing.
So you have the articles, der, die, das, that's three of them, and that's annoying in itself.
But they're not all by themselves.
Those same words are used as other things as you kind of think they should be.
So der Mann, and that means the man.
Now if you want to say the man who sleeps, you don't say der Mann, who schleft, because
who is an English word, you say der Mann, der schleft.
And so in a way, it's kind of like that man that sleeps.
It makes a certain sense, der Mann, der schleft.
If you look at languages around the world, it always works that way where there is a
definite article.
It's something else as well.
There are a bunch of things that take that form.
English is the odd one out again.
Only in English is there a definite article that's only itself.
From the linguistic perspective, it's a very strange thing.
So you have the man who sleeps, the man.
But then if you're talking about I saw him, you say I saw him.
The is only the, the is all by itself.
If English were a normal language, then it would be the man, the sleeps.
Or you'd say the man, and you'd also say, oh, I saw the yesterday.
That's the way it's supposed to be.
And what I mean by supposed is that if you look at getting that plain again, fill it
up with some gas, go around the world, where there's a definite article, it's not just
a definite article, it's a whole bunch of things.
And one way that that thing is used is as a definite article.
Only in this strange English language, in terms of what linguists have seen thus far,
is there a definite article that's just a definite article.
That's odd.
And if we look at it in terms of how language goes, that is how most Homo sapiens process
language right now, that doesn't make any sense.
Why does there have to be this one little the?
Now, I too, in my visceral sense, think of the as normal because it's all I've ever known.
But really, it's quite odd.
Have you ever had occasion to try to teach English to a foreigner or if you just listen
to foreigners talk a lot, as I do, for example?
Notice how hard it is for them to master the, if it makes so much sense.
And try to explain it.
And so you can go into a very basic grammar book and they'll say, well, the is what was
referred to before, whereas a, as in a, introduces something.
So, oh, I just saw a sloth running across the floor as opposed to the cat that I usually
see running across the floor, which we were talking about yesterday.
That is how we think of the and the.
But if that's true, if the is something that is already established, why do you say, what's
the best thing we can do?
That's a very ordinary English sense.
What's the best thing we can do?
Wouldn't it be a best thing since you're introducing that whole concept into the conversation?
People have written dissertations about why that is, and I'm not going to share that with
you today, but the is odd.
And yet we say the all the time every day.
If someone said, don't say the, we might as well just dig our own graves and step into
them because we could not speak our language.
And yet the is really screwed up.
So all of this is to say that in this language, things as basic as the and third person singular
S are really bizarrerie.
And I mean that in the pretentious French way, they are bizarrely.
And we don't really think about it.
But what it means is that we're thinking about making the language more logical when there
are two things in the language that really as soon as you step a little bit away from
the language, and especially if maybe you pull back from Europe, make no sense whatsoever.
And this sort of thing just kind of goes on and on.
I want to give you a few more just to give you a sense of how marvelously Dr. Sue Spike
Jones boing, boing crazy this language is such that the beach is a funny place to want
to be.
Another example, we commit, we submit, we permit, we transmit, we remit.
You may have done all of those things today.
And we know what the prefixes mean often.
And so transmit, trans is the across one.
Submit, well, sub means under, although, of course, submitting often doesn't involve
doing anything under, but we won't talk about that.
The main point is, what's mit?
You can't walk around mitting.
That doesn't really exist.
Now you may, if you have had Latin lessons or if you had a really good grammar school
teacher, you may have learned the intellectual fact that mit means to put.
That's what it meant in Latin.
But in terms of your mental representation of this language as you speak it while you
are at Kmart looking for pajamas, we don't think of mit as meaning put.
We may know it intellectually, but in terms of the language, we just kind of pop it out.
And so it's a little orphan that doesn't make sense because ideally, if this is a logical
language, then we are using words whose meanings we understand.
But whenever we use one of those transmit, commit words, we have this little bit of gunk
that we just kind of allow.
Or conceive, receive, deceive, perceive, those are nice words.
If you went outside and stretched and took a deep breath and had yourself a good sieve,
what would that be?
What is sieving?
That is not a word.
And so we know that it's a something because conceive and receive and deceive and perceive
all have something in common and it would seem to be sieve.
But to us, the idea that what sieving is is taking is very much an abstraction.
Again, if you've put on your Latin hat, you might know that.
But really, it's just a bit of stuff in the same way as people are in Congress.
They are, although probably not in Congress, making progress.
You can have egress from something.
But do you grasp much?
I have rarely grasped.
And if I did it, I didn't know what I was doing because I don't know what that means.
Now, of course, I know intellectually.
I know that grass comes from the Latin word for step, although it had a very different
shape.
But really, we just say those words.
All of which is to say that cranberry morphemes, which we've discussed before, are not only
the stray prefixes like crann and huckle.
And it's not only the small, junky little words like vim and kith, but it can actually,
it can be a whole verb root.
I mean, really, depending on how you analyze how language is represented in the brain,
sieve and mitt and grass are in there as verbs.
And then you add prefixes to them.
And that means that we have cranberry verbs that have no meaning and we just put up with
them.
So there's that.
Or here's one.
This is one of my favorites.
It's amazing, the influence that some people can have with the same anal impulse that leads
me to keep things sorted, such as my different deodorants depending on the color of the container.
Something that we all know about is often.
No, I do not.
Many people do.
They say often.
The idea being that because it's spelled that way, you're supposed to say often.
That's perfectly fine.
There's that word.
And for a lot of us, we would prefer to pronounce things the way they're spelled to the extent
that we can, vegetables instead of vegetables, or people who say clothes instead of what
the word has actually become, which is clothes.
That's what it is.
But because it's spelled as clothes, we might have a certain charmingly conservative impulse
and say clothes instead.
But there are a lot of English words.
I'm not going to say a lot.
There is a perky little collection of English words that we pronounce in a way that was
completely artificially created on the basis of what the word was in a language that wasn't
English.
It's absolutely fascinating.
And so, for example, perfect.
Now, Latin, perfectus, okay?
Now Latin is a good long time ago.
It's almost ominous that here in English, millennia later, it's so similar to the way it was then
because words are always changing.
And in French, for example, perfect, parfait.
And so that's that that C in the spelling, the cuss sound, that's gone because language
changes and sounds have a way of dropping out.
Perfectus, Julius Caesar says, parfait, Charles Boyer says, and that's the way it's supposed
to be.
Now, because English had borrowed so many words from French, we had that word, parfait.
It had become an English perfect.
And so by middle English, you see all the time our word for perfect, except there's no cuss
sound.
That C isn't there.
It's a blueberry tail's prologue.
If you went to a good school where you had to look at more than the classic first eight
lines, then you may remember a very perfect, gentle, knayacht, night, parfait.
Now it wasn't just that Chaucer was odd or drunk or something.
He didn't put the C in because that wasn't there.
Now, there were some pedants who, not long after this, decided that in terms of how this
language called English was going to be spelled, we needed to insert these lost sounds back
into these words to indicate where they came from and to preserve where they came from,
especially when we were talking about Latin because there was this Latin fetish that the
intellectual person had in these days.
We saw that with Robert Loth.
And so as a result, what happened was that these sorts of people started putting Latin's
C in perfect back.
And what's important is that it was in writing.
You may be wondering how these people could have had so much influence, and it's because
of writing.
And what I mean by that is that these Latin words came into the language not through somehow
ancient Romans being resuscitated from the dead and overrunning Great Britain for a long
time such that people started taking on their habits.
What happened was that Latin in writing, because of the Renaissance and much else, was something
that people who were of the writerly classes were exposed to, and they started changing
words in writing, which later made their way into common speech.
And so writing had a major effect in this way that it couldn't have with this otherwise
dead language.
But that meant that these pedants started spelling it with this C, with this K sound,
and so gradually people started saying it that way.
So the reason that we say perfect now is because some people with a certain arbitrary backwards
looking sentiment decided that parfait was no good because the word came from Latin perfectus,
and so here we are saying perfect.
And so that's what that is today.
So it doesn't really make sense that we say perfect.
It's highly arbitrary, highly contingent, and yet we're going to keep saying perfect because
that's just the way our language has been made to be.
So the other is the same thing.
Really the way English had it was sojour, and the L had gone.
And then there it was back in.
In the same way, although we don't say dalbut, that is a word where that B was stuck back
in because dubitare was what the word was in Latin.
So that's another aspect of our language, which is quite illogical, that made its way
in through writing.
And now here we are with our perfect soldiers.
Here is another thing, and don't worry, this is the second to last thing.
You talk about your parts of speech, and so you have the schoolhouse, rock, shorts, and
many of us remember them.
It's interesting.
People always remember certain ones, but there's one that always gets kind of left out.
So everybody remembers unown is a person, place or thing.
Who could forget lolly, lolly, lolly, get your adverbs here.
That one was good.
For some reason, I think the adjective one must have been shown one morning in 1975.
Only I seem to remember the adjective one.
Remember he was a hairy bear, he was a scary bear, and Blossom Deary sang it.
That's how I learned what an adjective was.
They sure weren't teaching that in my school.
But the fact of the matter is that sort of thing teaches us, plus the parsing exercises
that many of you maybe had, that there are parts of speech and that each word fits neatly
into its little box, and that part of what it is to do grammar is to be able to take
each word and put it into those little parts of speech boxes.
But you know, often it doesn't work, and I mean often, and not just with obscure words.
Take fun.
What part of speech is fun?
I mean, it seems kind of like a noun.
You'll say, we had fun.
Well, you can have a lot of things, and when you have them, they're nouns.
So fun, okay?
But what about, oh, that was a fun party?
Well, you don't mean that as a noun.
You don't mean that was a hen party to use an old-fashioned word that women used to use
for party where men weren't at it.
That was a juice party, no.
That was a fun party.
You don't mean a party of fun.
You mean that the party was fun just like the party was loud or the party was strange.
So there, it's an adjective.
But it's kind of an odd adjective because you can't say that was very fun, or if you
do, you're probably saying it with a thick accent and being told that you're wrong.
You can say something is very red or very big or very strange, but that was very fun.
Now yes, you can say really fun, but why not very fun?
What's wrong with it if it's supposed to be an adjective?
Or you can't say funner, funnest.
Any good card-carrying adjective is one where you can make it comparative or superlative,
especially if it has one syllable.
With two syllables, it gets hairy, but if it has one syllable, then you're supposed to
be able to do er, est.
And so it was red-er, for example.
It was greater.
It was the greatest, the greatest generation.
So fun, if it's an adjective, that was a fun party.
Yeah, but ours was funner, no.
Somebody might say it, but you kind of feel like they don't speak well.
And then funnest, what was the funnest experience?
No, we feel like somehow that's on the edge of what acceptable English is.
And make no mistake, I feel that way too.
But that means that fun doesn't really make sense as an adjective.
These are some odd things about fun.
This is not how adjectives behave, and then you notice that really it seems to be caught
between being a noun and an adjective, and that's the answer.
That's what happens to some words.
But that means that it's neither fish nor fowl.
You know, more fun, okay, that's fine, just like you can have more juice.
Why not funner, funnest?
And yet if you think about it, unless you're tragically sad, you say the word fun a lot.
But forget the, forget the schoolhouse rock, it doesn't fit.
There are a lot of words that don't fit.
And in that sense, if we're going to think of logic as being that words have their parts
of speech, fun is hopeless.
So we have all of these things.
And the final one that I want to call attention to is particularly interesting because what
we consider to be substandard actually makes more sense than the standard versions of what
this is.
What in the world am I talking about?
What I'm talking about is ain't.
So imagine if I say I ain't, well, the minute I say I ain't, well, that makes me a substandard
person.
It sounds like I didn't go to college, or I drank too much beer, or I'm putting on some
sort of demotic affectation, probably a combination of the three, but I'm not supposed to say
I ain't.
But then again, try to make I ain't into the standard.
So one way would be to say, am I not?
And you have to say it in that voice because it's stilted.
There's no am I not.
You can use it ironically, meaning that you're pretending to be stilted.
You could say, well, I have the most spectacular hat in this contest.
I'm pretty clever, am I not, giggle, giggle, ha, ha.
In terms of just ordinary, spontaneous, casual, neutral speech, am I not is not something that
you're going to say on a daily basis.
So instead of am I not, how about aren't I, but that's wrong too, because if you think
about it, aren't I is completely illogical.
It sounds as natural as tap water coming out of, I guess I'll say it, but if you think
about it, unpack aren't I, and you're saying I are not.
No one says that.
No foreigner, no child, nobody even playfully talks about I are.
That's just, that's not English, that's non-English.
So aren't I is technically a mistake.
Now I know I seem to be pushing it here, but the truth is that in a distant day, and actually
not that distant, these are the sorts of things that people were taught as blackboard grammar.
And I can think of no better example than Connie Brooks, those of you who have had the
benefit of long lives will remember the hit radio and then television sitcom with Eve
Arden that was about a school teacher, and she would sometimes mention the sorts of things
that she would be teaching.
And oddly enough, in one radio episode of Our Miss Brooks, this exact business with
Aint is discussed.
And so let's go back to the late 40s at a pleasantly pregnant moment in the radio sitcom
Our Miss Brooks with Eve Arden.
Mr. Boyden, that was the key to the school.
Mr. Jensen asked me to open up this morning.
Oh no, Miss Brooks.
Oh yes, Mr. Boyden.
Oh gosh, pretty soon Mr. Conklin and all the students will be arriving at school, nobody
will be able to get in.
Mr. Conklin will be furious at you.
Don't remind me, I can see the sparks flashing from his tongue already.
Gee, Arden, quite a spot, aren't I?
Aren't I?
That shows how upset I am, Mr. Boyden.
An English teacher should never be guilty of saying aren't I?
But Miss Brooks, what about school?
Suppose we hurry over to the plaything.
Arden is merely the contraction of are not.
The one who says aren't I is guilty of saying are not I.
The correct form is am I not, aren't I, being nothing more than an absurd and altogether
ungrammatical affectation.
Miss Brooks, what about school?
I ain't going.
So Connie was having not only her problems with Mr. Boyden, the always elusive biology
teacher, but with this area of grammar.
Now we would say all these decades later that Connie is being a little bit too pedantic,
or her teachers were too pedantic, in teaching her that aren't I is wrong.
It's not wrong.
We all say it.
What it means is that aren't I makes no sense, and yet we say it all the time and we accept
it.
And so that's one of a great many examples of which we've only seen a few in this half
hour of things in English that don't make any sense at all.
So it's not a matter of language having a different kind of logic.
It's also that a language is full of illogic, which we happily let pass.
And so I ain't maybe substandard, but it actually makes a whole lot more sense than the standard
forms, which are the sorts of things that we just let pass.
And so what this seems to suggest is that our concern in a language is less with logic
than with a certain number of constructions that get singled out for attention, such as
double negatives and dangling participles.
And a lot of those things have a logic of their own in any case.
But then on the other hand, there are things that have no logic at all.
And we just let them pass when, in fact, we might suppose that instead of being so alarmed
about all of these things, we might just accept that language is something which is inherently
not only logical in different ways than other sorts of logic, such as the mathematical,
but illogical in the same way as we cherish a charmingly sloppy, overgrown English garden
or a wild patchwork quilt or any number of other things in which we consider the lack
of order to be part of the charm, especially because all of this depends on what we call
order specifically.
What we value probably more importantly than logic is clarity.
And so the issue is whether or not meaning has been accurately communicated.
What we're often told is illogical in English never creates misunderstandings, for the most
part, and that suggests that we're faced with different kinds of logic.
And then it would seem that with a great many things that don't make any kind of actual
sense at all, we still manage to communicate with considerable precision.
And so our concern should be with clarity rather than logic because the two are not the same.
And that brings us to a guide to grammar that is couched in ways of looking at these things
that we have put into question in many of these lectures, but nevertheless has valuable
aspects as well.
How can we make ourselves fashionable in terms of clarity with strunk and white?
We'll find out in the next lecture.
