So, we've seen the hard parts, and now we have to address a very interesting and very
important question which anybody going through this course is going to have at this point,
which is, is there a such thing as good prescriptivism?
So if there are all these pitfalls in our notions of what is coherent, what is logical,
what should be kept in the language, then is there a use in thinking of language as
something to trim, something to beautify, something to try to do better than you might
if you weren't trying?
And the fact of the matter is that we have that impulse.
It is perhaps a universal of being a literate Western person to have at least some of that
impulse.
And as a result, even in these times, when the teaching of grammar tends to be less formal
and less thorough than it used to be in America, compact guides to usage are still popular.
And today, a lot of the prescriptive impulse, which is very much out there, doesn't come
directly from the works of Robert Loth and Lindley Murray.
Although I recommend, if you really don't have anything better to do, say in the middle
of the summer, going to one of the bigger libraries and paging through one of those books.
Loth's book is actually, in its elegant way, quite entertaining.
But we don't usually curl up with those books at this point.
Finally, what the prescriptive impulse comes from in a more live way today is two classic
works.
One of them is Henry Fowler's Dictionary of Modern English Usage.
Now my sense is that that one is more likely to be given as a gift than to be purchased.
That one is more likely to be cherished by people who are also literature fans in general.
Nevertheless, it's very much there, not hard to get in the United States.
But then, the real king of these books in the United States is, of course, the Elements
of Style by William Strunk and then amended by E. B. White in the 1950s.
And that one is known, of course, affectionately as Strunk and White.
So to the extent that you feel like you have got all your bases covered in terms of how
English should be, you likely have a copy of Strunk and White in that pretty Helvetica-type
face that the cover's been in for a long time, up over your desk or to the side of it or
under it, or at least somewhere near it, and you have consulted it often.
So let's talk about Strunk and White.
You might think, based on the things that I've been talking about over the past 15 lectures,
I would take a pretty dim view of Strunk and White, and that is not the case.
It's actually a very elegant book, and it is actually a book that's worth reading from
cover to cover because it's actually not very long, not very long in the way that books
tended to be before word processing technology.
And it's a book written by somebody who had at least a certain claim to authority on these
prescriptive matters because it wasn't written by, for example, a Strunk and White who were
pals arm in arm writing their own book about grammatical usage when really they were bricklayers
or poets or insurance salesmen or something like that.
Strunk was an English professor, an English professor at Cornell, as a matter of fact,
and White was the E.B. White who is best known to us as the author who published often,
for example, in The New Yorker.
They did not write the book together, and as a matter of fact, William Strunk Jr. is
a rather dim figure to us historically.
He is very, very dead, and the reason that we read Strunk and White is because E.B.
White took a course with him way back in 1919.
If you think about that, it's almost a hundred years ago at this point.
And Strunk had written a kind of booklet.
It was self-published, just a kind of guide, and it was White who in the 50s had always
been an admirer of this primer and polished it and fleshed it out into the book that we
know today.
And the truth is that if you read through Strunk and White, you learn a great many
things that are valuable about especially writing language, and that's something which
is increasingly difficult to internalize in our increasingly orally-oriented American
English-speaking world, as we'll see in subsequent lectures in this course.
Strunk and White is wonderful for that.
And also, Strunk himself has a certain puckishly imperious humor, which makes it fun to read
his opinions about what language is good and what language isn't.
That said, there are quite a few linguists who have taken on quite a dim view of Strunk
and White.
So to the extent that one can almost recreationally kick around Robert Loth sometimes, Strunk
and White have really come in for it from some.
So, for example, Jeffrey Pullum, who's an eminent linguist.
He is at the University of Edinburgh.
He has said with his typical beautiful writing style that I actually think William Strunk
Jr. would have approved of, it's sad.
Several generations of college students learned their grammar from the uninformed bossiness
of Strunk and White.
And the result is a nation of educated people who know they feel vaguely anxious and insecure
whenever they write, however, or than me, or was, or which, but can't tell you why.
The land of the free in the grip of the elements of style.
That's a pretty common opinion.
And you know the truth is that Jeff, of course I'm calling him Jeff, to make sure that you
know that I know Jeff Pullum.
The funny thing is I actually do.
Jeff is perhaps too harsh on that.
A lot of Strunk and White really is sensible.
And so, for example, if you go through it and you look at the first section, it's called
elementary rules of usage.
And that sort of thing is, it has a vaguely pompous sound, and that's the sort of thing
that gets the hackles up of a Jeff Pullum.
But actually, it's a guide to punctuation, and it's got really handy pointers on the
usage of semicolons and colons and commas and parentheses of a kind which I think anybody
would find useful and that many people I know actually could use.
And so, for example, you get things like place a comma before a conjunction, introducing
an independent clause.
Now, there's nothing wrong with that, nothing stuffy about that.
That means something like the early records of the city have disappeared, comma, and the
story of its first years can no longer be reconstructed.
Well, yes, it's nice to have a comma there.
There are people who would leave it out, and their writing is not as readily comprehensible.
Now, of course, after this, Strunk and White say that the comma is admissible, in a case
like that, when there's no second subject, but then not before but.
Now, that's an aesthetic issue.
And so, for example, the idea is that there's a contrast between a sentence like this one.
He has had several years' experience and is thoroughly competent.
The idea there is that there's no comma because it isn't and he is thoroughly competent.
So, smooth.
He has had several years' experience and is thoroughly competent.
That's fine.
But then, on the other hand, if you have a but, there are ideas that you then you have
to have a comma.
So, I have heard the argument, comma, but, am still unconvinced.
Well, I like that.
I like that like I like the color green, but this is one of those things.
There is no higher authority that dictates that.
And so, often, people will say, well, what are the rules?
And they'll look into Strunk and White.
And the idea is often that Strunk and White tabulated the rules that they got it from
somewhere.
But no, they're just deciding this.
And it might be that you feel that they have a nice way of decking out a living room, which
is the equivalent of what they're doing.
I think they do, but, you know, they decided that.
That's not based on something like the nucleotides and the way they work in DNA.
Useful though.
And so, for example, elementary principles of composition is another section, and they
have it all numbered out.
And so, for example, 19 is express coordinate ideas in similar form.
And well, you know, in terms of keeping the food separate on the plate, you should.
If you're going to be aesthetic, I say, just like them, feels good to me.
So, his speech was marked by disagreement and scorn for his opponent's position.
That's a processable sentence, but better, according to Strunk and White, is that you
use the prepositions that go with these particular nouns.
And so, his speech was marked by disagreement with and scorn for his opponent's position.
Now that is dotting an I, crossing a T.
Now there's nothing wrong with doing such things, and that does make for something that
you would certainly call more elegant.
It's not that the first sentence isn't comprehensible, but sure, I think that there's room for good
writing in that sense, or somebody says, the French, the Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese.
Now, I think you know that I just referred to four different kinds of people.
You don't think that I said the French, the Italians, and then all of a sudden went into
a disquisition about how lobsters mate.
Something you don't want to know, by the way, it involves urine.
But still, the French, the Italians, the Spanish, and the Portuguese, that's better.
It's more aesthetic.
You've got your ducks in a row, or if these ducks are in a row, all of them have two legs,
which is the way you like ducks to be.
Or number 20, keep related words together to ward off ambiguity, okay?
So there are two ways you can write a sentence about if somebody spills red wine on your
rug.
He noticed a large stain in the rug that was right in the center.
Okay, that's a nice sentence, but a little awkward, kind of like somebody where you can
tell that they're missing a toe, like it's just, it'll do, but it's a little awkward.
He noticed a large stain right in the center of the rug.
So instead of having right in the center hanging off with that, that was right in the center,
he noticed a large stain right in the center of the rug.
Yeah, okay.
And if you read through the written aspects.
If you read through the aspects of Strunk and White that are about how to compose sentences,
then really it's a very useful book.
If anything, one might feel that it's too short.
Strunk only gave us so much about that.
White only added so much, but those parts of Strunk and White are quite useful.
And another thing about Strunk and White, they have a bad rap for something among linguists
that they didn't really say.
And so it's often discussed in terms of language usage that one just shouldn't use the
passive voice, always use the active.
And so people feel self-conscious about using the passive voice.
But of course, the question is, if the passive voice were not to be used, why would it be
in the language?
It evolved among illiterate people using language as we use it.
If you're never supposed to say the man was bitten by the dog, then why did it emerge
anyway?
What's so terrible about it?
Linguistic constructions don't have smells and viruses.
And so that right alone would make you wonder, and I'm sure that a Strunk would have agreed.
They never say, never use the passive.
And so for example, they'll say, don't use, my first visit to Boston will always be remembered
by me.
But then again, nobody would ever say that.
Or at dawn, the crowing of a rooster could be heard.
Okay, that is a clumsy sentence, and there would be no reason for anybody to put it that
way anyway.
And so one might avoid using that kind of sentence if one were an extremely naive writer
who were tossing in the passive in unnatural ways.
But in terms of how anybody would use the passive who has half a sense of how to rub
it down on a verb together, they allow, for example, the dramatists of the restoration
are a little esteemed today.
That's perfectly fine.
And that means that a whole lot of passive usage that we would spontaneously use, they
would actually completely agree with.
And so it is not true, as one will often hear in condemnations of Strunk and White, that
they have told us not to use the passive voice.
It's just that in the eternal game of operator, that communication is, what they said has
been oversimplified into something that has distracted a lot of people into strawman arguments.
And so that can't be treated as a flaw in their argumentation.
So when we talk about Strunk and White, there is an awful lot that is good.
But then there are other parts of Strunk and White where one has certain issues.
And where one, one in this case being me, finds the book more an enjoyable read than
a guide to usage.
And I suspect that many people feel this way when actually engaging sections like these.
And so, for example, if you are looking at Strunk and White and you are in the vein of
wanting to criticize it, then what moves you that way is that often Strunk and White fall
into some of the pitfalls that Robert Loth did.
And so they'll prescribe against something as ambiguous when really in terms of how we
process it in real life, there never would be any ambiguity.
And so, for example, there's the pronoun trouble as always.
And so William Strunk had this notion that you're supposed to say something like, the
culprit it turned out was he.
That's supposed to be a sentence.
No, the culprit it turned out was him.
That's what we would say in this language called English.
To say the culprit was he is somebody who uses that voice and is probably fictional.
And so, Strunk is into this notion that a scholar of English in his era would have still been
privy to that you're supposed to have a nominative usage there.
And that really, although I doubt if Strunk, even at that point, thought of it this way,
Strunk wouldn't have been thinking it has to be that way because of Latin.
He had just been taught it is nominative and therefore you don't use the object form him.
But when the sentence that you use comes out sounding as pusillanimous and pithless as
the culprit it turned out was he, wrong voice, the culprit it turned out was he, then there's
something wrong.
Or another example is when Strunk comes up with, do you mind me asking a question?
And his idea is that that's wrong.
Why is it wrong to say, do you mind me asking a question?
His idea is that that implies that you are minding me and that really it should be, do
you mind my asking a question?
Now, okay, I imagine you could think of it that way but who has ever heard anybody say,
do you mind me asking a question and thinking, minding them, what do they mean by that?
And of course then I just committed an error by not saying minding him or it or whatever
one is supposed to say.
And so this is something where yes, you might think people might think that if you're thinking
of languages being like math or as pronouns as being not unruly little kittens.
But in real life the fact is that there is no ambiguity there.
English allows both and we know that English allows both because it creates no misunderstanding.
And the truth is that in many cases if you're an American person who wishes to have friends
or date then always saying, do you mind my asking a question might get you in a kind
of trouble.
I wouldn't say that in some places because it would leave you shunned as kind of a professional
pedant.
And so in a case like that you see what Strunk means.
He's playing with the language in a way.
But do we want to take that as counsel?
That's a question.
And along those lines, Strunk and White is where you'll hear about hopefully not being
a valid usage when you say hopefully she'll go up the stairs soon.
Whereas as we've seen if you can use certainly and supposedly in that way then why not hopefully
and this isn't something that Strunk and White address.
So I think we have to keep our own counsel there.
I mean the truth of the matter is Strunk, like all of us, is a person.
He wasn't a statue.
He wasn't the Strunk that we now think of as this figurehead.
He was a living, quirky individual.
So for example, White, who really enjoyed his teacher, describes him just like this.
From every line there peers out at me, the puckish face of my professor, his short hair
parted neatly in the middle and combed down over his forehead, his eyes blinking incessantly
behind steel rim spectacles as though he had just emerged into strong light, his lips
nibbling each other like a nervous horse, his smile shuttling to and fro under a carefully
edged mustache.
Now for one thing, notice that that bit with the horse is quote unquote an error.
The lips aren't like horses, which just shows how very difficult it is to write in the way
that they're talking about.
But nevertheless, think about Strunk.
So apparently he was rather zealous, so to speak, and he liked to bite his lips and
he had some peeves.
But he was just a person.
It wasn't a matter of him identifying how blood clots.
It was nothing that universal.
It's just how he felt.
And so for example, he felt the way many of us felt about nouns as verbs.
And so we'll listen to somebody say, I'm going to structure it this way.
And somebody will say, well, I just think that structure is a noun that's not supposed
to be a verb.
Now Strunk on that had the same feeling, except he's basing it on a hundred and more years
ago.
Because this is somebody who had been listening to language since the late 19th century.
And he puts it as, many nouns have lately been pressed into services verbs.
Not all are bad, but all are suspect.
Now you can imagine this lip biting, hair parted, grill creamed, bespectacled Woodrow
Wilson-esque person.
It must have been charming.
But you know, why are they suspect?
Especially when you notice that the ones that he found suspect are the ones that we today
think of as just chicken and rice.
So for him, he doesn't like, the candidate hosted a dinner for 50 of her workers.
Well, oh dear, host, host is supposed to be a noun.
How can you talk about hosting a dinner?
Well that might have sounded a little funny way back then, but those are awesome.
And so with that in mind, you find that some of the things that Strunk says are really
just stuff your uncle didn't like.
And so he doesn't like the word finalize because he thinks that it's fuzzy because it might
mean terminate.
Well, you know, we don't think so today and the world has moved on.
And there's this sort of thing in Strunk and White.
So overall, when we go through Strunk and White, it's a mixed bag.
A lot of it is handy counsel on clean, readable prose and you wouldn't want to do without
it, partly because it is.
So handy.
It doesn't go on for too long.
The punctuation rules are great.
But a rule of thumb with Strunk and White is that where they advise something that seems
rather counterintuitive and seems to have only been fitfully mastered by English speakers
at all educational levels, even after all of this time that Strunk and White has existed,
then generally Strunk and White were feeling more than they were thinking, i.e. they were
human like all of us.
And that would include what they have to say about shall versus will and also split infinitives
and also some rather eccentric notions about words like transpire and fix.
And so first half, lovely, second half, be careful.
Then there is Fowler.
Now Henry Fowler's dictionary of usage, it's from the 20s.
It's more influential in Great Britain than here.
But even here, if you've gotten past Strunk and White, Fowler is thought of as the next
place to go.
And new editions come out and are warmly reviewed in leading organs about the issues of the
day.
Highly readable.
I talk often about curling up on rainy days.
If you do that nowadays with something that is not an iPod, then you might want to do
it with Fowler.
And unlike Strunk and White, Fowler is a nice little squary chunk.
It's sort of the book equivalent of a chunky bar.
And so it's recommended in terms of something to go through to learn about shades of meaning
and etymology and common sense points.
But Fowler's got a problem.
And Fowler's problem is that Fowler is not consistent.
So Fowler has a lot of judgments.
But then you'll go to another word that presents the same sorts of issues, and he has a whole
different way of looking at things.
An example of that is aggravate.
So what do you think aggravate means?
I think of aggravate meaning that you irritate somebody.
So stop aggravating me, you tiny person.
That's what aggravate means.
Now he thinks Fowler's idea, and remember that also time has gone by.
This person way back then thinks that to aggravate is to make worse.
Now we have that meaning.
You can, well, this aggravated her condition.
But if anything we think of that as the secondary meaning, and let's face it, many of us don't
know it at all.
If any of us are raising children, do your children know unless they're major readaholics
that that's something that aggravate means as well?
The word's been changing.
Now for Fowler the idea is aggravate, the use of these in the sense annoy vex annoyance
vexation should be left to the uneducated.
It's for the most part a feminine or childish colloquialism, but intrudes occasionally into
the newspapers.
To aggravate has probably only one meaning, to make an evil worse or more serious.
Okay, yeah, but that's what he thought then, but I'm not sure if that's useful to us
now because words often had counterintuitively different meanings not very long ago to what
we're used to.
So for example obnoxious.
Obnoxious used to mean vulnerable.
It used to mean open to attack because noxa is injury and ob is towards open to attack.
That person is obnoxious with that wound that hasn't healed and all these germs flying around.
This idea that obnoxious meant annoying, which is something that crept in by interpretation
because obnoxious happens to have noxious in it, that's something that came later.
Fowler feels that that's wrong.
So here is Fowler expatiating, there's a word for you, on how we should handle obnoxious.
So he talks about this original meaning that's so opaque to us, this business of the open
wound, something being thrown to injury.
So its currency is now so restricted, this is the old meaning, that it's puzzling to
the uninstructed.
It's the words rightful or de jure meaning and we may hope that scholarly writers will
keep it alive as they've hitherto succeeded in doing.
Meanwhile the rest of us need not scruple to recognize the usurping or de facto sense,
i.e. the one that we think of now as normal, de facto sense offensive or objectionable.
This has perhaps no right to exist, but it does and will and unlike the other it is comprehensible
to everyone.
So he gives up on obnoxious, he just figures well the horse is out of the barn, but then
he's very particular about aggravate.
For no particular reason it's just that for him one of them was green and apparently one
of them was what red is for me.
And there's no principle at all and in the same way with Fowler as much fun as it is
to read.
If we followed him we would not use the word meticulous in the way that we use it, we wouldn't
use the word asset in the way that we use it, emotive is not a word at all, mentality
he didn't like that, we would say pneumatic instead of pneumatic and we would say reconnaissance
and not recognizance but reconnaissance instead of recognizance and that's just the
way he thought because he was a person in that world way back then.
And he also doesn't like singular they and for medicine he would want us to say medicine,
I don't want to say that and I don't think any of us do and so that's the Fowler issue.
So the Fowler book is a kind of an anthropology of prescriptivism, it's a snapshot of what
was felt to be correct by an educated type of wordsmith of a particular place and time
but there's no consistent authority there.
So anybody taking this course would wonder what I thought or linguists thought of strunk
in white and by extension perhaps Fowler and what they are is clever aesthetic manuals,
they aren't scientific parsings of the workings of English, they are interesting and valuable
curios of judgment.
Now that doesn't mean that there's no such thing as what a linguist and what I think
all of us would view as more authoritative manuals of what this language is and the way
this language goes when it is this language English.
If we're looking for something that takes that perspective in a scientific and consistent
way then we have to move on to some things that have been written more recently and that's
what we're going to look at in the next two lectures, get ready for some surprises.
