So, if we examine this world of what grammar really is, and we really zero in on this wonderful
thing called English, then what more do we find?
If linguists are about something more than just showing where prescriptivist grammarians
go wrong, then where do linguists go?
As it happens, linguists have described English between two covers in considerable lovably
doorstop detail, and the keystone effort there, and the one that we're going to use as our
example in this lecture, is the Cambridge Grammar of the English Language by Rodney
Huddleston and Geoffrey Pullum.
What we want to do is look at some of the things that this work shows us about this
language, which does show us that the description of English is just as interesting and just
as counterintuitive, talk about Billy and me and how we're not supposed to say it, just
as counterintuitive as the Connie Brooks Blackboard Grammar tenets that we're taught are what
grammar is.
Basically, what we see is that when English is described in detail, and I'm talking about
detail, you wouldn't curl up with this book on one rainy day, you would curl up with this
book during a rainy year, then what you find is that what we English speakers are doing
is quite awesome.
I don't mean that in the teen way, I mean it in the original way.
It really is an awesome thing how much of English grammar there is, and how much of
it one does write without even trying in ways that we're not even aware of.
Oddly enough, Huddleston and Pullum's book is full of things that actually make you metaphorically
and maybe even literally slap your forehead thinking about things that you didn't know
were in this language, and it really takes you in many directions.
I want to give you one of my favorite examples first, and it's all about the future.
And that is, supposedly in English we have a present, and remember that even there it's
more complicated than we're often told, but let's say it's I build, although of course
if you ask somebody so, Sam, what are you doing?
He doesn't say I build a house, but let's say for the sake of argument I build, and
then there's the past, I built, or builded, if you go back just a couple hundred years,
but I built, and then we have a future, because we figure you're supposed to have a future,
and so it would be I will build.
But you know, if you actually examine the way English works, rather than assuming that
it's going to be like Latin, which does have a very nice past, present, and future, and
there's nothing really more complicated to be said about it than that, if you're not
assuming that English is taking its skew from Latin, and you look at our English future,
you find that English doesn't have a future tense, English does not mark it.
And what I mean by that is that when you really zero the camera in on a little will, as in
I will build, you find that there are great many things about it that don't fit with its
analysis as a future marker, to the point that it ends up not working at all.
What I mean by that is this.
For one thing, let's take the basic proposition that will is a future marker.
So that's what will is for.
Well if so, then why is it that will actually behaves like an ordinary verb in many ways?
And so present, take, past, took.
There's will, that's the present, and then the past is would.
This is how linguists go about it.
We look at these sorts of patterns.
And so if will is just this marker that puts things into the future, then what's it doing
having a present and a past form as if it was just some verb?
That's your first clue that something's wrong.
That alone doesn't make the case.
That could just be a hair out of place.
We all have hairs out of place.
But when there are too many hairs out of place, you have to change your theory.
And will creates more problems.
For example, in English, there is a class of auxiliary verbs, and many of us have learned
what an auxiliary verb is, the helping verbs as they're often called.
And what these auxiliary verbs are, are mood markers.
And so they don't mark tense.
They don't put something in the past or in the future.
They mark mood.
Not as in, you know, I'm not in the mood for Blackberry Sorbet today, but as in can.
And we're talking about the potential.
That's a mood.
That's not about the past or the future.
That's what grammarians call a mood.
May.
That's the permissive.
That's another mood.
That may be the way you're feeling on a particular day.
Must is also often permissive, or it's about probability.
Why?
That must be Tyler.
Something like that.
Now, all of those mood verbs have certain things in common.
And it's interesting because will, which we think of as just this future marker, and
that seems innocent enough, actually is just like this little mood gang.
And so, for example, if you're in the mood gang, imagine them all wearing the same color
short pants, red short pants, and let's say they're shirtless, like early Mickey Mouse.
So it's this mood gang, and they're all running around.
They don't have an infinitive.
So for example, can, but there's no to can.
I wish to can, of course, if you're talking about preserves, but to be able to do something,
I wish to can.
You can't.
There's no to must.
That's very odd.
These verbs are defective in that way.
This is a gang, actually, of deficients.
Think of them as they're all, let's make them all pathologically short or something.
So that's what these helping verbs that are the mood gang are.
So they all have no infinitive, and neither does will.
So you can will yourself to do something, sure.
If you're talking about I will build, there's no to will in that sense.
It's just this little deficient gang member, right?
And then there is something else about this little gang.
They don't take the bizarre third person's, so notice he can, not he can's.
That's very important, because with a regular verb, you have take, taste, not he can's.
There's no, oh, well, she musts.
I insist she musts.
You say she musts.
They're defective.
There's nothing wrong with them.
One of their shoes is bigger than the other shoe or something like that.
It's this little gang.
And will is in that too.
And so she will, not she wills build a house, she will be a lot.
So we're thinking of it as this future marker, but it seems to have all this stuff in common
with this little gang.
And then finally, in this little gang, when you put this little gang into the past, it's
not really past.
It actually is about what you call the hypothetical.
What do I mean by that?
This.
I mean, that can.
And so, I wish you could move it.
Could is the past of can.
But if you say I wish you could move it, that doesn't mean that it happened in the past.
When you say I wish you could move it, you're standing right there saying it to somebody
in the present who is standing there winded after trying to lift a sofa.
Could in that case doesn't put the can in the past.
I mean, theoretically, you would be happy if the person had been able to move it in
the past, because then it wouldn't be sitting there.
But what you mean is that there's another realm of possibility that you wish that we
were in.
It's hypothetical.
And in the same way, you have might, wish I may, wish I might.
That doesn't mean wish I may now and wish I mott in the past, whatever that form would
be.
They are in the present.
Might is a hypothetical may.
In the same way, you have will and then would, but that's in the past technically.
But really, it's a marker of the same hypotheticality, all of which is to say that if you look at
a sentence with will and you look at the way this will behaves, and what I mean by behaves
is what it's most like in the language, it's one of this little gang of mood markers.
And the mood in question is hypothetical.
And what that means is that what will is, is it's a marker of hypotheticality.
Accidentally, it looks to us like we have a future tense, because a long time ago people
thought because Latin has a future tense and because any real language has a future tense,
although that's not true, Russian and Japanese don't have a way of marking the future all
the time in the way that we're expecting.
Which is actually one of those languages that doesn't have one future tense construction
in that way.
What it has is this hypothetical marker.
And if you think of it that way, if you just, you know, it's like you're looking at your
little girl grow up and you have to accept her as what she is instead of waiting for
her to become a reproduction of you.
And after you understand she's not you, everything she does makes more sense.
Notice how when I say that it seems like I've raised children, it's because I've listened
to people who say such things.
But I'm sure it's true.
And in the same way, will, you have to let it breathe and you realize that, for example,
here is vanilla.
That is the doctor.
Now, if you say that will be the doctor, well, that's hypothetical.
That means that somebody is walking up the pavement and somebody has neurostenia upstairs
or whatever they've got.
Oh, that will be the doctor.
It's hypothetical.
Then you can put that in the past.
That would be the doctor.
And so that's the hypothetical in the past.
And it means that there are other ways where when we use will, we're using a hypothetical
marker, not a future marker, despite what we've been trained to think.
And so, for example, let's say, you say, so, just watch, tomorrow I'll wear Argyle
socks.
Now, we think that that means that we're marking that this Argyle sock wearing will
be in the future.
But the truth is that when you say that, when you say that sentence, it courts an expectation.
What you're saying, what you're implying, and you might just even say it is, tomorrow
I'll wear Argyle socks, and there's almost a threat.
And just wait and see how many people say I'm a good dresser.
Tomorrow I'll wear Argyle socks.
And what that means in terms of the general meaning of that whole sentence is, if I wear
Argyle socks, then people will say that I'm a good dresser.
That's what you really mean when you use that will.
So we think, well, that's putting it into the future.
But really, it's a marker of hypothetical mood.
Now, the future kind of falls out of hypotheticality.
The hypothetical is often something that we associate with the future.
It might happen in the future.
But really, in terms of just futureness, that's not what will is doing.
In terms of what it patterns with, in terms of its infinitive, in terms of what happens
when you try to put it into the past and so much else, it behaves like a mood marker
because it is.
And so if you've ever learned a language where there's no regular way to express the future,
it's one of the oddest things about Russian.
It's really weird about Japanese.
It's often just left to context.
That's actually something that is true in many ways of English as well.
Here's something else about English that we're not taught is the way the language works,
but it does.
And it actually leads us to all sorts of notions about how to be expressive in this language.
Light verbs.
Now this is the sort of thing that we've seen in Strunk and White as discussed as too wordy.
And the fact is that there are cases where you might decide to be concise because the
light verb construction and then what we might call the brief construction are the same in
meaning.
So, I've already had two showers today, if that's one sentence.
Then there's I've already showered twice today.
Now I've already had two showers today is the light verb construction because you're
using have a shower.
The verb is considered light because it doesn't really have much meaning.
Really it's just sort of setting the stage for that noun shower and all of that together
becomes a kind of verb that has more bric-a-brac than a simple verb.
But I've already had two showers today, light verb.
I've already showered twice today.
If you would like to be concise, if that's what floats your boat, then you're not really
losing any meaning in saying I've already showered twice today and you're not creating
any new meaning.
But for a Strunk to say that from this we can extrapolate that we really should just
avoid light verb constructions altogether is questionable because the fact is as Huddleston
and Pullham show, the light verb constructions are often not equivalent in meaning to the
briefer ones and in fact generally that's the case.
So typically a light verb construction implies that something has taken place over a shorter
amount of time and often in highlighting that it makes the description of what you're talking
about somewhat more vivid than the shorter version.
And so for example, short version, she kissed him.
Light verb version, she gave him a kiss.
Now those two things don't mean the same thing.
She kissed him implies a certain length, a certain old moving as perhaps you think of
a Max Steiner score.
She gave him a kiss is and that's it and it just ended.
Those are two different things, however you feel about those two occasions and the way
you would rather have it done.
Or I calculated the costs, okay, I made a calculation of the costs.
So I calculated the cost, that could have been something you were stuck doing all day.
I made a calculation of the costs right there as if people use adding machines but you know
what I mean.
He looked at my draft, he had a look at my draft.
So he looked at my draft could be that he gazed at it because he found it sexually attractive.
He had a look at my draft means that he took it, quick look and then he moved on.
It's a vivid description of real life.
We rested, that could be for a week.
You could end up resting there for the rest of your life.
We took a rest, then we got up.
So these are different things which is important because it sheds light on the notion that
we should prefer the briefer versions.
Because the fact is that in those cases to rephrase more briefly would be downright
in felicitous.
The light verb construction would actually be the only one that was appropriate and what
that means is that these light verbs are not something that we should think of as a stylistic
choice that we should probably avoid in speaking English that probably arose after the briefer
verbs and are something to be pruned like weeds.
Rather, the way our grammar works is that we have two kinds of verbal construction.
We have the vanilla one where you just use the verb itself and then we have these light
verbs used with nouns which convey a different kind of meaning.
Now nobody takes you aside and says that these are the way that you lend a verb a shade of
I could call it dynamic, a linguist would call it punctuality, but we'll just leave
that there.
No one takes you aside and tells you that, but they could.
It's grammar.
And in many cases if you use just a brief verb, you kind of become that merchant.
So she gave him an unusually passionate kiss.
There's a vivid sentence you can imagine it in a good solid bad book.
Now are you really supposed to say she kissed him unusually passionately, a little clinical,
or we took a well earned rest?
Good sentence.
Now, according to Strunk with his horse lips, we're supposed to say we rested well earnedly.
I don't really want to say that, or she had an enduring influence on him.
That's a good sentence, I thought.
And if we look at it the old fashioned way, then we're supposed to say she influenced
him enduringly, which sounds almost menacing in some way.
That's not really what you mean when you say she had an enduring influence on him.
Rather, we have light verb constructions, and they're beautiful things like a golden
brown turkey on Thanksgiving, and then you've got your brief verb constructions, and they're
beautiful in a different way, like an amethyst.
I'm riffing, but you know what I mean.
And of course, there are also cases, and this is something that Huddleston and Pullum point
now, where really the light version has a whole different meaning from the brief version.
So he screamed.
That's one thing.
He gave a scream.
Now, those are completely different.
So he screamed at just, ah!
He gave a scream as, ah!
That's different, and you need to have that mechanism.
He walked in the park.
God knows how often he took a walk in the park, probably because he was upset.
So the fact is that where strunk, and therefore many other grammarians, have a problem with
the light verb constructions and talk about how there are too many words, there's a back
story there, and that is that if you were studying grammar even before strunk was born,
if you look at grammar books, particularly in the late 1800s for some reason, it was
considered kind of slovenly to use the light verb constructions, and so for the person
today who has a problem with using nouns as verbs like structure, the equivalent of that
person with a part down their hair and not smiling in a daguerreotype would have had
a problem with people saying things like have a look.
Believe it or not, it was considered quite vulgar.
And so we can see if you look, for example, at a Google engram, then you have a chart
that's in front of you where you can see how often in literature have a look was used.
And what's really interesting, if you think about print, and especially how formal print
was until relatively recently, as we will discuss in some lectures coming up, then have
a look, which seems like the most innocent thing in the world to us, and people have
certainly been saying it for a very, very long time, and we know that because have a
look is always there, to some extent, in any English that we recognize, it's very rare
in print in the 1800s.
So people who thought of themselves as decking the language out and at Sunday best weren't
using have a look because it was thought of as wrong.
But as always, our sense of how these things work is affected by looking at other languages.
I remember once when I lived in Washington, D.C. for a brief period, there was a guy from
Iran, and he and I used to talk about his native language, which was Persian.
And I remember finding something very peculiar, which was that so many translations of verbs
were really to do a something.
The verb was cardan, and always it was to do a sleep or to wake someone up was to do
a wake up.
And so every second sentence that I learned how to say seemed to have card in it.
And I tried to ask him why, and of course, who knows these things who speaks their language,
just like we don't know about why things are in our own language.
Imagine somebody asking, why do you have this word the?
You would just turn around and go home.
And in the same way, he didn't know why there was so much card.
But it's because in Persian, actually, there's only a small collection of short, brief, unitary
verbs.
And really, as often as not, there are only a few hundred verbs.
As often as not, you use a light verb construction.
That's the soul of Persian.
Their language is in Australia that actually only have three verbs.
There's come, go, and do.
And so if you sleep, you do a sleep.
If you dive, you do a dive.
They essentially don't have verbs.
All of which is to say that I'm not sure we can say that in any sense of, say, Robert
Lowe's universal grammar, if we're going to allow that there's a such thing, that the
light verb is somehow windy or wrong.
It's actually just one way of encoding actions.
And some languages make more use of it than others.
So we have to tread very carefully when we think of light verbs as just a flouting of
a general idea to keep it short.
Because really, light verbs are grammar.
So after light verbs, we can look at something different, which is up.
Now we've talked about up as used by many black Americans in black American English.
But what about even up in standard English?
It's more than verticality.
So for example, imagine me saying, well, I ate it up.
Well, what was up about it?
That doesn't mean that I consumed it to the point that it was no longer horizontal.
I ate it up.
Now imagine somebody who says, I like corns, asking you, well, what does up mean?
And you'd be kind of taken aback.
But that doesn't mean that it's an idiom, or that it doesn't mean anything, or that
the notion is just so complex that we have to just move on.
Actually, it's pretty simple, but we're just not taught it very much.
So for example, drink up, fry up, like fry up some eggs.
Clean up, read up, tidy up, shoot up, as in shoot up a room, like with a gun.
So all of those ups, if you look at all of them, you see that certainly it has nothing
to do with anything rising.
It's about completion, it's about culmination.
So tidy up means that you make the room nicely tidy.
Tidy up means that you have the result that you know more about the subject than you did
before, and it conveys that you have read to a point that will be useful to you doing
something else.
You've done enough of it.
To shoot up a room, you can shoot into a room.
If you shoot it up, that implies that you've somehow completed its portion of shooting
that would make it so that there had been enough shooting, enough bullets in the wall.
The fact is that up in our language has one meaning as the opposite of down, but it has
another meaning as part of the verbal system, which indicates that something has been done
to a complete extent.
It's a piece of grammar.
Lots of languages in the world have what's called a completed marker.
We don't have a little auxiliary alone that does that.
What we have is the up.
Now in some cases, the up really doesn't make any sense.
If somebody turns up, well, they're not.
They're not on the ceiling, and yet you don't really get that completed, culminated meaning
out of it either.
Sometimes there are just idioms, but for the most part, that up is something one uses.
I had a friend who was living with a Russian person, and the friend told me that the Russian
person had crossed a line with their learning English in saying, and this person didn't
happen to be a linguist, but they said, I found it really interesting to hear this Russian
person say, I'm frying up some eggs, and I said, yeah, and this is before I knew anything
about linguistics.
I said, yeah, that really is very idiomatic, because that's something that you don't expect
from somebody who only knows the language so well.
You would expect I am frying eggs, but not I'm frying them up.
That person had mastered not just one single isolated idiom.
They had learned how we mark the completed in the English language.
That's the kind of thing that you see in a grammar like Huddleston and Pullums.
So it's not just present, past, future, perfect, not a subjunctive that anybody really uses,
et cetera.
We have a much more complex verbal system than that, including things that are very systematic
in our minds that we are not taught about in school, because everybody is telling us
that it's wrong to say less books rather than fewer books.
So I want to close this out with one more.
It's always been one of my favorites, because you're never taught about it, and yet it's
so persnickety.
I mean, did you know that you know this?
It's own, and this is something that is described beautifully in Huddleston and Pullum.
And so it's not about English's intricacy in terms of whether subject forms or object
pronouns are in the right place or whether subjects and predicates are always agreeing.
It's something completely different and yet more complex than that, and we do it all the
time.
So own, it's a verb.
You can own a house, but it's also an adjective.
So my own bed, there's that word.
Little odd, if you think about it, why is own, it's not my owned bed.
Now that I mention it to you, it's going to be like your tongue.
If I tell you you have a tongue sitting in your mouth, well, for about the next two minutes
you're thinking about that you've got this thing in there that you can't get rid of.
In the same way, my own book.
What an odd little adjective that is, but it is there.
Now here's something else that you know.
You know that, I'm going to put it in a geeky way, the genitive pronoun that precedes own
must refer to the subject of the sentence.
What I mean by that is that you know that you can say my own children had to make their
beds.
You fit that into a context.
But you can't say the children had to make my own bed.
It seems like you could say that, I mean you can even imagine what that might mean, but
it doesn't.
You have to use it as the subject of the sentence, you can't use it as the object.
Now no one taught you that, Connie Brooks doesn't mention that, but if you speak normal
English, even if somebody has told you that you are not the most articulate person in
the world, you're not running around making mistakes of own.
You're not saying that my own, you're not saying that the children had to make my own
bed.
You'd never say that.
Or you can say, I have a car of my own instead of I have my own car, but you can't say I
have a car of me and you can't say I have a car of mine.
Why not?
If I say of my own, then it would seem to make sense that you could say a car of me
or a car of mine, but you wouldn't do that, you wouldn't do it at gunpoint because that's
not the language that you know.
How do you give own some more Tabasco?
Say my very own car, okay, but not really own car, not truly own car, not exactly own
car.
You've mastered that rule within a rule.
They're all of the own idioms.
He came into his own, he looks after his own and British people say to get your own back
and talk about, that's another one, that's where British people I imagine might start
thinking about their tongues.
Get your own back means to get back at someone, but they'll say you're trying to get your
own back and I heard that once when I was about 28 and it really threw me for a second.
To get your own back.
Now all these things make sense if you really think about it as relatable to the core meaning
of own which is about possession, but you can imagine an alternate universe English
in which there was no such thing as this usage of own.
Own really should in air quotes be about possessing things.
Now this adjective own and all of these very specific aspects of its conditioning are things
that we know which a foreigner has to learn very carefully.
I knew a person from, where was this person from, Korea and they used to say I finally
have a own place instead of living with other people.
English was quite good, but they hadn't mastered this business of own.
Why can't you say a own place?
Well, you just don't the answer is just because own has created this little spectrum of usages
for itself and we have mastered all of those.
We know exactly how to use it.
You can write this entry on how it's used.
We don't even need to be taught that is grammar.
And so what this means is that we can be proud of something.
A lot of the embrace of the blackboard grammar rules is a matter of pride.
We think we have learned these rules that were put on the blackboard about the things
that we're not supposed to do.
But the fact is that the actual way that English works in terms of its complexity, in terms
of there being all sorts of categories that we're aware of and that we manipulate without
even thinking about it, just as we are aware of in languages that we try to learn where
we have to come at it from the outside, all of those things are a matter of pride as well.
So for example, we don't just stick stuff into the future like some boring Latin.
We have a hypothetical marker that has a synergistic relationship with the future.
And if you think about it, that hypothetical marker means that we have something like that
subjunctive that we've basically lost and that we think of as an exotic frill in the
romance languages.
Well we have something that dwells on that hypotheticality in a regular way that's difficult
for other people to learn, or up.
We don't just have an inexplicable usage of up that's an idiom that somebody has to
master.
When somebody learns how to say, I'm frying up some eggs, they are using a complete marker
alongside all of the other complication in our verbal machinery.
Look and have a look are not synonyms, but in a way they're different words.
And so we make a choice between the two based on the fact that they are two pieces of machinery,
not just synonyms where one of them is shabbier than the other.
We have deeply quirky adjectives like fun and own, whose usage is so eccentric that
it confuses people who are learning the language after the age of 16.
What it means is that when you go through a book like Huddleston and Pullums, you can
see that our language is a mighty thing.
