You may have a sense, even if you are thinking somewhat differently about what English is
and what good English is and what good English isn't, that nevertheless there's been a change
lately.
You may feel that over the past four or five decades there seems to be something different
about the way people are using English regardless of the things that we've seen so far in this
course.
And you're right, there has been a change.
The question is what the change has been and the essence of it is that the public use
of language has become less formal than it once was.
Now we often think that there's been just a decline in the quality of people's language,
but another way of looking at it is that there's been a change in the way people use language
in public regardless of whether we're going to call the way they use that language good
or bad in the structural sense.
This has been a momentous development.
It has been, namely, a reversal of what had been a millennia long trend towards the evolution
of language into more elaborate forms via writing, which allows more elaborate forms
of language than is possible in speech, which is rapid and subconscious.
And so what that means is that we're seeing a new relationship between formal and informal
language.
And we're going to look at that in the next few lectures in this course.
It's important.
It's important, despite the fact that we can have questions as to whether it's really
about the quality of the language in terms of its structure falling apart.
That would be a quite thoroughly unprecedented development in language history.
Nevertheless, what we are seeing is important because it's part of the modern history of
the English language and also because it gives us a sense of the difference that exists
in all languages between either the spoken and the written or even when there's no writing
in a given language, which is true of most languages, between the informal and the formal.
And that'll allow us to assess whether this trend towards informality, which is quite
real, is a boon or a bane or both.
To understand that, we have to take a look at the difference, which we may think we
understand already, but we certainly must at least review it between spoken language
and written language.
Our sense of language in its most complete and maybe even its default state is written
language.
We think about lots of subordinate clauses.
We think of lengthy sentences.
We think of cleaned up structures.
So just randomly, John Milton's Areopagitica 1644.
Ever read any Milton?
You're going to get this sort of thing.
We should be wary therefore what persecution we raise against the living labors of public
men, how we spill that seasoned life of man preserved and stored up in books since we
see a kind of homicide maybe thus committed sometimes a martyrdom and if it extends to
the whole impression a kind of massacre and so on and so on and so on.
That's written language and my isn't it a beautiful thing, but you have to work on that.
You have to have a quill.
You have to have a fountain pen.
You have to have a keyboard.
You can do that bit by bit and then probably you can go back and fix it.
Spoken language is different from that.
Linguists have found that spoken language, and this is by everybody, including highly
educated people.
Spoken casual language comes in word packets of about seven to ten words generally.
Subordinate clauses aren't as common in spoken language as in written language and the fact
is that the difference between how even educated people speak casually and written language
like the Areopagitica can be quite surprising.
I don't know if any of you ever did the thing that board college students did pre-internet
back in the day, at least I did, which was you would make a tape recording of yourself.
You'd have that shoebox size thing that I think of still as default tape recorder.
Have you realized that there barely is such a thing as a tape recorder at this point?
But you have that box and you put it on and you'd record you and all of your friends talking
for 15 minutes and then you'd play it back and it would be hee hee.
And you would notice that conversational structure is absolutely chaotic.
Everybody sounds almost as if they don't really speak the language because that's what casual
speech is like.
It's not tidy like John Milton.
For example, I'm going to give you a passage of junior college students and this is in
the early 70s and so we're not hanging anybody out to dry who is still of that young, delicate
age.
And this is just a transcription of a very ordinary and casual conversation that these
students were having.
Here's how it went.
On a tree, carbon isn't going to do much for a tree really, really.
The only thing it can do is collect moisture, which may be good for it.
In other words, in the desert you have the carbon granules which would absorb, collect
moisture on top of them.
Yeah, it doesn't help the tree but it protects, keeps the moisture in, uh-huh, because then
it just soaks up moisture.
It works by the water molecules that adhere to the carbon molecules that are in the ashes.
It holds it on and the plant takes it away from there.
Oh, I have an argument with you.
Yeah.
You know, you said how it was silly about my, well, it's not a theory at all, that the
more pregnant you are and you see spots before your eyes, it's proven that it's the retention
of the water.
That is an actual passage.
And if you really imagine yourself or if after you're finished listening to this lecture,
you listen to your daughter or to those people over there or to him or to her, you'll see
that that's language and it's typical in its short sentences, in its repetitions, in
the false starts.
All of that is much less elaborated than writing because speaking is unconscious and spontaneous.
Writing is conscious and planned.
And what it's important to realize is that because language emerged as speech and writing
came along only about 5,500 years ago, spoken language is fundamental.
And spoken language is an artifice.
One of my favorite factoids is that if language had existed for 24 hours, then writing only
came along at 11.07 p.m.
Isn't that a fun factoid?
I love that one, especially because it's true.
So what we can see in the earliest samples of writing is that these writers were still
immersed in the culture of speech.
And this shows how much of an artifice writing is as we get at this difference between formal
and informal language in our modern society.
And so, for example, the Epic of Gilgamesh.
This is one of the earliest known works of what we would call literature.
It's preserved in the language Akkadian, which is another one of the passals in the Semitic
bunch, and so Arabic, Hebrew, Aramaic, Akkadian.
And it's from the 7th century BC, and that's a good long time ago.
And what you see is these word packages.
The prose is actually more like that student talking about carbon molecules than it's
like the Areopagitica.
So for example, Ishtar is rejected by Gilgamesh, and she entreats her father to give her the
tools to destroy him.
And the way it goes is, Father, let me have the Bull of Heaven to kill Gilgamesh and his
city.
For if you don't grant me the Bull of Heaven, I will pull down the gates of hell itself,
cross the doorposts and flatten the door, and I will let the dead leave, and let the
dead roam the earth, and they shall eat the living, the dead will overwhelm all the living.
Ba-da-ba-da-ba-ba.
Ba-ba.
And that's not just the artistry of the Epic of Gilgamesh.
That's what early writing tends to be like.
Many of you, if you are familiar with the Hebrew Bible, and you've actually experienced
in the original, it's just like that, or even early English prose.
So for example, this is from Mork d'Artur, and this is the late 1400s, and it's a little
tale.
And then they put on their helmets and departed, and recommended them all wholly unto the queen.
And there was weeping and great sorrow.
Then the queen departed in her chamber, and held her that no man should perceive here great
sorrows.
And it just goes on and on like that.
It's almost like listening to somebody tell a story.
And so then we went to Chick-fil-A, and then we saw Marlene there.
And then Marlene said, hey, what are you guys doing here?
And then Dan came in, and he said, hey, wait a minute, I already ate at McDonald's.
And so then it's like that.
That's how people ordinarily speak.
And a lot of early writing has a feeling very much like that.
The language style of something like the Areopagitica, or the rise and fall of the Roman Empire,
was something that came later, which was allowed by the deliberation that is afforded to you
when you are transcribing speech onto a piece of papyrus or paper with some long, sharp
object.
But this is the money point.
This is what's important if we're thinking about how history goes.
If we went back in time, the fact is that despite the dramatic representations that
we see of people back in time, people didn't talk like books then.
When people were being casual way back in time, they didn't sound as if they were in
a Shakespeare play.
And it's hard to wrap your mind around that, because first of all, in dramatic depictions,
if you see, if you sit through Cleopatra with Elizabeth Taylor, I don't know why I thought
of that, or if you look at more recently the Rome miniseries, there's a sense that a long
time ago people walked around orating or putting things in particularly witty ways.
No, people have always spoken casually in the same vein as we hear today.
The problem is how in the world do you hear it?
It's bracing how difficult that is.
It's one thing if in 1981 you recorded you and your friends having a conversation and
happened to keep it, which I happened to.
So I have a recording of people speaking very casually early in the Reagan administration,
sure.
But how would you hear, say, your grandparents discussing what they were going to have for
lunch in 1952?
Who was recording it?
Because the technology existed, but it tended to be kind of big and expensive, and so you
didn't make tape recordings at home for the most part.
The occasional hobbyist might, but particularly if you go back to, say, 1915, how would you
hear somebody having a conversation in 1915?
Instead, what you have is dramatic depictions of people talking in 1915, but then they're
written.
It's written up, and so what we can hear them saying is something that was put down on paper
and then they recite it.
Same thing with old movies.
What did they actually seem like?
So for example, something truly digging in the crates when it comes to radio is valuable.
I highly recommend, for example, candid microphone.
Candid microphone was the precursor to the candid camera TV show that more of you are
probably familiar with, where the idea was to surreptitiously videotape someone doing
something that made them look idiotic.
Well, as you can imagine, you would almost assume that that idea had started out in radio,
and it did.
And so Alan Funt would go around with a tape recorder, which was the size of a building,
and nevertheless he would manage to hide it, and he would record people doing and saying
funny things.
Now, the show in itself today is quite dull, but the fact is, it means that you're listening
to people speaking spontaneously, such as in this passage where we listen to an actual
casual conversation in the back of a cab in the 1940s, and what's important about this
passage to come is that these people, of course, dialect changes, etc., but these are people
speaking casually.
This cab driver sounds not at all like a New York cab driver would now, because he grew
up in the United States, but the fact is, he is talking like any casual American talks
now.
And so listen to this.
It's very interesting.
This is a taxi cab.
What can I do?
Well, there's not a store in the neighborhood you want to wait for, Mr. I'll take you for
a ride, you'll go for a change.
No, I don't want to go for a ride, that's where I want to go, Dr.
Well, then I can't help it.
Why not?
You'll have to pay me, I'm sorry.
You'll have to go to the store and get changed.
Well, I don't want to go for any joy rides now, Dr.
I know, but you should use some common sense when you got into a taxi cab, Mr. with a twenty
dollar bill.
Well, I just wanted it.
This is all the far we were going.
Yeah, but you didn't tell me you had a twenty dollar bill, did you?
What's the sense of getting mad about a thing like that?
Well, how much money did you start out with today?
That's a very important kind of recording to hear.
I'm not giving you a big, you hear him with his business about the argument.
He isn't talking like a book that cab driver, he's an ordinary person, he was the norm.
And so the book, time that again, wonderful novel that goes back to 1882 and tries to
give you an actual sense of what it would have been like to live in that context.
Jack Finney, from what I can see, the author of it, messes up one time.
He has a scene where two men who are set against each other are sitting on a park bench and
they're having an argument and they start talking in the melodramatic terms that we
associate with snidely whiplash from TV cartoons or something like Simon Legree from Uncle
Tom's Cabin, because of course all of us regularly attend performances of Uncle Tom's
Cabin, but I think you know what I mean.
And so he has one person saying, Tweed had hundreds of helpers still undiscovered, each
of whom took his share of the swag large or small.
So why have I spent two years at unsuitable employment, a filing clerk at City Hall?
And then Finney says, Pickering and Carmody were acting their roles in a time when the
melodramatic conventions of the stage were largely accepted as representing reality.
Deadly serious, meaning every word, each of them I think was also appreciating his own
performance.
No, no, no Jack, that's, no, I mean wonderful series of books, but no one sat on a park
bench talking like that in 1882.
We see people talking like that in 1882 in the plays and in the novels, but that's because
that was written language, which the fashion was to put into the mouths of ordinary people.
If you were angry on a park bench in New York, you didn't talk like Simon Legree, you talked
more like that cab driver, you talked more like our student who's talking about carbon
and moisture, people have always spoken like that.
And what we're seeing today is that more and more in the public sphere, instead of there
being a basic understanding, as there was in the period that time and again is set,
as there was back in the day, that language in public was supposed to be put in its Sunday
best.
So you were to use written or written style language, so you either wrote or you spoke
like writing.
Nowadays, there's more and more of an idea that in public, the language does not have
to be put into its Sunday best.
In other words, that spoken language is okay in circumstances that we consider, for lack
of a better term, higher and higher.
Now the fact of the matter is that there is a loss there.
There are things there that are sometimes dismaying in terms of how we communicate in
our society.
And so for example, written language can be more efficient than spoken language.
So I'm not making a claim here that spoken and written are just variants of the same
thing.
They're not.
Because as we've seen, written language tends to contain less repetition.
In speech, we tend to repeat things.
Some people do it more than others, but in general, we are emotional creatures and emotion
does not come in as tidy and self-censoring a packet as we might hope.
And so often emotion leads us to say the same thing over and over again.
A British guy was recorded many decades ago.
He's well back into the 60s and he's recorded as saying something very ordinary and it went
like this.
It should do, but it don't seem to nowadays.
Like there's still murders going on now, any minute now or something like that.
They get people who don't care.
They might get away with it then.
They all try it and it might leak out.
One might tell his mates that he's killed someone.
It might leak out.
Like it might get around.
He gets hung for it like that.
Now if you think about it, that is perfectly normal.
We all do that sometimes.
A lot of people do that a lot.
That's what language is.
It's messy in that way.
If you are a squirrel and you are disturbing my vegetable garden and you are a squirrel
and you know who you are, then what you do is once my tomatoes get a blush of red, you
grab that tomato and you sink your little rodent teeth into it and you suck out all
the good juice and then you eat that thing.
But you always leave a few little bits because you're imperfect.
You always leave those little bits and you know who you are.
Spoken language is imperfect in that same way.
It's always a little shaggy.
It's a little messy because it's a product of nature as we are.
Written language is also much less dependent on context.
So for example, imagine little kids who will just come up to you and say something like
Hershey Park.
And you say what?
Hershey Park.
And it turns out that a week ago, the kid was taken to Hershey Park and they don't know
that your world isn't their world.
And so they think that you know that they went to Hershey Park because of course you've
been to Hershey Park.
That's cute when kids do it.
Sometimes they're adults who don't understand that you don't know what they know.
But that tends to be much rarer.
But the fact of the matter is that writing tends to get beyond that problem in a way
that spoken language often doesn't.
Written language is dependent on context because you're speaking to somebody who's
right there who presumably knows something about your experiences because they are experiencing
life at the same time as you.
And so imagine there's a guy, it's about the year 2000.
He's sitting on a bar stool somewhere in San Francisco and he says something like Internet,
forget it.
I start out $100,000 a week easy.
Two years later, $30,000 debt secretary, us in two times, oh yeah, cyberspace will bring
us all together, early retirement.
That was some dream.
That was a person I actually heard and that's how he sounded.
Now imagine that person.
Now we probably know what he's talking about.
If we were there, we remember that there was this big Internet bust and if you sat at any
number of bars in San Francisco, you heard people having that conversation.
But you'll have no idea what he means in 100 years.
What happened to him, secret temps, all of that requires filling in.
You have to know what was going on and particularly in big cities with that industry around late
90s and into the early aughts.
If you've never heard that term aught, then start using it.
They used it back in the previous century, the aughts.
We need to start using it because otherwise what do we call that decade that just came?
That decade that just went by other than depressing.
But that aspect, the way that guy on the bar stool was talking was not just a matter
of English.
It's not just there's something about him and the way he talked after having a few
too many Jack Daniels on the rocks or something like that.
You can go back to Anna Karenina and if any of you have read Anna Karenina, and I really
have, I have read it more than once and a long time ago, so that's one book where I'm
not ignorant.
There's something that speaks to me about it.
And you know that the language in Anna Karenina is highly formal.
Tolstoy was not an economical writer, but then there is a scene where he has farmers
talking to one another.
Now these farmers, I'm imagining, they're probably semi-literate at best.
And the farmers talk like the internet guy on the bar stool.
And so even if you don't know Russian just from the texture of it, you can imagine when
you're, yeah, but I knew you said Daniels is shit.
What another word is Daniels adductively?
What all of it means is, me, logic complaint, nothing in the world.
Like at the mill, took the advance, took off.
Well, who?
He doesn't say because they all know what's going on.
So take at the mill, took the advance, took off.
Justice of the peace?
What?
He acquitted.
Toss it all.
Ah, run to the end of the earth.
So the justice of the peace, what about him?
So apparently he was brought into judge.
And then he acquitted.
Acquitted about what charges?
Well, they all know.
And so it doesn't have to be said.
That's in Anna Karenina, that's real speech.
You don't see that much of that sort of thing in a lot of the formal early novels.
But what it shows you is that there have always been people using speech like this and it
requires context.
Written language can convey information without that kind of shared context.
The writer can set the context and in a way that would be awkward in speech often.
And there's something else about written language that is underattended to, I think,
in modern society, which is that written language can make an extended argument.
If what you're trying to say is that the reason that policy A is a bad idea is because it
would only work if we had policy B in place.
But because of event X in the past, that didn't happen and all we have is a promise
Y that it might, and therefore I have only a hesitant embrace of A. That's something
that can make perfect sense.
But it's something that makes more sense.
It's easier to communicate and it's even easier to formulate if you have writing where you
can reflect, where you can go slowly, and you can probably correct.
Often you'll find that it's writing that allows you to create an argument because you can
see something that you thought sitting there, which otherwise is more evanescent if it's
just in your brain and subject to the vagaries and distractions of life as we actually know
it.
Whereas in speech, an extended argument is much more difficult.
It's harder to produce it because people tend to interrupt one another a lot.
That's just a natural aspect of human conversation.
And even if you do produce it, it's difficult to retain.
And even if a person does retain it, it's difficult to retain that extended argument,
say, 15 minutes later.
So speech is very immediate in many ways and it's part of the emotional aspect of being
human.
But in terms of the extended argument, which is an artifice of human relations and the
human mental capacity, the extended argument, it's something that is much better accomplished
through the written word or through formal language and formal language that people are
expecting to take in with a certain amount of effort than with just talking.
So to the extent that in modern society, we're seeing more and more of a trend towards
spoken rather than written or written style language, the extended argument has less place.
That's not to imply that it ever had a central place in any society of this thing that we
call human beings, but it has less of a place.
So there is that problem.
But then on the other hand, this new trend towards the spoken does have its advantages.
And one of them is that it narrows a gap that we can get used to, especially in English
speaking societies where the gap is often not as great as it is elsewhere.
It's a gap between the way one writes and the way one speaks.
So for example, remember that English was practically a foreign language in terms of
the way it was written back in the Anglo-Saxon times compared to the way people were speaking
with all of these new Scandinavian words and these new constructions from Celtics such
as the meaningless do and the obsessive progressive.
And so here's this old English and then here's this language that's very much like what I'm
speaking and it must have been at a certain point.
It would have been Middle English basically.
And the written convention was essentially another language or for example, the oaves
of Strasbourg that we saw where it was considered a novelty to write in the language of the
people as opposed to the way people usually wrote.
And from our perspective today, what we see is that the way you wrote was Latin and the
language of the people was French.
They were so different that to think of the French as just a variation on the Latin seems
almost linguistically oppressive.
And so to the extent that we have spoken language in the public sphere, we end up creating less
of a gap of that kind than there used to be where even in the United States the idea was
that if you stood up and made a speech, as we'll see in the next lecture, or if you wrote
something in a magazine, you were expected to have a command of a Latinate, big surprise,
kind of syntax that was only available to an elite few for the most part or a uniquely
positioned person from other social realms.
And that meant that you were at a linguistic disadvantage in using the kind of language
that you learned on your mother's knees, so to speak.
To the extent that that's less true in our society, that can be read as a good thing.
This sort of thing can be almost frightening in some places.
And so, for example, in Sri Lanka, the old Ceylon, one of the languages is Sinhalese.
And Sinhalese is really two things.
There is what's considered the literary language, i.e. what you write.
And then there's the spoken language, and they might as well be French and Spanish.
That's an exaggeration, but not by all that much.
And so, for example, some of it is kind of like standard English and black English, but
it's a wider gap than that.
For example, in the written language, you have to have a B verb.
And in the colloquial language, people don't use it.
Or the word for he is a completely different one in the standard language than in the language
that all people use casually, even people who are upper class and the most educated.
And so, for example, in literary Sinhalese, if you want to say he is a teacher, you say
he teacher is.
The word for teacher is govyak.
So, govyak.
He, in literary, is hetema.
And so, to say he is a teacher, you say he teacher, and then there's a word for is.
Hetema, he, govyak, teacher, veyi, is.
Hetema govyak veyi.
That's the literary.
But the Sinhalese, not of the streets, but even of the Ph.D. professor, as soon as he
goes home, the way you say he is a teacher, it's not hetema, it's aya, for he.
And then govyak, teacher, and there's no is.
So one Sinhalese is hetema govyak veyi.
The other Sinhalese is aya govyak.
And that means that if you're somebody who hasn't had the education to master this literary
variety, you are at a great disadvantage in doing anything other than chopping potatoes
in your home and talking about your day.
And that's because of this big gap in that language between the spoken and the written,
between the formal and the informal.
And so that's had some light on how we might feel about the spoken having more of a role.
Aldous Huxley said, and it was in those barren leaves, and he put it in the mouth of a character.
He had a character say, really simple, primitive people like their poetry to be as artificial
and remote from the language of everyday affairs as possible.
We reproach the 18th century with its artificiality, but the fact is that Beowulf has couched
an addiction 50 times more complicated and unnatural than that of essay on man.
Now essay on man was a poem by Alexander Pope.
Now you could say that people can just get accustomed to this kind of gap, but you could
also say that that kind of gap has disadvantages, and it could be seen, that's paragraph there
is rather sensorious that Huxley wrote, but it could seem a rather primitive way of being
that the way that you express yourself in public and the way you write is a different
language or even just vastly different in many ways from the way you have learned to
speak on your mother's knee because we've seen that the way that you learn to speak
on your mother's knee is the kind of marvelous monster that Rodney Huddleston and Jeff Pullum
can write a doorstop book about.
So that thing you learn on your mother's knee is Notre Dame in itself.
So what all of this means is that what we're seeing in society as a change in the use of
language is very much real.
Now there's a question as to whether what we're seeing is that for some reason people
today are less capable of handling grammatical categories and making things agree with one
another etc. than they were before.
There's an aspect of plus ça change in these sorts of things, but there is a trend towards
informality in public discourse and that is unusual because over the last several centuries
as there's been widespread literacy, the trend has generally been towards this increase in
the elaboration of language that writing allows and in a great many places that kind
of language having more and more purchase in society rather than less and less as has
only been the case over the last 40 or 50 years we live in a society of rapid linguistic
change in that way and their reasons to both celebrate it and to bemoan it.
And in the next lecture we're going to look a little more closely at what has happened
to our sense of what it means to speak in public.
