Think about how in an old movie or a certain kind of play or an older cartoon, when someone
is about to make a speech and they are a man, then often they'll go, my fellow countryman.
And there's always that little preparation, the idea that if you're making some kind of
public address, then you're going to clear your throat, you're going to speak in a different
way that you are making an address.
Notice that that's an old joke now.
Nowadays we have much less of a sense of that sort of preparation being necessary before
you address a number of people, or at least fewer people seem to have that.
And so when we talk about the difference in language usage today, what we're talking
about partly and what gives us a sense partly that something has changed is that people
speak to us when they are making an address in a very different way than they used to.
And nominally it used to be that when someone spoke to us, the idea was that they would
do it in a very different, a more planned, i.e. a written style to dwell in the categories
we looked into in the last lecture, a written style rather than in a spoken style.
And that has changed and it has a lot to do with why we feel that language in general
is changing.
And it is, it's a matter of language usage and it's part of this general trend towards
cherishing spoken style over written style.
That is, that it's not too melodramatic to say that there's been a death of oratory
in modern American English in terms of oratory as it was once thought to be.
That a speech was long ago can be almost counterintuitive to us now.
And a great example is before Abraham Lincoln made his Gettysburg address, actually that
was not supposed to be, and at that point wasn't, the centerpiece of the day.
If you were there, you came to hear Edward Everett, who Edward Everett was of all things.
This is what his profession was.
He was a professional orator, that's what he was.
You came to hear Edward Everett speak really well and he did.
He stood there and he spoke really well for two hours.
That's what you would have remembered if you were on the Gettysburg field that day.
And what's interesting from our perspective is also the kind of language that this speech
was in.
He had not the slightest sense that he was supposed to sound like a regular fellow.
His speech had passages such as standing beneath this serene sky, overlooking these broad fields
now reposing from the labors of the waning year, the mighty Alleghenes dimly towering
before us, the graves of our brethren beneath our feet.
It is with hesitation that I raise my poor voice to break the eloquent silence of God
and nature, but the duty to which you have called me must be performed.
Grant me, I pray you, your indulgence and your sympathy for two hours.
And this actually happened and this is the important part.
It wasn't unusual.
In that era, the idea was that one form of recreation, partly because they didn't have
iPods and broccoli, is that what you did if you wanted to pass some time in a useful
way was not by a set from the teaching company, you went and listened to somebody in too much
clothing stand up on a platform and speak in an elegant way, i.e. in a way that was
writing that was being spoken for a very, very long time.
No movies.
That was the closest thing that they had.
Now, this wasn't only a primeval thing.
As late as the 1940s, you could hear people who had been raised in that linguistic culture
still talking that way.
One of the most fascinating things in my attic, so to speak, oh that I could afford an attic,
but in my attic is a recording of Charles Eaton.
Now there's a name for the ages, my apologies to any of his relatives who might be listening
or watching.
Charles Eaton was a senator, Charles Eaton of New Jersey, and he, like many senators,
on December 8th, 1941, made a speech in favor of going to war with the Japanese after the
attack on Pearl Harbor.
And you can actually hear him speaking in this kind of language because there was a
radio hookup.
And so he said,
Now, Representative Charles Eaton of New Jersey, we'll try to catch him.
Made with the roar of the Japanese channel, we learned that people heard a trumpet call.
They called the unity, called the courage, called the determination, once and for all,
they'll wake all of the urge, this occurred at monster of tyranny and slavery.
And that's what we're going to do.
So, what he was doing was something which, although I doubt he would have thought of
it this way, what Charles Eaton was doing was something that traced all the way back
to an ancient tradition, which was when oration was one of the measures of man.
And if you think about it, technology is a big part of that.
After all, if you're talking about a time when there's no electric amplification and
there is limited literacy in general, there's no such thing as print either, and you are
living in that kind of society, but you have enough of society that you need to influence
large numbers of people on a regular basis, how else are you going to do it except by
speaking?
There's no such thing as a recording, so you can't send something around, and that recording
is something that would have been based on electric amplification.
You have to get up and in a very loud voice be able to convince people speaking.
You're not going to do it with a pamphlet, only some people are going to read that and
you can't make a recording.
And so, way back in, for example, ancient Greece, Aristotle was someone who was known
not only for some of the manuscripts that you may have read in college or maybe even
beyond, but also for the art of rhetoric.
And what he meant by that, rhetoric and orator are actually from the same root.
What he meant by rhetoric was the art of convincing people of a case in speech standing spontaneously,
not reading it out but just speaking.
And that made perfect sense in a culture quite different from the unprecedentedly technological
one that we live in today, which now very few people who are still alive have a memory
of having lived without.
But what that means is that we don't have that oratorical culture for various reasons.
And so, in 2002, when, for example, there was an argument in Congress for invading Iraq,
the level upon which people couched their arguments was quite different from Charles
Eaton's.
And so it was just one example, Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, and this was typical
of all of the addresses, I'm not singling him out.
One of his addresses was, and if we don't go to Iraq, that our effort in the war on
terrorism dwindles down into an intelligence operation.
So right there.
And if we don't go to Iraq, that our effort in the war on terrorism dwindles down into
an intelligence operation.
So that little syntactic hiccup, he certainly was not speaking in the way that an Edward
Everett would have been.
Now we all have those syntactic hiccups when we're speaking casually.
What's interesting is that a senator today is comfortable speaking in that same casual
way, not just Brownback.
This is the way all of them speak, except, interestingly, Senator Robert Byrd, the late
Robert Byrd, because he died at the age of 572, he was still orating in that way.
But you've got to be very old to do that.
So Brownback went on.
He said, intelligence operation.
We go to Iraq, and it says to countries that support terrorists.
There remain six in the world that are, as our definition, state sponsors of terrorists.
You say to those countries, we are serious about terrorism.
We are serious about you not supporting terrorism on your own soil.
Now that is spoken language, the way that he quotes instead of talking about what people
are saying, that's what we do.
And once again, the choppiness, all it is is a speech.
It's what language has always been.
But that's what he was doing in Congress.
He was comfortable speaking that way because he lives in our culture.
Now of course, we do have something in modern culture that we call oratory.
If I say what's the latest oration you've heard, you might think of somebody who was
speaking in a religious setting, say fundamentalist preaching.
But that is something, which even though we call it oratory, and it is in its sense,
it is not based on written language, it's based on speech.
So on the one hand, you could say, then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form
on his face was changed against the three men.
So he ordered that they should heat the furnace seven times hotter, and he commanded the most
mighty of his army to bind the three men and cast them into the burning furnace.
That is written language that many of us may be familiar with.
Now you can transcribe a fundamentalist preacher, and he's channeling that story, but the way
the preacher will do it, and this is an actual transcription of a fundamentalist preacher,
is, I can see the old king when he ordered that their furnace be heated, or heated seven
times hotter.
They tell me that he sent for the three strong men, the strongest men from his army.
He'd taken these men in and bound them, hand and feet.
So what you see here is short and short, short, brief, what you can take in in real time and
in a certain emotionally charismatic way.
That may be an oratory, but that's spoken language, that's not written language.
And that's the closest thing that we hear to what we would call oratory for the most
part today.
And if you're thinking about Barack Obama and the speeches that he made when he was
running for president in particular, notice that the parts that are considered to be the
most resonant are the parts that were short and punchy, and also had a bit of a preacherly
flavor.
Well, okay, that was good, but that had nothing to do with what Edward Everett had been doing.
We are an oral culture in that way.
What happened?
Why did it go that way?
There was a transitional period.
Now if you want to be particular about it, way back in the late 1800s, the bricks were
falling out of the wall, because for example, Charles Eliot, who was the president of Harvard,
when that was and remains a very influential position in society, he revamped the oratory
oriented curriculum, the rhetoric oriented curriculum that Harvard had had, which was
a model for education around the country, for one that stressed writing.
So that's just one brick out of the wall, but his idea was that the need for that kind
of speech should no longer be the cornerstone of an education.
So that started a certain trend away from studying things like the art of rhetoric
or more modern equivalents that would teach you how to stand up and speak the way a Henry
Clay would.
That's one brick out of the wall.
But then there was electric amplification.
When you talk like this, part of the reason people did it was because it was the only
way to be heard.
Imagine it's 1870, you're making a speech outside, and there are 3,000 people gathered.
Basically, you're going to have to spend an hour yelling.
That's rather a marvel that people made speeches back then.
Once you have a microphone pitching your spoken performance at that level, one, tends to break
the equipment, and two, sounds a little odd when played back.
So for example, people back then who were orators did make cylinder recordings.
They did make early shellac recordings, and you can hear them making their speeches and
the way they knew how to talk was as if they were outside yelling at 3,000 people.
And today, even if what they're saying is interesting or correct or historical, they
sound a little odd.
You'll get someone like William Jennings Bryan who we'll meet again in a second, or Booker
T. Washington, or you can hear Grover Cleveland.
There's a recording of Grover Cleveland talking, and it's a little odd because they're yelling
into our ear.
And so you'll get somebody like, and I'll say on this great day, it feels like we're
incidentally in that, no, no, if it's a recording, we need to speak in a new way.
And so that was one issue.
And then finally, the major change in how you made a speech in the United States came
after the 60s, and a lot of it had to do with the general trend towards questioning the
establishment then.
And that kind of formal language, the kind of language that you need to be taught in
order to master, or to be somebody who is possessed by a certain kind of geekery if
you're not going to be taught it.
That started to be associated with one's elders with, as it was put back then, people
over 30.
The idea was to be more come as you are, more against authority, more natural.
That was the mood.
And what would have been odd is if the use of language didn't change at that time.
What we do know is that by 1981, at which point, counter-cultural America was, in terms
of any extreme, gone and a new, settled America was just a very different place than it had
been before, you had something as innocent as Ed Koch, who was mayor of New York.
And after he was re-elected after his first term, he made a speech where, near the end
of it, he said, intellectual honesty and fiscal integrity got us elected four years ago.
And that is how we ran the city during the past four years, and that's how we will continue
to run this city for the next four years.
I love this job, and I love this city, and I'm proud of what has been accomplished.
I told the people the truth.
I spelled out what had to be done, and we did it.
It wasn't easy, but we did it.
That was fun to watch.
Notice I'm making it seem like I was there, I was too young, but I have heard about it.
That was fun to watch.
He was charismatic.
They made a musical about Ed Koch, believe it or not.
But the fact is, that's not the old fashioned oratory he was trying to sound like, and he
did sound like, and I'm sure he was proud of it, the common man.
It's a modern kind of speech making, and it's more like talking.
One can, if one is trying to make history into a tidy drama, as we all must, one can
identify one person who was a kind of transitional figure between the old oratorical America,
and now.
How do you get from somebody like Edward Everett to somebody like Ed Koch oratorically?
One person was Mario Savio, who was a student leader at the University of California at
Berkeley, and he made a speech in 1964 that he became famous for, where he aroused the
students to question the repressive policies of the administration.
He was an archaeopteryx.
An archaeopteryx is not something from the Flintstones that uses its beak to play records.
An archaeopteryx, remember that bird?
They would always have some creature that was conscripted to do something, and there's
a pig under the sink, and the birds would always look up and they'd say, ah, it's a
living.
Well, not that.
That's not an archaeopteryx.
The archaeopteryx is this grotesque transitional creature that has been found in beautiful
limestone fossils in Germany.
It's one part reptile, it's one part bird.
It's probably more bird, but the darn thing has teeth, and there are things about its
clavicles.
I wouldn't have wanted to meet one.
Apparently, it didn't fly gracefully.
Probably about as off-putting as a monkey.
But archaeopteryx, Mario Savio was a sort of linguistic archaeopteryx.
He made a famous speech, a stirring speech, and a beautiful speech, one of the culminations
of which was the following.
I ask you to consider if this is a firm, and if the Board of Regents are the Board of Directors,
and if President Kerr, in fact, is the manager, then I'll tell you something.
The faculty are a bunch of employees, and we're the raw materials, but we're a bunch
of raw materials that don't mean to have any process upon us, don't mean to be made
into any product, don't mean to end up being bought by some clients of the university,
be they the government, be they industry, be they organized labor, be they anyone,
where you wouldn't be.
And that brings me to the second mode of civil disobedience.
There's a time when the operation of the machine becomes so odious, makes you so sick at heart
that you can't take part, you can't even passively take part, and you've got to put
your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels, upon the levers, upon all the apparatus, and
you've got to make it stop, and you've got to indicate to the people who run it, to the
people who own it, that unless you're free, the machine will be prevented from working
at all.
So, that's Mario Savio, and when he says things like, we were told the following, or his famous,
I ask you to consider, or a word like odious, those are formal traits. This is somebody
who knew what an old-fashioned speech was, and he did not mean those things in irony.
But, there's a very accessible phraseology. He keeps his sentences relatively short, and
he makes a lot of points with nice abrupt rises and falls, and all of that is in the
spoken language. And the fact is, although nobody was mentioning this at the time, that
was a new way of making an important speech in 1964, and it was an outgrowth of changes
in approaches to formality, and in one's opinions of older generations and authority, and authenticity.
And something that's interesting and more indicative of this whole change in how we hear
speech is that it used to be, in American written culture, that if someone said something
in a spoken way, and was then transcribed in writing, the culture was, the idea was, although
people weren't always directed to do it, that you would write the person up into written
form when you quoted them. So, here's just a random example of this. The randomness
shows how prevalent it was. Marie Dressler was a vaudevillian and musical theater actress
who became, at a very advanced age, the most popular Hollywood star for a couple of years
in the early 30s. She was born Lila van Koeberg in 1868, and she died in 1934, but oddly enough
for a couple of years, this person who, by the early 30s, was neither young nor thin
was America's favorite star. She has actually been my favorite old movie star since I was
15, and not just because she's obscure, I really do like her. And the fact is that in
1911, so 100 years ago, she was quoted in a magazine. And this is how Marie Dressler,
who didn't get past eighth grade, was quoted as speaking casually. Only the other day,
I was invited to the home of some well-to-do and otherwise seemingly sensible people, and
when I was introduced, it was like this. This is Marie Dressler. Then, turning to me, my
hostess said, now say something funny. Now, let's go back to that passage. That's what
was written in the magazine, but did she really say that? I think, now, I wasn't there during
the Taft administration to see what she said, but no one talks like that now, and as we
saw in the previous lecture, no one talked like that then. She was a human being, and
so only the other day, I was invited to the home of some well-to-do and otherwise seemingly
sensible people. I personally would never pop that one out, and I like to dress like
which up now and then. That's something that somebody wrote her saying. She didn't put
it that way, or, this is Marie Dressler. Then, turning to me, my hostess said, now say,
no, no. What she almost certainly said was, then, the hostess turned to me and said, now,
say something funny. That's how people talk, but the idea was that you don't just transcribe
what somebody says. You have to put into written language when it's on the page. Now, fast
forward. It's 2002, and Kirk Douglas is in Premier Magazine. He's talking about his son
Michael becoming an actor. What's transcribed is exactly what he said in good old-fashioned
spoken English. After the first thing he did in college, I went backstage and he asked,
how was I? I said, you were awful. I thought, that'll cure him. He'll go be a lawyer. Two
months later, he said, I'm in another play. I said, oh my God. I went to see him. This
time, when he said, how was I? I had to say, you were very good. That's the way people
talk. As you know, that is the style that Kirk Douglas talks in, and it was just written
down. That's the way it's done now. It's a cultural difference. It's because we have
a different relationship to spoken language and a completely different relationship to
the idea that it needs to be dressed up, either in public or in print. Now, as I've said,
this is an odd development, as language universals have gone in terms of usage, because there's
always been a trend in most literate societies towards the development of these written forms.
The fact is, that it's not only these literate societies that I'm talking about, because
it goes beyond that. A universal in language is also, although we don't hear as much about
it, is that with language, there's a high version and a low one. So even with small
tribal languages, there's a way that you talk up and a way that you talk normal. An example
of that is the Zuni, our Native American group, and they have these kiva underground chambers
that they use for ceremonies. When you're in the kiva, just like when some people are
in various kinds of ceremonies, there's a certain kind of language that's used. It's
the high Zuni, and it has different words that are only used in the kiva. And so life
is ho'i in casual Zuni, but then when you're in the kiva and you're talking about life,
you say pinane, and that means a breathing into, the metaphorical. Or the word for frog
is takka. That's frog. It sounds like one, doesn't it? But then, if you're in ceremonial
language and you're going to refer to a frog, then it's, well, yeah, tinan kayapa. And that
means several are in a shallow container, because I assume some people would actually
enjoy seeing frogs doing that. I don't like frogs either. But those are the words. Now,
there's nothing exotic about that. It's kind of like our difference between rest and repose
or help and assist. It's just that the domains are more sharply established with the Zuni.
But that shows that even with non-written languages, there is a place that's established
for unnatural written style, i.e. elaborated language, or a Northern Pomo speaker. That's
another Native American language. In an interview in the 1920s, as quoted of saying of his grandfather,
my grandfather made a long speech in the sweat house. He spoke for about 20 minutes. Oh,
how he could speak. The words just flowed and flowed so easy, so smooth. He was a great
speaker. It seems innocent enough, but imagine someone saying that today about American English.
What a great speaker. And if they were saying it, it would probably be about that punchy
fundamentalist oratory that we saw. Whereas that person who was a Northern Pomo was talking
about the high Pomo that one would use in certain situations, such as getting up and
in the Native American way there, and then speaking for 20 minutes. Now, all of this said,
we have to realize that when we are using this kind of old-fashioned oratory, or when
we're thinking about it, we don't want to romanticize it too much. So, for example, spoken
language has an advantage, as we saw in the last lecture, of being less windy than elaborated
language, than formal language. And there are times when the extended and elaborated and
tapeworm sentence-oriented structure of formal slash written language can actually serve
to put you off of the scent. It can confuse. Sometimes the richness of the vocabulary and
the elaborate sentence structure can mask what really is a lack of serious content.
And so, for example, William Jennings Bryan is somebody who was known as an orator in
the same vein as Edward Everett. And his most famous speech of many was the Cross of
Gold Speech in 1896. So, William Jennings Bryan was given to getting up on platforms.
He was known, when he was young, well, not that young, 36, as the boy orator of the plat.
And he would say things like, I would be presumptuous indeed to present myself against the distinguished
gentleman to whom you have listened, if this were a mere measuring of abilities. But this
is not a contest between persons. The humblest citizen in all the land, when clad in the
armor of a righteous cause, is stronger than all the hosts of error. I come to speak to
you in defense of a cause as holy as the cause of liberty, the cause of humanity.
There are all sorts of things in that that the old Greek rhetoricians would have thought
of as quite artful. Notice, I can break out my imitation of William Jennings Bryan at
parties and really just rule. I have no idea how the man sounded, but you can tell he
sounded kind of like that. Anyway, he closed it with, you shall not press down upon the
brow of labor, this crown of thorns, you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.
I do know how that sounded because there's a record of it, but it sounds like, a cross
of gold. So, I'm not doing that. But that is how he sounded. Now, what's interesting
is that as beautiful as all that is, you can't help noticing that he sure does kind of slather
on the words. And the fact of the matter is that there was an acquaintance of William
Jennings Bryan who left for posterity, a rather acrid judgment of him, but it must have some
relationship to reality. And he said that William Jennings Bryan was almost unable to
think in the sense in which you and I use that word. Vague ideas floated through his
mind, but didn't unite to form any system or crystallize into a definite practical position.
Which is to say that being an orator or using that kind of high oratorical language is not
always something to be equated with any kind of logical brilliance or insight, and sometimes
it can help to pull it down. And so, for example, there are lessons that you can learn from
old style speaking, even though we most of us probably don't want to sound like William
Jennings Bryan. It's useful in public speaking to strike a balance between the casual, which
is key to communicating effectively in our era in particular. You have to sound like
the common man to an extent, or you are a stiff. But also, a concern was speaking in
a written way, so to speak, for certain passages. An example of this is of all people, Woodrow
Wilson, that's the 28th president of the United States, and he was a man of many qualities,
and one of them was that he was capable of making a speech where he really got into your
head, he actually convinced you of points that often were rather detailed, and yet he
could sound relatively down to earth. Now, of course, this is a very long time ago, it's
not that he was trying to sound like the common man, but he could speak in a very accessible
fashion. And an example of this is when he was trying to convince the United States of
the wisdom of the League of Nations proposal. And the man got on a train, a train of all
things, and went all over the country making speeches in the open air, trying to convince
people of something that he thought was good. He essentially worked himself to death doing
this. But the speech that he made was instructive in terms of striking a balance between the
grand old fashioned oratorical tradition, and actually speaking to a modern living person
in an immediate way. So for example, he said, and I will spare you my Woodrow Wilson imitation,
you will say, is the League an absolute guarantee against war? No, I do not know any absolute
guarantee against the errors of human judgment, or the violence of human passions, but I tell
you this, with a cooling space of nine months for human passion, not much of it will keep
hot. And he went on in that kind of vein, actually addressing objections that you might
have, and carefully showing where you might be wrong. This was a great way of making a
point before people, i.e., a kind of accessible oratory. For example, he went on in that
speech, but you say, we heard that we might be at a disadvantage in the League of Nations.
Well, whoever told you that either was deliberately falsifying, or he hadn't read the covenant
of the League of Nations. And then he followed that up with a careful explanation as to what
he thought the proper perspective would be. Or he went on, you have heard a great deal,
something that was true and a great deal that was false, about that provision of the treaty
which hands over to Japan the rights which Germany enjoyed in the province of Shantung
in China. He got into that kind of detail. It was quite impressive the way Woodrow Wilson
could make a speech. And as long ago as he lived, it is instructive for us today. But
the general point of this lecture has been that we have developed, as English speakers,
relationship to formal style language, often written, but even in terms of formal language
through the mouth. Quite different from the past in that we have a tendency to cherish
the more casual, the more oral, in the sense that that word is usually used, renditions
of language over the old fashioned, more, shall we say, strictured kind. And this is
an only a matter of what kind of speeches people make. The point extends also to how
we conceive of writing and what is considered appropriate in public versus in the private
sphere in terms of how we write. That is what the next lecture will be about.
